Capital One (0s):
Here's a little tip for your growing business. Get the new Venture X business card from Capital One and start earning Unlimited double miles on every purchase. That's one of the reasons Jennifer Garner has one for her business. That's right. Jennifer Garner is a business owner and the co-founder of Once Upon a Farm, providers of organic snacks and meals loved by little ones and their parents with Unlimited double miles. The more once upon a farm spends the more miles they earn. Plus, the Venture X business card has no preset spending limit, so their purchasing power can adapt to meet their business needs. The card also gets their team access to over 1300 airport lounges. Just imagine where the Venture X business card from Capital One can take your business. Capital One, what's in your wallet, terms and conditions apply. Find out more at Capital One dot com slash venture X

Canva (47s):
business with Canva. You don't need to be a designer to design compelling on-brand content. In fact, our team uses Canva to create episode artwork, social media posts, and graphics for our website. Canva has endless templates for things like presentations, business documents, brainstorms, posters and more. And you can even create your own custom brand templates for your team to use. And when a rebrand happens, Canva has your back. Say your brand updates their logo, and now you have an old logo and multiple presentations and social posts. Well, you can quickly replace your logo across all of your designs in just a few clicks. Canva is used by 85% of Fortune 500 companies. Whether you work at a small or big brand in a team of two or 2000, Canva empowers teams everywhere to design compelling on-brand visual content together. Start designing today@canva.com.

AT&T (1m 45s):
The home for every brand in business, there are plenty of white knuckle situations like data center migrations or office expansions and cyber attacks just to name a few, knocking on wood, crossing your fingers and saying All the well wishes won't help in these situations because next level moments need the next level network. At and t Business has the security, reliability, and expertise to take your business further. Don't rely on luck to get you through. Get the Network. More businesses choose at and t Business.

Apple (2m 23s):
Apple Card is the perfect credit card for every purchase. It has cash back rewards, unlike others. You earn Unlimited daily cash back on every purchase, receive it daily and can grow it at 4.15% annual percentage yield when you open a high yield savings account. Apply for Apple Card in the Wallet app on iPhone and start earning and growing your daily cash with savings. Today. Apple card subject to credit approval savings is available to Apple card owners, subject to eligibility requirements, savings accounts provided by Goldman Sachs, bank U SS, A member F D I C. Term supply.

The Great Creators with Guy Raz (2m 55s):
Hey, it's guy here. And before we get to the show, you know that feeling when you think back to some of your early work and you cringe. Well, I recently spoke with Tom Hanks and he told me he gets that feeling too. He can't even watch his own movies. And for a man widely known as the nicest person in Hollywood, Tom Hanks also struggles with what it means to be authentic. Check out our conversation on my other podcast. The Great Creators. just search for the great creators with Guy Raz, wherever you listen to podcasts. And now for today's show, another great conversation with a creator and a builder.

0 (3m 30s):
One of the most successful in Hollywood. It's from 2021. It and I Think you're gonna love this one.

3 (3m 39s):
Any Filmmaker that's in a screening of their films, not watching the film, they're watching the audience.

0 (3m 45s):
Yeah,

3 (3m 46s):
So you're watching the backs of heads. I've become really good at wa watching the backs of heads. Like I can tell what you're feeling by your neck at this point, and for the first time being in the back of a theater watching, you know, just the side view of the light of the screen hit people's faces as they smile, as they nod, as they cry. Whatever that feeling, just, you know, it was my first hit and I was addicted, and I've been addicted ever since.

0 (4m 18s):
Welcome to How I, Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz and I the show today. How Ava DuVernay took her skills as a publicist, writer, director, and entrepreneur, and built a movement that's changing how movies are made and who gets to make them. When it comes to thinking about who is an entrepreneur, we often overlook people who get their start in the creative arts. I mean, think about Walt Disney.

0 (4m 59s):
Before he built what would become one of the biggest media companies in history, he created the most iconic cartoon character in history. But for his time he was pretty unusual. Artists usually make their money by selling their art, their acting skills, their paintings, their music, their novels. But over the past decade, more and more creative types have started to take more control over how their work is used and in some cases, to own and distribute and market their own work. This is how Ava DuVernay has constructed her entire career. She's not only one of the most entrepreneurial Creators in Hollywood, but increasingly one of the most influential.

0 (5m 44s):
Now, you might think of Ava as a director. Her documentary 13th about mass incarceration in the United States was nominated for an Academy Award and her drama when they see us based on an assault in Central Park and the wrongful conviction of black and Latino teenagers made a huge impact when it was released in 2019. Ava's directed big budget films like A Wrinkle in Time and historical dramas like Selma. But her directing business is only one part of a much bigger enterprise, even a movement that Ava DuVernay has built from the ground up. She began her career as a publicist, and at age 27 started her own publicity agency.

0 (6m 28s):
She self-financed her first films, and because she had a background in marketing and knew how to network, she was able to build her own distribution company. Today, Ava oversees a campus just outside downtown LA that encompasses much of her work. ARRAY is a production company, a distributor of films, a nonprofit education center, a community event space, and a resource center to help people of color get into the film industry. Ava fell in love with the arts at an early age for the first years of her life. She grew up in Compton, California, and then moved to the nearby neighborhood of Linwood.

0 (7m 9s):
And one of the most important people in her life was her Aunt Denise.

3 (7m 15s):
She was a frustrated artist who loved music and fine art and movies and didn't grow up in a time or in an environment that encouraged or celebrated that those interests in her. So she became a nurse following in her mother's footsteps, but always fostered her, her love of art as a, just a lover of it to a fan, and really exposed me to all kinds of things that I would not have, I don't believe I would've come across if, if it hadn't been for her.

0 (7m 59s):
And it sounds like we'll talk about this later, but sounds like you particularly had a strong bond with her. Yeah,

3 (8m 9s):
I mean, she was They, weren, three of them who raised us. It was my mother, her mother, my grandmother and her sister, my aunt. you know, we're just a big, big part of our lives. And my two sisters came right after me, so this was a lot of ladies, a lot of that energy. and I would go to my aunt's after school, and I just spent a lot of time with her. So, you know, was as close to her as I was to my mother. But they had very different interests. My mother's interests were, you know, my education and the clothes on my back and the food on my plate, and just trying to keep it all going. And my aunt, who was single, her interests were art and fun and you know, kind of the things that my mother was so busy and focused on taking care of us, you know, didn't really have, have the space, the mental space for, and so they made a good team.

0 (9m 6s):
I guess when you were a, a little girl, maybe, maybe eight or nine years old, a a man named Murray May came into your life. Your mom married him and, and he would become a hugely important influence on you as a, as a kid and then as a grownup, right?

3 (9m 23s):
Yeah, my dad, she, I remember the first day that he came to pick her up for a date and opened the door. I don't think I've ever told the story. I opened the door and he was just so handsome and he had on a starched white shirt, putting up and slacks and I could belt and shiny shoes and I just really liked him from there. He was so, such a gentleman and so kind to me and continued that to be that to me, all of my life, all of his life, the rest for the rest of his life. So yeah, he had a big effect on me.

0 (10m 0s):
He was an entrepreneur. He had his own business. Right.

3 (10m 3s):
Yeah. I love you calling him an entrepreneur because I think that We don't use that word for people who are not, you know, creating companies that are fancy, so to speak. Yeah. But he owned his own business, a carpet, small carpet and flooring company. And, and yeah, he had about, I don't know, six or seven men, men who worked with him, but he would, you know, get down on his hands and knees and put in carpet and flooring for residences and commercial spaces in Los, Angeles

0 (10m 33s):
When you were a teenager and people would meet you and they would say, oh, Ava, she's gonna be this or that. What, what would people say about you? They would say, oh, she's gonna be the president, or what, what, what do you remember people saying?

3 (10m 48s):
I always got that I was, you know, bright that I was smart. The things that every kid should hear. Right. Just that, you know, I had potential and I could be anything that I wanted to be at the time for many, many years when I was young, when people would ask that horrible question that you ask children, which I don't think the children should be asked, what do you wanna be when you grow up? I'd say a lawyer and I would always hear, you know, positive reinforcement. Oh, I can see that for you. Or, that's perfect or you're gonna be that. I remember my godmother, Charlene gave me a briefcase for my eighth grade graduation and I thought, right, this is these, these are the tools that I need to go into the courtroom.

3 (11m 31s):
and I am truly a few short steps from the courtroom. This will not take long. I am that smart and I will use this briefcase and I will go to the Supreme Court and do whatever I need to do.

0 (11m 43s):
Was there anything in your childhood or teenage years that would, in any way you could look at and say, yeah, that I was gonna be a Filmmaker?

3 (11m 54s):
No, other than loving movies,

0 (11m 57s):
What, what movies did you love as a kid?

3 (11m 60s):
Anything that they played at the Lakewood Mall. That's the only place that I went to see movies with my Aunt Denise, who would take me after school to the Lakewood Mall. I should go there and see a movie one day that would probably bring back such emotional, some, so much emotion. But yeah, anything it, so this is, this is the late seventies, early eighties.

0 (12m 22s):
Yeah. I mean, so everything from, I don't know, like et to I action movies, to just whatever was playing

3 (12m 30s):
Yeah. All that kind of stuff. Very few black people I remember. Yeah. But just a bunch of studio stuff with different views of white life and, and I. I really enjoyed it. And then as I got into, I mean, I enjoyed movies and so as I got into high school, I remember, you know, loving the John Hughes stuff and wondering if there was any black people at the school. Yeah. I remember seeing the film that I really liked. I think it was 16 Candles and I, remember I saw the one Asian character. I really thought, oh, that's not nice. I remember thinking that everyone was laughing and I remember thinking, yeah, that that's not nice.

3 (13m 13s):
And but just generally and consuming the movies as, as a young person would, and at some point in there being aware that I wasn't seeing, you know, films with black folk in it.

0 (13m 27s):
What was the first film you saw where you saw black characters and actors on screen that you were very conscious of it?

3 (13m 38s):
The first film I saw that where I saw people of color on screen that was very formative for me was West Side Story. Yeah. Come to find out years later, half of 'em were not Brown. Right. But you couldn't tell me that Bernardo was not straight from Puerto Rico at the time. Like it was that in his, that film was such a big deal for me that it, it was, it was a while to shake off and realize that it was the magic of movies that made me see what I was seeing and feel what I was feeling. But that was the first film where I saw people, like the folks in my neighborhood. 'cause I went to school with a lot of Latino and Filipino people.

3 (14m 20s):
And so I remember loving the colors and the culture. Oddly, the first film with black people I can remember seeing and really, and I, I know it's not the case. I know I'd seen other ones, but for whatever reason, the the one that I really remember feeling deeply was not until I got to college, which was Mo Better Blues Spike Looses Mo Better Blues. I, I know I'd seen the other films before then, and I'd seen all kinds of other films, ladies Seeing the blues, other things. But the one that really had an effect was Mo Better Blues.

0 (14m 54s):
You went to U C L A and you majored in, in African American Studies in English, and you were, you, you wrote for the, for the black student newspaper there. What, what did you make of U C L A? You were there in in the early nineties. Did you like it?

3 (15m 10s):
I loved it. I had a beautiful experience there. Learned a lot, was involved with the Black Student Union, you know, learned about the power of protest, learned about communities of color in Los Angeles that hadn't been engaged with because I, you know, I think people who aren't from LA think it's all together, but it's really quite a sprawl. So if you're from Compton, long Beach, Linwood, you really have no reason to be in LA proper unless I had no reason to be in la. So I really wasn't familiar with LA proper until I got to college and it's like 40 minutes up the coast, but it felt like a different world.

3 (15m 51s):
And so yeah, just, just had a dorm experience living in the dorms for the first couple of years, you know, worked my little job as a waitress, came home with my tips going through, you know, to the games. Like it was a very normal college experience, except for the fact that there was like huge, huge racial unrest happening in the city at that time. So feeling, you know, being a college student and, and becoming conscious of my history and the, the historical context of the times that we were in really had a big effect on me.

0 (16m 25s):
You were there, you were a student at U C L A when the footage of Rodney, Rodney King beating came out, and then also the acquittal of those police officers in the aftermath of that. Do you remember that, that time? Do you remember, what do you remember about that time when you were a student?

3 (16m 45s):
I remember being enraged. I remember that, you know, the Rodney King assault was one in a steady litany of assaults in the black community at that time. And so it was just a very oppressive L A P D presence in black communities and in spaces where black people convened all around the city. That was deeply felt and, you know, became quite combustible when really the first video footage of a police assault that reached national prominence was still not enough to result in any kind of, you know, punishment for the officers who, who were involved.

0 (17m 32s):
Do you remember when you were a teenager, would you just see police cars driving around your neighborhood? Do you remember seeing police presence All the time.

3 (17m 42s):
Yeah, all the time.

0 (17m 45s):
And it just, it was just part of the background. It was just, that was just there all the time. Yeah.

3 (17m 51s):
It's interesting even to get the question, 'cause I am, it makes me think, you know, at, at my age Oh right. That's not normal for people who don't live in those communities. But yeah, police are everywhere and they're overhead as well. We call it the ghetto bird. It's a helicopter, helicopter, helicopter that flies low across black and brown communities. you know, in Los Angeles especially was one of the tactics of the L A P D

0 (18m 17s):
I guess when you were in college, you started to get into performing, like performing in a, in, in a Hip Hop troupe. A duo how did, called figures of Speech. How did that, how did that happen?

3 (18m 31s):
Yeah, it was down in, in the Leimert Park area, this glorious black arts district in Los Angeles and, you know, became a part of, you know, the arts and culture space there. And just, you know, a young person who was very attracted to Hip Hop and all the disciplines within Hip Hop

0 (18m 49s):
By the way, what were you listening to?

3 (18m 52s):
Anything that was late eighties, early nineties. So, yeah, you know, I think from Tribe called Quest to Public Enemy to far side, freestyle fellowship, all kinds, everything that was at that time.

0 (19m 3s):
Yeah. How did you start to perform yourself?

3 (19m 9s):
I was going to this open Mic night just enjoying it. This was the place to be. It was a place called The Good Life. It was a health food store that on Thursday nights would put a, a open a Mic and people would perform. And it was all Hip Hop, all rhyming. You'd come with your tape, you'd press play on your tape and you would have like two minutes to rhyme and impress the crowd. And so on Thursday nights you would listen to, you know, a colorful cast of local MCs who, you know, were known in the neighborhood. and I eagerly anticipated what they were gonna do and had fans and didn't have record deals, but were like stars to us.

3 (19m 55s):
I mean,

0 (19m 55s):
You wouldn't have probably known it at the time, but did it feel like, did it feel like you were part, I dunno, you were part of something special.

3 (20m 3s):
Yeah, no, you definitely knew it at the time that you were in something that was very special, especially If. you were able to be inside of it to know the artist and then eventually to become an artist there. The first time that I did anything as it related to actually being a maker of art, not a cons a, a consumer or a fan of art, which is a big part of the art practice is people to consume it. So I I, I value that and that's what my Aunt Denise was. you know, art that sits in a room by itself can only go so far. You need the appreciator. And so my aunt was that. I was that for a long time until I was encouraged to pick up the Mic and really enjoyed it.

3 (20m 43s):
And so did that for a little while.

0 (20m 45s):
Were you nervous about performing in front of other people?

3 (20m 48s):
Yeah, I think I, I think it's the rare artist who, you know, doesn't have nerves about the presentation of work and so yeah, definitely very nervous to get up there.

0 (20m 59s):
I, I read that when you graduated you wanted to become a journalist and, and at some point you actually went to, to c b SS to pursue this career path and I guess this was what, like the mid 1990s. What, what were you assigned to do?

3 (21m 12s):
Yeah, it was my senior year in college. I got an internship with C B s Evening News with Dan Rather and Connie Chung

0 (21m 21s):
Based in LA at the la la

3 (21m 23s):
Bureau. And this was right the time of the OJ Simpson trial. And it was an intern with a very prestigious paid internship that I was very excited about. Yeah,

0 (21m 36s):
That, I mean, c b s big

3 (21m 37s):
Deal.

0 (21m 38s):
That was like the high, that was a big deal. Big, big deal. 1995,

3 (21m 41s):
Huge deal. So that's the kind of thing you needed to move on and in space and did it and was assigned a juror on the first day. I remember going,

0 (21m 51s):
You were assigned a, you were assigned to what? To follow a juror on the OJ Simpson trial. You

3 (21m 56s):
Couldn't follow them 'cause they were sequestered, but I had to sit outside of their house.

0 (21m 60s):
'cause obviously that that was, I guess, a way to get breaking news. And what did, did that feel awkward? Did that feel weird?

3 (22m 6s):
Yeah, so I was basically outside of this, I think it was a lady, I can't remember, and I basically just sat outside her house, you know, and saw what was coming and going and like, made notes and, and I remember hating it and feeling like this is stupid and wrong and I don't wanna be doing this. And, and it really soured my appetite for news. So that was my last job in news.

0 (22m 36s):
So when you really kind of began your career then, at this point, I mean, you're young woman graduate, you went into, into film publicity. How did, how did you, how did you get into that?

3 (22m 53s):
'cause I was really interested in media still from the, the news days and had heard that publicists shape the news, they, they are involved with, with media outlets. So I was really interested in the media at that time. And so I went and I worked at a small studio for a while, about a year I was an assistant on a, on a publicist desk and then went to an agency and worked in agency life where I was mo juggling multiple projects. And this was all in the film and television space.

0 (23m 30s):
And how did you like it? Was it everything that you had imagined and more, was it exciting? Were you, did you feel like you were shaping stories?

3 (23m 39s):
Yes, I love publicity to this day. If I was not a film Filmmaker, I would be a publicist. I think about it as in terms of offering stories and presenting stories and, you know, understanding the power of publicity and that, you know, help me understand that, you know, everyone has a story. You just have to present it correctly. And, and that's giving me a lot of confidence in my own storytelling as a Filmmaker. Whereas I'll talk to filmmakers who will sometimes be driven by, oh, is this sellable? Can I market this? I never think that way because I know you can sell and market anything if you know how to do it, which I do.

3 (24m 23s):
So yeah, I, I, I loved it. and I still do. And I'm so happy that I had that tool set. That was my time as a publicist was really my film school in so many ways.

0 (24m 33s):
Yeah, I I guess you worked for a few different agencies for a couple of years and then when you were like, like 27 you started your own agency and the story I I read was that your dad Murray was the one who encouraged you to do that. Like, he kind of led you to realize that, that you, you weren't getting paid enough. Is that, is that how you ended up starting your own business?

3 (24m 58s):
Yeah, yeah. That was one of the, the steps in it. I talked with him about, you know, some of the, the projects that were coming into the agency that I was, where I was at the time that were coming to the agency because there was a young black publicist working there and that They weren, you know, black films or films that were youth oriented that were coming into the agency or I was being used.

0 (25m 21s):
And you were bringing those in?

3 (25m 23s):
Yeah, I was bringing some in or I was being, I was a centerpiece of the pitch of the agency. Like, this will be your day to day and look at her and she can do this and I get in the meeting and I do my thing and we'd get the business, you know. So yeah, it was a conversation with my father who just got me thinking about the numbers. 'cause I was like, oh, I'm getting a nice salary. And he's said, yeah, but, and he never said it. I mean, he was just such an elegant, soft-spoken, lovely man. Like I would've said cut to Ava's version. I would've said, okay, dummy, what are you doing? Look at the money you're bringing in. But he just kind of walked me through it as, so how much are the retainers? Like how much do they pay?

3 (26m 3s):
and I said, oh my gosh, it's like $10,000 a month. And he's like, wow. So you have, you've brought in, you've brought in six clients that are at $10,000 a month and I said, yeah, he was like, so that's $60,000 a month. and I said, yeah. And he said, and how much do you get paid a year? I was like, oh, ouch. So

0 (26m 27s):
Not $720,000,

3 (26m 29s):
Not even $60,000. How about that? So, so yeah, it was, that was an eyeopener. And there was a woman who's still working today by the name of Jackie Bean black woman who had one of the few black-owned entertainment PR firms at the time. Jackie Bean handled films out of the east coast was another woman named Marcy Devoe, who had a small practice with two people. She did television in, in Los Angeles. And so They weren, these two women who I think it's important to say their names, I saw doing it. And after my father had put that in my head, I, I looked for those examples and got to know them.

3 (27m 14s):
And it was really Jackie Bean who was very kind. I remember she gave me copies of her letters of agreements early on with clients. She told me, you know, how to set rates and how to do some of that stuff really early on. And even early in my my own agency days, we would share films. She would do the east and I would do the west. She was very generous and that way. And so yeah, I eventually started to do film and television and home entertainment, corporate crisis, event unit publicity strategy, got into marketing promotions and eventually by the time I closed my agency had run campaigns for every major studio in Hollywood.

0 (27m 59s):
You, I mean, as you kind of went on your own, one of the things that I'm always curious about is how people get customers. and in the early days, did you have to go out and, and kind of pitch yourself or, or were things kind of coming in through word of mouth?

3 (28m 16s):
Yeah. you know, some of that idea of, you know, this is a young black woman and I worked on, you know, black stuff and lady stuff. Anything to do with women. Yeah. Anything to do with youth animation. And so that's basically how I started and that business was coming in really nicely. And so, and yeah, we would pitch, we would pitch stuff, send out proposals, rarely cold, you know, I had those contacts, but, but yeah, it was a constantly, you know, that business is tr constantly trying to make sure you have enough business Yeah. and that you're servicing those clients so they'll come back again.

0 (28m 54s):
And were you, I mean, were you like also managing like press junkets for, for stars, you know, when they would come you, so you would be the person with them at times while they would, you know, do the five minute TV interview after interview after interview. Yep. That's

3 (29m 9s):
My job. Hmm. I do red carpets. That's why whenever I walk on a red carpet now, I have so much respect for the people who,

0 (29m 17s):
That's hard work

3 (29m 18s):
Create, it is very hard work, a red carpet. Most people who are notable, who are asked to go on a red carpet, they walk out there thinking I'm a star. Like this is, or this is my moment, or I have to do this red carpet, you know, my gosh, I don't wanna do it or whatever. And people are yelling your name and you're doing the whole thing. But you gotta think back to two weeks before when that red carpet was constructed, a media alert was written, it was sent out. Everyone that's on that carpet yelling, your name was booked, confirmed directions had to be sent to them.

3 (29m 59s):
They arrived, they had to be put in their places. Oftentimes they will fight over their place. I wanna stand here now. I'm here. The publicist there trying to wrangle that, you know, the the red carpet company that has to come and put down the red carpet, put up the stanchions, put up the lights. There's a whole industry around this isn the hair and makeup and the hotels that participate and I mean it's, it's a machine and it's a, you know, it's a machine that's around the business of making and selling movies. And that's what what I did.

0 (30m 32s):
I I've always felt like a publicist has to have the same level of patience as like a realtor or even a talent agent in that they are serer servicing clients who can sometimes be really difficult. Right? Like if you're a realtor, your client might blame you if the house doesn't sell for what they want. Or if you're a publicist, the client might blame you if they don't get as much publicity as they think they, they should get. Did you, how would you handle that? That kind of, I don't know. Are you just super patient?

3 (31m 8s):
No, I'm not patient at all. I I didn't do that kind of publicity. So in, in your, in your example, like a real estate agent, that's so true. The real estate agent has to be the patient one. 'cause they're interfacing with the client. I would be considered the broker my, I was the publicist for the film, not the individual people. So I didn't have to deal with how you got your hair done and why you didn't like your sandwich and this person was mean to you and you don't like that question. Right. So my clients were studios and networks, not individual people. and that was by design, because I'm not patient, I'm not gonna tell you everything's okay.

3 (31m 49s):
If it's not, I'm not gonna sit there and listen to your sad story when your sad story is you don't like your sandwich. you know what I'm saying? I would be the one that would be able to just have the straight talk with the client. you know, how would I liken it too, guy? I was your grandmother. Hmm. I'm not your mom. Okay. I don't have to go home with you and be with you forever. You come over grandma's house, you have a nice time. She sends you home after a certain period of time. That's what I was, I was with you for the period of this film. And when the film is over, you go somewhere else. So it allowed me to be transparent, to be able to say what I meant and what we needed. And just to talk straight.

3 (32m 30s):
and I found that, that, that really helped me as a director.

0 (32m 35s):
When did you, I mean as, 'cause I know you, I mean you worked with Clint Eastwood and Bill Condon and a bunch of really, you know, well-known directors and, and I read that you were brought on to work to publicity for the film collateral, the Michael Mann film, which was kind of a turning point for you and, and how you started to think about what you wanted to do. Is that, is that right?

3 (32m 59s):
Yeah, that was a big deal for me to be on the set of collateral. First of all, it was just so cool the concept of the film, but it also just had very hot actors at the time. Tom Cruise, Jada Pinkett, Jamie Fox, a young Javier bar dim. And it was just an exhilarating project to work on. But yeah, something happened on this that set. I, I a couple things. First of all, he was using these digital cameras and it was the first time I'd ever seen a film shot on a digital camera. He was one of the first to use these digital cameras called Vipers, which could shoot through the night. You could see the depth of the night, it would capture distance in the night, which is why that film looks so milky and gorgeous.

3 (33m 45s):
And then also he was shooting in a part of town that I knew very well. East La shot a lot in east LA with brown people and black people. And the story had black people in it and brown people and I thought, wow, he's shooting kind of like in the hoods that I know. Hmm. and I just began watching him and thinking, oh, I, I, I wanna do that. I'd been on many sets before and it never really hit me like I want to do that. I'd been on sets before where I thought I could do that. I could do what he's doing, you know, I mean, everyone's on a set watches now. I know people think that now 'cause they're watching me on a set and they'd be like, I can do, I can totally do that.

3 (34m 26s):
But I wasn't until I was on that set where I thought, oh, I want to do that. I want to use those cameras. I want to tell a story like this with actors like this. And so that really catalyzed the idea of, of trying to make some films

0 (34m 43s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Ava made her first 12 minute movie and how a chance meeting on an airplane would change the trajectory of her career. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This. I talk with so many business leaders who use Squarespace as their all in one platform for building their brand and engaging customers online. Squarespace lets you easily create a dynamic website and sell anything your products and services, even the content you create.

0 (35m 25s):
Squarespace makes it really easy to get started with best in class website templates for all types of businesses that can be customized to fit your specific needs. Squarespace also provides the tools you need to run your business smoothly, including inventory management, a simple checkout process, and secure payments. And with Squarespace email campaigns, you can build a community of email subscribers and customers. Start with an email template and customize it by applying your own brand ingredients like colors and logo. And once you send built-in analytics, measure your

Squarespace (35m 60s):
email's impact, check out Squarespace dot com slash built for a free trial. And when you are ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

MasterClass (36m 12s):
So this summer I finally decided to stop inadvertently killing the plants in my garden and really learn how to do gardening the right way. And helping me along that journey was Ron Finley on masterclass. Ron is one of the great gardeners of our time and in his class you will learn everything from the basics to the fundamentals of building a home garden and more. With Masterclass, you can learn from the world's best minds anytime, anywhere and at your own pace. Annual membership start at $10 a month and you get Unlimited access to every instructor. Thousands of online lessons, exclusive content insights, and much more. There are over 180 classes to pick from everything from sales and persuasion. With Daniel Pink to Tennis with Serena Williams with new classes added every month. The Ron Finley class, for example, teaches you how to grow your own food and keep your plants alive. And it really allows you to find the beauty and freedom and gardening no matter the size of your space. And I've loved how easy it is to fit the lessons into my day, even if I only watch for 10 minutes before bed. Get Unlimited access to every class. And right now as a How I, Built This listener, you can get 15% off when you go to masterclass.com/built. That's masterclass.com/built for 15% off an annual membership masterclass.com/built.

0 (37m 43s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So by 2005, Ava DuVernay is running her own successful business as a publicist in Hollywood. She's also watching a lot of other people make movies and she's starting to think, you know, I wanna do this as well.

3 (38m 0s):
It was my proximity to it that made it feel maybe this is possible to tinker with because I'd been on sets. And so I knew that real people made movies that they did not, you know, appear. Right. Also, I think the big piece of the puzzle is, and this is a big piece that I I don't think I've ever articulated, but I've, I've thought about for myself, I had no dreams of the outcome other than making a movie like that was, it wasn't let me make a movie to get famous, to get an Academy award to be rich, to be famous.

3 (38m 43s):
Right? That was not in my head. And the reason why it wasn't in my head is because there was nobody doing that, right? Like, there was, I won't say nobody, but there was nobody that looked like me, like They weren, very few black women making films at the time, They weren, a couple I knew by name. And I had seen that they'd made a film, but no one had gone on to great fame and acclaim and all of the things. So I think one of the core pieces of the journey was it started from such a pure place of just wanting to make a movie and to tell a story. It was all about that. And it wasn't about the outcome or the things that will come after I, I think now these days it takes a lot more because you can see we are out there, there's, there's a good number, nice number of us you can see, oh, I wanna be like Shonda or Issa and what, what did they do?

3 (39m 41s):
And how can I get to that level and do those things? I didn't have that, so I didn't have to think about it.

0 (39m 46s):
I remember when I was 21 and I, I was an intern at NPR. I'd never been done any radio in my life. I didn't know anything about it. I just liked listening and, and the way I learned how to do it was by, by cutting reel to reel with a razor blade, you know? And, and doing it really badly. And, and over time I learned how to do that. Right. The technical side. How did you start to learn the technical side of making movies?

3 (40m 15s):
Well, that's, that's a good question. you know, for me, early on I had to embrace what I didn't know how to do and not be intimidated by what I didn't know how to do. and I had been around enough filmmakers as a publicist to see that not all filmmakers were technically proficient. That the core of what made a great Filmmaker was, did you know the story? Not did you know the lens? Did you know, you know, the technical aspects? But there are a lot of filmmakers out there who are story and performance focused and less technically focused.

3 (41m 5s):
I thought the most important thing is the story. And all these people around me are supposed to know that stuff. So if I can write the story, then I will be the leader of the story because it came out of my mind and no one will know more about it than I will. And from there I made sure that I surrounded myself with people who did know their jobs. And one of the things that I learned from running my own business was to never be shy about saying, I don't know. Hmm. and that, that, especially for women and for women of color, black women, you know, to feel like you won't be taken seriously. If. you don't know everything, you know, to feel like you cannot ask a question were all things that I had to combat.

3 (41m 51s):
But the reason why I felt entitled to do it is 'cause I saw white white men do it. Yeah. I say white guys all the time don't know what they're the hell they're doing, but you know what they do have confidence. They just weren get out there and say, I wanna figure it out and I'm sure I'm sure I'll be okay. Sure, I can figure this out. And so, especially when you're an independent Filmmaker, you're really putting together small crew crews of people who will work for whatever money you can give them. And so there's a lot more grace there because everyone's kind of learning together. So that's what I did in the early years.

0 (42m 26s):
You made your first film, I think it was for short film Saturday Night Life in 2005. And it's 12 minutes. I haven't seen it. I, I've been looking for, it's hard to find.

3 (42m 45s):
I have my ways to make things disappear.

0 (42m 48s):
Well, let's talk about it then, just for a moment. Tell me what the, from what I understand the story was about when you were a little girl, your mom would dress you up and, and, and listen to people compliment you and and your sisters. Is that what what was the film about?

3 (43m 5s):
The film was about? Yeah. I, I told my mom I wanted to make a short film and try to make something. I had been taking kind of these extension classes at U C L A film extension classes. Hmm. Where you would, you know, there's like weekend courses on two days to talk about how to make a short film, that kind of thing. And so I decided I was gonna make a short film and I was asking my mom, I need to figure out a little story to tell. And she reminded me about this, which is basically that she, when she, before she met my dad when we were little and she was really, really struggling as a single mom, struggling with money, struggling with her confidence, everything.

3 (43m 51s):
The way that she would cheer herself up was she would dress us up, grease us down. Now the greasing down is important. So our skin shined. So Vaseline on our little brown faces and arms and chubby legs, put us in our, you know, patent leather shoes, our matching dresses. 'cause it was me and my two sisters. So They, weren, three of us do our hair, take us in the car on hardly any gas to the Alpha beta, which was the grocery store. And we would go there and she would dress us all up just to get a couple noodles or a bag of chips or whatever she could afford.

3 (44m 32s):
And she would do that. It makes me emotional just to say it. She would do that because she knew that her girls were so beautiful that someone would say, look at those girls, they're so pretty. Hmm. You're doing a good job. Hmm. And she'd buy her pack of gum or bottle of soda or whatever it was. We'd get in the car, we'd split it and we'd drive home, get, get ready for bed and just go to school the next day. But that was something that she did because she could get someone to say, you're okay. You're doing good. And to see her. So that's the short, it was a mo a single mom who woke up who was having a hard time.

3 (45m 15s):
She dressed up the girls, she took them to the store and it was the things that were said to her in the store. And then she drove them home. and I had no idea what I was doing. All I knew is I knew how to hustle up getting a grocery store. We got a store to let us shoot in there. And I think I made the whole thing on like, I don't know, five grand or something. But I made it.

0 (45m 44s):
And you were not pitching this to the grocery store as a student film, right? You were just saying, I'm making a film. Or do you remember how you

3 (45m 50s):
Oh, I wasn't a student. I was a grown woman with a PR firm. Yeah, right. Yeah. I went and I made it and had no clue how to edit it together. Had no, I remember I showed a friend, I haven't thought about this since it probably happened. I showed a friend of mine who made independent films, Hey, come see my, my cut at this film. She was like, okay. So she watched it. I haven't thought about this. And she said, this is really good. This is, I think this is interesting. I think you're on your way to something. Like all the things I say to people now when clearly it's not good enough. you know what, you're on your way to something. She said, you know what you might wanna do. and I was like, what? She's like, you might wanna put some music in here.

3 (46m 33s):
I said, music. She's like, yeah, you know how you go to the movies and there's, you hear music. and I was like, oh yeah, mus Music. Yes. Music. Yeah. I had shown this woman a cut with no music. He's dry. Not a lick of a cue, not a piano string. Nothing was in it. That's how little I know about how to put a movie together.

0 (46m 58s):
And did you do anything with the film? Did you try to, I mean you, you were a publicist, you had that experience. Did you try to screen it and get it out into the world in, in any way?

3 (47m 10s):
Yeah. There was no market for shorts. Yeah. you know, which is just further evidence of I didn't really care about the outcome. I remember my big goal was, ah, it would be great if I can get this into a Festival. Hmm. And someone was telling, someone said, oh, people don't really care about shorts at the big film festivals. You gotta go to a shorts Festival. And the biggest Schwarz, Festival They weren, like three big festivals at the time in the world. One of them was in the United States. It's the Palm Springs short film. Festival really considered one of the top festivals at the time. Hmm. So I was like, oh, Palm Springs. That, that, that's possible. So I submitted it to Palm Springs and I, remember the day I got the letter, I was in my office and I got this letter that I, the film was accepted and literally I did not feel that same joy.

3 (48m 2s):
Even when I got the Academy Award nomination. Like nothing has since felt as euphoric and like breaking me wide open as the Palm Springs short film, Festival acceptance. Hmm. I thought, oh my God, isn't this a miracle? And the first time seeing the film with an audience, it's in a shorts block. So it's like six other films. and I think my film was fourth or something. I remember it was coming up. I was so nervous. And to, for the first time being in the back of a theater.

3 (48m 43s):
I mean, any Filmmaker that's in a screening of their films, not watching the film, they're watching the audience.

0 (48m 49s):
Yeah.

3 (48m 50s):
So you're watching the Backs of Heads. I've become really good at wa watching the backs of heads. Like I can tell what you're feeling by your neck at this point and watching, you know, just the side view of the light of the screen hit people's faces as they smile, as they nod, as they cry, whatever that feeling just, you know, it was my first hit and I was addicted and I've been addicted ever since.

0 (49m 16s):
When you made that film. Right. So now you have a real film, like with real cameras that you used and Real Equipment and with a real cast, it was just 12 minutes, but it was a movie. It was a movie that you made. You were still also an entrepreneur. You had a business, you were running a, a publicity business. And did you think to yourself, I think this is where I'm headed. I think this is where I'm going into this direction. Or did you still think it was just something that you really enjoyed it and it was a passion.

3 (49m 56s):
I've really enjoyed it. It was a passion. And the reason why is because there was no precedent for sustainable livelihood as a black woman Filmmaker. Hmm. As recently as 2012. Yeah. Like, I'm, I'm seriously telling you this is not humility or me saying no golly G. So I never saw, like literally I could look at no one to say she's making a full living in supporting her family alone on making movies. As recently as 2012, like there was a woman named Gina Prince Bythewood, who, you know, was formative in that.

3 (50m 40s):
I knew her personally, knew her or was around her. I'd worked, I was a publicist on a couple of things. And she was actually, she and her husband were pretty instrumental in encouraging me in my script writing early on. I was, they were my clients, but They weren, two of them. And they were black filmmakers and she had made a great film called Love and Basketball and they were out pitching their things and making work. But yet, and still, you know, they were They weren many years in between the films that they were making. And she was the only one I knew, like one person. So for me, what I could see was a woman named Lynn Shelton, a white woman out of Seattle who's a Filmmaker, who made very tiny films that were so good.

3 (51m 24s):
And she somehow made a film almost every year. and I thought, oh, maybe I can be like Lynn Shelton and make like a little film every year that goes to festivals. Like she gets to travel with her film, there's like a review in the paper. Like, it's nice. Yeah. Like I wanted to be like her. Yeah. Still thinking I will have to have a job, I'll have to have a job. That was the extent of it.

0 (51m 49s):
Hmm. You, you went on to make a documentary about the Good Life Cafe where, where you had performed back in college. And then I guess right after that you, you started to work on an entirely different kind of film, a a narrative, which was based on your experience of taking care of your aunt. An Denise who was, who had been sick with, with cancer a a few years earlier, right?

3 (52m 14s):
Yeah. Yeah. She had had a recurrence of her breast cancer. It was like a stage two, the first time she had a, a surgery. And then it came back like six years later, which was the cruel part. you know, they say, oh, if you're five years you're out of the woods. And then like in the sixth year, it came back at the stage four. And I remember 'cause we moved into a house together after she got diagnosed, I gave up my apartment, I moved her out of her apartment and we moved to an apartment near the beach in an area that she always wanted to live in, in Long Beach. Because at that point she was, you know, basically given a death sentence, a certain amount of time to live.

3 (52m 57s):
And so I went to make sure that she was in a place that she found beautiful and enjoyed.

0 (53m 2s):
And so the film basically tells that story of a, of a young woman dealing with a loss of her, her beloved aunt. And you named it after, I guess you named after the U two song. I will follow. So what, what, tell me about that connection.

3 (53m 19s):
Yeah, the connection is that Denise, my aunt, was a big U two fan and really passed on that love of them to me. I remember, you know, she, one of the things about her is that she loved the things that people in her family and in her community didn't necessarily have access to, to love. I won't say they didn't love it. Just say they didn't hear it. They didn't know it. I think they would've loved it if they would've had access to it and felt like it was something that they were exposed to. But she exposed herself to it and somehow, you know, she loved rock. And of course she loved all the quote unquote black music too.

3 (54m 2s):
But she had a broader palette. Anyway, within that she loved U two. She took me to my first Amnesty International concert. Wow. you know, crap seats. 'cause she didn't have any money in a concert hall. I think it was The Coliseum. And U two comes out and she said, listen to this song. And it was like all white people and like, this is a very white environment. Okay. and I was not used to that. But she walked on up there, we're in there and she said, listen to this song. It's about Martin Luther King

0 (54m 38s):
Pride. I was like,

3 (54m 40s):
It's, I was like, it's about Martin Luther King. They're saying about Martin Luther King. Like, yeah, listen to it. Ava, listen to it. I get emotional. I could cry right now thinking about it. So Bono and the Edge and Larry Mure, they're up there rocking out to Pride. I'm trying to catch the lyrics. I'm trying to, and I start to hear the story and I start to put it together. and I was like, I think this, I think, I think this is about Martin Luther King and that was it. Hook line and Sinker. Can't tell me nothing about you two. Love him, love him, love him. So the title of of the film, which is about my last year living with my aunt Denise before she passed, is entitled I Will Follow, which is a famous U two song.

0 (55m 29s):
And from what I understand, Ava, the, the film was self distributed. Right. And, and I'm, I'm curious about this idea because I think a lot of people who, who are not in the film industry don't quite understand how this works. So when you say you are self distributed, does that mean that you are literally sending it out? Like sending out the films to theaters to screen? Like what does that entail?

3 (55m 54s):
Yeah, I would liken it to someone who bakes a cake in their kitchen and then has to somehow get it on the shelf of the grocery store. Wow. Like you're a lady who makes cakes. Okay. But how do you get it in the Walmart? Yeah. So that's distribution. And so an independent film is a homemade cake and theaters are, Walmarts, big chains are Walmarts. Now it's gotta be much easier for that homemade baker to get their goods in a small local bakery.

0 (56m 25s):
A small independent theater. Yeah.

3 (56m 27s):
And so that's what we did. So we would go to them and we would talk about the film and try to get the film in these theaters. And there's a lot of segregation in those theaters. A lot of it's another part of the puzzle of Hollywood that's very close to people of color, particularly black people. 'cause they're not owned by us. And you have to trust and hope that the person that you're pitching the story to sees the value in the story. So if I'm pitching a story about a black woman who is dying of cancer and her niece and they both love you too, and they're just talking about life or death issues in the house, which is what I will follow us If, you don't think that you have an audience for that.

3 (57m 17s):
If you're not sure how your audience will take to it, then you won't book it because you have seats to sell. Right? Yeah. It's a business. Yeah. And so that distribution is, we take this film and we somehow get it into the local bakery, into the bigger chains. And so that was what we did store by store, cake by cake, hand to hand. And so one of the things we tapped into was all the beautiful black film festivals around the country who had supported me as a Filmmaker early on with the short films, the early documentary. I went to them and I said, look, you are the only person I know in Boston, Boston, black Film, Festival, urban World in New York.

3 (58m 1s):
I don't know people out there, but I know you, would you help me get this film out? Would you help me present this film? And so started to put together a coalition of black film festivals that not only supported my work outside of their Festival, because they had lists of film lovers, black film lovers, they had relationships with theaters where they showed their festivals. They had a marketing apparatus around their festivals. So I was able to convince those festivals to pull the trigger on their marketing apparatus when their Festival was not in session, and to split the profits of whatever I made at the Pox office with them. And so that's how I created the African American film Festival Releasing Movement, which we called Affirm.

0 (58m 45s):
Right. And basically, a Affirm becomes like this, this sort of independent distribution company, I think like sort of sending out indie films to theaters and festivals and, and, and later of course, which we'll get to a Affirm becomes ARRAY, which is what it's known as today.

3 (58m 60s):
And that was covered on C n n and, you know, New York Times, and this new way of distributing black film in a very kind of grass rooted way. Eventually, you know, I'm not stopping knocking on doors. I'm eventually, you know, eventually got us into a m c theaters. Yeah. But yeah, you know, also was really accepting and really thinking about where are other spaces where we can show film? Why can't I show film at the museum? They have a screen. Why can't I show film at the university? Why can't I show film at the, you know, black women's sorority, rotary Club, whatever. So started to count those as screens.

0 (59m 37s):
That film I will follow, ended up getting some pretty great reviews. I mean, Roger Ebert was basically telling everyone to go see it. I think he said it was, it was like one of the best films he'd seen about the death of a loved one. And then after that, you started working in your next film called Middle of Nowhere. and I wanna ask you about, about funding for that, because as, as I understand it, you were financing these films with your own money. Like, like for I will follow You used the money you'd saved up for a down payment on a house. So when you started to work in the middle of nowhere, did you, did you also sell finance? Or did you try to raise money? Yeah,

3 (1h 0m 13s):
It, the, the second one, I used profits from the first one. Plus my landlord in my office building said, oh, I have some friends who might invest. And so he collected 20,000, 10,000, 50,000 from some, you know, people he knew that were, you know, doing pretty well. I mean, you know, like, not film people, just people who had an extra 20 grand to spare. And we put together like $250,000 and made middle of nowhere.

0 (1h 0m 48s):
That film, I think was also the first time you worked with David Oow. How did you guys meet? How did you come together?

3 (1h 0m 57s):
Well, this is a very rare example of me getting a phone call from an actor saying, I've read the script. He

0 (1h 1m 3s):
Called you,

3 (1h 1m 4s):
He called me outta the Blue one day. I knew who he was as an actor, but he wasn't huge at that time. I mean, I knew he was, 'cause I know all the black actors. But he had been like, he had had a small part one scene in Lincoln Spielberg's Lincoln, you know, he played like the bad guy in Planet of the Apes. you know, he had had like small roles in good films. Yeah. He had been on a plane to do looping, which is additional dialogue, recording a d r on Planet of the Apes. He was flying from LA to Toronto to do a d r and sitting next to a man, so strange, who says, oh my gosh, is this you?

3 (1h 1m 49s):
The man opens his laptop and he's been watching on his laptop a show that David was in in the UK called Spooks a spy show. And David's like, oh yeah, that's me, you know, thank you, thank you. you know, they get to talking and the guy and about a half hour in says, can I ask you, ask you your advice on just something that's come my way, this weird thing that's come my way. He's like, I have nothing to do with the entertainment industry, but I've been asked by my friend to invest in this independent film. Should I, David's like, oh, bad idea. Never invest, don't invest though in a film. you know, who is it? Yeah. And he, she, he said, yeah, it's by this woman, this black woman.

3 (1h 2m 32s):
I thought you might know her named Haven DuVernay. Just a week before he had seen me on c n n talking about a firm, which was our distribution thing. He had said, I just saw her on C n N. He said, can I read the script? So the guy gives him the script, he reads the script on the rest of the flight, gives it back to the guy. Afterward, he says to the guy, we should go have dinner. The guy was like, huh, this is an actor on a show that I was watching on my laptop. Yeah, let's go have dinner. They go have a steak dinner

0 (1h 3m 6s):
Like, like that night. Like, they get a

3 (1h 3m 8s):
Complain like, like that. Or the next night or something. Oh my God. Wherein David convinces this guy to invest in the film and then calls me when he Lands at L a X and says, hi, my name is David Oyelowo. And he said, you know, if there's any part for me in this, I would hope and I asked you to consider me. Wow. and I said, oh, this is really lovely. You've really boosted my confidence today. I just wanna thank you because this is really lovely. I know by the time this gets to your agents They, just weren kill They. just weren say, no

0 (1h 3m 41s):
They, just weren say, no way. 'cause there's no money in it. Look

3 (1h 3m 43s):
It, I'm gonna give you a hug at the end. There's no check. It's hugs. What are you talking about? But thank you. And he said, oh, I, that's kind of you to say, but I just want you to realize one thing. If I say I'm gonna do something, I'm gonna do it. And you should know my agents work for me. I don't work for them. Wow. I was like, okay. And sure enough, cut to three months later, we're on the set. And his seatmate was an investor in the film.

0 (1h 4m 7s):
That's an amazing story. It

3 (1h 4m 8s):
Is an amazing story, especially when you consider what happened next,

0 (1h 4m 12s):
Which, which we will get to in a moment. After the break, we'll hear more from Ava about the path that led her to Sundance and eventually to making some of the most powerful films of the past decade. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

Justworks (1h 4m 34s):
Hey, small business leaders on How, I, Built, This. We hear all about how founders have built their companies from the ground up. And today's sponsor, Justworks is all about supporting that small business growth. Whether you're looking for help with payroll benefits, HR tools or compliance, Justworks has you covered. Justworks makes it easier for you to start, run and grow a business. Let me tell you how Justworks can help your business. Great people are at the core of every great business. And Justworks can help you attract and retain top talent with Justworks. Get access to medical, dental, and vision insurance benefits, plus benefits that include wellness and mental health support, fertility and family building, financial planning and more. Because you and your team deserve benefits that go beyond the basics. Justworks makes it simple to hire and manage remote employees across all 50 states. Help when you need it with 24 7 expert support for you and your employees. Run your business with confidence. Learn more about Justworks and how they can help you get more done by visiting justworks.com/podcast. That's justworks.com/podcast.

Mercury (1h 5m 45s):
90% of startups fail 90%, just 10 out of every 100. Last. In order to succeed, startups need grit, talent and the ability to perform at the highest level. That's where Mercury comes in. Mercury is banking engineered for the startup journey, a modern solution to help your company become the best version of itself. To eliminate the hurdles that come with traditional banking, to offer a product crafted to help you scale with safety and stability. To go beyond banking and provide access to the foremost investors, operators and tools. Because when you can operate with confidence building your company becomes an art form. Join over 100,000 companies banking with Mercury at Mercury dot com. Mercury is a financial technology company, not a bank. Banking services provided by Choice Financial Group and Evolve Bank and trust members. F D I C.

0 (1h 6m 48s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raj. So it's 2012. And Ava DuVernay has submitted her latest film, the one with David Oyelowo to the Sundance Film Festival. And by the way, it's not the first time she's submitted something to Sundance. She's done that several times before and been rejected every time. But this time with the film, middle of Nowhere,

3 (1h 7m 12s):
I got in and got into the top category, dramatic competition and ended up winning.

0 (1h 7m 20s):
You won Best Director. Wow. I think even up until that point, like you were running a publicity company and you were really good at it and you were really successful and but winning best director at a film Festival like that, that's working at the top of the, of, of your craft. Like did you, what did you remember thinking when that happened? I

3 (1h 7m 43s):
Remember thinking, I should think about trying to really do this full time.

0 (1h 7m 48s):
I I would think so. Yeah.

3 (1h 7m 50s):
Yeah. And so I remember thinking, wow, this is, I cannot believe I've won this and that if I'm ever gonna do this, the time is now to, to try to strike out and do this full-time so I can be Lynn Shelton and maybe make a film a year that I don't have to pay for. And, and that was truly, I thought, gosh, I could just support myself on movies. That's the first time that idea came to my head. and I remember giving myself six months to wean myself off of my business and give my clients to other PR firms and just kind of transitioned the business into being more of a film distribution entity.

3 (1h 8m 32s):
Because at that point I had distributed two of my own films. and I thought, if nothing else, if this fails, I know I can distribute films for other filmmakers. If my films don't continue on, I can help other people's films continue on. Yeah. So that's how my filmmaking and our business of ARRAY started to become really intertwined. It.

0 (1h 8m 55s):
It's what's so interesting is that I'm sure at that time, They weren people who interviewed you and were surprised to learn that you weren't a full-time Filmmaker or that you were, that you had a publicity company. But when you think about it, like what you were doing as a publicist was shaping stories and telling stories and that's what you do as a Filmmaker. So actually as you explain your evolution from one to another, it makes total sense because there actually slightly different versions of the same thing.

3 (1h 9m 32s):
Yeah, for sure. It's crafting story. Yeah, I agree. I, you know, the main thing about being a director is you have to convince people or inspire people to wanna do the thing that you need done. Yeah. And through it all, talking to actors, which is a big part of If, you ask any director, young director, what is the piece that they're scared of? Almost all of them will say talking to the actor. But it is your job to talk to the actor and get out of that other human being with their own history mind and thoughts and heart, what you think will service the whole project.

3 (1h 10m 13s):
So talking to the actor, I mean, it's not like talking to your grandma, like these are, the actor has their own, like some of them are warm and fuzzy and some of them aren't. But for me, publicity at prepared me to talk to the actor to deal with actors and to be comfortable around them.

0 (1h 10m 27s):
I think of a director as like a c e o and a c o o at the same time. Like, you are running the operations, but you are in charge and responsible for everything.

3 (1h 10m 39s):
Yeah. I think of the c I think of the director as the mayor of a small town because a film has every element of a small town. I mean a fire department, a hospital, that's the medic, you know what I mean? There's some people work in construction, there's some people working with the food. There's someone that's in charge of the bathrooms. There's someone that's in charge of the stuff that's gonna come after the visual effects, the color, the actors, the, I mean, it is literally, you know, it's, it's dozens of departments of everyone doing their little piece. Just like in a town. Like everyone has to know what we're doing, but also feel, I like people to feel free to contribute beyond their role.

3 (1h 11m 20s):
If, you have an idea. Say it. If something's not working, say it. And to be able to kind of manage all of that.

0 (1h 11m 27s):
I read an interview you gave and you talked about after you won Best director of Sundance, this was your quote, you said, there was no golden ticket that unlocked the riches of Hollywood for me. They weren, no studio meetings, They weren, no studio calls, They weren, no offers to do things. I mean, you had won this incredibly prestigious award and you didn't return to LA with like an inbox just jammed with offers.

3 (1h 11m 56s):
No. Nope. I didn't. They weren some things that came through. I got an opportunity to make a short film for a fashion brand. And while very different than the trajectory of my white male counterparts who had won the award the years before me, who basically slid into movie deals, you know, I found myself making a short afterward for a brand. I was grateful for it. I got to make something on someone else's money. and I loved what I made. It's a piece for Prada called The Door. But it was much different than, you know, one of my fellow filmmakers at Sundance who won the screenwriting award that year, who within six months had a deal to direct the sequel to Jurassic Park.

3 (1h 12m 43s):
you know, They weren differences. But, you know, kept going, what, what can you do?

0 (1h 12m 50s):
You were not originally meant to be the director of the film. That that really became the first major film that you were, you would direct in terms of budget, which was Selma. You were originally not meant to be the director of that film, right?

3 (1h 13m 8s):
No, I think it was the eighth. Wow. The eighth, seventh or eighth or something. And not like seventh or eighth director that they called sixth or seventh director who was actually had a contract to make the movie. Like wow, that many people had dropped out.

0 (1h 13m 25s):
And part of it was 'cause the budget was so small, right?

3 (1h 13m 28s):
Yeah. The budget was so small.

0 (1h 13m 30s):
$20 million or something. Which

3 (1h 13m 31s):
$20 million. Imagine. I mean, I just told you what I was making films with before. Right? So imagine someone says $20 million to make a film. I'm like, are you cra yes, I can do it, I can do it. I have no idea, but I promise you I can do it. And of course that opportunity only came to me because of David

0 (1h 13m 56s):
Who called you? 'cause he read your screenplay on a, on an airplane and then was in your film Middle of nowhere. He was cast in Selma. And how did, what happened? I mean, how did he get you involved in in that film?

3 (1h 14m 13s):
He was cast in, in Selma by the director who left the film before because of budget. He had always knew, and his mother rest in peace had been very much a champion of him playing Dr. King. And he always knew that somehow he's gonna play Dr. King. So he, this is something that's been with him for many, many years. So this King movie is moving around town. He, I think the story is that he had auditioned for it with another director and didn't get it. And when the, the director before me auditioned him, he was cast as Dr. King. Hmm. But when that director, I don't know why I'm pretending like it's, it's Lee Daniels.

3 (1h 14m 55s):
It's Lee Daniels, yeah. Okay. Yeah. I mean, what the heck? Why are we, you can Google, right? There's a thing called Google Now Guy, there's, we gotta say the names. Yep. So when Lee Daniels left the film, basically David being scrappy, the same scrappy guy that's gonna take a stranger on the plane to steak dinner to advocate, to invest in a film for a woman he doesn't know in a film he is not in, said, just because the directors left doesn't mean I can't still play Dr. King. So he says to the producers, if I can find another director who will do it for $20 million, can you consider still making the film? and I can still play Dr.

3 (1h 15m 36s):
King. So cut to this woman he just worked with on this film, one Sundance. He says to me, you're gonna need to rewrite this film and make it for $20 million. What would you consider doing it? I never saw myself making a Civil rights drama. It's just a, it's the kind of movie that I would never watch. And he said, well, could you make one that you would watch? Hmm. and I thought, ah, that's interesting. And having not a lot of options on the table at that time. And having that challenge from him, I started to become very attracted to the idea of doing it.

3 (1h 16m 22s):
And so I said, I will take a swing at this script and I will try. And the whole deal was if I could write a script that could be made for 20 million that was good, they would make it.

0 (1h 16m 34s):
You had to rewrite the entire script. And from, from what I understand, I mean the, the King family owns the rights to his speeches. You couldn't, you had to recreate his speeches without using the same words.

3 (1h 16m 48s):
The King family doesn't have rights to his speeches, but an estate, the estate has the right to his speeches. And the estate had already given the rights to the speeches to another Filmmaker who was much more famous than I was. 'cause nobody knew who I was. you know who it was? Was

0 (1h 17m 3s):
It Steven Spielberg?

3 (1h 17m 4s):
Look at this guy. Well researched. Yes. Steven Spielberg had the rights to the speeches in film at that time. And so in order to tell the story the way around it was to approximate or to rewrite Dr. King's speeches, easy. No problem. Right. How

0 (1h 17m 27s):
Did you do

3 (1h 17m 27s):
That? I don't know. Yeah. I, I remember writing it, I remember doing the story first, which needed to be changed from something that was a lot of kind of trying to have political intrigue. It was a lot of stuff with the president and to really imbue it with a sense of black people on the ground in Selma. The, the, the film was called Selma, not President Johnson. Right, right. So it was about taking what I'd learned as an African American studies major as U C L A, what I learned as, you know, a daughter of my father who was from Lowndes County, Alabama, which you know, sits right two minutes from Selma, what I knew about all of my summers growing up, visiting my father's family in Alabama in the summers.

3 (1h 18m 19s):
And to just pour all of that into the screenplay. And then afterward I tackled the speeches and I remember submitting it and getting a really fast answer back. We're gonna run a budget on it, but this is fantastic and if we can get this down to 20 million, you're gonna be in production. Wow. And then we were,

0 (1h 18m 41s):
You filmed, I think it took you like 30 days to film that movie, which is kind of nuts, right? I mean, to make a whole feature. Yeah.

3 (1h 18m 52s):
It took you 30 days feels like, oh, it just took you 30 days for you had only 30 days. Okay. Maybe that's what it was.

0 (1h 19m 0s):
Yeah, yeah,

3 (1h 19m 1s):
Yeah,

0 (1h 19m 1s):
Yeah. That's what you had.

3 (1h 19m 3s):
That's what I had. It was, it was like 31 or 32 days or something like that. Yeah.

0 (1h 19m 7s):
So to make that work, you have to probably spend twice as much time like organizing every minute of the day. Right. Like planning that out in super detail.

3 (1h 19m 22s):
Yeah. Yeah. A lot of heavy prep and really important to have people around you who know what they're doing. The challenge with the period piece as one can imagine listening is if I'm making a movie about now, I can go out, find a location and if there's a scene in a grocery store, I just walk into the grocery store and I shoot. Yeah. If I'm making a movie about, you know, the sixties, I've gotta find a grocery store that still looks like the sixties or change it to look like the sixties. And every single thing that's on the shelf has to look like the sixties. And every actor has to be dressed like they're in the sixties. So I can't just pull clothes off the Yeah.

3 (1h 20m 4s):
Store. Everything has to be made and rented. And so that's how, why period pieces cost so much. And that's why the 20 million, you know, goes quickly because every, every streetlight sign, shoe, car, everything has to be period. So the way that this film came about, I always trace back to that random flight that David had on the film before. and I know that that's not random for me. That's a part of the design of why I am supposed to be doing what I'm doing and how things fall into place. I believe that everything's for a reason.

3 (1h 20m 45s):
And so that, that set was really intense with a spirit of this is meant to be,

0 (1h 20m 54s):
Even when Selma came out, it was and is widely praised. But you were not nominated for best director. and I know that, this is probably kind of a sensitive question, but I don't know, I mean, did it matter? Did were, were you hurt by that?

3 (1h 21m 12s):
I wasn't hurt by the not getting best director. And I'll tell you why. I was hurt by David not getting best actor nomination for him not to be nominated. That was, I remember the moment. I just, that was the moment where I, I was, you know, really had the wind knocked outta me. Yeah. The reason why I wasn't hurt by getting Best Director is because statistically speaking, there was no way for that to happen. And people are like, Ava, what are you talking about? I just, I had worked in the industry as a publicist. I've done Oscar campaigns

0 (1h 21m 44s):
And it's a campaign.

3 (1h 21m 45s):
It is a campaign and it is a very specific route to the nomination and it just wasn't gonna happen. I do not know at that time, did not know any of those people. And they did not know me.

0 (1h 22m 2s):
The Academy Electors or

3 (1h 22m 4s):
Members or whatever they called my branch, the director's branch. Okay. Right. I did not go to film school. I did not interface with them. I did not live in the same places. I did not speak the same film language. I, I didn't know them and they didn't know me on top of that. No black woman director had ever been nominated in the history of the academy, which at that point is many decades. So that's against me. So when I say no, I wasn't, I wasn't pushed outta shape about it. People have to remember what the times were. There was no precedent for it to ever happen. So I was not delusional enough to think, oh, I'm gonna be the one.

0 (1h 22m 46s):
I'm curious about what you think makes a great director. Do, do you think that great directors are great because they can get actors to give them their best work? Is that a a definition of what makes a director strong?

3 (1h 23m 7s):
No, I don't think so because I think, I mean, I think that's a part of it, but I mean, you can have a great actor give a fantastic performance in a film that's Ys not working. We've all seen that. For me, it's a film that I can look at a film and say, oh, that person got their vision out. Like they, right. They told the story that they wanted to tell. Like I made a film called Marie Clinton Time. I look at that film and for all of the beautiful experiences that I had on it and for the beauty that I think is in the film, it's not my film, right?

3 (1h 23m 48s):
It was the first time I made a film for a massive studio and went through a process of kind of like group filmmaking. you know what I mean? Like a lot of people with a lot of opinions who have a lot more power than you do. And ultimately you compromise and you get to the end and you say, okay, I think this will be okay. you know, and sit back and say, oh, okay. That, that wasn't quite what I meant. Not not quite what I started out wanting to do. and that, that was okay. That was what that experience was for me in my career.

3 (1h 24m 28s):
And so many, you know, directors go through that They weren. So there, there are many people around the world that I continue to hear from about the film, you know, in ways that are nourishing and necessary and beautiful. But I look at the film and I remember the process and it was a process that wasn't all my process. So I think that, you know, the, the successful film is the film that the Filmmaker can say that's more, that is more of what I had in mind than is, than it's not. And the closer you can get to that being kind of 100% is, you know, now you're in Freedom Land.

3 (1h 25m 9s):
And that's what I experienced on, I will follow. 'cause no one cared Middle of nowhere 'cause no one cared Selma. 'cause really no one cared. Yeah. you know, I mean, they cared, but they really let me have that, that it

0 (1h 25m 23s):
Was still yours. Right.

3 (1h 25m 24s):
It was still mine. Yeah. I thrive in smaller environments. And so after that went on to do 13th and to do, when they see us in spaces where I could get a hundred percent of what I wanted out out. And so that's my deficit is I kind of have to, I have to have room to move and can't really make movies by committee. I can make movies with collaborators. I can hear, you know, insight and criticism and ideas, but I can't really like, give up parts. you know, I, I can't, it's hard for me.

0 (1h 26m 2s):
Could you imagine working on a big, big budget film like A Wrinkle in Time Again? Or, or not really, not that you wanna kind of focus on things that, that you shape?

3 (1h 26m 16s):
I've had the most success with the work that I have done Unhindered.

0 (1h 26m 21s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 26m 21s):
You know, whether it's the independent films and the success that they had. Selma, which was a really hands off process. 13th, which was, and When They See Us, which is Netflix saying, hello ma'am, would you like this money to make something that's important to you? Well, yes, thank you. When will I see you again? Oh, when you're finished. That is the perfect time for me to see you again. Thank you. Whether it's my film, my TV projects, now, you know, I have the most, you know, success with networks that are really saying, Hey ma'am, we are paying you for your voice and we're gonna let you do you. That's the stuff that really works. So if there was something that was big budget where that kind of space was a allowed or given to me, afforded to me, and it exists, it exists for some filmmakers, if I was ever presented with something like that and it was something that meant something to me and I was attracted to, sure.

3 (1h 27m 15s):
But you know, right now the things that I'm focused on are much, you, you get more leeway when you are spending less money. So I'd rather have leeway and less money.

0 (1h 27m 27s):
I mean, it's interesting that this idea of creating your art on your own terms, right? Because that, that is what you are doing with your company, which, which you, you rebranded, you call, it's now known as ARRAY. 'cause you're not, it's not just a distribution and production company and a nonprofit, but it's, it's kind of like a movement, right? Like you do all kinds of outreach and you've got a database of people of color working in the industry. I mean, the ambition of what you, of what you built there is big. And so it seems to me that a actually you can do many bigger things by doing it on your own, right?

0 (1h 28m 8s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 28m 9s):
I mean that's interesting, this idea of doing it on your own, because I was just talking to, I just did a panel with some fellow artists for, for Freeze in New York, this kind of art week in New York. and I was talking about like sometimes wishing that I was one of my white male counterparts who does not have to labor on top of the film. Like who can just make his film? Who doesn't also have to go make the speech to the independent film. Right. Cinema houses, who doesn't have to like, try to create film literacy in our community and build a, a screening room that's free for the community to learn about films from around the world.

3 (1h 28m 53s):
'cause there's no movie theaters in our neighborhoods, like, who doesn't have to create initiatives on my sets where, you know, I have to focus on, you know, equalizing opportunities for women directors. Like, who just doesn't have to do that. Like my white guy friends don't sit on panels about this stuff. Like, they don't get called for articles about this stuff. They don't have to do it. They just can make their stuff. Yeah. you know, I talk to Filmmaker friends at, at a, you know, these days it's a Zoom, but you know, you run into someone in the store or something and you know, what are you working on? And they're telling you about a film. Well, what am I working on, dude, you don't wanna frigging know, like, I'm talking to CEOs about inclusion.

3 (1h 29m 39s):
I'm fighting for, you know, to get more black folks in these unions so that they can be hired as crew. Like, I'm doing a lot more than just being able to sit home and make my movie. Yeah. And so I'm in a place right now where I really have to interrogate my feelings about doing that. Where in some moments of the day I am like, I shouldn't have to do this. you know, if this is a equal playing field, then it should be equal for all of us without me having to do this extra work on top of my art making. But within that, the joy, right, the freedom of expression, the building of new ideas, the disrupting of systems, the innovation that I've experienced by doing all that outweighs the days where I think, I wish I didn't have to do all this.

3 (1h 30m 35s):
So I think right now, ARRAY is 10 years old. It is a nonprofit that has community outreach and educational initiatives and learning guides for everything that I create.

0 (1h 30m 46s):
It's physical buildings. You have a campus, it's

3 (1h 30m 48s):
A four building campus and historic Filipino town in Los, Angeles, we have, you know, we are vaccinating people and community screenings and literacy and, you know, the three day film Festival to educate the community about Philippine x films or, you know, the French new wave or to teach kids how to read subtitles or to, there's all kinds of stuff going on, right? That stuff is, it's magic. It's beautiful to me. And it's come out of a place of absence, but it has become a place of abundance.

0 (1h 31m 20s):
There's a quote that I read in an, in an article, an interview you gave and you said, we, you were talking about the entertainment industry and you said, we need to to be thinking more broadly about how we not only reform the system, but rebuild the system. Which is huge. Just a huge, enormous task ahead. Do you think that's either happening or, or will happen? Yeah, I

3 (1h 31m 45s):
Think it will happen. It may not happen and be fully realized in my time, but someone's gonna see it right in the future or someone's going to be activated by it. And you know, this whole journey is just all of us taking our own little steps. Like especially the journey of black people, the journey of women, the journey of black directors. Like each person's lifetime is just one step and a long walk to get to a certain place. And so I'm hoping that my step can be a big one. I'm like trying to leap and get us a lot further in my time.

3 (1h 32m 25s):
And that's really my hope for ARRAY. That this is something that even after I'm gone, you know, even after my time on this, this planet is done, could the principles and the work and the, you know, way of working that I'm trying to embed in this kind of ARRAY way, can that continue on without me? That's the goal.

0 (1h 32m 50s):
When you trace your life story, just everything that you've experienced and all of the, just the, I mean, it's a life of a somebody who followed their curiosity really. How much of, of where you are today do you attribute to just the grind and how hard you worked? And, and does any part of you attribute any of it to luck as well? Or what do you think?

3 (1h 33m 20s):
I guess I, I I attribute it to luck, but I don't call it luck, you know, I, I think it's, it's my path and it was these are blessings. These are, this is designed and it's up to me to work, to live up to these moments that are put in front of me. But certainly in the way that you're defining it, I would say luck. Yeah, work really hard, but you could work really hard and never get the breaks, you know, work really hard and never get, be seen, be heard. You can work really hard and you know, no one reads your scripts on a plane and calls you the next day and says, let let me be in it. Who ends up being the same guy who gets you Selma that gets nominated for the Oscar that does da da.

3 (1h 34m 1s):
You could be, you could make 13th and you know, it sits on the back channels of Netflix and doesn't really get seen or moved, but it moved. You can, you can make, when they see us, you know, and not change the lives of the five men, it doesn't, it completely revolutionize who they are as human beings. And they lived differently than they did when it first came out because no one saw it and it didn't make a difference. But that did. And so, you know, there's only so far that the work can get you. And that's far like, I believe I would've gotten far from just sheer hard labor.

3 (1h 34m 42s):
But there's been a, a furthering beyond that that has been blessings that have come into my life that are beyond my control. And some people call that luck, I'll take it.

0 (1h 34m 58s):
That's Ava DuVernay, Filmmaker and founder of ARRAY. Our conversation was recorded back in 2021 and since then, Ava worked with Colin Kaepernick on a six-part series about his formative years called Colin in Black and White. And she recently wrapped production on Origin, a film based on Isabel Wilkerson's bestselling book cast. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And it's always, it's totally free. This episode was produced by Rachel Faulkner, with music composed by T Arablouei. It was Edited by Neva Grant with research help from Liz Metzger.

0 (1h 35m 42s):
Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, Carla Estevez, Sam Paulson, and Rael Wood. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This

Amazon Music (1h 36m 4s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to How I Built This early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon music app today,

wondery Plus (1h 36m 12s):
or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If, you wanna show your support for our show? Be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com.

0 (1h 36m 25s):
Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Stamps.com (1h 36m 32s):
For 25 years, stamps.com has made mailing and shipping easy. All you need is a computer and printer. Imagine mailing and shipping right from your desk anytime, no traffic, no waiting, no hassle. Plus stamps.com gives you discounts up to 84%. Sign up for stamps.com today. Use code program for a four week trial plus postage and a digital scale. That's stamps.com code program.