0 (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How I, Built This Early, and ad free Right. now join Wondery. Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts.

Indeed (10s):
If, you need to hire. you need Indeed, indeed is your matching and hiring platform with over 350 million global monthly visitors according to Indeed data and matching technology that helps you find quality candidates fast. Ditch the busy work Use indeed for scheduling, screening and messaging so you can connect with candidates faster. And indeed doesn't just help you hire faster. 75% of employers claim indeed delivers the highest quality matches compared to other online job sites. And get this. How I Built. This. listeners, get a 75 pound sponsored job credit to get your jobs more visibility@indeed.com slash how I built indeed.com/how I built terms and conditions. Apply Need to hire you. Need indeed.

Pipedrive (1m 3s):
This episode is brought to you by Pipedrive, the easy and effective CRM for closing more deals and driving small business growth New year new targets. Pipedrive allows you to automate your sales process so You can focus on your other business priorities in 2024. With Pipedrive, You can stay on top of your sales activities so you never miss a follow up. So sign up today and get a special 60 day free trial now@pipedrive.com with the code built terms and conditions apply. Hey, it's guy here and I hope your new year is off to a great start.

0 (1m 41s):
On today's show, we have an episode from the archives. It's about a founder who could not come up with a compelling business idea until one day he tried to set up a meeting for 15 people and he realized that is a really hard thing to do. And from that Calendly was born. It was an episode that first ran back in 2020 and I hope you enjoy it. Oh, and one more thing, just a quick note on this episode, Tope Ana's name is pronounced Tope. That's how he pronounces it. And I know some of you from Nigeria think it might be pronounced Tope. Nope, he pronounces it. Tope. So without further ado, here's the show.

0 (2m 23s):
How much was it gonna cost you to get this prototype built?

2 (2m 27s):
A little over $200,000 is what we thought it would've cost. Wow. So I had to empty every single dollar in my 401k, use every single dollar in my savings account. I had to borrow a little bit On top of that, I ended up borrowing a little bit from Linden Club

0 (2m 41s):
At a high interest rate.

2 (2m 42s):
I had a very high interest rate and maxed out all my credit cards and put it all in on on this idea that at the time didn't even have a name.

0 (2m 57s):
Welcome to How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealist, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz. And on the show today, how to Awotona turned his frustration with scheduling meetings into Calendly, a multimillion dollar business that makes setting up a meeting quick and simple. One of the things we talk about a lot on this show and a thing that is such a crucial part of building anything is rejection. Hearing the words no, for some people it's easy, it doesn't phase them, but for most people, rejection is hard.

0 (3m 46s):
And overcoming the fear of it, building the resilience it takes to withstand the endless nos, it comes from practice. Think about previous guests we've had on the show, like Mark Cuban and Sarah Blakely. Their earliest jobs were in sales. They had to make the same pitch over and over again and hear hundreds and hundreds of people tell them no over and over again. Same thing with entrepreneurs like Davis Smith who built Cotopaxi and David Neman of JetBlue. As young men, they had to do what is probably the most difficult form of salesmanship going door to door as missionaries.

0 (4m 27s):
Most of the time the doors slammed in their faces. But like anything else, eventually you get used to it and it helps build up a thick skin, which of course served all of these entrepreneurs very well later on, as it did for today's guest. Tope Awotona. Tope also spent his early years as a salesman, first door-to-door selling alarm systems and later doing million dollar software deals with major companies. And all of the nos he heard along the way served him especially well when he eventually went on to launch and then fail at his first two businesses, losing tens of thousands of dollars along the way.

0 (5m 11s):
But like other people you've heard on the show, Tope was able to take all of that disappointment, all of the slam doors and all the meetings that went nowhere and all of the failed aspirations. And to think of it more like research. So that when he finally set out to start a business that did and is doing really, really well, he had a better idea of what he wasn't supposed to do and a much better sense of the steps he needed to take in order to succeed. And what Tope wound up building was Calendly, it's a meeting scheduling platform that he started because he got so frustrated trying to schedule his own meetings and couldn't stand the endless back and forth emails.

0 (5m 55s):
And today, just seven years after it launched, it's a $60 million a year business. And as you'll hear it reached that point with just a small amount of outside investment. But before we get to Calendly, a little about Toe's, earliest years, he's Nigerian and he spent his childhood in Africa growing up in the suburbs of Lagos. His mom was a pharmacist and his dad was a microbiologist who was also pretty entrepreneurial. He sold chemicals to different businesses and toe's. Early childhood was pretty great.

2 (6m 29s):
Yeah. So lived in a number of different places, but where I lived for 12 years, you call it like a lower upper class neighborhood for, you know, in that part of the, the world knew all of our neighbors were friends with all the kids in the neighborhood. My parents were, you know, very active in the neighborhood. So everyone kind of knew them and they, they were people who were really kind of very magnetic. And so they just really attracted a lot of people, very generous people, very given people and people just, there were always people around, is what I remember as a kid. Were

0 (7m 8s):
You a, a well-behaved kid?

2 (7m 10s):
Depends on who you ask. I knew how to get into enough trouble to really terrorize my siblings, but not really face the wrath of my parents.

0 (7m 20s):
Were your parents strict?

2 (7m 22s):
My mom was, my dad was not so much, they could not have been more opposite.

0 (7m 26s):
So your mom was the kind of disciplinarian, your dad was more kind of chilled out?

2 (7m 31s):
Yes. So my dad was, Hey, you know, let's eat 10 ice cream sandwiches for dinner if that's what we want. And my mom's like, no ice cream in this house.

0 (7m 40s):
Was were you a pretty good student as a, as a little kid?

2 (7m 43s):
I'd say so. Very good. I'd say. Was

0 (7m 45s):
That something that your parents stressed at home education? They

2 (7m 48s):
Did, but not, you know, I don't remember having a lot of conversations with my parents about my grades. There was just an expectation that you performed well in school because they did. I remember as a kid, you know, probably eight or seven, my mom would, would argue with my dad about how she really thought it was important for us to go to Harvard. And I didn't know what Harvard was, but I know that my mom thought it was important.

0 (8m 11s):
And when you were little, like 8, 9, 10, 11, would people talk about you as a, as a smart kid, would they say, oh, there's to, he's really smart, or, or did you just feel like just everyone you knew was pretty good at school?

2 (8m 24s):
I don't know if people did. I think the first time it occurred to me was, so I ended up skipping a few grades, you know, like in primary school. And I think that's when I, I knew Hmm. And I think my mom was a little worried about what that might mean and how, how that might play out. So I think that was really the first time I became conscious of it.

0 (8m 52s):
I guess. When you were 12 years old, your father, your father was tragically killed and I, I can't imagine what that was like for you, for your brothers and your mom. What do you remember about that time, about how you felt?

2 (9m 11s):
I remember that it changed everything I thought I knew. So as a kid, I, you know, my dad was my hero. Right. And you know, because when you're, when you're 12 and your dad lets you get away with everything, he's your favorite parent.

0 (9m 28s):
Yeah.

2 (9m 28s):
I would stay up late at night till my dad came home, no matter how late that was. So after he died, you know, I went through, you know, a period of time in which I lost a lot of weight. I didn't really have an appetite for many, many months after that. I became an insomniac at the age of 12. These are things I now recognize that are, you know, signs of trauma. But at the time I didn't really recognize it.

0 (9m 52s):
You were 12 years old when your father died and, and you were there. You you, you saw his death?

2 (10m 1s):
I did.

0 (10m 2s):
It was a, it was a robbery, essentially.

2 (10m 5s):
A carjacking.

0 (10m 6s):
I can't imagine how you were able to cope with that as a kid. I mean, I mean, it's hard for kids to process emotions easily sometimes. I read that you kinda went back to school and kind of carried on. I

2 (10m 20s):
Did, I did. You know, I think some of that is the Nigerian way to be honest with you. But I also think within that, my mom had a very, my mom was a very strong and resilient person. And you know, one of the things I really appreciate about the Nigerian culture is really everybody's your family, right? Even your, your family friends are essentially think of themselves as your family. So I think she was able to, you know, a lot of people rallied around her and supported her, but she definitely, it was a very, very difficult time for her. But I think she also really wanted us to, I don't wanna say move on with our lives, but I think she wanted us to, you know, she thought the best thing that we could do is proceed with our lives.

2 (11m 10s):
That's what would make our dad proud.

0 (11m 13s):
Your dad at the time of his death had, he kind of had gone through starting several businesses and some of them were, were kind of did okay and, but I guess he never kind of fulfilled his dream of really making it big, right?

2 (11m 28s):
You know, I don't know. I think that's one of the things I really miss actually is, you know, when you're 12 years old, there are a lot of things you want to ask, you know, you wanna ask your parents that you don't get to. So I don't really know what his dreams were. I do feel, as I think about it as an adult now is, I think he knew that he was incredibly, he was incredibly gifted in so many different ways. And I think he felt like he hadn't done his best work yet.

0 (11m 52s):
Hmm. So from, from what I understand, when you finished high school in Legos, you had an opportunity, an opportunity came to you to go study in the United States. Is is that what happened?

2 (12m 5s):
Yes. It was always a given that I was gonna go to college in the States. Hmm. But then what happened was, because my mom also retired at the same time, the whole family ended up moving to the States at that. In 96

0 (12m 18s):
You had family already in the us

2 (12m 20s):
Correct. So my older siblings were here, two, my older siblings were here as well as my aunt and her husband and her kids. And as a matter of fact, when we first came to the States, we lived with them.

0 (12m 30s):
Where did you move to

2 (12m 32s):
Marietta, Georgia.

0 (12m 33s):
And what was the plan that you would go to university? I mean, you'd finished high school. So what was that, the plan?

2 (12m 39s):
So that was the plan. So I took the SAT but then my mom was like, you can't go to college at 15, you're too young. So I ended up going to high school. I went to Wheeler High School, Marietta, I went there for two years

0 (12m 51s):
And, and I here, I mean, I'm curious, I mean, what did it, what was it like for you? I mean, you'd come from, from Lagos to Marietta, Georgia and now you were a student there. Was it totally different? Was it a completely different world for you?

2 (13m 6s):
Oh, absolutely. Hmm. I mean everything from the way, the way classes worked to uniforms, right? So the very fact that you didn't have to wear uniforms was very, very different from what I was used to. One other thing that was very different from me was in high school in Nigeria, I was a very popular kid. Hmm. That was very different here. And you know, just new country, very different culture. And you know, most of the people in the high school, they've known each other for many, many years. 'cause they went to middle school together, they went to maybe went to elementary school together and that was, I guess it was tougher socially than academically for sure.

0 (13m 46s):
Yeah. I mean, do you remember, I mean, coming from Legos where everybody around you was black, right? I mean the leaders, business leaders and people were powerful and also the poorest people, everybody around you was black and coming to America where racial issues are front and center, was that sort of jarring or something that you, you, you didn't expect when you arrived?

2 (14m 9s):
Not really. And that's not to say there weren't issues, but I think I was probably blind to them. And I think part of the reason why is in a lot of ways I've always kind of been the odd man out in everything I've ever done. Right. So even in high school in Nigeria, I was two years younger than most of the kids. And so I'd been kind of used to being the odd man out and just really being able to connect with all kinds of different people and not really thinking much about the differences. So I probably was blind to some of those things.

0 (14m 42s):
Hmm. Alright. So here you are and you graduated high school. So presumably this, at this point, you know, you're, you, you were gonna go to college. You, you had the opportunity to go when you were 15, but now you're 17 or maybe close to 18. So you, you decided to go to the University of Georgia initially, is that right? Correct. And what did you, what did you study when you got there? What was your, what was your focus?

2 (15m 6s):
Computer science initially, but I graduated with a business, sorry, a degree in

0 (15m 10s):
Business. And why and why Computer science?

2 (15m 12s):
Yeah. So I picked computer science for, for two reasons. So back in 95, windows 95 was launched. And that really opened my eyes. I just saw all these grown adults, you know, tripping over themselves to buy software. I thought that was really fascinating. I also noticed at the time that the world's richest man was Bill Gates. And so my little teenage mind, I started to connect the dots around maybe this is where the world is going.

0 (15m 40s):
So when you got to the University of Georgia, I mean this is like 98, I guess 98, I'm still early days of the internet. Did you like it? Did you like living in Athens? Did you like being a student at UGA?

2 (15m 52s):
I loved it. I loved it. I felt like I actually came into my own and I was, you know, developing my own independence.

0 (15m 59s):
And how were you, did you work while you were a student as well? I did.

2 (16m 2s):
So I initially worked at CVS

0 (16m 9s):
Like as a cashier?

2 (16m 10s):
Yeah. As a cashier. But then I, you know, like most college kids, I wanted more money. And somehow I think through a classmate or a friend, I learned about door-to-door sales.

0 (16m 22s):
So you thought that's what I wanna do to make more money.

2 (16m 25s):
Yeah. So I got a job selling alarm systems door to door.

0 (16m 29s):
Wow. This is while you were a student? Like Yes. During the summertime. Yeah.

2 (16m 33s):
Yes. It was a summer job. Talk about like, the most difficult job ever. I would knock on people's doors at, you know, right before dinnertime and so, and so, I'm pretty sure half the people who bought from me bought from me, just so they could get back to their dinner.

0 (16m 48s):
And, and were you doing this in, in Athens, Georgia?

2 (16m 51s):
Correct. So in Athens, Georgia. So we would go knock on doors for three, four hours and try to make a sale. And what would happen was the job was strictly commissioned. Right. So, which is, you know, you could potentially work all week, all month and,

0 (17m 6s):
And make nothing.

2 (17m 7s):
Yeah, that's right.

0 (17m 8s):
How did you do, did you make decent cash that summer?

2 (17m 11s):
I did. I did. So what happened was my very, very first day I sold two alarm systems. Hmm. Which, you know, allowed me to make $500, which at age, you know, 19, that's, that was a lot of money to me.

0 (17m 26s):
Yeah, that's great money.

2 (17m 28s):
It was the most money I'd ever made in a day. And interestingly, the rest of the week I did not sell anything. And so the very fact that I sold to alarm systems the first day, I think if that sequence would've been reversed, if I would've gone the first four days without selling any alarm systems, who knows what I would, you know, how my career would've changed. But that's what happened.

0 (17m 49s):
Did you like going door to door selling things? That's really hard. I mean, 'cause people slam doors in your face and they're not interested and they say no soliciting. Did you like that?

2 (17m 59s):
I liked it, huh. And I'll tell you why I liked it because of those first two days. Because

0 (18m 3s):
You made the money.

2 (18m 4s):
Yeah. And I think it ultimately gave me the understanding that there's a hit rate, right? So if you knock on X amount of doors, you'll ultimately make X amount of dollars. So to me it was a very predictable thing. And in between there's a lot of rejection. You know, people weren't happy that I interrupted their dinner. That that part was tough. But the rejection of people not really wanting to buy, that didn't really phase me. The other thing I really liked was it was the first time, like I could, I could really influence how much money I made. I could work harder, I could improve my skill and not wait six months, 12 months to make more money. I could make more money the next day, the next week.

2 (18m 45s):
Hmm.

0 (18m 45s):
So did, did being a salesperson just come naturally to you, do you think?

2 (18m 49s):
I guess you could say, so I did feel like it was stretching me in new ways that I had never been stretched before. So keep in mind, at the time, I'm still a computer science major, right? So I was used to a different form of any electoral stimulation. I'm coding, you write coding, you instruct the computer to do these things for you, and you see what you create that was fulfilling. But then this was a whole different, a whole different form of fulfillment and satisfaction. You could, you were influencing people's decisions, right? That was fulfilling in a way.

0 (19m 16s):
So you graduated from college and, and when you did, did you have a, like a ton of job offers?

2 (19m 22s):
No. Far from it. Hmm. I think one of the things I've learned, you know, myself, you know, many, many years after, is I think being the child of immigrants, I think maybe hurt my understanding of how to, how to be successful in the business world in America. And so I didn't do some of the things that my peers were doing, like internships. I didn't do those things. In hindsight, I should have done those things. And, you know, my parents would've known to, I, I mean, I, you know, they would've probably pushed me to do that if they were from here, but they didn't, my mom didn't know that herself. Not to put the blame on her, but I think there's, I am probably more savvy about how those things work today.

0 (20m 3s):
But from, from what I, I read about you, I mean, you did land a a couple of pretty good sales jobs out of college. Like I think for a couple years you were working for, for a like a luxury travel agency. And then, and then you got a job with IBM selling software. What, what was that like?

2 (20m 24s):
You know, it took me a while to, you know, there was a little bit of an adjustment, right? I'd spent a lot of time selling to consumers in the last few years. And so now I was selling to IT managers, right? To IT people, and also selling in some cases to, to CIOs. So I got exposed to a much more complicated, a much more sophisticated sales process. But I loved it. I found myself not really, like I, I enjoy the work I did, but you know, I've always been a very, very impatient person. And so, you know, at the time I looked at the CEO of IBM and he was in his sixties and it took him all 40 years to get there. And I didn't know that I had that much time to wait.

2 (21m 6s):
So I wanted to be in an accelerated path. And so I started looking for a much smaller software company that was growing at a much faster rate. So at the time, you know, IBM was probably go growing double digits every single year. And some of the businesses that I was looking at where, you know, probably going growing double digits every month. And so really wanted to, to work for, you know, a smaller company with, you know, more growth opportunity.

0 (21m 38s):
So you, you leave and what, where'd you find,

2 (21m 41s):
I went to Kansas City to work for a company called Perceptive Software. It made enterprise content management software. So I think of it as software to manage paper files, right? So digitalized files and manage the approval workflows around it. So

0 (21m 57s):
This is like B2B stuff, right?

2 (21m 60s):
Yeah. And so I really enjoyed working for the company, but while I was at the company, part of the onboarding process is you get a, a chance to, to meet with the founders and, you know, they, they tell the story, the company's founding story. And that story just really opened up my eyes. Why, you know, it was the first time I heard about the founding story of, of a company, of a successful company. Because before then, I thought that most people who started, you know, very successful companies, they just hit the ground running on day one. They knew exactly what product they wanna deliver to the market. Customers received it, they accepted, they break their backs, they pay them money. But what I learned from this founder was it took them eight years to really get to product market fit, as we call it today.

2 (22m 44s):
And the idea pivoted many, many, many different times. And the reason that that business became successful was had more to do with their ability to learn from their customers, their, their own resilience. Hmm. So from that point on, I think it made me realize that, you know, entrepreneurship was way more attainable than I thought it was before that. So I thought I had to be, you know, I just, yeah, it just, the story made me realize that I didn't have to have all the answers, but if I saw something that I thought needed to be changed, I just needed to take action and learn and persevere. And so because of that, I started, it kind of rekindled this very, you know, this latent idea that I had of becoming a tech entrepreneur.

2 (23m 30s):
And so from that point on, I started dabbling in a bunch of small businesses.

0 (23m 38s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Tope decides to get into e-commerce and how that leads him to failure after failure. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This

4 (23m 59s):
American literature has been shaped by remarkable storytellers like re Poe, mark Twain and John Steinbeck. But behind their groundbreaking books and stories lies equally incredible tales of struggle and triumph. Hi, I'm Lindsey Graham, the host of Wondery podcast, American History Tellers. We take you to the events times and people that shaped America and Americans. Our values are struggles and our dreams. In our latest series, we'll explore the lives of six of America's greatest authors and how their personal triumphs and tragedies influenced their writing and transformed modern literature. Follow American history tellers wherever you get your podcasts, You can listen ad free on the Amazon Music or Wondery app.

4 (24m 39s):
Hi, I'm Lindsey Graham, the host of Wonder's podcast, American Scandal. We bring to life some of the biggest controversies in US history. Presidential lies, corruption in sports, corporate fraud. Our newest season looks at Aaron Hernandez, a rising pro football star who shocked the sports world when he was arrested for a brutal murder. In 2013, fans media and Hernandez's own family couldn't understand how a beloved and respected player for the New England Patriots with a $40 million contract could commit such a heinous crime. But there had been warning signs all along the way, and they pointed to a much larger health crisis among current and former NFL players. Follow American Scandal on the Wonder App or wherever you get your podcasts, You can binge American Scandal, Aaron Hernandez early and ad free Right now on Wondery Plus.

0 (25m 33s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 2012 and to has decided to start his own company. But news from his family in Atlanta means he has to change his plans.

2 (25m 45s):
My mom was really sick and she ended up being in the ICU for, for about a month, month and a half or so. And she was recovering from the complicated case of malaria. And so because she was recovering from that, I think at the time she, looking back on it now, she, she had cancer at the time as she was recovering from that. And she was just in a, in a tough place and I wanted to be closer to her. I was thinking about going back to Atlanta and then at the same time I got recruited by a company in Atlanta that one of my best friends was working at.

2 (26m 27s):
And so that kind of accelerated the decision to, to come back to Atlanta.

0 (26m 32s):
Was it also a, a software company?

2 (26m 34s):
Yes, it was another software company doing a very similar thing, but for a, you know, as in selling enterprise software, but selling it to, in a, to a different industry. So,

0 (26m 43s):
So this company that you joined, I think it was called Vertafore, is that, is that right? That's correct. And I guess while you were there, you meet, you meet like this business contact who I, I dunno the whole story, but, but like he starts giving you ideas for how You can like start your own company. Yeah.

2 (27m 1s):
So he told me that he had actually helped a number of different entrepreneurs start a number of different e-commerce businesses. So he said most people start e-commerce businesses because they wanna sell something in particular. They wanna sell hand sanitizers, they want to sell masks, whatever it may be. He's like, well that's one way to start a business. But he said an interesting, a really interesting way to start a high growth e-commerce business is to instead start a business around around keywords that have a lot of traffic that You can optimize for. So instead of starting a business to sell hand sanitizers because you wanna sell hand sanitizers, what if you started a business selling light bulbs?

2 (27m 42s):
Because it turns out that there's a lot of traffic for light bulbs and no one's really satisfied in that need. Very well, I'm just throwing that as an idea. Okay, I got you. Okay. And so I thought that was fascinating and he showed me some of the businesses that he'd helped start. And you know, in hindsight I should have probably interviewed some of those other entrepreneurs. But the idea sounded fascinating. And so I paid him to do an analysis for me to find out what are some keywords that,

0 (28m 8s):
That people are searching

2 (28m 9s):
For Exactly. And are not, and no one's really fulfilling the e-commerce need.

0 (28m 14s):
And what did he come up with?

2 (28m 16s):
He came back with projectors.

0 (28m 18s):
Projectors?

2 (28m 19s):
Projectors? Yep.

0 (28m 20s):
Like, like slide projectors?

2 (28m 23s):
Yes. Or

0 (28m 24s):
Video projectors.

2 (28m 26s):
Movie projectors. Movie projectors. Yeah. There were actually six specific keywords. It was HD projectors, it was movie projectors. I forget what the other four award were now, now. So there's a, there's a ton of search traffic looking for movie projectors and then you analyze the sites that are currently ranked and hide for that keyword. And then you look at how placeable they are basically. And you know, his instincts were that they were easily replaceable, that you could, with three, six months of work, you could be, you could be at the, the highest ranking site for the, for that keyword.

0 (28m 58s):
So do you, did you start a projector company?

2 (29m 2s):
I did. I'd never used a projector in my life. Right. Yeah. Well maybe use, maybe seen a few in a different meetings. Right. But never really bought one before. Said it won up before, but the analysis, you know, seemed compelling to me. And so we started a projector business and we called it projector spot.com. And after something like two, three months of work, we set up the website and we were ready to, to take orders. And I should add that the, we didn't actually go out and buy projectors and sell them on the website. We established dropship in relationships with different wholesalers and in a space of, you know, two to three months or so, we launched the business.

0 (29m 42s):
And did you have to put in a lot of money to to to start this up?

2 (29m 46s):
Yes. I put in probably something like, I would say about $20,000 or so. I don't remember all the details, but I would say most of it probably went to the website development. 20,000

0 (29m 58s):
Is a lot of money. But you, were you just saving all the money that you were making from sales over the years?

2 (30m 3s):
I was, so, I had some really good years and I just sucked that money away.

0 (30m 10s):
And did you like when you told your friends about it or did you, did you tell anybody about it or did you keep it secret?

2 (30m 17s):
I did and they all laughed. They

0 (30m 18s):
All laughed. They laughed saying what? Yeah, you're selling movie projectors or HD projectors?

2 (30m 24s):
Like yeah, they asked me all the, all the smart questions they should have asked me, what do you know about projectors? If it's this easy to start a business, why would this guy just not run the business himself? Right? Why are you so confident that you're gonna rank highly for these keywords? Yeah. So there's a lot of laughter when I share the idea for sure.

0 (30m 43s):
Alright, so you launch this thing and, and do any orders come in?

2 (30m 49s):
They do. They do. Oh, but then I saw very, very quickly that the margins were raise your, raise your thin, right? So you end up selling a $500 projector and maybe you make $5. Right.

0 (30m 60s):
Why? Why are they so thin? Well,

2 (31m 1s):
One, because electronics in general is just very commoditized and there are many, many other merchants out there. And so most of the competitors were actually not making their money on the projectors. Like it was a loss leader for them. What they were really doing was they were creating their own, they were making money from the accessories or the light bulbs, maybe the lens. I don't, I forget what, you know, what all the supplies and parts are, which explains why I had no business doing this in the first place. But that's really where the bulk of their profits came from.

0 (31m 32s):
So how long did the business last?

2 (31m 34s):
I would say less than six months.

0 (31m 36s):
Ooh.

2 (31m 37s):
Yeah.

0 (31m 38s):
So you lost all that, that 20,000 investment?

2 (31m 41s):
I did, I did, but I wasn't, it didn't phase me. I mean it was disappointing in some ways. Yeah. Because I had, you know, 'cause you put a lot of time and effort into effort, getting it to up and running. You sacrifice many late nights, many weekends in and you do all that and it doesn't really materialize.

0 (32m 2s):
How did you know it was time to just give it up?

2 (32m 4s):
Two things. One, I realized that I didn't, I just didn't really care about projectors. Right. So what I, a few things happened, right? So whenever people would place orders, so some people would place orders without really asking any questions. But then a lot of people really came to projector spot.com not just looking to buy a projector, but they wanted to be educated about projectors. And so I realized that for me to be successful in this business, one the business model was just really, really tough. And two, I needed to become passionate and knowledgeable about projectors and I just didn't really wanna spend my life doing that.

0 (32m 42s):
So, alright, so you, you kinda leave that behind and did you have an immediate idea after that or did you kinda take some time?

2 (32m 51s):
No, I knew exactly what I wanted to do next. Wow.

0 (32m 54s):
What was,

2 (32m 56s):
So I wanted to go back to e-commerce and, but I thought that this time around I would pick a higher margin product and so I turned around and created another e-commerce website. And this time around, rather than paying the guy $20,000, I built it all myself.

0 (33m 12s):
You built a a website and, and and what was the product?

2 (33m 15s):
So I called the website yard steals.com

0 (33m 18s):
Yard steals, like steals like cheap deals for the yard

2 (33m 22s):
E Exactly. Okay. And so the idea was, you know, You can get good deals on home and garden equipment. That was the category that I was going after. And what I wanted to do was, a, a few of my coworkers at work were crazy about the big green egg. I'm not sure if you've heard of it before.

0 (33m 42s):
Sure. The grill, the outdoor grill.

2 (33m 43s):
Yeah. So ceramic grill and people were fanatic about it. People who love it, just loving, they rave about it. But what I spotted was that a fanatics people were about the big green egg. It was actually really difficult to get it if you didn't live in a major city. Hmm. Right? So if you lived in a city like Atlanta, it was easy for you to get, if you lived in a city like Athens, which is, you know, let's call it 70 miles from Atlanta, you had to drive to a major city to get it. And so I thought that, I thought there's an opportunity there and I started calling the different manufacturers of these grills. I thought I could build a better, a better e-commerce business than they could. And my larger vision was I would do a better job of driving traffic and driving demand to to yard stills.com.

2 (34m 28s):
And eventually I would go start my own. I would build my own, you know, topes, blue Egg, whatever you wanna call it.

0 (34m 37s):
And did you sink another 20 grand in into this idea?

2 (34m 40s):
Probably a little less, but I, I forget the exact amount. Alright,

0 (34m 44s):
So you put this up and did you, orders start coming in. Orders

2 (34m 47s):
Start coming in and the margins are better this time. So instead of making, you know, like $5 for a $500 purchase, you're making a few hundred dollars on a, on a $700 purchase or something like that. So much better margins.

0 (35m 1s):
But you never saw a big green egg. You would just get the order, you would contact the, the shipper and then they would ship outta some warehouse.

2 (35m 8s):
Exactly. Yeah. I never saw one. It's just, you know, order in and order out. Hmm. And so I think what I found was I did much better than the first business. Right. So, you know, probably netted sold more grills one, but I think this, I found that the same problem kind of repeated itself. When people come to buy any kind of product, they're not looking just to just to do the transaction. They're also, they're looking to be educated. And so I thought to build a real successful business around this, you had to invest time and effort into building a brand, into educating people and creating content and doing all these different things. And I just wasn't excited about that work.

2 (35m 48s):
I didn't feel like home and garden. I, I just didn't feel like that was my calling.

0 (35m 53s):
So when, I mean, so how long did that last ultimately that

2 (35m 57s):
Business? Probably about the same three to six months I would say.

0 (35m 59s):
Right. Once you, I mean you essentially had two back-to-back failures not, this is a good thing 'cause you're gonna need those in the future. You're gonna need to start and fail at a couple businesses. Did you think maybe I'll take a break from starting up a business for a while and go back and just get a safe job?

2 (36m 16s):
Yeah, so this entire time I never quit my day job. So what I ended up doing is I'm still working my, you know, my day job at that time, traveling all over the country. But what I realized was that I was, I started all these different businesses, not because I was passionate about solving a, a problem or, and not because a problem necessarily existed. I was doing all these things because I wanted to start a business. And so I thought that I wanted to take a break and rather than forcing a business idea, I thought that I needed to pick a, a problem that truly existed and I needed to pick something that I was, you know, really excited and committed to being a, a student of it.

2 (37m 0s):
And I decided that I would basically take a break from starting businesses until I found, until I found that idea that check all those boxes. Alright,

0 (37m 9s):
So you are doing your day job selling enterprise software and, and I guess one day from what, from what I understand, you like start to think about scheduling and calendars. Tell me what happens.

2 (37m 24s):
Yeah, so I was a national account manager. So I managed a, a number of Fortune 500 a hundred accounts in the Southeast. So companies doing over a billion dollars in revenue and also selling complex enterprise software to them. So what that meant was the types of like the kind of companies you're selling to are like the Coca-Colas of the world. So they need to bring 10, 15 people to a meeting. And then a lot of times for the deals that we sold, we needed to also involve systems integrators or, so these are the firms that would actually go in and deploy the software and so they would bring another three people. So very often you are trying to arrange meetings with 20 people across three different companies.

2 (38m 7s):
And it can be very painful.

0 (38m 9s):
It's so painful when you've got like five people on a student a conference call and there's multiple emails and I can do Wednesday. Yeah, but I'm good on Wednesday. I can't do Wednesday. How about Tuesday? It drives me up the wall.

2 (38m 20s):
It's a common problem and I'm thinking it's 2012 'cause at this time it's 2012, surely this is a solved problem. I'm gonna do an internet search and see what I can come up with. I can really make it easy for, you know, 20 people across three different companies to compare their availability. And I do a search and I find a number of different products in the market that are solving bits and pieces of it, but none that really, that I thought did it really, really well.

0 (38m 50s):
And you didn't know what that looked like. You were just looking for an option.

2 (38m 53s):
Correct. I just knew that as a consumer, as a potential consumer, I didn't feel like any of the products on the market at the time really checked all the boxes of what I would need.

0 (39m 3s):
What was it that you thought you needed?

2 (39m 5s):
Yeah, so a few things I thought I needed at the time. So one, there were a lot of products on the market that were really tailored to brick and mortar businesses that do a lot of appointments, right? So if you are a salon and you do a hundred appointments a day, there's a lot of great software for you, right? But if you are an enterprise software sales rep that really does maybe, you know, five external meetings a day or three or four, there were no really good options for you. The other thing I noticed was that, you know, as a salesperson, one of the things I knew very well was that just because you wanna meet with somebody doesn't mean they want to meet with you. Right?

2 (39m 45s):
And so I thought a lot of the products that existed in the market really spent a lot of time designing for the users of the software and not so much the recipients of the invitation. And so I thought that if this would gain mass adoption, you really needed to build for both, for all participants. You needed to make it a great experience for every, for all the users of the product. Whether they were your own registered users or the people who are receiving invitations from your registered users. Those are some of the things that I, that I noticed.

0 (40m 13s):
Alright, so you, you think maybe there's something to this?

2 (40m 18s):
Yes. And so I spent two, three months signing up for every single product that existed on the market and really deconstructing them, tearing them apart. I must assign up for what felt like probably, you know, 20 to 30 different products. I used the products religiously to really understand how they worked. I spent a lot of time in their community forums to really figure out what their customers were saying, huh? I would submit support tickets to really understand their customer service. I would pose as a buyer of their software to understand how they were selling it, how they're pitching it. And what I learned was that in spite of the fact that I thought there were gaps in what they did, their customers loved what they did in spite of the fact that their customers wanted a lot more.

2 (41m 6s):
They thought what they did was incredibly valuable. And so that was interesting to me. And it told me that if at a minimum you do as much as what they're doing, there's a decent business to be had out there. And then I thought if you took it to a whole different level and you really lowered the barrier of entering right, and really democratized it and make it, made it simpler for, you know, the more casual schedulers, I thought there was an even bigger opportunity. And I, I just knew that this had to be done.

0 (41m 39s):
And, and how long, I mean, how, how many months does it take before you say to yourself, okay, I've done the research, there's nothing like what I wanna make. Maybe I I gotta do this.

2 (41m 50s):
It takes me six months. So with the other businesses that I started, I basically had made a decision to start the business and I looked for all the evidence to support the a decision I'd already made with this, I led with an open mind. So I was just as happy to not do it as I would've been to, to do it. So I just really let the facts kind of guide me. And I was hoping at the end of, you know, my, my exploration, I would come back and say, this is just like the other business ideas that I've had. Someone's already done it and they're doing it really well. Go do something else. But at the end of six months, I, I couldn't sleep. That's all I thought about.

0 (42m 31s):
That's all you thought about?

2 (42m 33s):
Yeah.

0 (42m 35s):
When we come back in just a moment, why to put every penny he had into his new project and why when he finally built it, he was forced to give it away for free. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

5 (42m 60s):
Even if you read all the books, there's very little that can prepare you for parenthood, but sometimes You can find something that gives you a little insight from Wondery I Love My Kid, but shares hilarious stories and anecdotes about parenting that are actually relatable. Like when a friend asks you to do something at 6:00 PM on a weeknight, here's

6 (43m 18s):
A clip from an episode.

5 (43m 19s):
Is dinner three hours at your house?

6 (43m 20s):
I notice that when I have company over and we have a dinner party that is about the time, oh, okay. And I'll, and, and I really want everyone to leave no later than six 30 or seven. And I'm so, and only the people without kids are like kind of clueless and I'm no, you don't understand like, it's bedtime now and it is, you don't wanna see this,

5 (43m 40s):
You don't want see this and I

6 (43m 41s):
Don't want you to see this. It's

0 (43m 44s):
Yes,

5 (43m 45s):
Some horrors are about to happen.

6 (43m 46s):
Yeah, they're the boss. She's the boss of us. And I don't want you to see that.

5 (43m 50s):
Listen to I Love My Kid. But on the Wondery app or wherever you get your podcasts, You can listen to I Love My Kid, but early and ad free on Wondery Plus

7 (43m 60s):
Everyone leaves a Legacy. I

8 (44m 1s):
Like Mr. Gorbachev, we can do a business together

9 (44m 4s):
For some, the shadow falls across decades, even centuries.

10 (44m 10s):
It's unacceptable to have figures like roads glorified,

7 (44m 14s):
But it also changes. Reputations are re-examined by new generations who may not like what they find.

11 (44m 22s):
Picasso is undeniably a genius, but also a less than perfect human

7 (44m 27s):
From Wondery and Goal Hanger podcasts. I'm Hirsh, I'm

9 (44m 30s):
Peter Franco.

7 (44m 32s):
And this is Legacy, a brand new show exploring the lives of some of the biggest characters in history

9 (44m 39s):
To find out what Bear Past tells us about our present.

12 (44m 43s):
Nina Simone was constantly told to sit down and shed up. You're the angry black woman. The

13 (44m 48s):
Name of Napoleon still rings out in the pattern of the guides who thrive on the tourist trade.

7 (44m 54s):
Follow Legacy now wherever you get your podcasts,

0 (45m 12s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's around early 2013 and Tope Owatonna has this idea to make software to help people schedule meetings in the most seamless and efficient way possible. And the first thing he needs is for someone to do the coding.

2 (45m 32s):
And so I decide that this needs to happen fast, so it's not really something I can code myself. And so I started going to meetups to see if I can meet other technical co-founders, but that didn't prove to be successful. And so my third option became, let me see if I can hire a firm to build the initial product. You

0 (45m 51s):
Could, you could not find a technical co-founder. You looked around.

2 (45m 54s):
I did. So what happens is this, a lot of people have, you know, everyone has an idea for an app they want to build, right? And so if you're a talented engineer, you get, you get a, a lot of terrible pitches every single day. And so most engineers that are entrepreneurial, they would rather pursue their own ideas or if they're gonna take their risk, they would rather, you know, like bet on themselves and kind of go after it. So as, as easy as it sounds that, you know, just 'cause you have an idea, it doesn't mean that You can really attract, get engineers to get excited about it.

0 (46m 26s):
This is an important point, right? Because you're right, everybody has an app idea, but if you're not a software engineer, you can't make it. You need one to help you. But if, if You can, if you find a good one, is a good chance that that engineer wants to start their own business on their own. And they would, they would sort of be be like, well why should I do this with you?

2 (46m 42s):
Exactly. And also, you know, they're also probably well paid at what they do. So, you know, kind of, you know, risking all of that to,

0 (46m 50s):
To start up a business with some random person.

2 (46m 52s):
Exactly.

0 (46m 54s):
So you could not find a technical co-founder, which is a common problem. Yeah. So to make this thing you decided to like outsource it to like a, some, you know, engineering company that does these things for hire.

2 (47m 6s):
Exactly. So there are lots of companies out there that really help whether they're large corporations or entrepreneurs bring their products to life. And so what I ended up doing was I started talking to a few companies in the States. There was one in Atlanta, there was one in Charlotte, there was one in San Francisco. And inevitably the very first question they would ask me was, what's your budget? And I get that it's an important question, but I just felt like they, all they really cared about was

0 (47m 36s):
How much are you gonna pay us?

2 (47m 37s):
Exactly. Yeah. And so I kept looking and so I didn't rule those people out, but I ended up getting, finding a company in Ukraine. And from the first interaction that we had, you know, their initial, their initial response to me was on how much budget, how much, how much money do you have to put into this company to this idea? Their first response back was, we think this is a great opportunity too, as a matter of fact, here are three ideas that we have. And so I knew, I knew that I wanted to pay attention to, to them.

0 (48m 10s):
This company's called Rails Wear, I think. Right? That's

2 (48m 13s):
Correct.

0 (48m 13s):
And and did, did you, I mean, did you make any of these companies sign like non-disclosure agreements? Or, or did you just kinda risk it that you would tell them your idea and hope that they wouldn't copy it?

2 (48m 25s):
No, I didn't. I did not make them sign any kind of NDAs. Not because I didn't, you know, ultimately what I believe was, and it's still what I believe today is I think the key to, to success is the execution of it. Not so much just the idea because you know, a number of other people before me that had the idea, but I was thinking of executed the very different way and I thought my own, I guess I, you know, maybe I was full of myself. I thought my own unique perspective on what needed to be done would be good enough to protect the idea.

0 (48m 54s):
I mean that this may, this is an important point again because it is true. A lot of people are paranoid about talking about their ideas, but ideas, ideas are a dime a dozen. And, and, and, and 10, 20, 30, a hundred other people may have had the idea that you had thousands may have, but it's, it's executing the idea well, which is something that you have to believe only You can do.

2 (49m 16s):
Absolutely. And you know, it's interesting you say that because the other thing that happened and is, as a scrappy entrepreneur, one of the things I tried to propose was, Hey, why don't I just give you a cut of the equity and you and You can work for free, but even they weren't willing to take that risk.

0 (49m 33s):
Yeah. Because otherwise they'd never get paid. I mean, everyone is gonna be calling them up with every idea.

2 (49m 39s):
That's correct. And so they weren't, they weren't willing to do it and which I, I I fully understand and, but it worked out well, I guess.

0 (49m 46s):
So you hired them to build a, a prototype of what this could look like, like an, like an M-V-P-A-A minimally viable product. Yes.

2 (49m 55s):
So before I hired them, I actually flew over to Kiev to meet with them and we spent two days really brainstorming on the idea. They, they challenged me in a lot of different ways. I learned a lot from them. But I actually came back to the States initially not thinking that I was gonna do the idea. I I actually came back from the meeting thinking, man, this is much bigger than I thought. Maybe, maybe it's too much to do. But I ended up changing my mind

0 (50m 23s):
Why

2 (50m 24s):
A few things happened around the same time I found out that my mom's cancer was terminal. Hmm. And I think it gave me a sense of carpe DMM a little bit and just really realizing that, you know, who knows how much time we all have, you know, like, here's my mom and you know, you know she's dying. Would she make the same decision if she was faced with the same decision, knowing her lifespan? How, what decision would she make? That really changed my thinking around go for it.

0 (51m 2s):
You're thinking, who knows what's gonna happen to me tomorrow? Better do this.

2 (51m 6s):
Correct. Now's the time to do it. Nothing's guaranteed. You can try to wait for the perfect moment, the perfect idea, the perfect, the perfect development sequence or You can start with this place and start it with what You can do and expand from there.

0 (51m 24s):
Alright, so you decide to do this and how much was it gonna cost you to get this prototype built?

2 (51m 32s):
A little over $200,000 is what we thought it would've cost.

0 (51m 35s):
Wow. Did you have that money?

2 (51m 37s):
I had most of it, but it required doing a lot of things to tell you not to do. So I had to empty every single dollar my 401k

0 (51m 45s):
And pay the pay the penalty, presumably.

2 (51m 47s):
Yep. I had to use every single dollar in my savings account. I had to borrow a little bit on top of that, I ended up borrowing a little bit from Lending Club

0 (51m 57s):
At a high interest rate.

2 (51m 58s):
I had a very high interest rate, so cobbled together my 401k and my savings and then, and then some debt and maxed out all my credit cards and put it all in on, on this, on this idea that at the time didn't even have an name.

0 (52m 16s):
I mean, that's a really big risk. I mean, yeah. You know, you were what, 31, 32? I guess. So you still could recover if it, if it was a disaster. But I mean, wow, that's a lot of money. You were basically cleaned out, I'm assuming. Yes. Aren't you nervous?

2 (52m 33s):
Not at all. It sounds crazy to say that now. And it could have gone, it could have been really, really, really bad. And I, it would've set me back many, many years if it didn't work out. But not at all. Here's why I've learned a lot from my previous failures. This felt like a, you know, as crazy as it sounds, I felt like I had a calling to do this, right? For a number of reasons. I felt like I spent all my life in sales and I think I really understood. I felt like I knew a lot about meetings and meeting etiquette and what works, what doesn't work. I felt like I actually, you know, unlike the e-commerce businesses that I tried to start, I actually knew a lot about software businesses and I felt like I, because I spent so much time researching the air, the space, I felt like I knew exactly what needed to be built to build a great business.

2 (53m 21s):
So, it sounds crazy, but I wasn't, I wasn't scared.

0 (53m 25s):
So this is 2013, you put all your money into this product to be built this for this company. Rails wear, most of that, money's going to them. What did you tell them? You said, okay, I want this to be like a calendar that somebody can just say that, here's a link to my calendar. You pick a time when you wanna meet me, and that calendar would be integrated with whatever they used, whether it was Google or, or Microsoft or whatever.

2 (53m 52s):
Yeah. So a few things. So before I ever met Realware, I'd actually come up with my own requirements document, right? Okay. So, which again, something I didn't do with the previous businesses. So I had, I created my own detailed list of requirements and detailed flows that needed to happen, that needed to be built. And also my own sequence of how the work needed to be done. So

0 (54m 12s):
What were your requirements?

2 (54m 13s):
Oh man, you need to be able to integrate your calendar, be able to specify your availability in all these different ways. You need to be able to guard your availability. And so, you know, I, I thought the user experience and design just needed to be front and center, right? It just needed to be appealing functionally and also aesthetically. We had to get really fancy with, with how we detected time zones to make it really, really accurate without the user having to, you know, intervene at all. So there are a lot of technical, small, little technical details that really made a difference in the US user experience that we had to figure out.

0 (54m 48s):
Alright, so you get this product, it takes about six or seven months. Meantime, how is your mom doing? This is 2013. Yeah,

2 (54m 56s):
So she died about two months into the, into the development. So she died in June, 2013.

0 (55m 4s):
Did your mom know much about what you were working on?

2 (55m 7s):
Not really. So I kind of downplayed it to her. So I told her that I was ex, you know, she knew about the, she knew about the previous businesses and she, she supported my, my different business ideas, but she wanted me to, she wanted me to prioritize my, my day job, but she thought it was, you know, it was, she thought I was doing really good with my job and that she didn't lose, she didn't want me to lose focus at that. So in some ways I downplayed what I'd done to her, but I'd really committed a few hundred thousand dollars to it.

0 (55m 40s):
You never told her

2 (55m 42s):
I did not.

0 (55m 43s):
Because she wanted you to have security and health insurance and all that stuff, right? Correct.

2 (55m 48s):
All the things that she felt like, you know, she wanted for her son and she wishes that, you know, that my dad always provided, right?

0 (55m 56s):
Yeah. So after her death, I mean, how were you able to kind of just, 'cause you were in the midst of building this thing, like this was intense. I mean, soon after you were, you were in Ukraine again. How'd you stay focused?

2 (56m 13s):
Yeah, so I, I poured myself into the, into the business, into the product. And so, you know, it was a very, very, very difficult thing for me. Very, very difficult thing for me. But Calendly became a huge distraction from that. And I just, I worked like a dog, just so I didn't have to think about that.

0 (56m 38s):
So by the fall around September of 2013, the first version of this product is available, but you had spent all your money on developing it. So how were you going to, I don't know, pay for the servers and pay for, I mean get, get the word out about it? I mean, how, because you had no money left, right?

2 (56m 59s):
Yeah, so I got, you know, help along the way through Sware actually. So a few things happened. As Sware was building the product, they got connected to another potential client, a software company in San Francisco that's gone on in, done really well to a multi hundred million dollar business now. And that company was looking to engage them to do some work for them. And so Sware was, was like, Hey, let's show you this product that we're building, right? So they show them Calendly and at the time, Calendly is not quite, it's in a, it's not quite ready to be in a public beta.

2 (57m 40s):
But what what ends up happening is they love the product. And so somebody from their, from their customer success team signs up for the product and starts using it to schedule onboarding calls with their customers, which those customers happen to be K to K through 12 schools. So a customer success person from this company in San Francisco starts scheduling onboarding calls with K through 12 schools.

0 (58m 8s):
Yeah.

2 (58m 9s):
So the cat's out of the bag at that point, because

0 (58m 11s):
When you send somebody your Calendly link and they see it, they're like, Hey, what's this? I, I want this too.

2 (58m 20s):
Exactly. They say, I schedule a lot of meetings, that was easy. I would love to use this to simplify my meetings. And so the K through 12 school start adopting it, and then they turn around and start using it for parent-teacher conferences, right? So the use case goes from, we're doing, using it to do onboarding calls to these schools, start doing parent teacher conferences with it. And then, you know, a few weeks in a school comes to us and says, this is the best thing that's ever happened to us. We've been struggling with parent-teacher conferences. We struggle with, you know, how, you know, you know, the administrative burden of setting them up, the participation rates. We wanna roll this out to all of our teachers.

2 (59m 1s):
Hmm.

0 (59m 1s):
And what school? Where's the school

2 (59m 3s):
In Kentucky? And so they come to me and they say they wanna sign up 80 teachers and I just 80 teachers, which at the time was a lot of people now. And

0 (59m 13s):
Just to interrupt, Tope, what was your business model? How would you make money off of this at that point?

2 (59m 17s):
Yeah. So I'm glad you raised that 'cause I neglected to mention that. So, because I ran outta money. No, my, my idea, the business model going into it was to, to have a 14 day trial so you could use the product for free, no credit card, no feature restrictions for free for 14 days. And at the end of those 14 days, you would have to upgrade with a credit card.

0 (59m 39s):
Well, and then pay like a subscription fee.

2 (59m 41s):
Exactly. But because I ran outta money, we couldn't bill the, the billing features. And so by default, the product became a hundred percent free.

0 (59m 51s):
You couldn't bill the billing features.

2 (59m 53s):
Correct. 'cause I ran out of, I, I had just enough money to bill the, the scheduling capabilities, but not enough money to get around to, to enforce the billing. So no way to capture revenue from, you know, potential users.

0 (1h 0m 7s):
You couldn't just like set up, I guess you can't really set up QuickBooks, right?

2 (1h 0m 10s):
Well, You can set up QuickBooks, but it's within an online product. You have to find a way to restrict the features if they're not paying. Yeah. You know, there's some technical complexity there and some work that needs to be done to, to kind of turn the features off and on based on their trial status, their payment status, collecting the payments initially, I mean, to, just to give you an idea, initially that's, that was maybe two, three months of work for two engineers to work on that.

0 (1h 0m 35s):
Wow. Okay. So you could not do this. So you, so you were forced to give this away now, but then how were you gonna pay for it? I mean, you're giving it away. How were you gonna make money? I mean, was the plan to just get a bunch of users and then kind of figure it out? Hopefully you would get investors. Yeah. So

2 (1h 0m 52s):
That, that had to become the idea. So I, I was faced with this dilemma. So keep in mind I'm still working my, I'm still working my full-time job this whole time.

0 (1h 0m 60s):
Your day job. Yeah. Okay.

2 (1h 1m 1s):
So I hadn't left that. So this is, you know, this is my side hustle. I was still, you know, I was meeting my obligation to the company. I was actually had a really good year that year. And so I felt like, so long as I was, you know, it was not interfering with my job. It didn't really, I didn't sure, I didn't feel like I needed to disclose it. Right. And so I have this dilemma in which the business is growing, you know, in the sense that people will sign up for it and every time, every day the signups are growing because of the virality of the product. And because, because people are, again, good value from using the product. But I had no, I didn't have the money to, to turn it into a revenue generating business. And,

0 (1h 1m 38s):
And just to clarify, it really started with this one software company in San Francisco, and then went to teachers, and then from there it just organically grew.

2 (1h 1m 48s):
Exactly. So the first, you know, 300 to 500 signups really came heavily from K through 12. But after that initial wave of K through 12, it spread to all kinds of different industries. It spread to, to people in all kinds of different roles. It was salespeople, it was recruiters, it was freelancers, it was consultants. I just began to spread like a wildfire.

0 (1h 2m 10s):
When when did you know, or when did you feel comfort, comfortable leaving your job, your, your day job?

2 (1h 2m 15s):
I wouldn't say so. I don't know that I actually felt comfortable, but I, I, I knew that a decision had to be made. 'cause I, you know, seeing the growth of, of Calendly, I realized that one, this thing was growing in spite of the fact that I was just doing it part-time. And two, I owned a hundred percent of this thing that was growing. And so, to me, the choice was very obvious.

0 (1h 2m 37s):
And during this time, did you tell anybody about, about your idea? Or, or did you keep it a secret? Like did you, did you tell your friends about it?

2 (1h 2m 46s):
I told my close friends. I definitely told my, my, my brothers and my siblings.

0 (1h 2m 50s):
Did people think it was a good idea? No,

2 (1h 2m 52s):
They didn't think so. They thought it was a solved problem. I remember when I, when I was leaving and I told my boss I was leaving, he's like, you're leaving for that. He, he felt like he'd feels me that I, you know, like he felt like, I was like, I got get desperate. And I, you know, and I'm pursuing, you know, scheduling, that's a salt problem. Like nobody needs that. But yeah, it was not, it was definitely not obvious. I didn't quite know how I was gonna fund it, but I, the, the decision to me was clear. And so I began to put together a pitch deck and start going to different events, trying to meet investors.

0 (1h 3m 29s):
And at that point, you still had not, you were fully, you'd funded this thing by yourself,

2 (1h 3m 34s):
Funded it myself, and ran outta money. And then I convinced Rails wear to work for, not work for free, but to work with understanding that when I raised money, I would pay them back. So Wow. I was able to get them to work on credit.

0 (1h 3m 50s):
There's a quote of yours I read and I wanna read it to you. I'm curious to ask you more about it. 'cause you described the process of trying to raise money. You said, everyone said no. Meanwhile, I watched other people who fit a different profile, get money thrown at them for shitty ideas. Those VCs were ignorant and shortsighted. The only thing I could attribute it to was that I was black. Can You can you walk me through your experience trying to raise money?

2 (1h 4m 20s):
Yeah, so I think first of all, I think it is difficult for pre-revenue businesses in general to raise money, especially in the southeast, right? Because I think that the farther you, you are away from the coast, the more they, the more investors value revenue. Whereas yeah, when you're on the coast, I think they care more about growth. So I think that process for anybody's is challenging. But I'm sure race pay plays some aspect in it, but it's not really, there's probably more to it than that.

0 (1h 4m 51s):
But did you, but I mean, you didn't really, it, it sounds like you didn't really kind of pitch to investors at this point yet.

2 (1h 4m 57s):
No, I definitely pitched to investors. You did? Yeah. And I, I got

0 (1h 5m 1s):
All in all in Atlanta, the Atlanta area, all

2 (1h 5m 3s):
In the Southeast. So a few people in Atlanta, few people in the southeast. I had, you know, a guy from a, a pretty big firm. Not only did he, you know, so I mean, I'll tell you, I had a very, what I thought was a very condescending kind of experience. So at the time I was actually in Kiev, right? So I'd flown to Kiev to work with Rails wear, and I stayed up till 2:00 AM to meet with this person, and then he stands me up. Right? Hmm. So just a lot of, like, a lot of experiences like that, that were just, you know, it's one thing to not invest, but it's another thing to, to kind of treat people like that. Yeah. How much is that is just the arrogance of, you know, somebody who thinks they're an important VC versus race.

2 (1h 5m 47s):
I, I know who knows, but I mean, I do know that many other entrepreneurs who didn't have as much, who hadn't made as much progress had more of his than I did.

0 (1h 5m 59s):
So how did you eventually wind up connecting with people who, who did wanna invest?

2 (1h 6m 7s):
Yeah, so I, I started going to different events. I got started connecting with people in the startup community, and then I ended up signing up for a membership at a, at a place in Atlanta called the Atlanta Tech Village, which is a, it's a coworking space specifically for tech startups. And it's, while I'm connecting with different investors that the, the owner of the Atlanta Tech Village catches wind off Calendly. David Cummins is his name. And he thinks it's really interesting because he, at the time, he was actually using a competitive product. And so he knew firsthand that this was a, a big problem and he was impressed with what we've done.

2 (1h 6m 51s):
And so we get connected. Huh.

0 (1h 6m 53s):
So what happens?

2 (1h 6m 55s):
So we have a one or two meetings and he follows up with a term sheet and says, I am, I love what you're doing. I think that this is, that this can be big. I'd love to invest.

0 (1h 7m 8s):
I read that it was like $350,000 or something like that. Were you nervous about taking that investment? 'cause you owned a hundred percent of this thing, but, but at the same time, you needed the money.

2 (1h 7m 17s):
Yeah. So I was ambivalent about raising money, to be honest with you. 'cause, you know, I felt like I started the business, you know, in the most difficult way possible, you know, really, you know, putting everything I had, risking everything I had to start the business. And so in some ways it felt like a step backwards to have to, you know, seed, you know, some of the ownership. But once I met David, that changed in the sense that like, I felt like I was gonna have a, when I was gonna be, you know, working with a successful entrepreneur himself and not just a, a money man. Right. I felt like I could learn a lot from, from him.

2 (1h 7m 57s):
And so the ambivalence I had went away once I, once I met him. So

0 (1h 8m 2s):
It's, it's a spring of 2014 and you get this, this investment in your business of about $350,000. And how much runway does that give you at, at that time? I mean, was that because I mean, I'm, I'm assuming the business even in April was like, was just you, right?

2 (1h 8m 22s):
That's right. So it was just me. I was the only employee and then, you know, rails were, and so that ended up giving me, I wanna say something like nine months of runway. And

0 (1h 8m 30s):
Do you remember how many, I don't know how many people had you signed up by, you know, a year into it by September of 2014? Maybe

2 (1h 8m 40s):
About 15,000 at the time.

0 (1h 8m 42s):
Right. So it's pretty good. And I'm assuming that in that first full year, 2014, you really had to figure out a plan to make this profitable, right? To monetize this.

2 (1h 8m 52s):
Yes. And so that became, you know, priority number one was I raised the $350,000 because honestly, I, I didn't enjoy the funder raising experience. Yeah. You know, it's not fun. And I wanted to make sure that I was, I never really had to do that again. And so I prioritized generating revenue. By August, 2014, we turned on billing and introduced a premium plan. And so we start generating revenue in August of 2014.

0 (1h 9m 23s):
And how did the premium plan work?

2 (1h 9m 25s):
Yeah, so that actually created, it created some fiction at the time in, you know, looking back on it would've done it differently, but part

0 (1h 9m 31s):
Of friction with

2 (1h 9m 32s):
Customers Yeah. Existing users. And so some portion of the existing user base was disappointed that they had now had to pay for a product that was a hundred percent free. Right. But really what the, what the premium plan did was he basically, we still had a free product, but we just limited what you could do on the free plan. And so you had to upgrade to the premium plan to get, let's call it 60% of the features used to maybe to get for free before. Right.

0 (1h 9m 59s):
And what was, what were you charging for it?

2 (1h 10m 1s):
$10 monthly if you pay, if you paid monthly or $96 if you paid annually.

0 (1h 10m 7s):
And, and was your idea already at that point that hopefully one day big companies like Microsoft or you know, Microsoft, but like, you know, big companies would, would use your, your service?

2 (1h 10m 20s):
It absolutely was the, the plan to eventually begin to acquire larger customers. But some of that was already happening, right. So we were getting, you know, pockets of, you know, a department in, in those big, big businesses using our product.

0 (1h 10m 35s):
And do you, I mean, do you, at this point, do you just kind of, do you continue to seek out outside investors or, or do you decide to just see if You can make a, a, a go at it, you know, through cashflow and revenue?

2 (1h 10m 48s):
A little bit of both. So we start to generate revenue and it, it, it definitely extends the runway. And I forget exactly how much additional time it gave us, but we ended up raising an additional $200,000 in early 2015 as cushion as an insurance policy of sorts. We ended up not needing it. Wow. But we did.

0 (1h 11m 9s):
Were you ever worried that some big company, like, you know, like Microsoft or Google or somebody else would just come in and with a lot more money, you know, and just crush you?

2 (1h 11m 21s):
I used to. Hmm. What I found is that, you know, when you spend a lot of time with your customers, I think you, you find out that there's a, there are a lot of things that they want to do that need to be done that maybe those companies don't have the appetite for doing.

0 (1h 11m 34s):
I mean, as you kind of think about, you know, the product you offer and how, you know, technology changes so quickly, what, I mean, are you thinking like four or five steps ahead of what Calendly might be to make sure that it doesn't become obsolete?

2 (1h 11m 53s):
I do, and I, I spend a lot of my time thinking about that. You know, our overall vision is to take the work out of meetings, right? So we really think about our mission as not just removing the back and forth of scheduling, but how can we really automate the entire meeting experience, right? So, you know, too often, not only are meeting meetings difficult to schedule, people sometimes forget to show up when they show up. They're not prepared. There's no clear memorialization of the key decisions that are made and, you know, action items that are open, those are the things that we're looking to fix. And there's a lot there. And that will keep us very, very busy for five years.

0 (1h 12m 34s):
Would you ever sell a company to, you know, a sales force or a huge player like that?

2 (1h 12m 39s):
Absolutely not. I am, I'm very excited about what we're doing and I feel like we're just getting started and there's a lot to, there's a lot to do. And so that's not remotely on my radar.

0 (1h 12m 52s):
Hmm. When you think about your journey and, and what you've accomplished, you know, you've had some incredible lows in your life, some, some failures, quite a few, and this just unbelievable success. How, how much of this do you attribute to, to your hard work and talent, and how much do you think it, it has to do with just being lucky and being at the right place at the right time?

2 (1h 13m 18s):
Oh, that's a great question. So I think everybody's lucky, right? I think the very fact that I didn't get hit by a bus today, that's luck, right? And we're, you know, same thing for you. The fact that that didn't happen to you, that's luck. And you know, I look at the family I was born into, I think your family really determines your, your ceiling in life and your, and your floor as well. Like how high, both, how high or low of those things are. And I had no say in the family that I was born into. So I feel incredibly lucky there. I picked the right industry, you know, one that's grown like crazy. So all those things are definitely luck. But I think, so I think we're all lucky, but I think what amplifies that luck and what makes one successful is hard work.

2 (1h 14m 0s):
It's skill, it's resilience, it's an appetite for risk taken. So that's my view. I think it's a combination of both, but I think when you add those four things, it just ticks locked a whole different level.

0 (1h 14m 17s):
That's Tope Oana founder and CEO of Calendly in 2020. When I first spoke to Tope, the company was doing around $70 million in annual revenue. And since that interview, the company took on a huge chunk of outside investment with a valuation of $3 billion. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And of course, it's free. This episode was produced by Rachel Faulkner, with music composed by Rum Arab Bluey. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Daryth Gayles. Our production staff also includes Casey Herman, Carrie Thompson, John Isabella, Alex Chung, Chris Masini, Carla Estevez, Sam Paulson, Malia Aga, and Catherine Cipher.

0 (1h 15m 7s):
I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. If you like How I Built This You can listen early and ad free Right. Now by joining Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts, Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon Music. Before you go, tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.