0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this Early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

1 (9s):
When you leave home, can you ever really go back? Soccer legend. Leo and I both left Argentina As kids.

2 (17s):
You know, you're that piece of a puzzle that doesn't fit anywhere

1 (20s):
To so many immigrants is a way to reconnect. Listen to the last cup in the embedded podcast feed to hear the latest collaboration from NPR and Fudo Studios.

0 (30s):
If you're like me, you need to make every minute of your morning count. There's a new way to do that with a podcast called The Seven from the Washington Post. It just launched and takes you through the seven most important and interesting stories of the day in just a few minutes. Most episodes aren't much longer than five minutes, which is perfect for my busy schedule. Host Jeff Pierre takes you through the top stories of the day with the reporting and insight of the Washington Post. Get caught up every weekday at 7:00 AM as a listener of how I built this. We know you appreciate an informative, insightful story. The seven from the Washington Post is short and smart. It gives you well curated, accessible, and fascinating news.

0 (1m 10s):
Listen weekday mornings, wherever you get your podcasts. Follow the seven from the Washington Post and get caught up on news today. It's time to reboot your credit card with Apple Card. Now through December 25th, get 5% daily cash back on products at Apple with a new Apple card, including a new iPhone 14 or Apple Watch Ultra. And everywhere else Apple Card gives you up to 3% unlimited daily cash back on everything you buy. Apply now in the Wallet app on iPhone and start using it right away. Subject to credit approval. Monthly financing through Apple Card monthly installments is ineligible to earn 5% back.

0 (1m 49s):
Additional exclusions apply valid only on qualifying US purchases. For new Apple Card customers who open an account and use it from December 1st to 25th of 2022 at Apple, visit apple.co/save five for more details. Hello everyone. So as a lot of you know, we produce 88 brand new episodes of how I built this a year, and it's a lot of work. So this week we are taking a quick break to reset and we're playing this one from our archives. It's an amazing episode. It's a story of Dave Anderson who turned his childhood love of barbecue into a national chain called Famous Dave's. It's a barbecue chain that started in a tiny town in rural Wisconsin.

0 (2m 34s):
And the story of famous Dave's is really a story about everything good and everything bad that can happen when you go into the food business. We first ran it about two years ago. It's an awesome story and I hope you enjoy it. Did you give it the name Famous Daves as kind of a joke because you weren't get famous, right?

4 (2m 57s):
Well, on the road out of town, there's like Dave's guns, Dave's antiques, Dave's Boats. So I was going to name my place Dave's famous Barbecue Shack, huh? I get my business cards and it said, famous Dave's Barbecue. I am mad. Can't believe the printer messed up my business cards. And my wife said, Dave, calm down. Why don't you just leave it so famous Dave's the rest is history.

0 (3m 33s):
Welcome to how I Built this, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealist, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz, and on the show today how a passion for smoked ribs led Dave Anderson to open a barbecue shack in the middle of nowhere. And how it grew into famous Daves one of the biggest barbecue chains in the country. So most of the biggest restaurant chains started in small places. McDonald's was born in San Bernard Bernardino, California, dominoes in Ypsilanti, Michigan, Sonic, Shawnee, Oklahoma, Arby's, Boardman, Ohio.

0 (4m 19s):
There are a number of reasons why this is the case. There's usually less competition. The rent is lower, and if what you're offering is new or different, people will stand in line for it as they did at the original Boardwalk fries in Ocean City, Maryland, which is now a franchise company with more than a hundred locations nationwide. They stood in line the Chicken Salad, chicken Auburn, Alabama, which now has 140 stores, same with five guys in Arlington, Virginia, an empire of more than 1500 locations today. And as you will hear in the mid 1990s, people came from far and wide for some of the best pit barbecue they ever had.

0 (5m 4s):
And it wasn't in Texas Hill Country or Eastern North Carolina, but rather in Hayward, Wisconsin, a town of 2300 people in the northern reaches of the United States, where in January it can get down to minus 17 degrees. This is where Dave Anderson, after years of trying out different business ideas, decided to open famous Dave's Barbecue in 1994. Today, famous Dave's has about 125 locations nationwide, making it one of the largest barbecue chains in the country. But the story of Dave's is also a story of how a simple passion for serving smoked ribs, chicken, and brisket can grow too big and too fast.

0 (5m 54s):
And how a founder can almost lose complete control of a good idea. Dave Anderson grew up in a working class family in Chicago in the 1950s and sixties. Both his parents were Native Americans who grew up on reservations in different parts of the country.

4 (6m 13s):
My dad's a full-blood Choctaw Indian from Idabel, Oklahoma, and if you were to look at a map of Oklahoma, you would see that Idabel is in the southeast corner of Oklahoma, which is way down south. And then my mom is from the LaDae Reservation, which is way up north. She's a member of the LaDae Lake Superior Band of Ojibwe.

0 (6m 37s):
So she grew up in Wisconsin, he grew up in Oklahoma. And how did they meet?

4 (6m 42s):
Both my parents. I, I think is, you know, the unfortunateOklahoma part of my story were taken by the Bureau of Indian Affairs away from their families and stuck in Indian boarding schools, basically making orphans out of them. Now, fortunately for me though, my parents met at Haskell Institute for Indians in Lawrence, Kansas.

0 (7m 3s):
So both, just to clarify, so both your parents grew up on Indian reservations. They met at a boarding school that I guess was where Indian kids from across the country were brought to, I don't know,

4 (7m 15s):
Basically to mainstream 'em because yeah, my dad, when he was brought into a boarding school, didn't speak English, he was wow. Basically a Choctaw speaking Indian and wow. When he got put into these boarding schools, he can remember actually being beat and having his mouth washed out with soap until he would forget his language and only speak English didn't happen in Abraham Lincoln's Day or George Washington's day. But this generation, my parents, I think that's a story that sometimes people in America never hear.

0 (7m 52s):
No, they don't. What did your dad do for a living when you were a kid?

4 (7m 57s):
My dad was an electrician and my mom was a secretary. She worked as a secretary. So I was like a lot of kids that lived in a working class neighborhood and we didn't have a lot, but we always had food on the table. I think growing up though, I, I always knew that my family was different, huh? Because when all the other kids are going out for pizza and hotdogs, especially in Chicago being a great pizza town and Chicago hotdogs, my dad would load us up into the family car and we were headed down to the south side of Chicago for rib tips. Hmm. And growing up I knew every black-owned barbecue joint in Chicago.

4 (8m 39s):
And I can remember as early as 1959 eating rib tips at LE's Barbecue of 59th at State Street.

0 (8m 47s):
Yeah. I mean, Chicago became obviously hugely important as a barbecue capital because of the great migration. So many African Americans who, who migrated out of the Jim Crow South, moved to Chicago and brought with them their culinary traditions. You

4 (9m 5s):
Know, they also brought blues. What a great combination. And so Chicago throughout the years has always been known as a great blues town. Yeah. And also great barbecue,

0 (9m 16s):
Dave, as a kid, did your mom and dad instill strong Indian values in you? Did you, did you have a strong Indian identity as a kid?

4 (9m 26s):
You know, growing up in a Native American family, we were cognizant that we were America's first people. My dad was very proud of his Choctaw nation. My mom was proud to be from the Lada ray reservation. And for us, that got carried over in that we ate Indian foods. My dad was very insistent that he had his foods from the south. My mom, when she was growing up, she did a lot of fishing and she harvested wild rice. And, and so throughout the years my dad would always, what I almost call, make pilgrimages down to the south so he could get his beha, which is a corn type of bread, you know, almost like a tamali wrapped up in corn Huss.

4 (10m 17s):
And then my mom would always take us fishing up north and we would harvest wild rice. And, but more importantly, to raise money for the family. My parents would have a Indian fry bread stand and my dad would grill and smoke up venison. My mom would make Indian fry bread and also wild rice soup. But we would sell venison fry bread sandwiches along with bowls of wild rice soup. I think attending Indian powwows with my mom where we would have this Indian fry bread stand really taught me a lot about cooking, cooking outdoors, but also the appreciation for foods that are harvested naturally.

4 (11m 0s):
Being able to harvest wild rice fishing and, and all of those are experiences that I think throughout the years have always carried over to me.

0 (11m 10s):
How were you as a student and how, how, how was school difficult for you? Or, or were you a pretty good student?

4 (11m 16s):
I, I was not a good student. I thought I was the dumbest kid in class. You know, I, huh, I, I can remember my dad sitting me at the kitchen table. I would have a blank piece of paper in front of me and I would cry because I didn't know what to do. And it wasn't until years later that I found out that I had attention deficit disorder, which explains a lot, you know, explains why I was bouncing around all the time. And, you know, back then, I don't think there was a name for attention deficit disorder. Yeah. Other than you were a problematic kid. You know, if it wasn't for an art teacher telling me, he said, Dave, he said, I, I know you struggle in the rest of your classes.

4 (11m 59s):
He said, but when I watch you, you may not be the best artist, but you see things that other people don't see. You know, I would've never heard that from an English teacher. I never would've heard that from a math teacher. And that really stuck with me all these years. I'm able to see things other people don't see. I'm able to visualize, I'm able to see where things can go.

0 (12m 23s):
You so clearly high school was not school, was not, did not come easy for you and was challenging for you. I mean, I guess when you were 18, you kind of had your first experience with entrepreneurship, something about selling fuel additives or some, what was that? Tell me about that.

4 (12m 41s):
So I was right out of high school and that year I had gotten a call from a friend who said, Dave, do you have a suit? Said, of course I got a suit. He said, put your suit on, I'm picking you up. So I put my suit on, I have no clue what's happening. We drive to a beautiful hotel near O'Hare Airport, and he still wouldn't tell me what's going on. And then we, we go on to the lower level, we go into this beautiful room, and there's a lot of people in there. And he said, you are about to witness one of the most incredible things you'll ever see. And then all of a sudden, the most dynamic person comes out and starts telling all the people in this room this incredible story.

4 (13m 31s):
How it doesn't matter where they've been, what they've been through, or what they think of themselves, they can be successful. And this person was none other than Zig Ziegler,

0 (13m 42s):
The famous motivational speaker. Yeah.

4 (13m 45s):
Zig. Yeah. I, I mean, listening to the Zig Ziegler's share how I could become an entrepreneur selling oil additive and gas conditioner. And I never heard anybody so motivating, so inspiring, telling me that I could be successful. So go home. And my dad asked why I put on a suit and where'd I go? I, I said, you know, I heard the most amazing thing that I could be successful. I could own my own business. And I said, dad, you gotta hear this guy. He's having another meeting tomorrow night, would you please go with me? I begged him.

4 (14m 24s):
So he goes with me the next night, and here this guy sounded like my dad. This guy was from Yazoo City, Mississippi. He spoke with a southern accent. He said, doesn't matter where you come from, doesn't matter what you've been through, anybody could succeed. And my dad was blown away too, for the first time he thought his son maybe could be a businessman, maybe, you know, and, and it's oil conditioners. It has to do with a car. And maybe my son can do that.

0 (14m 56s):
So you went to see Zig Ziegler speak, and by the way, we had Holly Gerdon, who, who founded Supergoop, who also was influenced by his tapes. How did you find this opportunity to get involved in selling a fuel additive? Was that connected to Zig Ziegler, or was that completely separate?

4 (15m 15s):
I think Zig Ziegler was the spokesperson for a multi-level company. Got it. And it cost $2,500 to join. Now, $2,500 in 1971 was a lot of money. Yeah. But my dad for the first time realized that his son, who wasn't the best student, who barely got through school, who had adhd, maybe this was something that he could do. So my dad had some savings, and then he borrowed some money to give me this chance.

0 (15m 49s):
What, just out of curiosity, what was the product, tell me what the product that you were trying to sell.

4 (15m 55s):
It was called steed conditioners. There was a gas additive, which made your car run better. There was a oil conditioner.

0 (16m 5s):
Right. And did you have success selling it?

4 (16m 10s):
I don't think I sold one case of the stuff. Wow. My dad had a garage full of steed, oil and gas conditioners, which never went away. I didn't sell anything. But here's the thing, part of this opportunity was we had to go through a five day how to sell training program. That training program changed my life. Hmm. Because part of the training program every day was they would tear down everything you thought about yourself, and then they would build you up.

0 (16m 44s):
I read that you even, you would like, stand in front of a mirror and practice shaking hands to gain confidence as a salesman. Would you do that?

4 (16m 52s):
Yeah. Because, you know, growing up I was really probably the shyest bashful kid in class. And here I am trying to be a salesman. And so for years in my dad's basement, I, I stood in front of a $5 mirror that I got from Kmart, and I had a candle and I would say, Hey, B, C. And, and I tried to put that candle out with my voice, and I would practice smiling in the mirror. Today everybody thinks I'm photogenic. They think I've got a good smile. Well, I worked at that smile. In fact, I even would wink at myself. But these were the things that I did because I realized I had to change who I was.

4 (17m 35s):
I had to go from being a shy, bashful, dumb kid into being somebody that could go into a room and be able to share a story, being able to tell somebody who you were.

0 (17m 46s):
Huh. But meanwhile, the, the gas conditioner business did not work out. And I guess you, you then got like another job working at a, at a new store location for, for Eddie Power.

4 (17m 59s):
Right. And that, that was a pretty important turning point in my life because I helped open up a brand new store start to finish, which would help me later on in life. But I, I went over there and the significant part of this is that not only did I meet my wife there who was selling men's wear at Eddie Bauer, that's kind of how I get into selling Terrariums. Wait,

0 (18m 26s):
Terrariums.

4 (18m 27s):
Yeah. There was a young lady there who was selling these little bubble balls at Christmas that had cartridge berries and what they call Princess pines wrapped in some moss. A and I never seen anything so, so beautiful. Well, she had said that she just couldn't go out and sell 'em. I said, well, I can sell. And so on my own time when I wasn't working at Eddie Bauer, I would go out and I would go to a flower store and show 'em these bubble balls and they liked them. Then I realized that I should be doing this for myself. So I started making my own line of terrariums and playing planted dish gardens.

0 (19m 11s):
And you would just make them yourselves? You would just make the little garden inside the balls?

4 (19m 16s):
Yeah. You know, I actually had a corner in my dad's basement where I would bring these huge bags of dirt and sand and other ingredients to, to make the right dirt for these terrariums. And then my dad being an electrician, set up a whole line of grow lights in, in his basement. So I started bringing in hundreds and hundreds of plants.

0 (19m 43s):
How did you know what to do? You just kind of figured it out. How did you know how to make them look nice? Well,

4 (19m 47s):
I think it goes back to my art teacher who said, Dave, you see things other people don't see. So I, I think I had this ability that I could take these little plants and arrange 'em so that there was almost this sort of magical feeling to them, you know, they, they were alive, they had color, and, and I was able to arrange 'em. So they, they really looked special. And I think that's what the Flores, you know, saw when I would bring my samples and they saw something that was really special.

0 (20m 18s):
Hmm. So, so did you start to make some sales?

4 (20m 21s):
Yeah. The first time I have my own samples, I go to Richard Lang Flores, and I got my first order from Mr. Ashner at Richard Lang Florist. And that Mother's Day, I went to his flower shop because I knew he was going to be busy. And you know what a lot of people don't realize is that florist, unlike a retail store that can order toys three months in advance, Flores have to work like days around the clock because it seems like everybody forgets they have a mother until Mother's Day. But all of these flower arrangements have to be fresh. So I went to him and I helped him.

4 (21m 2s):
I busted down his boxes. I I swept his floor. I even cleaned his bathroom for him. And then I helped him deliver flowers. And after that Mother's day, everybody's exhausted, he comes up to me and he said, here, put this in your pocket. And he hands me a fistful of cash. And I said, Mr. Ashner, I can't, I I can't accept this. I came here to help you because that's how grateful I am. You gave me my first opportunity. Mr. Ashner couldn't believe that I would work for nothing. A and he went and told every one of his florist that he was good friends with, he said, you gotta meet this kid.

4 (21m 41s):
He's a hard worker. He's got beautiful stuff. Give him a chance, give him an opportunity. So after that first summer, I had almost every major retail Florence in the city of Chicago.

0 (21m 53s):
Wow. Buying your terrariums.

4 (21m 55s):
Buying my terrariums planted dish gardens. Yeah.

0 (21m 58s):
So were you starting to feel pretty confident about the business?

4 (22m 2s):
Well, you know, part of my story is that I'm Native American, just started out in business. My parents don't have money. I don't have money. My business is growing and I can't get a bank loan. I must have pounded the streets of Chicago. I I went to bank after bank and always got turned down. You gotta have assets, you gotta have collateral. And I said, well, I'm starting out. I really don't, by the way, what, what's an asset? You know, I, I mean, I would have stacks of orders and I would go into a bank and I wasn't able to get anywhere. But something else, Mr.

4 (22m 42s):
Ashner shared with me one day. He said, you know, Dave, if you really want to get ahead, you've gotta join the local Chamber of Commerce. So I dressed up and I went to a Chamber of Commerce meeting, and here every mover in Shaker in the community that was in business was there. And they always had a speaker. And so I liked that. I, I, I joined, you know, my local chamber of commerce, and I was there religiously. In fact, I started helping set up. And one day I was at a Chamber of Commerce meeting, and a, one of the presidents of the bank grabs me after the meeting.

4 (23m 23s):
His name was Gerhardt Moff. He was the president of the Bank of Chicago on Wilson Avenue. He said, Anderson, Jim Ashner speaks highly of you. He said, I'm having a promotion at my bank this Saturday. How would you like to set up in our lobby? I'm gonna have somebody on the other side pass out hotdogs and balloons and, and popcorn and you can sell your dish gardens. So the next morning I show up at the bank, I, I set up and I sell out. Wow. I'm packing up my boxes and about ready to leave. And the president of the bank, Gerhardt Umoff, he says, Anderson, he said, I wanna see you in my office.

4 (24m 6s):
I am sweating bullets. I think I must have pissed off one of his customers. And I start to go back to his office, and I have never seen a desk as big as this desk. And he says, pretty good job, Andy. I I heard about your dish gardens and you really did a good job with my bank clientele here. And he said, I also understand that you're looking for a loan. He said, yes, sir. He said, well, how much do you need? I said, $10,000. And he's looking at me, he says, well, what kind of assets do you have? And I, oh, my heart sunk. I knew I wasn't going to get my loan. I said, well, sir, I, I, I don't have assets.

4 (24m 48s):
I figured I had a, you know, net worth of $400. And he didn't say anything for quite a while. He sat there looking at me. Finally, he reaches down into his desk drawer. He said, we don't usually do this, but I just watched you today. Sell out every one of your products. He said, I'm gonna take a fly on this. And with that, he wrote out a check for $10,000 on my signature alone.

3 (25m 20s):
Wow.

0 (25m 22s):
And obviously, I mean, you were really able to grow this business. I read that like at a certain point you were doing more than like $300,000 in revenue a year and, and you'd hired a bunch of people. You know, you had employees. But, but then I guess it ground to a halt. Like, it, it, and eventually like went under what happened?

4 (25m 44s):
Well, act of God, you know, I don't know how to explain it other than the Chicago blizzard of 1979. Look it up. You will see snow that goes over the roof of cars. The mayor of City of Chicago could not clean city streets for three months because of that blizzard, that snowstorm that just created a gridlock in the city of Chicago. A lot of businesses went bankrupt. And, and in the flower business, I had a whole bunch of floors that could not pay me at all. And then for months, no orders

0 (26m 20s):
At that time. You were in your twenties, were you married? Yeah. Did you have kids at that point when you were, when you had the terrarium business?

4 (26m 28s):
I, we just had one young son, James. And, you know, a lot of people don't realize when you can't pay bills. You know, back then I was digging through seat cushions to find change just so I could, could buy my kids milk. It, it was tough. It was just so tough that because of the snowstorm, I ended up going bankrupt, lost everything because of that.

0 (26m 55s):
Yeah. So this is the early 1980s. And, and when that business collapsed, I, I guess, I guess you worked at a few other jobs in sales before you landed a consulting gig with the Native American tribe in Wisconsin. What, what kind of, what kind of business did they have that they needed help with?

4 (27m 15s):
Well, it was my mom's tribe, the Lake Superior Band of La Coore, right. Ojibwe. They had called me up and they said, Dave, we understand that you owned your own business in Chicago. We could really use your help. They had a cranberry marsh. They had a logging company. They had a construction company that was building houses for Indian people. They had a grocery store, they had a printing company, they had a gas station, and they had a bingo hall. But one of the things I noticed right away was every time I was in one of these businesses, we were failing. We were losing money like water flowing out of a siv.

4 (27m 55s):
Hundreds of thousands dollars, easily a half a million dollars a year we were losing. And then I realized that the problem was, is that with any of the people working within these businesses, they didn't think successfully. They, they, they didn't talk about achievement.

0 (28m 11s):
So they wanted you to help them kind of turn their businesses around. And you kind of realized that that morale was actually the biggest problem. It wasn't mismanagement. It wasn't, but morale was the top challenge.

4 (28m 26s):
Not not just morale, just the basic understanding of thinking successfully. Yeah. They didn't talk about profits, they didn't talk about achievement. That's when I called up Zig Ziegler and I said, Zig, remember me, you met my dad. Were the Native Americans from Oklahoma, my dad's Choctaw. He said, I remember you Dave. I said, I would like to bring 20 of my managers and my assistant managers down to Dallas, Texas to go through your born to win course. So I bring this group down there, I come back and boy did I catch, holy hell. The tribal leadership comes to me. And he said, we heard you took all of our managers down to happy camp.

4 (29m 9s):
We coulda used that money to have groceries for the poor. We coulda built roofs over the elderly. I says, yeah, but you're failing in your businesses because nobody thinks about success.

0 (29m 21s):
And when they came back from the Zig Ziglar experience or sessions like the team that you brought there, were they transformed?

4 (29m 30s):
Very much so. We had a group of native business people who went from doing a job to becoming entrepreneurs in a way that really wanted to be successful in their businesses. And within three years, we turned around all the businesses. Were now making money, we now have accountability. And we got recognized by President Reagan's commission on Indian reservation economies as being one of the top eight most progressive tribes in the country.

0 (30m 1s):
Hmm. So on, I guess on the strength of this success, you, you decided to go and get more education. You decide to do a master's degree in the mid eighties. And by the way, just because we, we didn't talk about this much, you actually went to college back in the seventies. Do you want to Roosevelt University in Chicago, but you never finished, but still you went and pursued a master's degree in public administration at Harvard. How did that happen?

4 (30m 32s):
Well, kind of what happened for years, I mean, years I would enroll every fall religiously. I would enroll in school, and I always dropped out. I, I mean, I think if you went back and looked at Roosevelt University's records, you'd laugh because you'd see enrolled dropped out, enrolled, dropped out. I, I just could never make it. I think what made the difference for me at Harvard was I was able to take the courses that I wanted to take. And I took courses that I understood, because once you get into any master's program in Harvard or any graduate program, you can basically go to any school there and, and take a course.

4 (31m 17s):
So having worked for a tribe, I really flourished in a course that had to do with community development. And so I was able to design a course that really made sense to me, and I was passionate about it. And I did well, I, I, I mean, in fact, I did really well. So by then I'm starting to understand that maybe I'm not as dumb as I thought.

0 (31m 42s):
So in 1986, you, you get your degree from Harvard or Master's degree, and, and you are then, I guess sort of recruited by another tribe in Minnesota to help them with their bingo operation. And this is like early days, I mean, sort of Indian casinos and, and Indian gaming was still in kind of its nascent phase at that point. So tell me what you, what you, I mean, you get there and they were, they had like bingo parlors there that, and that was a how they were making some of their money.

4 (32m 16s):
Right. And I didn't know a thing about Bingo, but again, you know, one of my strengths is seeing things that other people don't see. So I'd watch this bingo game and I would see generally ladies and some guys, older guys, they come to bingo, you know, spend a few dollars and have a good time. And I got to thinking, I said, you know, some of these gals really spend a lot of money playing Bingo. So I asked this other guy who was kind of helping me, I said, Fred, I, I said, what do you think they spend here sometimes? He said, you know, they may spend anywhere from $20 to $50. I said, really? Well, this place can hold 400 people.

0 (32m 54s):
Where, where was it held?

4 (32m 56s):
It was in a, a skating rink for kids. And I said, why don't we hold a big bingo game? Because back then the bingo games generally had a jackpot, a thousand dollars. But I was thinking, well, if I could fit 400 people in here and they spent $50, that's $20,000. So I said, Fred, why don't we offer a $20,000 jackpot? And he looked at me like I was crazy. Hmm. I said, I think we can do it. I, I, I said, if, if you were to have $20,000 Bingos, what do you think they would pay? He said, well, I think they'd spend a hundred dollars. I said, great, let's charge a hundred dollars and see if we could sell it.

0 (33m 37s):
And did people, I mean, $20,000 jackpot, I'm assuming it attracted, attracted people to the Bingo hall.

4 (33m 43s):
Oh my god. We, we not only sold out, we had people that were like banging on the door. We, we literally had to lock the doors and we had hundreds of people standing outside that wanted in. And that's what really kind of started my being known in Indian country, because then I started like a consulting business that I would help other tribes figure out how to do big bingos. Hmm. And I was doing a cons, some consulting for the LACS tribe. And the tribal chairman came up to me, he said, I foresee that casino gaming is going to be a, a big thing.

4 (34m 22s):
Could you help get us started? And so we were able to put together a financing group. So I was one of the original founders of Grand Casinos.

0 (34m 33s):
And, and so all these casinos were on Indian tribal lands.

4 (34m 37s):
We started out that way. And then we got to be so successful, we actually took Grand Casinos public. So that's the first time I was part of a company that went public. Wow. And we went on to build eight casinos all over the country. Wow. In fact, also built Stratosphere.

0 (34m 56s):
Oh, stratosphere. The, the hotel in Las Vegas. Yeah. So this is kind of a turning point. It sounds like a, a pretty significant turning point in your life, because I'm assuming that really for the first time you actually came into some significant personal wealth.

4 (35m 11s):
Yeah. But we were also helping tribes become successful in emerging gaming markets. But I wanna be careful wh when I say this, because not every tribe does really well with casino gaming. Yeah. There's a lot of small tribes that have small gaming enterprises, but the one thing they're able to do is keep people employed. And there's probably only a, a handful of tribes that really have come into significant wealth. But a lot of these tribes also help other tribes because now there's access to capital.

0 (35m 48s):
But I guess kind of in the early nineties or maybe the mid nineties, you, you sort of decided to, to take yourself out of the gaming world. Why, what, what

4 (35m 58s):
Happened? Yeah. I, I can remember the, the day that Stratosphere opened, my wife and I were in a limousine on the bottom watching this wonderful skyscraper casino that really changed forever, the skyline of Las Vegas. And I said, I think I'm gonna leave tomorrow.

0 (36m 19s):
Wow.

4 (36m 20s):
I didn't want casino gaming to be what I was known for in life. I I really was a Native American. I was an entrepreneur. I really don't want my kids to think that gaming was where dad hung his hat in life. And yeah, that's when I made the decision to quit.

0 (36m 38s):
So I, I guess, I mean, as you were, you know, you are working for grand casinos, but in, in the back of your mind, it's in like the mid nineties, you started to come up with an idea for a barbecue restaurant. And I know you had been obviously a barbecue fan and you know, I know your dad was really into barbecue and would take you to places in the south side of Chicago. But were you always kind of experimenting over the years with like, building fires and smoking meat and grilling meat? Like people knew you as the guy who made great barbecue?

4 (37m 11s):
Well, I can remember it was still in grade school, but I had come home and my dad was home, and I can remember opening up the porch door and I was just overwhelmed by this aroma. And he had been to the south side of Chicago. He had gone to one of his favorite barbecue joints. And I see my dad pulling this rack of ribs out of his lunch bucket that was wrapped in newspapers. This was the real deal, real wood, real flames, real fire. And, and I tasted that rib. And even though I've been eating barbecue all these years, it was that day, that time, that rib, I said, I'm gonna learn how to make barbecue.

0 (37m 58s):
Why did you wanna open up a restaurant?

4 (38m 1s):
Well, I don't think I started out that I wanted to open up a restaurant. I just wanted to make great barbecue. And so I started inviting friends over to my cabin and could say, Hey, why don't you guys come over this Friday and I'll cook you up some barbecue? So they said, sure. So then they start showing up and they'd say, oh my God, Dave, this stuff's phenomenal. You ought open up your own rib shack. Well, the more that happened, finally the, the dreams started to come together. And so in the north woods of Wisconsin, I started building this barbecue shack.

0 (38m 38s):
So wait, you, you decide, I'm gonna open this up. I think it you opened it up in, in Hayward, right? In w Hayward, Wisconsin. Is that right?

4 (38m 44s):
Hayward, Wisconsin. A little town of only 2000 people.

0 (38m 48s):
I mean, let's just be honest. Most people, when you say Wisconsin, don't think southern barbecue.

4 (38m 55s):
No. Wisconsin's all about BRW and cheese.

0 (38m 57s):
Right? Exactly. Right. It's, it's braw and cheese. And, and, and did anybody say to you, Hey, you know, you make great barbecue, Dave, but there're 2000 people in this town. How are you gonna make this a sustainable business? I mean, did anybody say that?

4 (39m 14s):
Oh, as I was building my barbecue shack, people would drive by and they'd say, Hey Anderson, what are you doing? I said, I'm building a rib shack. And they literally would laugh at me and they would say, are you crazy? Hayward, Wisconsin, why don't you go down to Memphis or Kansas City, Nashville, someplace down south where people really know barbecue, you gotta be nuts

0 (39m 39s):
Coming up after the break. Why Hayward Wisconsin turned out to be just the launchpad that Dave needed to become famous, and how that first restaurant fueled an aggressive expansion that nearly broke the business. Stay with us. I'm Guy Ross and you're listening to How I Built This.

Burrow (40m 5s):
On this show, we talk to founders and companies that are disrupting entire industries when it comes to furniture. Burrow is changing the game with their affordable, stylish, comfortable, and easy to assemble designs. Burrow is a new kind of furniture company with its own in-house design studio from stain and scratch resistant fabric to solid hardwood frames, burrow selects materials that will stand up to everyday life and every order, no matter how small or large, is delivered directly to your door for free. Now you can shop Burrow's New Union collection, their biggest, deepest plushies widest modular seating design To date, the unique fabric is soft and comfortable, plus it's stain resistant and easy to clean. And our listeners can get $75 off their first order at burrow.com/built. That's Burrow b u r r o w.com/built for $75 off burrow.com/built.

BetterHelp (41m 8s):
This show is sponsored by Better Help. Unfortunately, life doesn't come with a user manual. So when it's not working for you, it's normal to feel. Stock Therapy is an incredibly helpful tool to help guide you through these difficulties. I know lots of people who've tried therapy, I've tried it in the past. People love it. It's super helpful. It's helped lots of people learn coping skills, deal with difficult situations, and improve relationships and a lot more As the world's largest therapy service, better Help has matched 3 million people with professionally licensed and vetted therapists. Available a hundred percent online. Plus it's affordable. Just fill out a brief questionnaire to match with a therapist. If things aren't clicking, you can easily switch to a new therapist anytime. It couldn't be simpler. No waiting rooms, no traffic, no endless searching for the right therapist. Learn more and save 10% off your first month@betterhelp.com slash built. That's better help h e l p.com/built.

0 (42m 19s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built this. I'm Guy Raz, so it's 1994 and Dave Anderson has decided to open up a barbecue shack in the little town of Hayward, Wisconsin. And he set himself a pretty high bar.

4 (42m 34s):
Before I even opened the doors, I had already determined that I was going to have the best ribs, I was going to have the best honey buttered cornbread, the best barbecued baked beans. I had this list and you know, I started out with my dad's recipes, but I visited every barbecue joint every time I was going anywhere. I always look at who had barbecue joints in town and I learned things. I I I liked how somebody did their cornbread or I liked maybe how they had one type of sauce or how they were doing their briskets. And, and guy, I know you've been all around this country and if you were to tell me that, you know for a fact they had better coastal in Anchorage, Alaska, I will be on a plane today.

4 (43m 19s):
I will be flying up to Anchorage, Alaska, and by tomorrow night I will have stolen that recipe.

0 (43m 25s):
But, but I mean, you, I mean you knew like you had recipes cuz you were, you were making barbecue like from the time you were a kid, right?

4 (43m 33s):
Yeah. I can remember even back then, we were the first family on our block. They had a, had a charcoal grill. And so I started learning how to grill foods and, and then I wanted to smoke things and we, we didn't have a smoker, so I, I took a, an old trash can I cut a hole in the bottom, I took rebar, put it across so I could put my ribs on top of that. And so by time I opened Famous Daves, I actually have been working on my recipes for 20 years because, you know, the ingredients that you use to create the, the sauces, the seasonings barbecue is not easy.

4 (44m 13s):
It's hard. Hmm. Because the, to make a good barbecue sauce, you know, it's almost like Chinese cooking. There's a lot of flavors involved in making a good barbecue sauce. It's sour, it's got a robust spiciness to it, it's sweet. And then there's different forms of sweetness to it. You, you've got your brown sugars, you have your honeys, you've got your fruit sauces. There's a lot of nuances to making great tasting barbecue sauce. And, and I think especially when you're creating robust flavors that heat is very important. And a lot of people may not realize this, but every menu item at Famous Daves is hot.

4 (44m 54s):
My coastal has a bite. My beans have Hal Pinots in them. Yeah. That heat opens up the taste buds and that's when you really can enjoy the full flavor of my cooking.

0 (45m 5s):
And did you give it the name Famous Daves as kind of a joke because you weren't get famous, right?

4 (45m 11s):
Well, the Road to Famous Dave's, not only are we in a small town, but I was also eight miles out of town. And on the road out of town, there's like Dave's guns, Dave's antiques, Dave's boats. So I was gonna name my place, Dave's famous barbecue shack we're getting ready to open. I get my business cards and it said Famous Dave's Barbecue. And I am mad, I can't believe the printer messed up my business cards. And my wife and all her wisdom said, Dave, calm down. Why don't you just leave it, you know, we're about ready to get open. Just leave it. So famous Dave's the rest is history.

0 (45m 52s):
Wow. I read that like you were obsessed with all kinds of things. Like when you, when you set out to make the restaurant, you, you wrote down a hundred things that you wanted to be the best at. Not just like the best ribs and the best brisket and the best coleslaw, but like the best bathrooms. Like is that, is that right that you wanted to put a lot of attention into the bathrooms in the restaurant?

4 (46m 15s):
I believe that I'm the first one that coined the term bathroom marketing. I think that's one of the things that people talked about was, was my bathrooms. My lady's bathroom had imported rose painted basins and 24 karat gold faucets on a marble base. I had wrought iron around the mirror. I had crown molding. I mean, who puts crown molding in a bathroom? But I can remember when we first opened, I got a call within the first week. Some lady said, Anderson, write me down for eight 30 on Thursday, your women's restroom. I said, what? She said, you heard me eight 30, I want your women's bathroom.

4 (46m 58s):
She said, I'm gonna hold my next cocktail party in

0 (47m 1s):
There. Wow. So it was really just about, you know, there's all kinds of details. It wasn't just great food, but you wanted people to talk about the bathrooms.

4 (47m 9s):
Well, wasn't just the bathrooms. I think it goes bath back to my best of the best list. For instance, my music, I personally inventoried every blue song that was played in a Famous Thieves. I had something like 6,000 blues CDs back then. I knew the difference between jump blues, push beat blues. I didn't want any old blues. I I wanted all sort of Chicago jump blues. So when people were sitting in a famous Daves, I almost wanted it to be subliminally, they had to start getting in this groove and they felt good and they were bopping around. So that was all the experience. I wanted to touch all five senses from the smell of the wonderful wood aromas of meat smoking in my pit to them feeling good because of the music and then the visuals, I, I put a lot of antiques in my famous Daves.

4 (48m 5s):
So everything about Famous Daves was really sensory overload.

0 (48m 11s):
I'm looking at Hayward on, on the map and it is, I mean, it, it's up there. It's in northern Wisconsin. It is far from everything. It's like gotta be what, two hours from Minneapolis?

4 (48m 21s):
Three hours.

0 (48m 22s):
Three hours?

4 (48m 23s):
Oh seriously. We're, we're, we're out in the middle of nowhere. And even though I never advertised it, it wasn't but months that the word quickly has spread throughout Wisconsin and, and even as far away as Iowa. I mean, we're serving 6,000 people a week. And, and as I'd be walking through the restaurant, people would grab me and say, Dave, you gotta open up one of these in my town. I said, well, where, where are you from? Well, we're from Des Moines, Iowa. We drove all the way up here. We heard about your barbecue. We just came all the way up here just to eat people actually demanded us to have famous Daves. And so the, the first famous Daves outside of Hayward was in Minneapolis.

4 (49m 5s):
I found an abandoned gas station. It was only 2,900 square feet. We only had 50 seats. And we opened up again without any advertising. But within weeks I've got a line around the block. Wow. We're doing phenomenal numbers. I can't even keep food in stock. I had to get a refrigerator truck to park next to my little restaurant just so we had food to cook.

0 (49m 29s):
What, what was the, I mean, what was it that you were, that you were doing that was a, I mean obviously your food was good, but you gotta put the word out. How, how were people finding out about it? Was it just word of mouth?

4 (49m 40s):
You know, it was like word of mouth on steroids. I, I, you know, I have no idea, but people were telling friends and friends telling friends, you gotta try the barbecue. But, you know, I, I think that's what speaks to famous Daves is that I went through all of the, the things it took to make great barbecue. I slow smoked our ribs until they were tender. I flame charred 'em. So we were able to caramelize the sauce on 'em. We, but more than anything, guy, it's America's food barbecue is how America celebrates. You know, if you, if you want to have a good time, you tell your friends, come on over, we'll have a backyard barbecue.

0 (50m 20s):
Yeah. You know, I know that while you were starting to get famous Dave's up and running, you were also kind of struggling in your personal life. You were drinking heavily at the time and you would later recognize that as alcoholism. Can you, can you tell me about that? About what was going on in your life?

4 (50m 42s):
Well, I, I'm pretty open that my life has had some very dramatic transformations. I, I do think sometimes that our Native American folks struggle with the alcoholism. I know my, my mom's side, it was in the family. I know on my dad's side it was the family and, but you, you know, you didn't talk about those things. And so I wasn't really aware that was something I needed to watch out for. And you know, over the years it just kind of built up where, you know, I couldn't wait till Friday so I could party and couldn't wait till Saturday so I could party after work.

4 (51m 24s):
And you know, what I didn't realize was that pretty soon I was partying on Sunday and it wasn't too long after that I was partying on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, I was partying all the time. And one morning my wife came to the bedroom. She said, Dave, you got some friends downstairs, you better go down and and see 'em. I said, well, I didn't remember inviting anybody over. She said, well, they're here and, and they say, your friends are yours. I'm all confused. I have no idea what's going on. So I go downstairs and sure enough, there was people that I knew and it didn't take me too long to figure out what was going on.

4 (52m 4s):
They were doing an intervention on me. And that was a tough thing. You know, nobody wants to admit that they struggle with alcoholism. Nobody wants to admit that they need help. But here I was listening to my wife, my son, and some really close friends tell me how much my drinking was taking a toll on the family. And when they said, Dave, you got a choice here, what are you gonna do? And I said, you know, I I let's do this thing.

0 (52m 36s):
How, how were you able to, did you go to treatment?

4 (52m 39s):
Yes. I, I, you know, treatment sounds like a tough thing and I think it's one of the reasons why people who struggling kind of don't want to have anything to do with it because it sounds like something people do to you. But today I am so grateful, 25 years this April have been sober that I, today I look at treatment as really recovery and recovery as a gift.

0 (53m 6s):
Hmm. And, and I mean, meantime, things were moving fast with Famous Daves. Like you opened that first location in, in 94 and then a second one in 95 in Minneapolis. And then by 96 you've got four restaurants, I think all of them in that region. But then with, with just four restaurants, you decide that year to, to take the company public.

4 (53m 32s):
Well, you know, I'm very open about it. I think that was one of the worst mistakes of my life going public because I didn't realize that when you go public, you don't own it anymore. But we went public and we, we actually oversold, we were supposed to open up at $6. We ended up opening at 11.

0 (53m 52s):
Wow. So famous Daves goes public in 1996 and a new CEO is named Douglas Lanham. Did you, did you bring Douglas on because you were now a public company and, and you thought it was better that he kind of run the operation?

4 (54m 10s):
Well, one of the things I was told by the Wall Street guys was that I was just a barbecue guy that I needed to hire Wall Street savvy, casual dining executives. Yeah. The one thing was is that they tried to run Famous Daves as a casual dining company when really we were a barbecue company. We sort of lost our heritage of being just barbecue and, and people were trying to turn it into something else.

0 (54m 40s):
So you were basically the chairman of the board. Douglas Lanam lasted like a year or so before he stepped down cuz the stock price was falling. And, and I guess around 2000 famous Dave's kind of shifted or pivoted into a franchise model. Did you support that idea?

4 (54m 57s):
I, I think I was always supportive. Looking back though, I wish we had kept it within the family, but you know, we had some good franchise partners, but I, I think one of the problems early on was they tried to get rid of the lines that we had around the block. And so they thought that the way to alleviate that was to build bigger boxes.

0 (55m 20s):
So they were giant, they were just giant restaurants too big,

4 (55m 23s):
Too big. And today there's a lot of 6,500 square foot boxes that probably should have never been built.

0 (55m 31s):
But, but to me, the franchise model was gonna be tough for famous Dave's because it was your recipe. It was a, there was a whole technique and you're kind of handing that off to franchisees and you, you risk giving up the quality, right. When you, when you turn to a franchise model.

4 (55m 48s):
Well, I think that's one of the things that's Hallmark about Famous Daves, is that we never really lost the quality of our food. My original menu was actually inspired by Jimmy John's dad, James Leo who he said, Dave, he said, first of all, you want to keep everything simple and the second thing you always wanna do everything in threes. And he said, there's something magic about threes, whether it's the the holy trinity, it's the three little pigs, the three amigos on your market set. Go ready, aim, fire people remember, remember things in threes. So the original famous day's menu was really pork, beef and chicken, coffee, milk and pop, coastal beans and potato salad.

4 (56m 33s):
You know, it was all in threes. And, and even how we trained people, we would season smoke and serve. Now there might be several steps underneath, but everything was done in threes. And I think that speaks to going back to that 100 best of the best things that I wanted to accomplish was I wanted to have the best training program in America. So I I, in the early days, I spent about $2 million developing my training programs. And I created this leadership from the Heart training program that actually focused on building up the people. The second thing I did was I created Hog Cabin University.

4 (57m 15s):
I wanted to create certified pit masters. And then I also created a train the training program. And so we spent a lot of money on training. In fact, people would look at Famous Daves and they'd say, wow, you guys spent a lot of money training people. What happens when you spent Honest Money training and, and they leave. All I had to do was look at 'em and say, well, what if I didn't train 'em with the best training I could do? And they stayed

0 (57m 47s):
After the company went public. And you kind of found an outside CEO and then, you know, there were other kind of corporate folks who were brought in to run the company. Did you feel like you were losing control over the business? That, that this idea that you had was kind of slipping away from you?

4 (58m 5s):
I think for the most part, the only thing I regretted was the company building these bigger boxes. And you know, barbecue is a type of thing that grows slow and it's slow smoking. I, I think that tried to grow too fast. I think that was one of the problems of being a publicly traded company. Now. It seemed like we were being run by the court of the earnings report and if we were to miss earnings statement by one penny, my God, the stock got slaughtered. And as a Native American, I didn't have a lot of people around me that could counsel me.

4 (58m 46s):
You know, I was sort of at the mercy of people that knew how to run publicly traded companies on Wall Street that, you know, that, that, that's what I think I didn't feel comfortable with.

0 (59m 1s):
So when you had ideas, would they listen to you when you said, Hey, let's do this, let's do that. Or would they say, well Dave, we got this, we know what we should do?

4 (59m 12s):
You know, I think that's a struggle with any growing business is I think they thought of me, even though I was the founder and I was the, the, the creator of all this, they sort of thought of me as the entrepreneur. Yeah. And they thought that, you know, the corporate people needed to take over and, and that the entrepreneur just sort of messed things up. And, and today, I, I wish I had fought harder and, and I had trusted my gut more because I would've stayed to these smaller footprints and I would've stayed to a smaller core menu.

0 (59m 52s):
2003, you stepped down to become an assistant secretary at the Bureau of Indian Affairs in Washington, DC Must have been an exciting opportunity for you. So you just kind of at that point just left Famous Dave's entirely like you walked out and said, look, I'm gonna go do this job and maybe I'll be back and see you in a couple years.

4 (1h 0m 13s):
Well, the reason why I left is I had to, when you accept a job with, as an assistant secretary or any high level government job, you basically have to sign away all of your rights to any of your business interests. And so, as much as I wanted to stay involved, I, I couldn't, I had to, if I was gonna do this job for the president and serve the White House, I had to sign away all my business interests. Looking back, I wish I had never did that,

0 (1h 0m 44s):
Because why?

4 (1h 0m 46s):
Well, I think what happened when I went to Washington DC all of my entrepreneurial spirit got lost in the politics of being in government. A and I should have listened to people who counseled me and said, Dave, you don't want to go to Washington dc And, and I said, but I really believe that I can make a difference. I wanted to encourage entrepreneurship within the tribes. I really had some great ideas. But when I got there, boy did I get an awakening that, you know, change doesn't happen in Washington, DC like people think. And as an entrepreneur who's used to getting things done, I was stifled here and I was really frustrated.

4 (1h 1m 29s):
And, you know, it just seemed like e every turn of the road, everything was gridlocked.

0 (1h 1m 33s):
Hmm. So you stepped down in 2005, clearly frustrated with, with your job in Washington, and, and I guess you tried to come back to the board of Famous Dave's, but the board refused to, to give you a seat. I I, is that right?

4 (1h 1m 50s):
Yes. That's one of the unfortunate things of publicly traded companies. They felt they didn't need me. You know, they

0 (1h 1m 58s):
But you were still a shareholder.

4 (1h 1m 59s):
I was still a major shareholder. Yeah.

0 (1h 2m 1s):
Yeah. But you had no other influence over the company at that point?

4 (1h 2m 5s):
No, none. Wow. They, they felt they didn't need me anymore.

0 (1h 2m 9s):
Wow. How did you take that? I mean, were you bad? Were you hurt? Were you, how did you respond to that?

4 (1h 2m 15s):
I was devastated. Hmm. I was devastated. Everything that I worked hard for all my life, my ambitions, it was just like shattered. It was like this was my dream. I had worked hard all these years, you know, in my kitchen, working on seasonings, working on recipes, working on my barbecue sauces. And I, I look back and I think, how can they do that?

0 (1h 2m 41s):
When don't we come back in just a moment. Why Dave Anderson decides to walk away entirely from the business and the surprise phone call that eventually brings him back. Stay with us. I'm Guy Ross, and you're listening to how I built this,

American Giant (1h 3m 2s):
This holiday season feel the satisfaction of supporting local craftspeople and the joy of giving presents that will really last a long time by shopping American Giant. The classic full zip hoodie from American Giant still shows the impact of Made in America quality. It's a sweatshirt that wears better and softer 10 years after you get it. I've been a long time fan of American Giant clothing. I wear their clothes all the time. I'm actually wearing their hoodie right now in the studio. Their products are especially great for gift giving. They really have something for everyone. They've got essential basics, awesome t-shirts, socks, jeans, and there is even an American giant pickleball club that has activewear for pickleball loving people all around the world. Join American Giant in their mission to support the manufacturing communities that provide great jobs for the people and places that need them. Shop gifts that last@americangiant.com slash built and get 20% off when you use code built at checkout. That's american giant.com/built promo code built.

Audible (1h 4m 11s):
You know what I most love about Audible? No matter where I am, my imagination can run wild with epic adventures, chilling mysteries, and can't miss comedies. Audible has an incredible selection of audiobooks across every genre. Audible is the home of storytelling. With all your audio entertainment in one app, find the best of what you love or something new to discover. I've recently been listening to the Underground Railroad by Colson Whitehead on Audible. And what I love is that with Audible's free app, you can listen anytime, anywhere. And so I can listen while cooking or working out or on a plane. Let Audible help you discover new ways to laugh, be inspired, or be entertained. New members can try it for free for 30 days. Visit audible.com/built or text built to 500 500. That's audible.com/built or text built to 500 500 to try audible free for 30 days audible.com/built.

4 (1h 5m 17s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So after losing a seat on the board of Famous Daves, Dave Anderson continued to do publicity work in consulting for the company, but had much less of a say in how it was being run.

0 (1h 5m 33s):
Day-to-day famous Daves was going through a lot of management shakeups. And in 2014, the job of CEO went to a former CEO from McDonald's named Ed Rensy.

4 (1h 5m 46s):
He tried to turn Famous Daves into a McRib, got rid of a lot of the history of famous Daves. There was a lot of fun antiques that were part of the decor, and he started pulling the stuff off the walls. He started getting rid of, you know, our honey butter cornbread. He thought it would be easier to take the honey butter off the top of the cornbread and just put it in the cornbread. But there's, you know, one of the most interesting stories of famous Daves was in the beginning, I didn't have money enough to have a smoker. I used a garbage can li and so our All-American barbecue feast is served on a garbage can li well, ed Renzi got rid of the garbage can lids and tried to put it on some type of stainless steel platter.

4 (1h 6m 34s):
And I, I can remember people just coming up to me and saying, Dave, my family just absolutely loves the garbage can lid with all your barbecue on it. Where'd the garbage can lid go? There's a lot of things that just was being the heart and soul of Famous Dave's was being ripped out.

0 (1h 6m 53s):
Hmm. I guess you were so angry that you, I read that you like severed ties with the company in 2014 is what, what happened?

4 (1h 7m 3s):
Well, I wasn't gonna listen to some guy who ran McDonald's tell me how to be a barbecue pit master. I, I had barbecue sauce running through my veins. I wasn't gonna stand for it. And I, and I, I just said, look, if the board at the time wanted to have somebody like Ed Renzi, if this is what you're gonna do, I'm not gonna be part of it. And so I basically emotionally, legally, financially was separated out of famous Dave's.

0 (1h 7m 37s):
Wow. Financially too.

4 (1h 7m 38s):
Everything

0 (1h 7m 40s):
You divested, it's

4 (1h 7m 41s):
All gone,

0 (1h 7m 41s):
Sold all your stocks.

4 (1h 7m 43s):
Well, I didn't have much stock left. Hmm. You know what a lot of people don't realize is they, they may think I had a lot of stock well over the years in the beginning, you know, like any business, you have your highs and you have your lows. Well, there were times when Famous Days had its lows where I put up my stock as collateral and there were margin calls. And by the time things were where they were, there wasn't much left.

0 (1h 8m 11s):
I mean, your name was still on all these storefronts all over the country. Well,

4 (1h 8m 18s):
You know, one of the things I didn't realize is that when the company went public is you don't own your name anymore. Yeah. So consequently, I lost something that I had worked all my life for. Huh. And, and you know, I, I wish I had attorneys that had given me better counsel in the early days because, you know, I'm a Native American. I, I, I don't have a community of people around me that could give me good counsel. And if the attorneys really cared for me, what they should have said was, Dave, you shouldn't go public. You really have something special. You should really keep this in your family.

0 (1h 9m 1s):
So you step away and the the brandest is not doing well at this point. There are a number of management shakeups and, and I guess in 2016 you get a call, they some they want you back. They want you to come help them rebrand and return to their roots. What, what's the story?

4 (1h 9m 23s):
So I'm kind of out of famous Dave's and one day I get a call from Mike Wright who was running the famous products retail line. And really Mike was a good friend and he called me up, he said, Dave, he said, I'm in the area, do you mind if I stop over? So Mike shows up at my house. And he said, Dave, he said, there's some things we gotta talk about. He said, the company misses you. All the franchise owners miss you, your customers, they miss you. People who love Famous Daves are missing you. You've gotta come back. And I said, well, I don't think the leadership wants me.

4 (1h 10m 3s):
He said, that's not true. He said, people want you, they want you involved. And I said, well, I am out of famous Daves, I'm not going back. And he really laid a guilt trip on me. He said, Dave, if there was ever a time, and there may never be another time, if there was ever a time that you come back, you gotta come back now because Ed Renzi is not gonna be around. The company really needs you. There's new leadership. We need you back. Huh.

0 (1h 10m 31s):
That must have felt pretty validating.

4 (1h 10m 34s):
I was in tears.

0 (1h 10m 36s):
Yeah.

4 (1h 10m 36s):
I thought I would never hear that again. I, after Mike left, my wife and I talked and it, it was really, you know, a tough conversation of what do we do? Famous Daves has really been such a love-hate relationship where I love the food I created. I love being with our guests. And the reason why I came back was my wife and I came to an understanding that it was really the people that we cared about. It was the franchise owners. It was the people who came to Famous Daves who loved the food. And I, I think it was for that as I knew I had to come back.

0 (1h 11m 18s):
Hmm. So you, you start to, I guess essentially consult with, with a company to, to help them, like do a rebrand. And, and one of the things I, I guess you kind of suggested was to, to kind of bring back the, the, the classics, right? The, the Cajun chicken sandwich and the brisket burgers and other things. But also, I guess at that time, this is 2016 and even to this day, famous Dave's started to buy back some of its franchises in order to kind of retake control, I guess, of the business.

4 (1h 11m 51s):
Yeah. One of the things I think the company realized is that there was some franchise owners who probably had enough, there was a number of management changes over the years and, and they kind of got disenfranchised with the, you know, not having the passion they once had. So one of the things the company realized is that the only way they could write the ship was they probably had to buy back some of the franchise, reinvest in them, get back the training programs that we used to have and just kind of reinvent ourselves and bring back the basics. Getting back to what made us famous in the beginning, we needed to be devoted to making people happy.

0 (1h 12m 35s):
A new CEO came in in 2018, Jeff Carvello. And I guess, I mean, did he started to ask, you know, kind of bring back some of those things like the, the trashcan and the, the history? I mean, you go on the website now and the, the, your story is, is right there front and center.

4 (1h 12m 50s):
Well, I think one of the things that makes Jeff so special is that he grew up eating famous Daves in Chicago. Hmm. He loved famous Daves. He was the first c e o who actually called me up on a regular basis. I mean, Jeff and I talk all hours of the, the night he'll, he'll call me up at 11 o'clock and we'll talk till one in the morning. This is how passionate this guy is. Jeff reaches out to the franchise partners, you'll see Jeff in a restaurant actually pushing a broom. When we were doing a remodel on one of the restaurants, Jeff was there with a paintbrush. I had never seen any prior CEOs actually get in a restaurant and wanna work.

0 (1h 13m 34s):
And, and I mean, your role really in the company in a sense, and, and this is not, I hope this is sounds complimentary. I mean, you really are, you're like Colonel Sanders. I mean, you really are the kind of the ambassador, the brand ambassador of the company. Do you feel like you are listened to more now than you ha than you were in the past

4 (1h 13m 53s):
Today? There's without a doubt. Jeff listens to me. Jeff is the first CEO that actually brought me back to the board and said, you know, the board needs to hear your ideas, Dave, because after all, you know, I, I'm one of the few barbecue restaurant owners that was actually inducted into the National Barbecue Hall of Fame. Yeah. I'm a celebrity judge at all of the big barbecue events. I live in this world of barbecue.

0 (1h 14m 22s):
Yeah. By the way, is the company still publicly traded

4 (1h 14m 26s):
Today? Yeah. Yes. The company still publicly traded. I think our stock is around three bucks. Right. So, you know, the only place you can go is up.

0 (1h 14m 36s):
Do you think that, I mean, you know, we're in the midst of this pandemic, right? And many states in which famous Daves is operating ha have certain restrictions and, and there's a lot of delivery. And as you know, the restaurant industry's really been hit hard. Do you know, I mean, how, how is Famous Daves doing in the midst of this, this crisis?

4 (1h 14m 57s):
You know, famous Daves really is built on what's basically picnic food, barbecue travels, and it travels really well. When you look at our menu, when you, when you're serving barbecued ribs, pulled pork sandwiches, beans coleslaw, that's the type of food that travels. The famous Dave's restaurants are built for takeout. We have our own dedicated takeout doors. And that's why I think famous Dave's for the first time in a long, long time is on the road to recovery. So we're actually able to thrive, unlike a lot of restaurants who are struggling.

0 (1h 15m 36s):
Hmm. You know, given, given all the ups and downs of, of your career and a lot of incredible ups and, and a lot of just incredible triumphs and successes, but also some really tough, tough breaks. I mean, you know, even, even with famous Daves, you know, kind of taking it public and then, you know, losing the business for a while and the brand and, and, and of course now you're back in involved with it. But I mean, when you kind of look back on, on the different decisions you made, would you have done things differently or do you think that you kind of had to make the mistakes you made in order to, in order to learn how to do things right.

4 (1h 16m 17s):
You know, guy, I struggle I think every day sometimes thinking that I wish I could do things differently. But you know, the reality is I really have overcome a lot of adversities in my life. I have done things in my life that I wish I hadn't done. I should have been dead three times. I've been broke three times. But every time I've always come back stronger. You know, I often tell people that life is not always on top of the mountain. It's the valleys and it's the struggles down there that you, you have to come back from where you learn things.

4 (1h 16m 57s):
I think that's how you grow. And, and so if you're not out there on the edge making things happen, how do you know what's possible? But one of the things I I go back to is that the food of famous days, my original recipes are still holding the test of time. And as much as we shoot ourselves in the foot, as much as we've made our mistakes and growing is that people have always resonated with my food. And so, yes, we've had our tough times at Famous Dave's, but, but look at what we've also accomplished. Our barbecue products are in big box retailers like Target, Sam's Club, Costco, we are all over America.

4 (1h 17m 39s):
Yeah. It could not have happened if things were easy. So, you know, I think my story of my struggles in overcoming the my D h d overcoming my alcoholism, overcoming the tough times in my life, I is, is no different than the story of famous Dave's.

0 (1h 18m 1s):
Yeah. I mean, that's the thing, Dave, you know, you, your legacy will continue to live on after you're gone. Cuz it's at some point we're all gone. Right. Obviously. And this brand will continue. And is that more important to you, that legacy than, than, than than wealth? Or are they both equally important?

4 (1h 18m 20s):
Well, first of all, I don't think I've ever worked to, to get a paycheck more than I've worked to be a positive difference in the lives of other people. I've worked really hard to be good at what I do, but more than that guy, I think if anything people remember about me, I've been able to build something and give jobs to families and create opportunity where there was none. And a lot of people sometimes say, God, would I wish I was in your shoes? I have to laugh. And I say, I don't think so. But the one thing I can share is that I am grateful.

4 (1h 19m 1s):
I live a life of gratefulness. I live a life of sobriety and I live a life that I am so fortunate to be living this country because the things that I have done, it doesn't make sense. There's, there's no rhyme or reason that I was able to get a bank loan on my signature alone, much less having a 1.98 grade average in high school, no undergrad and getting into Harvard University, who would ever known that from some Indian kid growing up on the west side of Chicago. Yeah.

0 (1h 19m 35s):
When you think about your story and, and everything you accomplished, do you, do you think that what happened to you happened because of your skill and, and hard work and perseverance? Or do you think a lot of it had to do with luck?

4 (1h 19m 52s):
Well, I don't know about luck. I I wish I had been lucky. You know, you know, I think luck is created when you have a dream, you're willing to work for that dream. You're willing to work hard. You know, I, I think luck is a byproduct of you just being a hundred percent devoted to never, ever giving up.

0 (1h 20m 20s):
That's Dave Anderson, the founder of Famous Dave's. Earlier this year, the restaurant's parent company was bought by a Canadian franchiser in a deal worth 200 million. And last year Dave was inducted into the National Native American Hall of Fame. And by the way, some of you may remember that several years ago Dave competed in a food network barbecue challenge called Best in Smoke. And he made it all the way to the finals until,

4 (1h 20m 49s):
Till right at the very end, they pull a surprise. You've got 20 minutes to cook something out of tofu. I said, what's tofu? And all my years of cooking, I had no clue what tofu was. And today I know there's like a, a firm tofu Sure. And there's like a silky smooth

0 (1h 21m 5s):
Tofu medium.

4 (1h 21m 6s):
Well, they gave us the silky SMO and I lost $50,000 because I could not cook

0 (1h 21m 12s):
Tofu, cannot grill silky tofu.

4 (1h 21m 14s):
Oh, it, it, it, I tried it, it, it fell through the grill grates.

0 (1h 21m 21s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you enjoyed it, please help us spread the word. Tell someone about how I built this or post about it on social media. And thank you. If you wanna contact the team, our email addresses ibt id.wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at How I Built This and mine is at Guy Raz. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by Ramin era Bluey. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Gareth Gales. Our production staff also includes Casey Herman, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Liz Metzker, Katherine Cipher, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung, Chris Masini, Sam Paulson, and Carla Estevez.

0 (1h 22m 3s):
Our intern is Susanna Brown. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey, prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon Music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.

Men in Blazers (1h 22m 44s):
The world's greatest sporting event only rolls around every four years. And every four years everyone becomes a soccer fan. That's right. Billions of eyes are about to fall upon 32 nations battling it out for soccer supremacy. And the Men in Blazers podcast will once again be your guide to every incredible goal, every heartbreaking defeat, and every moment of human triumph. This is America's number one soccer podcast, bringing you expert analysis of every US men's national team game, and exclusive interviews from a slew of athletes and celebrity guests all month long. This is what the world will be talking about. Follow men and blazers wherever you get your podcasts. You can listen ad free on the Amazon Music or Wondery app.