0 (0s):
Hey everyone and happy new year, you know, we want it to set just the right mood for 2022. So we're running an episode that is so full of joy and good vibes. And of course, great advice. It's one of our favorites from the archives, the story of Headspace, hope you enjoy.

2 (21s):
We knew the business that we had wasn't working. And so with the last bit of cash that we had, we managed to pull in every single favor that we had left. Our friends and family had said, look, we really love you guys, but we're not, we're not giving you any more money. This is a terrible business, like well done, but enough's enough

0 (44s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm guy Ross and on today's show how a Buddhist monk and a stressed out marketing consultant sat down at a Starbucks and wound up launching Headspace meditation app that has millions of users around the world. So we've had several episodes that feature co-founders. And if there's one thing that's clear, it's that all of them brought different skills to the table at method, Adam Lowry mix the ingredients to make the soap.

0 (1m 32s):
Eric Ryan design, the now iconic bottles at Reddit, Steve Huffman did the coding. Alexis Ohanian did the content. So you get the point, right? And it's almost hard to imagine any of these companies making it without both co-founders. And that is also probably the case with today's story, because it's a story of two totally different people with totally different strengths. One of them, Andy Puddicombe trained as a Buddhist monk for more than a decade. The other rich Pierson was a rising star at a top tier advertising agency in London. They met because rich was spiraling. He was burnt out and looking for help.

0 (2m 14s):
And Andy was the person he happened to come across at the time Andy was offering one-on-one meditation sessions out of a back room of a doctor's office. Neither Andy nor rich could have imagined that eventually the two of them would build a meditation app. Headspace now used by millions of people and a business that generates more than a hundred million dollars in annual revenue and the story of how they came together at the exact right moment, each with the exact skillset they needed to co-found and build Headspace. Well, it's a pretty long journey. And Andy, the Buddhist monk, he would say that it took as long as it was supposed to, but it actually starts when Andy was growing in the UK in the 1980s, he was first introduced to meditation as a kid around the time his parents' marriage started to fall apart.

3 (3m 9s):
Yes, my parents been up at 10 and my mum was, she was, she was looking for a way to cope. Meditation definitely was within her kind of sphere of, of interest. And in Bristol, there was a local group, it was a TM group, transcendental meditation group. And she decided that she was going to do a six week course. And my sister, I found out was going along with her and I didn't want to be home on my own. So I asked if I could join them. Yeah. And it led to actually kind of a couple of years of doing that kind of thing into my early teens.

0 (3m 44s):
It was in like the early eighties when meditation was by no means mainstream. I mean even the sort of Western.

3 (3m 51s):
Oh, it was so outside of mainstream.

0 (3m 53s):
Yeah. And did it feel weird or different w when you were a kid, did you feel like this was a little unusual eight?

3 (4m 0s):
I don't know if I had that point of comparison, you know, as a kid, you don't necessarily have the, this is, this is weird and that's not, my mom was going there. So I was going there. It wasn't until I told a really good friend of mine, he's still a very good friend of mine. I shared with him confided in him that I'd been going to do this thing, because I knew it was a little bit kind of weird. And, and I went into school the next day and all the other kids in the class were sat on their desks. Cross-legged sort of arming at me as I walked in the room. And it was at that point, I, I think then I registered that, oh, okay. This is definitely not something that is mainstream. And it's probably not something that I'm going to be able to talk about too much to other people.

0 (4m 44s):
What, what was it, was it focusing on breathing? Do you remember what those group sessions were like with TN?

3 (4m 50s):
It's typically a mantra, so you're given sort of a word or a phrase and you repeat it over and over for sort of a 20 minute period. And at that time I found it really, really difficult as a, as an energetic young kid to sit there and be still and to focus. But it was definitely something that I still found. You know, I still look back at it with a sense that it was, it was a very positive influence, an early stage in my life

0 (5m 17s):
When you were like 16, because in the UK, it's a little different than in the U S which is certainly at that time, like the drinking age. Yeah. Probably wasn't really enforced. And it was typical for 15, 16 year old kids to go to pops and get pints of beer and drinking cultures is very different. There were you into that? Were you part of that?

3 (5m 37s):
I was very into that by that stage. I was playing in a rugby team as well, and it was very much part of the culture. Yeah. We'd go out at the weekend with our, with our fake ID and go and find some drinks.

0 (5m 50s):
I read that around this time, like in your teens, Y you were at a pub one night, you went through a pretty traumatic experience. What, what happened?

3 (6m 5s):
It was Christmas Eve. We'd had a party at the local rugby club in keynsham. And so it was Christmas morning. By the time we all of came out onto the street and we were standing in a big group outside the club and a drunk driver came down the road and crashed into the group of us. And I was just very lucky to be standing on the edge of the group, but it killed two people and injured. So put in sort of critical intensive care at 12, 12, the group, and, you know, every single one of us there that night dealt with, dealt with it in a different way. I think we were all very confused.

3 (6m 47s):
You know, we're still young, 19 years old, you know, I don't know if we ever really kind of know how to deal with that kind of thing. I just wanted to get away. I think we often do this, right? Like the idea, the sense of getting away in a physical way, kind of, we think that we're going to be able to outrun it mentally as well. And of course he never can. So, yeah, like I think a really to this day, you know, kind of a really important and impactful part of, of my own journey. Wow.

0 (7m 22s):
So I guess eventually you left home, you went and you went to college and you started studying at a place called de Montfort university, by the way, where, like, where is that?

3 (7m 34s):
Yeah, that's in, it's in Bedford. So it was a sports college and actually I didn't go straight there. So my grades weren't good enough. So I went and spent a couple of years in actually here in the U S doing some coachings sports. I already trained prior to university. I trained as a personal trainer. So I was already working in sort of gyms and things. I'm really enjoying that till eventually when I was 21, I got in as a, they call it as a mature student in England, which basic means your grades don't have to be quite as good. And you're a little bit older, so they'd let you in, I think it's a petty thing. And I started studying sport science.

0 (8m 10s):
So you you're at university and you decide to drop out I'm in the middle of it. Yeah. What, why, what, what happened?

3 (8m 20s):
Yeah, so I was just increasingly, you know, I just felt the sense of disturbance or unsatisfactoriness, I kind of felt like I was doing something I enjoyed, but I, I just didn't feel like it was really making me happy. And at the time I was going out with this go, who lived there kind of locally. And we, we talked a lot, you know, she was really into Buddhism and stuff. And, and, you know, she talked with a huge amount of aberration about these monks and nuns that would go away and meditate and try and understand their mind, you know, and only it was just into the second year. It was pretty early on, just had a day, you know, where all of a sudden that seemed to make a lot of sense.

3 (9m 5s):
I just, it was like an inexplicable feeling that I, I just had to do this so much so that I went into university that same afternoon and said, I'm going to leave. This is what I'm going to do.

0 (9m 18s):
So just, I just want to understand this. You are in your second year of college, you're kind of just something's missing, which is not unusual for a young person in their twenties, early twenties to kind of experience. And you decide that you want to go and study Buddhism and become a monk. Yeah. I mean, just, yeah,

3 (9m 41s):
I would frame it ever so slightly different or you're absolutely correct. But my experience of it was not the, is not that I sat there and chose to do it. I genuinely felt nothing else made sense. It was, it didn't even feel like a choice. I didn't, I didn't sit there for days thinking, should I do this? Shouldn't I do this? What are the pros? What are the cons? I sounds, I'm aware of how strange that sounds, but just suddenly think one day you're going to quit college and become a Buddhist monk. But at the time for what it's worth, it felt like a calling. I couldn't sort of ignore.

0 (10m 21s):
So this is like, sort of really pre internet, you know, browser days, you couldn't just go to the internet and your university library and like, look up, you know, how to become a Buddhist monk or like, where do I go? So what did you, so you decide that you're going to drop out of university and how do you even find out what to do?

3 (10m 40s):
I mean, firstly, I just love the idea. That's even kind of a search option on, on Google these days, how to become a monster, but like, I guess it is, and there would probably people kind of Googling that, but no back then I'd read a little bit. And most of the stuff I had read was from Southeast Asia. So it has its home in Thailand and Vietnam and Sri Lanka. So I started thinking, okay, I'm going to go to Thailand. I knew of a teacher who was there, who I really kind of respected. I enjoyed that writing. So I thought, okay, well, I'm going to, I'm going to go there. But this girlfriend of mine said, oh, a friend of mine has just come back from, from the Himalayas. She went to visit the Dalai Lama. He was in Northern India in this kind of small town.

3 (11m 22s):
I went and got a lonely planet guy from the local library and looked it up and thought, well, that looks interesting. Okay. Maybe I'll fly to daddy instead. And you know, did that alarm was there must be a, a pretty good place. So I flew into a phone to daddy. I think I'd done a little bit of research and I printed some stuff up before I went and I knew of a retreat center. So I went to a retreat center and said kind of, you know, this is, this is what I'd like to do. Could I just start off maybe by working here kind of maybe doing some retreat. And I was for probably six months or so before then going on to Thailand and Burma sort of to actually train in a, in a monastery.

0 (12m 1s):
And when you got there to burn my what, like, what was the commitment you were making? Like how long were you going to be there

3 (12m 9s):
In that particular tradition? You don't make a time commitment. I didn't later on in the Tibetan tradition I did, but I started training as a, as a novice monk. And it was of all the, of all the training. It was really full on. It was way more full on than what I've come from in India. I mean,

0 (12m 25s):
What are you, what are you like? What, what's a typical day?

3 (12m 27s):
Like, so in Burma it was just meditation. So we were doing an 18 hour day. So it's eight hours of sitting and eight hours of walking meditation all in the same room. Plus then the two hours for, for eating at five in the morning and 11 you'd have lunch and then no eating after midday. And then you'd have somewhere around three, three and a half hour sleeper at nighttime. And that was it, seven days a week. Wow. So it was, it was a really, I mean really kind of quite extreme retrospectively. I think I would have done things a little differently. There was no one, there, there were no English people there. There was no one who spoke really English.

3 (13m 8s):
Even my teacher there didn't really speak any English. So every afternoon I had 10 minutes with him and I'd go and sit there and he'd look at me and he'd sort of smile and look very kind of warm and happy. And sometimes I'd sit there and I'd smile and kind of laugh. And other days I'd sit there and I'd cry and he didn't really have anything to say, cause he didn't speaking. Sometimes he'd just speak Burmese anyway. And I would just sit there and kind of, you know, so there wasn't a lot of instruction taking place.

0 (13m 37s):
Yeah. I've talked to people, who've done the pasta, which is like 10 days sound retreated, who who've had like an certainly in the first few days really broken down, you know, really just emotional breakdowns is so hard. It's so isolating. You must've experienced that.

3 (13m 53s):
Oh yeah. Yeah. I definitely, I, I, I met apart myself that I had never previously experienced and it was vulnerable. It was painful, challenging in ways. Yeah. I don't even know how to describe.

0 (14m 8s):
I'm still thinking. Yep. I want to become a monk. Like, I mean, to, to me, I think 90% of people would have just dropped out at that point and said, this isn't for me.

3 (14m 19s):
I think there's different ways of looking at that. I think through the lens of avoidance, I think you just look at it and say was karma, you know, kind of, that was my journey and this is the journey I'm on. And I kind of eat, did you know when you're living your life? And it just feels like you're in the right place in the right time, even if it's difficult, there's still the sense that this is, this is just where I should be right now. So even when it was difficult, I still felt that this is where I should be right now. But yeah, eventually kind of, there was a point where I think I kept getting in Asia as well. You know, like that is the additional challenge. It's not just the challenges of the mind, it's the challenges of the stomach and the bowels as well.

3 (14m 59s):
And I remember eventually a teacher from Australia coming and he said, look, honestly, he said, if you want to kind of go and do like a, a year retreat or a two year retreat or something like that, he said, I'd probably try and do it in the west if you can. He said, find a good teacher. But he said, it's so much easier to do that. So yeah, I started sort of looking at some, some other places as well. And, and I met this teacher, this Tibetan Lama and, you know, we talked a lot by that stage. I'd already kind of done multiple years. I dunno, probably four years, something like that or training. And we talked to, we talked a lot and I was so moved by his warmth, by his compassion, by a sense of joy things.

3 (15m 40s):
I'd not necessarily, I'd witnessed a lot of awareness and focus and attention in other monasteries, but I hadn't really kind of seen this other sort of side and yeah, I made the decision. It was really easy again, kind of actually, this is what I've been looking for. And yeah. Now I don't know how many years, 8, 25 years later. He's still, he's still my teacher now.

0 (16m 0s):
So Andy, I mean, during the spirit of like, I assume that you'd go home now and again, you know, to visit family and friends, when you did, like, what did they think of you? Did they feel like you changed a lot? Yeah.

3 (16m 13s):
So I do remember going back. So I was, I was fully ordained and I remember walking down the high street. So I mean, this is a small town in the Southwest of England. I'm walking down there and my bright sort of maroon robes and seeing kind of old school teachers and you know, old mate. And then the same as my friends kind of, Hey, be great to all meet up together. And they're like, sure, yeah, just come down to the pub where we always are. And I'm thinking in my mind, you know, there's this conflict, oh, I'm a monk. I can walk into a pub as a monk and maybe it's okay if I just drink water and look, they're not going to meet me anywhere else. Cause like genuinely they'd been saying those same chairs for many years.

3 (16m 54s):
They weren't going to give them up. So I did, I walked into a local pub where we all used to hang out as teenagers and I sat down around a table. I remember there were eight of us around this table. I drank water, they drank beer and we talked about the Himalayas, but I never felt like I, I lost touch with the character or the person I grew up with. It wasn't like a different person. It was just, I was having a different experience.

0 (17m 21s):
Okay. I, I wanna, I want to kind of fast forward just a couple years to, to the early two thousands, because I guess at a certain point you actually wind up in Moscow, in Russia, teaching at a meditation center there. Yeah. And I guess you were sort of, you were supposed to be there like waiting until you could get a spot at like one of these long-term BridgeStreet's is, is that right?

3 (17m 42s):
Absolutely. So there was a, there was a four year retreat coming up, but one of the monasteries and this retreat just kept getting pushed back. So I found myself in Moscow for a number of years kind of teaching meditation, but waiting to go into long-term retreat. And so I think on the one hand I was thinking, okay, I want to make a long-term commitment to retreat and better understanding my mind. And on the other hand, I was getting this kind of experience of what does it mean to teach meditation, you know? And it wasn't what I'd set out to do, but I kind of accidentally found myself in a position where, where I was, I was then teaching,

0 (18m 19s):
Teaching meditation in Moscow to Russians in English.

3 (18m 24s):
Correct. And mixed in with the Russians are a bunch of ex-pats who lived in Moscow. And I got to know people who would come along to these centers kind of alongside the sessions that we'd have at the center. I'd meet up with them. And then one of the ex-pats that invited me to, to go in and teach his exact, an oil company in, in Russia. And he said, look, you know, kind of, you can't come in dressed as a Buddhist monk. You know, it's an oil company, we're Moscow. And that had got me thinking about this whole idea of, you know, demystifying this and trying and trying to make it more accessible.

0 (19m 1s):
You go back to the UK in 2004, after a couple of years in Russia to study circus arts, this is a total like less out of left field. People are going to listen to this and say, wait, what? Wait, I think you were a monk you were doing when he learned, joined the circus. What what's.

3 (19m 20s):
Yeah. So it sounds crazy. I know it, he actually stayed stay with me. I, it, it does actually make more sense than it than it first sounds what happened was I was in Moscow and I'd already made the decision actually to sort of hand back my ropes to no longer be a monk. Why? So I found increasingly over the years that I was there, that as I say, I was meeting people and I was finding a way of talking about meditation in a way that I had never experienced myself. And, but that seemed to really resonate with people.

0 (19m 57s):
You've found a way to explain it to people, language that you exactly wished you had had

3 (20m 3s):
Exactly that. So I found myself living in Moscow, still teaching in the meditation center, but no longer living as a monk. And I hadn't done any exercise for 10 years. And I was really excited about doing some exercise. And a friend of mine now is doing a degree Moscow state circus. And he said, look, you know, I used to love acrobatics and stuff and juggling. And he was, oh, why didn't you just come along? You know, meet some of my teachers. So I did, and I really got to know how it happened, but I was there and one of them said, Hey, look, you know, you can do a degree in this back in London. And I was already thinking, okay, how do I make this transition from Buddhists monk, living in a monastery to kind of making this content more available?

3 (20m 50s):
Yeah. I had no money as a monk. You give away all your belongings. So I'd given away all my clothes, money, everything. So I think, how am I going to go from Russia back to England? And I kind of saw an opportunity, I guess, as a, now a very mature student. I'm a 32. I was, I was in a position where the government would essentially kind of pay for everything

0 (21m 11s):
Fund your education to study, to study circus or

3 (21m 16s):
Yes. So, so they, they funded not only the degree, but they also funded my living as well. So, you know, I was, I got into a situation where I didn't have to find kind of a job when I went back to the UK. So by, during the day I went to school and studied, studied circus arts. It was a, it was a big,

0 (21m 35s):
The difference. And meantime, in your mind, you had this idea of, I think I can make meditation more accessible because

3 (21m 41s):
Yeah. I mean every available, I was up at four o'clock in the morning writing content and trying to work out kind of, okay, well, what is this thing that I want to do? But alongside that running in parallel was I managed to find a, a place where I could teach, teach meditation, just doing one-to-one. At that point, I found a doctor who ran an integrative health center in London, where they had everything from of rheumatic specialists to cardiac specialists, you know, right across the board, all different disciplines. And he had heard of mindfulness and he said, well, look, if you can make it work here, then I'm happy to give you one of the clinics rooms

0 (22m 22s):
Who were the kinds of people who were going to see where they, where they, people who were suffering from medical elements, where the people who just had work stress or where they kind of hippy dippy kind of people or people in suits and ties or

3 (22m 36s):
Yeah, they, the, I deliberately chose that clinic or that kind of approach because I didn't want it to be in a, an alternative kind of health clinic or something. You know, I wanted it to feel really kind of mainstream. That was, that was intentional. It was also in the city, it was in the financial district of London. So most of the people I was seeing worked in the financial industry, they were struggling with depression, anxiety, insomnia, migraine. It was broad, but I would, I would say that they were all struggling with many of the things that we, we all suffer within

0 (23m 14s):
In life now. So in London where you convening like larger meditation groups or was it mainly one-on-one groups?

3 (23m 20s):
So I did. I started with some workshops. So the, in the clinic, I was primary, but by that stage, I'd finished kind of studying at the, at the social score. I was working full time in the clinic, seeing anything from six to 10 people a day. And I started weekends. I started, I did a few, a few workshops, but it only really changed to sort of much larger, larger groups after I met my now. Very good,

2 (23m 46s):
Good friend, rich, who's the co-founder of Headspace.

0 (23m 49s):
So this is probably a good time to bring you in rich. You've been sitting here patiently and that's, I understand it like you, when you met Andy, you were, I guess, in your mid twenties and working in London at this sort of high powered ad agency called BBH, is that right?

2 (24m 6s):
Yeah. I was working on kingly street right in the middle of Soho. Right. So

0 (24m 10s):
Like sort of day-to-day life was probably like working all day and like not getting much sleep. And what was that? More or less what it was like? Yeah,

2 (24m 18s):
I was working a lot. Like we, you know, if we were pitching we'd often work 15, 16 hour days and we would, it was client services. So, you know, you're at the behest of clients, so you have to work crazy hours. But at the same time, there was just a lot of, there's a lot of drinking and partying that went with the culture and it was a way to kind of really let off steam where everyone worked really hard and played really, really hard. It was very hard living, I would say for, for, in those early years when I, when I was working for

0 (24m 47s):
Sure. Did you like that life?

2 (24m 49s):
Well, I loved it to be honest with you. I absolutely loved it when I, I felt like I'd found my career calling and I loved that I could be around creative people and come up with creative kind of products over time that I think when I gave up drinking, when I kind of decided that I was not going to kind of live as hard, you know, I just knew I didn't want to do that anymore. And I kind of, I felt the, kind of the shallow nature of selling people, things that I maybe didn't want. And I just wasn't getting, I just wasn't getting any joy from that experience. And I didn't know what I wanted to do. And I was getting acupuncture at the time because I was just getting more and more anxious as I kind of didn't really feel like I understood my place in the world.

2 (25m 34s):
And in that, that the person that was giving me the acupuncture said, look, and I was obviously telling him about my job and how unhappy I was. Well, I've got, I've actually got a course starting next month. Have you ever thought about being an acupuncturist? I think you'd be a brilliant acupuncturist. And I'd said, no, I've never considered that. And, but I, yeah, I went in the next week and, and I quit and decided I was going to go and become an acupuncturist. Yeah. That's how that,

0 (26m 3s):
So did you start taking classes?

2 (26m 6s):
Yeah, I, I just felt like I wanted to do something that had some impact. And so I started the course three days a week in a normal academic kind of calendar. And then I was freelancing for the rest of the time to kind of make money from

0 (26m 21s):
Doing freelance advertising.

2 (26m 24s):
Well, freelance kind of just marketing advice. I was weird when I kind of quit my job. Lots of people reached out. And so I kind of managed to cobble together quite a few independent jobs that was enough to kind of pay my, you know, pay my mortgage. And I got a flatmate and I managed to kind of survive that way and pay for my, so

0 (26m 44s):
You're doing that. And how did you come across Andy? I mean, at that time he's teaching meditation in the city in London. Did you hear about them from someone else?

2 (26m 56s):
Yeah, so the, one of the, this guy called Adam Braeden who had a business called all star lanes and he had asked me to help him out with some marketing. So I was helping here. We'd become good friends. And I was open about, you know, how anxious I was feeling and just how that was getting progressively worse. And he'd been getting one-on-one lessons from Andy and he suggested I should go meet Andy. Like Andy had this clinic and he'd wanted some help with it. So it was the skill swap. You know, I met Andy and he had the clinic. And so he said, look, why don't, you know, I'll put you through the clinic experience and I think I can help you. And maybe you can help me with some ideas for the clinic

0 (27m 37s):
At Andy. What did you think that rich could help you with? Did you think he might be able to help me figure out a way to get this out to more people?

3 (27m 45s):
Yeah, I think, I think exactly that, you know, I, I could see that it was working for people and people who previously wouldn't have looked at meditation were getting benefit from it. At that time I was starting to put together. I was thinking like, do I start trying to train other people to teach meditation? Do I try and take this into workplaces? I just didn't really, I had no idea I put zero business experience, but also no idea how to brand it or anything, you know, kind of, and I just thought that that rich could, could help sort of help me yeah. Take this idea outside of the clinic and beyond that.

2 (28m 21s):
That's right. So w there was a Starbucks that was over the road. And so we would, before the session, we would go over the road and he, and he tell me what his ideas I'd give him a loads of ideas and then we'd go over to the clinic and he would teach me meditation. So I really kind of started, it was a very much an exchange of skills with no real sense of where it would, where it would go.

0 (28m 43s):
Yeah. I mean, w what did you say to rich? Like, did you say, Hey, you know, I want to start an education company. I wanna make like, pamphlets. Like, was it, was it not that specific?

3 (28m 53s):
I think it was more about, I really want to demystify meditation. I want to get meditation out there. I want to get more people meditating. I don't know how to do it kind of outside of it,

2 (29m 3s):
At which point I said, how do you feel about the name? Because I really want to demystify meditation. I said, talk to me about the name. It was that it was called a senior, which Andy can,

0 (29m 15s):
But it was the name of your clinic as soon. Yeah, yeah,

3 (29m 18s):
Yeah. It was called a Sonia. So Sonya, Sonya Yetta and ASIN Yetta, which was the old Sanskrit. Whereas, but as soon you means kind of bringing the, making something real out of emptiness. And so, like the, the sentiment of it was kind of right in the sense that kind of, I wanted to bring something into the world that kind of, you know, people hadn't necessarily experienced, but I mean, an old Sanskrit name, probably not the right way to demystify something.

0 (29m 47s):
So you guys start this process of just kind of brainstorming in the meantime, Richard going through a course, right. Like a meditation course. Yes.

2 (29m 55s):
And he's teaching me as he would his clients in the clinic. It was a 10 week course. And it was just a really good kind of training experience. The aim of it at the start. It really was just the kind of simple exchange. This was

0 (30m 9s):
Almost like a barter. It's not the word, but like you gave Andy, you gave rich free meditation sessions and rich, you gave Andy free consulting.

2 (30m 18s):
Yeah. That was very much

0 (30m 23s):
Got the better end of that deal. Like who, who is going to lose more money out of it because Richard charging a lot of money for your

3 (30m 28s):
Consulting? I think,

2 (30m 31s):
No, honestly, I think genuinely, I kind of, you know, I remember when I, the second time we went to see him, I, I basically wrote out a stream of consciousness of everything that was in my mind because I couldn't make sense of it. And so I didn't know how to explain in words what was going on in my mind. And so I just made, wrote this, when I think back of this, this madness of like double sided, kind of 18 sides of pure drivel, really, when I, when I think about it and Andy, I gave it to Andy, I said, look, this is what's going on. And he patiently read every single word in front of me and never like a look of judgment or anything on his face. And at the end of it, it was just like, look, I think one, I think this is like very normal and to, you know, I, I think I can help you with it.

2 (31m 15s):
And so to hear that when you felt desperate, is I, yeah. One of the, like the kindest things anyone can ever do for you. So I think, I genuinely definitely think I got the vetted, I got the fed end of the deal then the 90.

0 (31m 32s):
So Andy, I imagine that most of the people who came and saw you really liked you because you are there to help them. What did you like about rich or what did you, did you, I mean, there must have been some kind of connection between the two of you pretty quickly.

3 (31m 46s):
You know, obviously we, we got on very well, but we had a shared sense of anything is possible. Just, I think that was just our character. I think whether it was, we were born with it or we kind of got bought up in different households, but we both had a shared sense that anything was possible. We both shared and naive optimism and ambition. I think we both got energy from being with the other person. So

0 (32m 11s):
You're meeting regularly and you're kind of brainstorming. And at what point did the two of you say, Hey, let's do something together. Was, was it the feeling from the beginning or did that

2 (32m 22s):
Well, I think, yeah, I don't think right from the beginning. I definitely didn't think that that was going to be the thing I thought I was genuinely just helping Andy. And I just felt very grateful that I was getting helped with my anxiety. And so I just still, it was genuinely like a skill squat, but the, I think the moment it kind of became clear was when we were talking about what it could be, and we got a sense of that kind of shared understanding, and Andy actually said to me, would you come, would you like to work with me? And I thought he was saying, it's my business. Would you like to come and work for me? And I was like, yeah, sure.

2 (33m 3s):
He said, well, I can't afford to, to kind of pay you, but would you do it? And I was like, yeah, of course. And it was at that point that Andy said to me, no, I like as a 50 50 partner, like I want, I want, let's start this thing together. And that was the first time genuinely that I thought, oh, he actually wants to do business with me

0 (33m 29s):
When we come back in just a moment at Richmond, Andy turned the one-on-one meditation experience in the clinic into an app used by millions of people all over the world, stay with us, I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR Support for this podcast. And the following message come from. Klayvio the email and text marketing platform that puts creators in control. If you're the creator of an e-commerce brand, you need a platform that hustles as hard as you do, Klayvio unlocks the power of your e-commerce data.

0 (34m 17s):
So you can personalize and automate messages that keep customers coming back. Creators communicate with Klayvio get started for free@klaviyo.com slash NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's right around 2010, when anybody come and rich Pierson decide to go into business together. But at this point they still don't really know what the business is going to be. They have a hunch that Andy's meditation training could help a lot of people.

0 (34m 59s):
The problem is how do you scale Andy?

2 (35m 3s):
The very first idea, actually that I think on the first or second time that we met in Starbucks, I said she puts on an app and Andy's like, yeah, I like the idea, but it's, it won't work because traditionally it's always been taught in a kind of teach to student model, like in a kind of in live in person. And so that's when we started to play around with the idea of events and live events, you were going

0 (35m 29s):
To be a, like a live events business.

2 (35m 31s):
We were, we were for several, several years. Yeah. We were live event. We did

0 (35m 35s):
Live events and out of curiosity, I mean, rich become marinated in this world. He'd been in advertising and business development. Like this was a totally normal pursuit. Yeah. You had been like you would given away all of your stuff, right? Like you, you were like living in monasteries and wearing robes, like was a part of you uncomfortable with them with the idea of like a business.

3 (35m 60s):
Yeah. I don't know if we really thought of it as it was almost more like kind of, how do we just change the behavior and the way people think about something obviously to survive while I was working at the clinic, I'd have to charge money. And so I'd kind of got past that point. That was at the beginning of the clinic. That was a really big leap for me to charge money, to teach somebody meditation felt so fundamentally different from where I'd come from. I spoke with enough teachers that really kind of coached me through that and helped me get, understand that well, that is the reality of living in the world. Like your landlord is going to want some rent. And if you have a skill, it's kind of okay to put a value on that and to, in order to share it.

3 (36m 44s):
So I'd gone through that kind of more through the clinic process. So by the time we got to, to Headspace, it was more about just this big idea of, of demystifying meditation and getting out there

0 (36m 54s):
You guys needed to, to build an events company or to a fence company is probably not the best description, but this idea that if you wanted to spread this idea, you still needed money to Mount events and to advertise. And so, so where did you go first?

2 (37m 11s):
Well, we went to Andy had some clients at the clinic that he, you know, he'd worked with and people that he knew in Russia that kind of contributed. So friends on that side went to my dad, my poor dad, I,

3 (37m 26s):
But I think which is that by the way, like have to give him a shout out. He was amazing. Yeah. I mean, honestly, if it hadn't been for him, we, we wouldn't have, we wouldn't have made it. And he, I remember going down to, to see him go and we presented him with this, this big kind of pitch. We put together a business plan and everything. And at the end of it, he said, I don't know if it was like, it's a terrible idea. So those in this idea is going to work, but he said, if anyone can make it work, he said, I think you two guys can. And he said, so, you know, I'm prepared to unprepared to give

2 (38m 1s):
You a 10th of what you've asked.

3 (38m 3s):
Exactly. But it's on you guys, not on the idea.

0 (38m 7s):
And I read that, that your dad invested or gave you 50,000 pounds to help start it. Yeah. But I mean, I'm wondering, I mean, did you tell him, you know, oh, we're going to have events and people are gonna buy tickets and you know, we're going to create a sustainable business that way. Or was there more like, I mean, how would he have seen a return on his investment

2 (38m 30s):
At the time? It was purely just the events. And we felt that we could build a business from that. And that was the business quite rightly, actually in hindsight said, we'll never make a good business. And it didn't. But the thing that I would say is one he never, ever once asked for any shares in the business or any return for any of the money that he gave us. And to the point that actually, when we finally did do a fundraise in 2015, like our first proper fundraise, that was when we kind of forced him to take shares for the amount that he'd invested in the early days. But he never genuinely, he said to me, I was never expecting to see any of that, that money back.

0 (39m 12s):
And how did you come up with the name Headspace?

3 (39m 16s):
It was one of those beautiful moments. And trust me, there was so many bad names for weed. I don't remember them all, but we were, we were actually going, I think we were going down to, was it down, shut down. And we were on the way on the way down there. And I'm rich kind of said, I really feel like it just, it needs to have something very tangible in there. Like the mind is so intangible. Like, you know, kind of the word head I think is really kind of clear what it, what it's about. And I was sat in the passenger seat and I said, yeah, but it needs to feel spacious. Like that's what people want. That's what people are looking for. And we, you know, we looked at each other and went head space. It was just one of those. And we, I mean, we'd spend months trying to go through a brainstorm or there's so many bad

0 (39m 58s):
Ideas you were thinking of.

2 (40m 1s):
I've got, one of them was recognition. I know that, which sounds like a bad German techno club in Berlin. There was recognition. There was like, mindspace mind, lab, mind, lab, mind, gym. Yeah. I mean, every combination that was the none of them. Good.

3 (40m 21s):
And none of them were good.

0 (40m 22s):
Okay. All right. So you have a little bit of capital to work with it's 2010. Yeah. And what's the first thing you do? Do you like mountain event?

3 (40m 33s):
Tell him how he's spending the money Richie.

2 (40m 38s):
Well, I, I mean, I went to the, I felt, well, we both felt that meditation was really intangible and you can touch it and you can see it and you can, what is it? And so we really wanted to create a physical experience. So we spent off the 50,000 pounds, we spent 20,000 pounds of it on the kind of physical collateral to give out at the event. So we, we, we designed these beautiful cards about 60 different cards leading you through the 10 steps of meditation tips for how to sit when he was really the first version actually of the, of the app in a way.

2 (41m 24s):
Yeah.

3 (41m 24s):
Yeah, I think so that the 20 grand went on that. And then I remember sitting on the back of Richie's moped, traveling around London, looking at, trying to find the right venue. And we eventually settled on, on BAFTA

0 (41m 36s):
Art and film,

3 (41m 38s):
Film, and television kind of fairly kind of Luxy garner feeding. I just, as far away from the community center vibe as we could get, cause we were trying to, you know, put meditation this new space and I think it was 10,000 pounds a day. So basically on that first event, I think we'd already blown 30 before we even kind of turned up. Okay. So,

0 (41m 58s):
So this first event happens, I guess, in may of 2010. Right. And by the way, how many people showed up?

2 (42m 4s):
Yeah, we had about 200 people there. So

0 (42m 6s):
It was, and this was in, in, in London at BAFTA.

2 (42m 9s):
It was in London and BAFTA. Yeah. And it was off the back of, we'd had an article in the times and it launched about four weeks before the event. And it was double pay spread, which is really hard to get in the times. And it said Britain ins <em></em> said Britain's top meditation girl, the experts expert. And it was about how Andy had been training some politicians and sports, you know, professional athletes who had been coming to the clinic. And it was a kind of profile piece on, on Andy and that one helped to sell tickets to the events. And secondly, it started a process where we managed to get a book deal, a three book deal with hunter and Staunton and advance from that, which I think was still at that time, it was like one of the highest advances paid for a debut nonfiction author really funded the rest of the business.

2 (43m 5s):
Yeah. It really did.

3 (43m 6s):
Yeah, exactly. He gave us, I was a hundred,

2 (43m 8s):
180,000 pounds,

3 (43m 11s):
Which at that time, at that stage in the business

0 (43m 14s):
Transformational probably. Yeah, it was. Cause I have to imagine that the events that you launched weren't really generating because they're expensive. Right. You've got to pay for the venue space. So maybe provide,

2 (43m 26s):
Yeah. We were losing money on them.

0 (43m 28s):
So describe what they were like, why would you sit like on a stage or in the front of the room and lead meditations? Was there food, was there coffee, tea,

2 (43m 38s):
Favorite space moments in the taxi on the way to the first event with Andy and I just looked at them and I'd be so busy trying to work out all of the, you know, get the events, the event, I just turned it in. I said, what have you got planned for the day? Do you know, do you know what you're gonna talk about? And he's like, I'm just working it out. And I was thinking we'd like five minutes turning up. And it started like the first event was Andy on stage for eight hours with some breaks.

0 (44m 8s):
It's an all day event.

3 (44m 9s):
'cause you got, you got to feel sorry for the audience, but it was, it was just, it was me. It was me. In fact, probably I'd say all the BAFTA ones. Right. So probably for the first, I don't know, six or eight events we did, that was the format. It was, it was eight hours on stage, a break for lunch, like a couple of breaks kind of midway through morning and afternoon. And then

2 (44m 29s):
Yeah, we did. We used to try and put them on every four to six weeks and they got

3 (44m 33s):
Shorter as they got shorter. So we went from a full day to a half day, from a half day to sort of two hours and eventually down to 45 minutes or something. And I think the shorter they became, the more often we did them and we would do maybe sort of two or three in a day on a Saturday, rather than sort of one big one every six weeks or something.

2 (44m 52s):
But it was, it was like, hindsight's no sight, but we got to speak to pretty much every single person that came to those events. And I dunno if you think back to 2010, the UK, probably the most cynical market in the world at that time around this type of subject matter. So it was just really interesting for us to see how different people responded. We got feedback cards that were very detailed that we made people feel fill out, leave it till they filled them out. But it was brilliant because it, that really that input and that feedback, it was just a big research group for when we eventually did launch. Yeah.

0 (45m 30s):
So I guess it was 2012 when you launched the first version of the app, how did that, how did that happen? I mean, it sounds like rich that you had already, in your mind, you were thinking we've got to put out an app and Andy, it sounds like you were a little bit reluctant about doing that. So how did you kind of come to terms with turning it into an app?

3 (45m 50s):
So we talked about how could we recreate that 10 week journey in the clinic? How could we kind of give somebody that sort of same level of benefit and definitely I, I was reluctant, but then when we, I think eventually they just blocked me in a studio or something and said, just try and recall some stuff and see, see what happens. But I, I, yeah, w together we chatted and translate the 10 week course into a 365 day program.

2 (46m 21s):
The reason that we got to that point was that we knew the business that we had, wasn't working and our friends and family, it said, look, we really love you guys, but we're not, we're not giving you any more money. This is a terrible business, like well done, but enough is enough. And so with the last bit of cash that we had, we managed to pull in every single favor that we had left.

0 (46m 45s):
Where were you recording the audio? I mean, did you have to get studio space and, and do that?

3 (46m 52s):
I mean, so much of Headspace is down to generosity and kindness of friends and people we knew along the way. And rich had, you know, whenever we needed something or had a problem me, but, oh, I know a guy, well, I know go and, and we phoned him up and he had this friend Dre, who's not the doctor. Who's, who's a very, who's a very dear friend of both of us now. And Dre was, I mean, he was amazing. I mean, the first version of the app, he basically gave us free access to his studio for the first couple of years, I had a

0 (47m 27s):
Recording studio. He, he had,

3 (47m 30s):
Yeah, he had a recording studio as part of his business, his production business. And I mean, maybe we pay for the engineer, but other than that, I mean, he did everything for free. He was, again, we just couldn't have done it with, without

0 (47m 43s):
You would record 10 minute meditations that

3 (47m 47s):
Yeah. They're actually longer. So it was, and at that time we, you know, we just did them all real time and everything. And so it was, yeah, it was 10 minutes for 10 days, 15 minutes for 15 days. And then it was 20 minute meditations for the rest of the year. Yeah.

0 (48m 1s):
And it was just your voice speaking a little bit silence coming in silence, like in real time. Yeah. Olden rules. Yeah.

3 (48m 11s):
Yeah. We put together this year long course. Hmm.

0 (48m 14s):
But when it came to the app itself, like the coding part, did you like hire a tech team or did you just like have some outside company put it together for you?

2 (48m 24s):
Well, the, my old agency at BBH helped us. They gave us some kind of helping kind of pulling it together. And then we also had a lot of freelances. So we had a freelancer in Bulgaria. We had someone in India, we had people in London. We just, it was really a scrappy as we could make it, just to get the thing up. And then we managed to convince this was a really big thing for us. So two things that happen that really helped thirsting. There's a woman called Cathy Walters at Virgin, agreed to put our content on every single Virgin Atlantic plane. And we pitched her down at Gatwick and she came back a couple of weeks later and said, yeah, we're going to put it on

3 (49m 8s):
A laptop,

0 (49m 9s):
Which was mass. We're going to put Andy's recordings on our, our planes and really going to pay for this or that. You just would

2 (49m 17s):
Definitely,

0 (49m 17s):
It was a great exposure. Right. It would be great.

2 (49m 19s):
Yeah. Was a massive, huge, it was massive. And then on the back of that, we then managed to convince the guardian newspaper in the UK to put million booklets on the front and we didn't pay for it. The booklets

0 (49m 32s):
Of, of what.

3 (49m 34s):
So we, we put together, they wanted content and we wanted exposure. So it was, it was a great, it was a great deal. They said, could we come up with a booklet on how to meditate, but they would actually kind of, you know, print it out, pay for the booklets. Yeah. So we, we put together a little mini sort of manual for the start of the year on how to meditate and how to have a mindful year and

0 (49m 56s):
Immediately have an impact on, on the downloads of the app.

2 (49m 60s):
That's exactly right. Like in that first month that we launched, we took 32,000 pounds in revenue in that first January. And that was, you know, based that we never made a single in any month leading up to that, that was a really amazing moment for the, for the team. And then it was like, oh my God, this thing's going to fall down unless we rebuild it.

0 (50m 23s):
When we come back in just a moment, how rich and Andy suddenly to confront a totally unexpected challenge when one of them is diagnosed with a life-threatening illness, stay with us, I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor DocuSign. When you're running a small business, you want to maximize every minute and every dollar that's where DocuSign could help DocuSign can give you the freedom to complete your business agreements anywhere in real time and get signed versions back in minutes, it's that simple visit docusign.com today to learn more about how DocuSign can help add valuable time back into your day.

0 (51m 14s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, wix.com. If you're ready to build a successful business online, go to wix.com and start by creating your website. You can choose from over 800 designer made website templates to showcase your brand the way you want. And with advanced SEO and marketing tools, you can expand online, join millions of people running and growing their businesses with Wix. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2013 and rich, and Andy's meditation app is starting to get some attention.

0 (51m 54s):
And right around this time, they decide to relocate the business from London to Los Angeles. And this, by the way is after they've already made a few promotional trips to the U S.

3 (52m 6s):
And what we found was that every time we came over to the U S we were making great connections, great relationships, great friendships, but we would always be saying, oh, we're from the UK. We're going back to the UK. And very often those conversations would be well great. When you, when you move out to us or when your company kind of moves out here, let's pick these conversations up. And so we got us kind of chatting, and I think both of us, and we used to love coming to, to California, especially, it always felt like home for both of us. You know, I think we really connected with, with the feeding here. And there were a lot of, a lot of really good business kind of reasons for, for coming here. Yeah.

2 (52m 46s):
I think what is today, I think in the UK, you speak to someone about an idea and they'll give you a thousand reasons why you can't do it. And I think in America you say the same idea and they go, there's a thousand reasons why it works. And have you thought about making it bigger? And can I introduce you to X, Y, Z? And it's just a different, it's built into the culture and the psyche here in a way that it's not extra, but you don't have to. It's kind of just part of the way that this country has been built. And I think that if you are positive and you dream big, like there is no better place. I think, in the world to build a project like Headspace space. And I think we felt like that

0 (53m 24s):
I do want to ask Andy about Ms. Shortly after you moved to California, you were diagnosed with cancer. I was. Yeah. So all of a sudden you guys moved

3 (53m 36s):
Business there. Yeah. And you're trying to grow it and there's this huge setback. First of all, you are fully recovered today. I am. Thank you guys. Yeah, I am. Yeah. We're five, I guess, five years on from it. Now,

0 (53m 55s):
Did you, I mean, this is a real test because you would work with people who are recovering from cancer treatment promptly, the clinic in London and, and, and it's different when it happens to you.

3 (54m 7s):
It is. And it's also different, you know, I'd spent many, many years kind of doing practices, specifically reflecting on one's own mortality and impermanence and death. And it's very different doing that in an abstract way in a monastery when you're healthy. But I did find, I found meditation was kind of my rock throughout that period. It was, it was something that I came back to not just once a day, but sort of many, many times a day, you know, it's not that I was free from fear. Don't get me wrong. It was a scary time. But I think the temptation in those types of situations in life is to leap ahead to what might be, what could be, and to get kind of caught up in a lot of anxiety about that.

3 (54m 50s):
Or maybe even get into a kind of a conversation in your mind, you know, is it fair or am I, you know, and thankfully that training kind of allowed me to, you know, as much as possible to stay fairly kind of present and not to get too, too caught up in that stuff.

0 (55m 6s):
So were you kind of out of commission for, for awhile?

3 (55m 10s):
I was, you know, so I, you know, the, the first week, obviously, you know, we didn't really mean that medical insurance, we were so new in America and in the meantime, you know, we were having to establish ourselves in, in the us and kind of get set up here and also manage the team back home as well, because there were sort of, yeah, 12, 15 people in the office back in London.

2 (55m 34s):
I think it was a challenging time, like all round, really. It was a really, I didn't really know anyone in, we didn't know anyone, we didn't, we were really kind of out here on our own. And so there was no other choice. And Andy had all these things booked in all these speaking engagements and the company needed money. And so we couldn't turn them down and we'd signed contracts. So I had to learn how to kind of go out and do that. And it was, it was a really challenging time, but also just to see, I think Andy and Lucinda and his wife go through that and feel very helpless is tricky. Like it was just a really tricky mix of emotions.

2 (56m 15s):
I would say that I, that I had and a lot of just uncertainty, I mean,

3 (56m 20s):
The load that rich to con alongside just running the, that day-to-day of running a fast growing company, he basically took on all of the events and talking kind of engagements, which were in Europe and in Asia. And I mean, rich was, I can't remember how many miles you flew in. There was a space of like a month. I mean, tens and tens of thousands, just, he was, he was living, living on planes. So it was, it was really amazing to kind of watch actually just that the capacity that he had to do that

0 (56m 54s):
When you guys got to LA, was it already clear that to build this into something bigger, you would have to raise outside money? Well,

2 (57m 3s):
We wrote, to be honest, we were a bit not bit. We were very nervous about it and it took us well. I think it took me a long time actually, to get comfortable with it. It was kind of irrational fear about losing control of the vision and the mission don't know if it was that

3 (57m 21s):
Irrational. It

2 (57m 22s):
Happens a lot. It does happen a lot. And we'd probably heard a lot of bad stories. And so when we got to California, it was the product was, it really did take off in a different way and the business was really making serious kind of money. And so at that point, when, like when people were coming to us saying, we want to invest in your company, I do think we had a lot of leverage because the business was generating a lot of cash and we didn't have many people working at the company. So it enabled us. We probably, to be honest, we probably went overboard, but we met over 60 different investment houses would be the best way to describe it until we found someone that we really felt aligned with and we could get the deal done that would work for,

0 (58m 6s):
I'm trying to imagine, like pitch meetings. I know that a lot of investors, when you got to California, we're really interested in, and you probably didn't have to sort of sell them on the idea too hard. But Andy, I mean, just wondering, given like your background and like, you know, you studied to be a monk and you like gave up all your possessions and you had this epiphany as a 24 year old, 23 year old to live a simpler life. Now you are the, all those things that you did were going to be built into a business that these investors we're talking about scale and, you know, billion dollar company, and was a part of you uncomfortable with that. I have to imagine it was

3 (58m 48s):
I'm sure there were, there were moments of discomfort. I think the biggest kind of thing that when, if they're talking about scale, well, that's great. We were talking about the same thing. We wanted to get this out to as many people as possible. And we couldn't do that without the money. I think that the temptation very often is to, is to look at it in a very sort of black and white wanes interest in society in general and say kind of like, you know, okay, money, money's bad. You know, you guys are trying to do this. It's good, money's bad. I think we look at it in that way. I kind of, I think money can be incredibly helpful. You know, I was really excited about getting meditation out there and getting it to, to more people. So that was a way of doing it.

0 (59m 27s):
It seems like one of the ways you guys have also managed this process, cause I think you've raised almost $75 million after a few rounds. The first round was 2015. I think you raised about $30 million that rich you handle the business side really. And Andy, you kind of focus on just really the content. Yeah.

3 (59m 48s):
I mean, near the books and rightly so Richard herself to the business

2 (59m 53s):
And he said, look, we, we work more as a kind of creative partnership on the things that, you know, Andy is passionate about. I'm passionate about. And yeah, the day-to-day running is and is not involved in, in

0 (1h 0m 6s):
Yeah. You know, once you guys raised two, these rounds, you had capital from marketing and to really push this out in, in new ways and there was an ad, I think it came out in 2016. It was, it was the editor. Something like, you know, when I, when I meditate, I crush it when I meditate, you know, guest. And so some people criticize this and said, look, you know, meditation is not about performance. This is not the point of meditation is not to make you a better investment banker. It's not to make you, you know, a better football player. It's it's, that is not what it's about. How do you feel about that when people say that

3 (1h 0m 48s):
It was interesting that, that campaign, because I think, I think, yeah, she did something really kind of helpful. We wanted to, we wanted to show people that meditation, isn't this thing, you know, and we're going to tell you how you're going to benefit from it. We wanted to say, look, there is a skill. Anybody can learn this skill and you can apply it with your own intention to any aspect of your life. The reality is, as I've seen over kind of a lifetime, is that very often the reason people start meditating, isn't the reason they necessarily continue meditating and that they might begin it because they want to be better on the football pitch. But over time they start to realize it's showing up in other areas of their life as well.

3 (1h 1m 31s):
And yes, they're performing better, but actually they're starting to have pass better relationships. And, and we wanted to break the mold and kind of say, it's not just about feeling calm and having relaxation into that kind of traditional way of thinking about meditation, that it can also be active. It can also be exciting. It can be joyful and it can be different.

0 (1h 1m 52s):
And I mean, I guess one of the reasons why you have to advertise your, you know, your app, your product is because you have competitors right there, are there other meditation apps out there, which is, which is like one of these kind of weird aspects about this whole world, because you kind of expect the meditation space to be like peaceful and kind and gentle, but like, this is a big business, right? Like there are other people in the space. So do you, do you guys, I don't know. I mean, do you sort of, if you've got competitors, are you kind of looking over your shoulder to see what they're doing and, and are you trying to gate them?

3 (1h 2m 27s):
No, I think there are different ways of, of kind of looking at it personally. I don't necessarily look at it as, as competition in the conventional kind of sense. I feel like we have a job to do, and we'll sort of keep doing that and what other people do other people do. And I don't really like the idea of, I think it's a very strange idea of competing for people's happiness. I mean, that sounds like a, it sounds kind of absurd in a way. So I kind of feel like if our mission genuinely is to improve the health and happiness of the world, then if anyone's out there doing things that will genuinely improve the health and happiness of individuals, then that's something to celebrate is not something to feel bad about from a competitive point.

3 (1h 3m 10s):
Now.

0 (1h 3m 11s):
So anyone listening to this interview, who's familiar with Headspace will recognize Andy's voice right away. And I know Andy, you probably like people come up to you and cafes they're you Andy, from, from Headspace. And because it's so distinct. And I wonder, I mean, is Headspace a company, an idea that can live without Andy's image and brand and personality behind

3 (1h 3m 36s):
You can definitely live without my image. I mean, this is a face for radio, but this is probably a question for Wrexham rather than,

2 (1h 3m 44s):
Oh, I, I think so. If you think about it, we do have a English female voice in the product at the moment. So that shows you that the essence and the quality and the authenticity of the content is still there, but it's just delivered by someone else. So yeah, we're in French, we're in German. We're going to be in Spanish. We're going to be like, there's other languages coming out this year and the same, the same kind of idea. So I definitely think it's not just about Andy's voice. And so as long as we stay true to the way that we build products, I think there's a huge room to bring in other voices, other experts that aren't Andy.

2 (1h 4m 25s):
So

0 (1h 4m 25s):
Yeah, but you, you almost have to, you have to think about what is right. Cause the value of a company can't be wrapped up around a single nationality. And I don't say that. I mean, I love it. I love listening to you, you know, on the app, but if one day you both decide that you want to step out of this and your investors want to sell it or whatever it can't be wrapped around.

3 (1h 4m 48s):
That's correct. He's out in, it's a lot of pressure to have it in, in just that. I think, I think that that cancer kind of scare out. She was a really good, you know, a good wake up for, for us to start thinking about that kind of, you know, it's too risky to have it. You know, what, if that person, you know, or if I, and I'll to buy a bus or eaten by a shark or whatever happens in California, but you know, like there is a risk, right? And so I think it's not only of improving, you know, it's, de-risking things for the company, but it's also helping to improve the experience for our members as well.

0 (1h 5m 25s):
And Andy, when you think about all that you had wanted, when you were 23, 24 and a life of simplicity, you've a very complex life. Now you guys have what, 200 plus employees, you know, you've got investors, you've got to have investor walls, you've got family, you running a business, people depend on you. Now that's a very different life than the one that you had originally signed up for. But do you prefer it this way?

3 (1h 5m 59s):
I honestly can't compare the two. I can't say kind of, I can't look at one and say, I prefer it to the other, because for me they're not separate, obviously they are different experiences of life, different environments, but the mind's still the same. Right. And I, I didn't necessarily go into the monastery because that was necessarily how I would always want to live. It was more, I thought it would take that long for me to understand my mind. And I feel really lucky to have been in a position where I was able to go to that environment to experience the simplicity of that and then have this incredible almost what feels like a second chapter where I get to kind of share that.

3 (1h 6m 42s):
But it's, you know, something that, all the kind of complications and stuff. Yeah. They're not easy, but you kind of, you live with them because you care about it.

0 (1h 6m 51s):
How much of what happened with Headspace to you attribute to your hard work and your intelligence and your skill and how much to just luck?

2 (1h 7m 5s):
Yeah, I think I, I dunno. I would describe it as just a lot of generosity. I'd say it's one of the things that, without that, from a lot of people that really did just believe in us in the early days, maybe classify that as luck. I don't know. Probably sure. But I would also say we've worked, we've worked really, really hard, as hard as you know, I've never been more committed to anything in my whole life because I have,

3 (1h 7m 33s):
Yeah. I think there's, there's just a set of ingredients that come together and we've contributed to that, but we've often said as well, that sometimes it feels like there's just, this, there's this momentum. It's almost like a train that's just going. And it's like, we grabbed on to, to the back of it. And to start with, we felt like we were kind of, you know, sort of just comfortably sort of traveling along and then it just sort of picks up a load of speed. And now we're just hanging onto it at the back of the train. Cause it's, it's been, it's been incredible to, to be, we feel like we are part of something rather than necessarily making something happen.

0 (1h 8m 8s):
That's anybody comb and rich Pierson co-founders of Headspace today. Headspace has millions of in 190 countries and a last reported valuation of $320 million. And even though Andy is no longer the only voice narrating on the Headspace app these days, he and rich joke that if anything ever happens to him, at least he still have hours and hours of his meditation recordings.

3 (1h 8m 35s):
So I think, I think they've worked in, are those a couple of thousand kind of in total?

0 (1h 8m 39s):
So if you are eaten by a shark, there's a thousand hours that are still there on tape.

3 (1h 8m 46s):
I'm hoping it's not going to go down that way, but look, if it does say that, you know, thanks for having this.

0 (1h 8m 56s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show. This week, this episode was produced by Casey Herman with music composed by Raptiva Arab Louis. It was edited by Neeva grant with research help from David jock. Our production staff includes JC Howard, Julia Carney, Elaine coats, Farah safari, Liz Metzger, and Harrison BJ Choi. Our intern is Catherine cipher. Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Roz, and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.