0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

1 (9s):
New Year's is here, and with it brings the possibility of change as one behavioral scientist put it. Fresh starts are really powerful. So as you head into 2023, life Kit is a great resource to help you plan your life and tackle changes both big and small. Listen to the Life Kit podcast from npr.

0 (27s):
Hello everyone and happy New Year. I just wanna let you know that we'll be back next week with a brand new episode of how I Built This. But until then, we wanna bring you this really inspiring episode from our archive. It's my conversation with Diana Trout, the co-founder of Health Aid Kombucha. Diana was a biochemist who partnered with a pharmaceutical rep and an aspiring musician to start brewing kombucha in a closet. And then they grew the brand into a 250 million business. This episode first ran in the fall of 2020. Hope you enjoy.

3 (1m 5s):
There were days in the summer that we were making 1500 bucks in a market. Wow. It surprised us and it surprised the farmer's market people. But first of all, you couldn't walk through the market and not taste our kombucha. We would make sure that everybody who walked by our booth got a sample.

0 (1m 23s):
How'd you do that?

3 (1m 25s):
Hey, you, you wanna try some probiotic tea?

0 (1m 33s):
Welcome to How I Built This, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I Am Guy Raz. And on today's show, how an unlikely idea for a product to fight Hair loss led to today's fastest growing brand of kombucha called Health aid. What are the questions we get all the time from aspiring entrepreneurs is, how do I turn my promising side hustle into my main gig?

0 (2m 13s):
Because for everyone out there who's making something in their garage or kitchen and maybe selling it on eBay or at a local flea market, or really anyone who's working on a business idea, part-time, that moment where you decide to make the side hustle, your full-time job can be daunting and scary, especially if you're walking away from a stable career with a salary and benefits. Now, of course, there's no one simple answer to the question of when to do this. It often comes down to an overwhelming feeling that what you've started to build is actually the thing you want to do with the rest of your life.

0 (2m 54s):
The feeling Nancy Twine had when after three years of working on her side hustle, she quit her job on Wall Street to go full-time with her hair care products company, Brio Gio, and the feeling Sal Khan had when after years of making YouTube tutorials, he realized Khan Academy was what he wanted to pursue full-time. And today's story follows a similar pattern. In 2012, Dyna Trout, her husband Justin and her best friend Vanessa, launched a side hustle selling homemade kombucha at a farmer's market in Los Angeles. They had very little experience and almost no money.

0 (3m 35s):
But less than a year after that, as you'll hear, they were facing that transition moment and Dyna decided to go all in on kombucha. Now, over the past 25 years, kombucha has become a huge category in the beverage sector. In fact, in 2020 the market for kombucha in the US is expected to be close to 2 billion. But at the beginning, Dyna Trout really had no idea where kombucha was headed. She started making it for fun as a graduate student. At the time, Dyna was living in Boston and working toward a PhD in biochemistry, and she says that if you ask any of her roommates in graduate school, what they remember about living with her, they would probably all agree it was the food.

3 (4m 24s):
Oh man, I made the best dinners. I mean, I got into some serious credit card debt in, in grad school, let me tell you cuz I would invite everybody over. Neighbors, friends. Friends of friends would come over and I would make something spectacular paella, like 24 hour paella and you know, every kind of fish under the sun we would find and, you know, build salt rocks and then put that in the smoker for, I mean, it was just really beautiful, real whole food cooking and, and lots of wine.

0 (4m 54s):
Yeah, yeah.

3 (4m 56s):
It was a lot of fun. And, and I got into, you know, I wasn't really afraid to get advanced, so that's how I started getting into like sprouting things and fermenting things. So yeah, kombucha, kimchi, sauerkraut, keifer, these were all things I played with.

0 (5m 12s):
So you, you end up earning a master's degree in nutritional biochemistry and also a master's in public health, but, but I guess like you eventually decided not to pursue a, a PhD.

3 (5m 24s):
Yeah.

0 (5m 25s):
So you're, so you've got these degrees, it's 2007 and you're living in Boston or the Boston area. And I guess at the time you were, you were dating somebody who's now your husband Justin, is that right?

3 (5m 37s):
Yeah.

0 (5m 38s):
And and tell me about what, and you guys did, I guess decide to relocate to the West Coast.

3 (5m 43s):
Yeah.

0 (5m 44s):
Why'd you wanna leave the East Coast and go to, I mean, I can understand that I live in California, but why, why would you, why did you decide to do that?

3 (5m 51s):
Yeah, I mean, three reasons. The weather, the produce, and the music. Hmm. So Justin was a musician, so the decision for us as a couple was, are we gonna go to New York or la It was a tough call, but we just, I think it had been a particularly brutal winter too. It was like we just wanted to move to California and I didn't know what I was gonna do yet, but I figured I could figure it out when I got

0 (6m 15s):
There. So you're in la you moved to LA and I'm assuming you start to look for a job or you start to look for a job before you moved?

3 (6m 23s):
Well, I was looking, I was very open-minded and also practical in the sense that I understood I had, you know, an undergraduate degree to pay for and two graduate degrees to pay for. So I was really looking for what would pay me and what could use my skillsets. And I got recruited actually by a pharmaceutical company, which is pretty funny because if you knew me back then, you know, you couldn't even convince me to take an Advil then. So it was pretty funny that I ended up taking a job with the second larger pharmaceutical company in the world,

0 (6m 54s):
Which is

3 (6m 55s):
GlaxoSmithKline

0 (6m 56s):
And, and based in la

3 (6m 58s):
Based in LA and that's where I found myself for five years. That really was my only job. I mean, that was my only real job besides the stuff I did extra just to, you know, buy my beers in college.

0 (7m 9s):
Yeah. So you are, you become like an employee of GlaxoSmith Klein and, and I guess on, on like the first day, on the first week you get paired up with somebody who would factor into your life later. And this is a Vanessa Dew,

3 (7m 22s):
Vanessa

0 (7m 23s):
Dew. And both of you were like young sales agents at that point? Sales reps,

3 (7m 27s):
That's right.

0 (7m 28s):
Yep. And, and how were they, how were you guys paired up?

3 (7m 32s):
So, first day, not first week, first day she, so they make you do a ride along your first day. So they paired us together and we became fast friends. And funny thing happened, I just have to share with you that day cuz she had broken up with her boyfriend the night before. And so it wasn't a great day for her. And so when she picked me up, I could see she had like mascara under her eyes from tears. And I, and I'm particularly good with people, you know, that have just been through something. And so we had just a really good day and I think it wouldn't have been such a great day had that not happened. So a little bit serendipitous on many fronts.

0 (8m 6s):
So when you, when you started working there, was it, did you enjoy it? Was it, I mean, what did you like about sales?

3 (8m 15s):
I don't know if I really enjoyed it. Hmm. I loved being with people and connecting with people. So yeah, I did really well. I, I think the first year I was like, probably one of the top, I think me and Vanessa, we won the, the team won the top award for the year. And it was like that the whole time we were there.

0 (8m 33s):
What was your ambition at that point? Did you think, you know, I'm, I'm kind of kicking butt here at Klein, maybe, maybe I'll be an executive here one day?

3 (8m 42s):
Yeah, for sure. I always had that grandiose fantasy, I guess you could call it. And, and it was, it's only a fantasy because, you know, there were a hundred thousand employees at gsk, but that, that's absolutely where I was focused at that point on being a manager next and then moving from management up to, you know, more executive leadership and so on and so forth. So it was like, I had my vision to get to the

0 (9m 6s):
Top. I guess a few years in, you are exceeding expectations on sales goals and they give you this, this chance, I guess for a year to sort of step away from the sales side and be what they call a change agent. And what, what is it, what, what did they let you do?

3 (9m 21s):
So the context of that time is important here. Pharmaceutical companies were all in a transition state because generic medicines were starting to really come out. Yeah. Oh yeah. And there was just a lot of change, a lot of attrition, layoffs, every three, four months, productivity went down, engagement went down, morale went down. It was like a, a real turning point. And one of the things they came up with was get your 10, 20 best people and get them to help you bring productivity back and engagement back. And so they called them change agents, and I was fortunate to be one of them, and I accepted because I really didn't know what was ahead, but I felt that it was an opportunity for me to continue to move up.

0 (10m 6s):
So what would you do? You would travel around?

3 (10m 9s):
Yes. It was really, really cool and also unstructured. And, and this is why it was an important moment for me, and what I chose to do with that was I went and met with every single team for a week and I spent time riding along with each individual. I spent time with the manager, I spent time with each team and I just talked to them. You

0 (10m 33s):
Were an internal consultant basically, I mean,

3 (10m 35s):
A little bit. Yeah.

0 (10m 36s):
And then what happens? It ends and they, they're like, okay, go back to your job in sales,

3 (10m 40s):
Basically.

0 (10m 41s):
And you were like, this is what I'm assuming you get back to your sales job and you're like, I'm back to what I was doing before that.

3 (10m 48s):
Yeah. I had all this autonomy and no structure and I could just do whatever I wanted. And I was good at that. Hmm. Like, I loved that. And then pharma sales is so much rules, so much structure. Yeah, yeah. No, I was not happy.

0 (11m 4s):
So you get back and you are feeling uninspired and unfulfilled. Did a part of you think maybe I should find another job?

3 (11m 14s):
No, it, it was, I wanna say it was clear, but it wasn't really clear. Maybe a better word is it was loud. There was definitely a calling, I guess you could say that I needed to start something.

0 (11m 30s):
And and where did that come from? I mean, you hadn't done any, any entrepreneurial stuff up until that, I mean, you hadn't been on that track, right? No. You hadn't been thinking about that. So was it, did it come from someone else?

3 (11m 43s):
It came from that change agent experience. I think, it may not sound very entrepreneurial, but in fact it was. I had no, just a very big goal. And so that ga that sort of built my confidence too, where I said, Hey, I'm really good at this sort of like, lack of structure thing and taking charge. And I'm also good at getting people on board and like inspiring them. And I, and I loved that. Yeah. I really loved that. I felt a lot of fulfillment from getting people to sort of combine forces and, and go

0 (12m 16s):
And, and by the way, what was, what was Justin doing at this point? Because I mean, he came to LA to be a musician. So what, what was he doing Well Yeah. While you were at Glaxo?

3 (12m 25s):
Yeah. Yeah, good question. Because I think that's another part of what drove the entrepreneurial thing. So Justin was writing songs. We had turned our second bedroom into a songwriter room. He played for a band. And on the side he worked for an, an entrepreneur, a very, very successful entrepreneur.

0 (12m 43s):
What did he do for him?

3 (12m 45s):
Justin sort of, I guess you could say his job was in marketing, but he really was a little bit of like an assistant. Yeah. And he would talk about this entrepreneur and just how successful he was in the life that he lived. So that also I think, drove my desires because Hmm. I think we started to say, well, imagine what we could do. Huh.

0 (13m 1s):
So did you, I mean, so you're still at Glaxo and you're still working there, but did you, did you start to kind of brainstorm with, with Justin and, and I guess also with Vanessa, your closest friend at, at Glaxo, did you guys sort of start to talk about, Hey, what what could we do?

3 (13m 17s):
Yeah.

0 (13m 18s):
Could you just sit around and kind of throw ideas out?

3 (13m 21s):
Well, it was more structured than that. The beginning was more of an emotional journey. Like, I think the three of us had to accept that this is what we wanted first. And then we were like, what are we gonna do? As soon as we got to the place of knowing we wanted to do this immediately, every Saturday we were having entrepreneur club meetings. So it wasn't just sitting around, they were structured.

0 (13m 41s):
Like you had to all come with ideas or,

3 (13m 44s):
Yes, yes. So the idea was in the week you were supposed to have a notebook with you, and at any point during the week, if you had a pain, a struggle at all, you had to write it down. Yep. That was what we gathered around. Yeah. So we had all kinds of ideas.

0 (13m 60s):
Like what?

3 (14m 1s):
Like, okay. So they ran the gamut. So parking was a pain in the ass. So the idea for an app that would, you know, solve for looking around for parking in downtown la Vanessa would come in and say, I remember one of the ideas she brought up was her high boots. She has these like knee high boots and they would slouch, they would fall when she would walk. What could we create that would hold those boots up? Oh yeah. I mean, really all over the place. So if we liked the idea, like the three of us would look at it and brainstorm solutions, and we thought the there was one that had legs, we would move it to the next phase. Right. Which would mean somebody would take it on and do a little research.

3 (14m 41s):
What's, what does the competition look like out there? How much would it cost to, you know, just sort of initial broad stroke stuff. Yeah. And most of the stuff would get crossed off the list because we just just didn't have any significant money. And we had gone through several weeks of this process in the entrepreneur club, maybe even a couple months. And by the way, Vanessa and I did start one in there. You

0 (15m 3s):
Started a

3 (15m 3s):
Business? We did, we did. Well, I'd you say, I wouldn't say we actually started a business. We made business cards. We felt that parties could be better if they had like a theme. Hmm. And that we have themes for birthday parties as kids. Yeah. Why don't we have theme parties more and easy theme parties for adults. Hmm. And then eventually this could turn into a really great business where we would sell kits. Like that was sort of the thought. And so we called it thematics.

0 (15m 33s):
So like if the party, if it was like the, the theme was the Flinstones, you would go decorate a house like the Flinstones. Yeah. Okay.

3 (15m 40s):
So we made business cards. We even went and sold a, a party to a record studio in Hollywood. Wow. And what was it was I, it was Halloween and I don't remember, which is really sad. We never ended up doing it. Oh, that's why I don't remember. Okay. We sold it in and they were excited to do it, and then like it just sort of puttered out. They ended up canceling the party for a reason unrelated to the, the theme. Right. It was like they, they were cutting budgets or something and they decided not to do a Halloween party this year. Right. So there was a bit of frustration, you know, in the group. And we were going to get another party going. And Justin basically came into one of the meetings and said, guys, I feel like what you're talking about is just is gonna be a lot of work.

3 (16m 26s):
I'm not particularly interested in that. I mean, the three of us really were broke,

0 (16m 30s):
By the way. And you're still, both of you are still working at GlaxoSmithKline at this point. You're still because you needed the income.

3 (16m 36s):
Oh,

0 (16m 36s):
Yes. All right. So you guys are having these entrepreneurial meetings, and I guess that the problem you decided to settle on was because Justin raised this problem. What was the problem he had and what, what was the idea?

3 (16m 50s):
The problem was hair loss.

0 (16m 52s):
Okay.

3 (16m 54s):
So his entrepreneur, the, the one that he was working for, he became successful by selling a product that basically solved for hair loss. Hmm. And so Justin would see how far people would go, consumers would go to protect the hair on their head. And so he came in saying, guys, we could make something here. I think he had recently gone to represent that company at a trade show or something, and he just saw the incredible opportunity. So he brought that to the table.

0 (17m 23s):
So he's thinking, we gotta get into hair loss because this is a big deal. It's a huge industry and his room to kind of enter that market. Yeah. And, and so what did you guys, I mean, where did you start?

3 (17m 35s):
So Justin, Vanessa and I started researching what would regrow hair and Yeah. The idea was we create some kind of product that worked though. That was the goal.

0 (17m 42s):
This is a bold swing. This is like a big swing for the fences because for at least 2000 years, humans have tried to answer that question. And it's pretty bold that the three of you are like, we can figure this out. I mean, I love that.

3 (17m 56s):
Yeah. So I was particularly interested in finding a natural substance. Got it. And so I was sort of researching what could you eat? What vitamins would you need? And, and it just started researching that, that was my angle. And when I came back the following week, I had reported that basically I found all this anecdotal ev like all these people all over the world just talking about using a kombucha scobie on their head to regrow hair. Well,

0 (18m 22s):
Let's just pause for a sec. Okay. I make kombucha. I know what you're talking about. But in kombucha there is a large gala, uppi sort of pale mushroom kind of thing that sits on top of the kombucha called a Scooby.

3 (18m 35s):
It's an acronym. Yeah.

0 (18m 36s):
What does it stand for?

3 (18m 38s):
Symbiotic culture of bacteria and yeast

0 (18m 41s):
Scooby. It is a, like a mushroom kind of thing that just eats up the sugar fungus. It's a fungus. And that's what makes the kombucha, that's what ferment a kombucha and helps make it sour. So you read that the, that the kombucha Scooby it, what if you stick it on your head, it promotes hair growth.

3 (19m 2s):
That's right. Wow. And I wasn't just seeing that once. I was seeing that in a lot of places. What? Yeah. People talking about taking that Scooby, mixing it with something or just putting it straight on the head as a mask. But what I really thought was I know how to make kombucha and therefore I know how to make Scooby so we could try this thing.

0 (19m 23s):
Yeah. So you thought, all right, let's try this out because you, you couldn't j I mean, you knew this from working at a big pharmaceutical company that there's something called the fda. Yeah. I mean, you couldn't just put out a product and say, this will stimulate your hair growth made out of acop.

3 (19m 38s):
So Yes. And I did know all of that. And for this to work, I knew we would have to prove it. Right. So because Justin was thinning, we're like, okay, here's our Guinea pig, let's start with a sample of one and, and see if this stuff really works. So I just had to make kombucha and I just had to make a lot of it. Yeah. Because each time you make a kombucha, as you know, guy, you make a scobie. Right.

0 (19m 60s):
And, and you were gonna test this out and, and what were you gonna do? Were you gonna just directly put it on his head or were you gonna mix it with stuff?

3 (20m 6s):
So we were gonna just put it straight on his head first. Yeah. But I think our, our sort of line of sight was that we would eventually mash this up into a really beautiful mask that had like beautiful smells and would have other things in it that would probably be good for hair, like avocado, coconut oil, something like that. That was sort of the goal. But at first we wanted to see the, you know, if with the active ingredient work, a k a, the Scooby. So yeah. But we never actually put one on his head because we got in, there was an intervening happening.

0 (20m 37s):
What happened? I mean, you've got this idea you're gonna try a remedy, a mask for

3 (20m 41s):
Hair loss. Oh yeah. But Vanessa's friend of a friend, I don't know if she actually ran the farmer's market, but she was, was one of the leading positions at a farmer's market organization in la, one of the biggest. And she had called us to say, listen, one of the farmers is dipping out for the summer. I'll give you the spot to sell your hair loss product. Wow. If you want it. So we didn't have the hair loss product yet, but that didn't matter. We said, yeah, yes. We said we'll do. Yes. Yeah.

0 (21m 8s):
And this is in 2012?

3 (21m 10s):
This is 2012. This has gotta be like January of 2012.

0 (21m 14s):
Got it. Okay. And so you were thinking, we'll take it. And when, when was the spot gonna open up

3 (21m 18s):
In March? March 26th was the first market, and it was gonna be for the summer.

0 (21m 22s):
So you've got two months or less than two months to get this into the market. Yeah. Are you scrambling to try and make this work?

3 (21m 29s):
Yeah, so, so I've got like 60 SCOBYs gathered. So I've also got like 60 cases of kombucha in my apartment, which is just like useless to me. It's like byproduct, even though I made really good kombucha, the goal was to make really good SCOBYs. So like I was just sort of handing that kombucha off to friends.

0 (21m 46s):
You were just bottling it up and leaving it,

3 (21m 49s):
We were bottling it up in cheap bottles that we got from general bottle supply in la. And just every time a friend would come over, I would just give them a case. And I remember the week after the lady, we said yes, the following weekend was when we got together and we're like, okay, let's bring all the ingredients together that we've seen online make a difference. And everything was very natural. So we had like avocados, coconut oil, vitamin C, different kinds of food products that had anecdotal evidence around hair growth. And we started messing around, you know, and the goal was to, you know, get to a place where we would be able to create a really smooth, beautifully smelling mask that someone would want to put on their head.

3 (22m 33s):
Right. And you would sell that for like 50 bucks a pop at the farmer's market. Like that was kind of what we were, we were envisioning. And I think the three of us all thought that was gonna be pretty easy. And you know, it took an afternoon for us to realize like, this was way formulating a product, it was gonna be way harder. It was so complicated. And the Scooby did not blend well and it was, it was really smelly, you know, like it, and Justin kept saying, I just don't know how anybody's gonna put this on their head.

0 (23m 3s):
So once you realized that this is not gonna, you're not gonna be ready in time, what did you decide to do?

3 (23m 10s):
Well, what was originally a byproduct suddenly became the main show. You know, we saw 60 cases of unlabeled kombucha, and we were like, okay, wait, check, we know this is really good kombucha. Everybody tells us that check. We already have it check, you know, a lot of checks. And so we said, okay, we're gonna, we're gonna sell that.

0 (23m 32s):
And what did you call it? Did you have a name for it?

3 (23m 35s):
Yeah, it was called Health Aid.

0 (23m 36s):
How did that happen so quickly?

3 (23m 38s):
It happened in about a two hour meeting around a circular table. The same table we started the entrepreneur club at. And you know, there wasn't a lot of pressure for this drink. I wanna just say when we decided to sell the kombucha, we hadn't given up yet on the hair loss idea. We just kind of realized it was gonna be harder to make than we could make in the time. Yeah. That we needed to make it by. So it wasn't like, we still thought the big idea was hair loss. And so there wasn't a lot of pressure to make all the right moves with this kombucha. We each had different things we were working on. For me it was create an awesome package. I had stayed at a friend's house in New York City and I loved, she had this like, apothecary set of like old medicine bottles and stuff, just like decoration.

3 (24m 22s):
And I just loved that look and feel. Yeah. Right. And so I took a picture and I drew something on a piece of paper that said, you know, bubbly probiotic tea and kombucha. And then I took that sketch and sent it to a friend who was Justin's musician friend, but also happened to be a graphic designer and, you know, gave him 50 bucks and a case of kombucha. Wow. And he came up with a really awesome label for us that we printed on our jet printer and scotch taped on the bottle.

0 (24m 53s):
So you've got the labels and you label 'em on and you guys just pack that up in a Yeah. In, in a car. And you drive to the farmer's market. Did you get like a, one of those like white tents? Yep. What'd you do? You had like a sign? Oh,

3 (25m 5s):
It was way more than that. I mean, I took this very seriously. It was like everything had to match. It was, I felt that the whole theme of the booth had to be apothecary. So our sort of thought was, it was gonna be a little bit like, come one, come on, experience the elixir of life. You know, like that was sort of gonna be the theme and it would draw people in the market. It would almost be, we thought maybe we could make our farmer's market like a show.

0 (25m 28s):
And, and, and so what happened? Did you start like getting customers buying it right away?

3 (25m 32s):
Oh yeah. Wow. I remember the first purchase, the first guy who came, who,

0 (25m 36s):
Who, who was

3 (25m 37s):
It? Just some dude. Yeah, I think his name was Mark. But he showed up and we like, asked a couple questions, took a sample, and me and Justin were like sitting there, you know. Yeah. You know, looking at this guy, like, is he gonna buy one? And he asked for two,

0 (25m 50s):
Two bottles.

3 (25m 51s):
Two bottles, $10 baby,

0 (25m 53s):
A $5 a bottle. That's a lot. Yeah, yeah,

3 (25m 55s):
Yeah. Well, at the time actually, that was sort of what they were going at in the store too. They were like four 50 or something at the store.

0 (26m 1s):
And, and, and how many bottles did you sell that day?

3 (26m 4s):
All of them.

0 (26m 5s):
Wow. You sold them out?

3 (26m 8s):
We sold them out in like a couple hours.

0 (26m 11s):
Wow.

3 (26m 12s):
It surprised us. And it surprised the farmers market people. They were like, what the, where'd this team come from? And, and it, and what frustrated us is we sold out, I wanna say by like 11:00 AM and the market didn't close till two. So we could have made a lot more. So the following week, you know, we could only do so much cuz kombucha takes a good week to make. But Sure. You know, two weeks after that, we showed up with a lot more. And there were days in the summer that we were making 1500 bucks in a market. Wow.

0 (26m 41s):
And, and by the way, where were you living? Where were you and, and your and Justin living at this point?

3 (26m 47s):
So we had this great apartment off Sierra Benita Boulevard in LA right near the grove.

0 (26m 52s):
And where were you brewing The kombucha

3 (26m 54s):
In our closet. Wait,

0 (26m 56s):
So because you, so

3 (26m 58s):
You so Well, that's where it was fermenting, but of course we used our kitchen for, you know, making the tea and Yeah.

0 (27m 4s):
Yeah. Were you making in gallon jars?

3 (27m 6s):
We were making it in the same jars. We make it today, two and a half gallon cookie jars from Bed Bath and beyond. Hmm. And that apartment just happened to have a huge closet with a bunch of shelves, and we put in stainless steel shelves to add to that, you know, you could fit 10 jars per shelf and we probably had a good 20 or 30 shelves. Wow. So we could make a, a lot of kombucha. Yeah. And, and then we, we bought, I mean, I'm not sure if this was electrically safe, but we bought one of those space heaters and just sort of put it in the closet so it warmed up the room to make the fermentation go a bit faster.

0 (27m 39s):
Alright. So you got all this kombucha going, and then you spend the summer just

3 (27m 43s):
Slinging kombucha,

0 (27m 44s):
Basically slinging kombucha. But during the week, you were still working, you were still selling farmers.

3 (27m 49s):
Yeah, but it was, it was hard man. Like, so yes, in the week I was working and at night be just working so hard at making the kombucha, making more kombucha. At the height of the summer, we were in seven markets and there were only three of us. So we

0 (28m 4s):
You were in seven farmer's markets.

3 (28m 6s):
Yeah.

0 (28m 7s):
And by the way, how are you, I mean, this is not just on the weekends, right? You had to do weekday markets, but you and Vanessa had weekday jobs. So what did you do?

3 (28m 16s):
And so did Justin. Yeah, I mean, we didn't do the weekday markets at first. We did weekend markets, but then we did pick up a Thursday market, but we hired somebody to do that. Hmm. So he would do it for a hundred, a hundred bucks and a percentage of sales. And so that's how we were doing the seven. Of course three of us, each of us would do a market, and then we had four people.

0 (28m 37s):
All right. So you are sounds, I'm assuming you're getting repeat customers, people coming back to your stall at the farmer's market and saying, I bought this stuff last week is great, I want a few more bottles.

3 (28m 46s):
Yes. At least half of our customers were repeat and then the other half were new, which was so cool. We were really driving people to the category, people who were new to kombucha. And we would, first of all, you couldn't walk through the market and not taste our kombucha. We would make sure that everybody who walked by our booth got a sample. It was just,

0 (29m 7s):
How'd you do that?

3 (29m 9s):
Hey, you, you with the kid? You wanna try some probiotic d

0 (29m 14s):
And who were your customers? Were they like yoga people? Were they like, was it just la It's just LA people are kind of health conscious.

3 (29m 23s):
It was kind of just la I mean, for sure the ones that knew kombucha were probably more like the yoga customer. But I would say a lot of customers that came to us and bought really had never heard of kombucha before. You know, had heard something about probiotics. Yeah. And were just like, well, my doctor told me I should have probiotics. I'll give this a try. Yeah. Let me buy one. Yep. And another thing we were doing at that time, pretty quickly, customers who loved it would say, will you just bring this to my house? Like, I don't wanna carry a case around the farmer's market. Will you just deliver, if I buy a whole case, will you deliver it to my house? And we're like, yeah. So then this whole other business started, which was us distributing cases to homes all throughout LA after the market.

3 (30m 5s):
So like Saturdays and Sundays became extremely busy for us.

0 (30m 9s):
Now here's a question. So this is, this is very promising, you know, you're selling a lot of kombucha Yeah. At farmer's markets, but it's a, it's a farmer's market business. Did you, you know, did you think, Hey, we should take this beyond the farmer's market. Did you think this is going great, this is gonna be a great farmer's market business?

3 (30m 26s):
No, no. We, we quickly saw, I wanna say it was like June or July when

0 (30m 31s):
We had of 2012 when

3 (30m 33s):
We Yeah. When we had realized this was the business. Wow. To be honest, it was about the consumer to us. Like there was a response. Hmm. They like, loved our kombucha. We were getting, they would say things like, I drove a hundred miles to buy this kombucha. You know, it was like that. And we were like, okay, we, we have something here. It felt wrong to go back to hair loss after that. There was something here. It was alive and like growing.

0 (30m 57s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Diana, Justin and Vanessa started to ramp up production while burning through cash. And how one single week would determine whether health aid would survive or die. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz, and you're listening to How I built this from npr.

4 (31m 24s):
A teen solo hiker is terrorized for days by unknown figures dressed in white. Two cops quit their jobs at a local theater because of encounters with an alleged demonn, an isolated forest in Canada where people keep turning up headless. These are just a few of the unbelievable stories you'll hear on the Mr. Ballen podcast. On Amazon music. Each week you'll hear about inexplicable encounters, shocking disappearances and other strange, dark and mysterious stories. And they are all true. Like the case of Haley Vega, she disappeared on a hiking trail for 51 hours. And when she was found again, she said a friend helped her survive. And this friend of hers exactly matched the physical description of a little girl who had gone missing in that exact spot 23 years earlier and who had never been found.

4 (32m 12s):
Hey, prime members, listen to the Amazon Music exclusive podcast, Mr. Ballen podcast, strange, dark and Mysterious Stories in the Amazon Music app. Download the app today.

0 (32m 31s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from npr. I'm Guy Raz. So it's toward the end of 2012, and in less than one year, Dina and our co-founders have pivoted from selling a hair loss treatment to a business selling kombucha at farmer's markets around la. And at this point, they can tell that health aid has the potential to become much, much bigger. The problem though is time. All three co-founders are still working their day jobs and they had to decide whether it was time to jump into this side hustle full-time.

3 (33m 9s):
Well, everybody in our families was telling us not to do it.

0 (33m 13s):
Everyone said, you're nuts. Don't leave that job.

3 (33m 14s):
Don't, don't leave that job. Don't

0 (33m 16s):
Sensible advice. Yes. But I mean, but for you, the decision to quit, I mean, was it just obvious that, that it was time and this, this new thing with kombucha was gonna take off?

3 (33m 26s):
No, it was so scary. It was so scary. I was so afraid to call my father and tell him, oh my goodness. I remember that. I was like, shaking.

0 (33m 34s):
Would you tell him,

3 (33m 36s):
You know, I, I've made the decision to quit my job and give health aid a full-time go. Hmm. He was sort of like, come on, you don't have to do that. I mean, listen, I'm supportive of health aid. It's going well, you should keep doing it, but like, don't quit your job. You should be making some money first. You know? Yeah. Because it wasn't at that time, I think Justin and I had, had scrounged together enough money to have a couple months of rent saved up. So at the end of the year, we found ourselves in this place of being like, it was like our dream. All three of us had the dream to give this thing a go. So we made a sort of packed at November, I wanna say it was around Thanksgiving, where we said, okay, let's put in our notice end of the year, boom, we're done January 3rd, we come back.

3 (34m 19s):
It's game time, baby. That was sort of the, that was the thought. And it really was as soon as we showed up, I call that one of the most important marky motives because it was when we came back that we could put our full line share to this business and growing it. And that's when we moved away from farmer's markets.

0 (34m 37s):
All right. So you, you quit, by the way, you're making all the kombucha in your apartment, you guys are making it in your apartment?

3 (34m 45s):
Oh yeah. No, I had like, our apartment literally turned into a factory, a a

0 (34m 50s):
A kombucha factory. Didn't it smell by the way of kombucha? Oh,

3 (34m 54s):
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. We were like, definitely, I mean, neighbors who lived at Sierra Bernita with us. Thank you. Because we, we really, yeah. Their lives were worse off because of us. Not only did it smell like kombucha all the time, but we had people coming in to help us make it. I, I mean, any friend that needed, you know, some cash Sure. But there was a point where our kombucha, you know, could just, could not fit anymore. And we needed some space. Plus we started to sell in stores. Like stores would come to our markets and say, Hey, can I sell this in my really awesome, you know, craft cocktail store? Can I sell this in my like high end market? And so we would deliver not just to individuals, but also to small wholesale accounts.

3 (35m 35s):
And when we did that, that was when legally, you know, they would say things like, Hey, you know, where's your

0 (35m 41s):
Nutrition label? Where,

3 (35m 43s):
Where's your nutrition label? And like, where's your like business location? And we're like, yeah, we can't be like Sierra Bonita apartment a, you know? Right. So we found a, it was called Cake Bake Shop in Manhattan Beach, and the owner's name was Laura, and she was closed on Sundays and Mondays. And in exchange for us opening on Sundays and Mondays and manning her shop, she let us use all the extra space she had for free.

0 (36m 12s):
I mean, there's so many like really cool strategies here because you didn't really need a lot of money to start up, you didn't have an office, so you just kind of barter to use the space.

3 (36m 22s):
It was a barter,

0 (36m 23s):
But did you, at, you had to buy jars. You had to buy bottles. Did you at any point go out to people that you knew and say, Hey, can we take a loan? Can, can you help us out? Did you like do anything like that?

3 (36m 35s):
Yeah, no, we were so busy guy and we were the type of people that in the walk-in fridge at the bakery shop, when the light was out, we didn't like fix the light. We would just like work in the dark. So yeah, no, I mean, we probably should have been thinking ahead because there's no question that as we got bigger, cash was coming back to us at a later time and that was starting to really infringe upon our cash situation. But we weren't really thinking about that. So no. When we needed money the first time we really needed money. We needed money to buy our first filling line, which already we were past the cake bake shop stage. It was the next stage. But we asked both of our parents for that.

3 (37m 15s):
Vanessa asked her dad, and I asked my dad, and they, they gave us money at like a, you know, I don't even think there was an interest rate. It was like, pay us back in a year,

0 (37m 24s):
And how much money did you need to get a filling machine or whatever,

3 (37m 27s):
60 grand. So 30 grand each. Right. And that was just for a filling line that was like gone. It was l literally the price of that and Wow. So we were, yeah, we were out of cash fast.

0 (37m 39s):
And what was the, the sort of the division of labor between you and Vanessa and Justin? I mean, you were the chief kombucha brewer, right?

3 (37m 48s):
Well, yes and no. I mean, I was also the marketer. Okay. In the beginning it was like anybody who has arms and legs and has, like, we all shared the chores and the responsibilities and brewing was the most physically difficult. I mean, it's a lot of lifting cases of liquid moving cases around filling bottles. So it was like no one person could do that all week. So we would switch. There was no clear kind of job responsibility yet. Yeah. But once we quit our job, what we did is we put jobs, individual jobs and responsibilities onto postcards. So we had like a hundred postcards each with a job from, you know, making deliveries to brewing the kombucha, to opening accounts.

3 (38m 31s):
And we put those on a wall and we sat at the back and we just said, said, okay, go pick up the postcards, the three of us go pick up the postcards that you, you know, are most drawn to and you think you're the best at. Wow. And naturally, Vanessa picked up the sales ones. I picked up the marketing and leading people ones, and then Justin picked up a lot of the operational manufacturing ones. So it it, so we very naturally fell into our roles of c e o for me, chief of sales for Vanessa and c o o for Justin.

0 (39m 3s):
And, and when it came time to having that difficult conversation, sometimes difficult about how to divide up the business, was it difficult or not? Was it just like, yep. A third, a third, a third? How'd you figure that out?

3 (39m 12s):
It was not difficult. Yeah. We, we all very grateful that the three of us landed with each other because I know a lot of people have founder issues. It's natural, right? Yeah. You've got a thing of value. But for us, it just really hasn't ever been, the three of us were equally devoted, dedicated, put the same amount of work into health aid. So we were, yeah. Third or third or third all the way and always have been.

0 (39m 38s):
All right, so you guys start, so you decide, alright, let's get this in stores. Right? And how do you, where do you start? Because I guess, did you approach stores with your kombucha? Did you like Yeah. Oh yeah. And and were they instantly like Yes, we're in, or or did you get more pushback?

3 (39m 52s):
You know, some, you know, we had a sales sheet that like I had, you know, used my as inspiration for my sales pharmaceutical sales days. Sometimes you, you get somebody that was super stoked about it. One of the biggest early on challenges was refrigeration.

0 (40m 10s):
And this is, we've done this before in the show with like, you know, honest tea and other products that some need refrigeration, some don't. It's very hard to get onto refrigerated shelves Yes. In stores. Yes. Because there's limited space and everybody wants that space.

3 (40m 25s):
Yes. It's totally cutthroat.

0 (40m 27s):
And you're just some three friends making kombucha. Yeah.

3 (40m 30s):
We're kind of a joke.

0 (40m 31s):
Yeah. Yeah. And but you would, what would you do? You would go to these stores and say, Hey, can I talk to the manager? And you would have like samples with you?

3 (40m 37s):
Yeah, a six pack of kombucha is usually what we show up with and we just, we'd say, you know, try it. And, you know, sometimes we'd be able to put it right in the fridge right then and there. And we, we created a whole self-distribution model for a good two years. We ended up buying a van or, you know, leasing a van, a big white van. It wasn't refrigerated, but we put a bunch of coolers in there. But yeah, I mean, it wasn't as easy to make a wholesale sale as it was to make like a customer sale in a farmer's market, but it was worth the squeeze cuz usually the bigger the store, the more cases they would order at a time. But there was a period of time where Vanessa, Justin and I, we, we would each take a day to deliver during the week, a couple days a week.

3 (41m 19s):
So we delivered every single day and our days were full and we would just drive around LA and drop off product to restaurants, cafes, small grocery stores.

0 (41m 30s):
And they were buying like, what, a couple cases here and there?

3 (41m 32s):
Yeah. Like probably the average delivery was somewhere between two and 10 cases.

0 (41m 37s):
So I guess you eventually, in 2013 you land a deal with a one which is a larger market, like an upscale market in la Yeah, yeah.

3 (41m 45s):
It's like a proper grocery store. Yeah. But they only have three of them at that time. Actually, at the time they only had two. So it was still not a huge chain. Like we could make the deliveries

0 (41m 54s):
And with all of the beverage options at a place like airline already by 2013, that was a pretty crowded space. Not just kombucha, but just beverages, fruit juices, natural juice, cold press this, press that, press everything. You know, it's all, how are you getting people to notice health aid kombucha in the refrigerated case?

3 (42m 11s):
We just wouldn't let it lose. We would show up and do samples. Right. Justin, Vanessa and I were doing samplings at least once a day. Hmm. And then, you know, we did a good job of creating a bit of buzz around the product too. Yeah. And I think people liked that. We were like a trio, you know, of entrepreneurs that were just getting started and we, we had a really good kombucha. So, you know, hopefully people would tell their friends. I don't know, it just, it really did grow, but, but we pushed it very hard. Hmm. I mean we were always, always selling this thing. I was always demoing it felt like.

0 (42m 44s):
And, but, but did you have any employees at this point? Was it just kind of volunteers or friends or interns or what?

3 (42m 51s):
We had some people that worked hourly for us in the brewery to help us. And then we also had some independent sales reps that got paid a commission. So let's say we had about 20 of those individuals that were working like some five, six hours a week. So not, not a lot. That was how we ran our sales. That was how we were able to grow in accounts. And then on the brewery side, we probably had two or three individuals.

0 (43m 17s):
Hmm. And were you also using credit cards to pay your bills?

3 (43m 20s):
Yes.

0 (43m 21s):
And maxing out on your cards

3 (43m 23s):
Every month.

0 (43m 24s):
All right. So you need to scale up, right? You're getting more demand. So, and clearly you've got a winning thing here. Could you go to a bank and get a loan? Did you try

3 (43m 33s):
Well, I always gave my middle finger at the Wells Fargo, you know, billboard on the 4 0 5 because it would be like helping small businesses grow. And I'm like, you didn't help us.

0 (43m 43s):
Oh, you actually went and asked them for a

3 (43m 45s):
Loan? Oh yeah. I mean everybody said no

0 (43m 46s):
Because you had no collateral,

3 (43m 48s):
No collateral, no, yeah, no assets as individuals, but also no profitability. It was just like a complete, you know. So you actually went with

0 (43m 56s):
This business you met, went and met with the loan officer or loan officers? Yes. Yes. And, and you showed them your, your like business model and everything?

3 (44m 3s):
Yes. We didn't get good loans from banks until like a couple years ago because our business was a bit like a rocket ship that, you know, it was growing like crazy. But we didn't have any sense of where our next dime was gonna come from and except from, you know, selling the kombucha. But like we were going way faster than we, we could keep up with for sure. So I think from a conservative bank perspective, it just was not, it was not a safe move until recently.

0 (44m 31s):
So what do you do? I mean, if, you know, either this is a point where, you know, this can be like the trough of sorrow, right? Where the, where you need a bridge loan or you need some money or, or you're gonna, you're gonna fizzle out, right?

3 (44m 43s):
Yeah, a hundred percent. And I remember the moment we were at the brewery and we had a $50,000 credit limit and we just assumed that Amex would extend our credit. Yeah. Because we were good about paying it in full every month, you know, so we were like, oh, it's not gonna be a problem. I mean, we've been great customers, you know, and then yeah, we got a flat no,

0 (45m 4s):
A flat no to extend your $50,000.

3 (45m 7s):
Yes. Like it was like you're maxed out and you're not getting any more credit from us.

0 (45m 14s):
When we come back in just a moment, Dina and our co-founders struggle to find funding until their funding finds them stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to how I built this. Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz, so it's 2013 and Dina, Justin and Vanessa have maxed out their credit cards and can't get an extension. So they scramble to make a list of people who they can ask for money.

3 (45m 56s):
We were starting to gather those people and we got a cold call from a guy by the name of jc. He was a, a manager at an investment company called First Beverage. So Yeah.

0 (46m 9s):
And he found out about your product maybe by going to Ewan or, or farmer's markets. Yeah. Okay. Yep. And he called you to what to

3 (46m 16s):
Say? He tried our kombucha and he thought it was the best he's ever had. Wow. And you know, they really wanna talk about an investment. Wow. Now they had just gone through a very long diligence process with another kombucha company that was bigger than us at the time. And they didn't end up doing the deal for whatever reason. I'm not sure why, but they were convinced about the category. Wow. So it's like they entered our world already sold that they needed to get into a kombucha and fast. And it was like, could this be any more perfect? Like where do we sign? And they, they were able to cut a deal pretty quickly within six weeks we had cash and they allowed us to include some friends and family as well. So we did like a series A slash friends and family round together.

3 (46m 58s):
And that was in 2014. And that was our first investment.

0 (47m 2s):
So you get this investment, what does it mean? What, what were they, I mean, how, by the way, how much did they invest?

3 (47m 7s):
Over $2 million.

0 (47m 9s):
Wow. So they, but this enabled you presumably to hire people?

3 (47m 14s):
Yes. So that was exactly what we did with the money. Got you. So we did two things with the money. We moved into our, the next brewery, which was really, really important cuz we were in way too small space and couldn't keep up like we were maxed out. Hmm. So we used half the capital probably to build out our next brewery, which we had already found the space and identified the equipment we needed. We just needed, you know, to write the checks and, and then the other half to hire four or five key people. And I mean, that was like game changing guy cuz like Yeah. It's game changing.

0 (47m 50s):
And as you kind of did this get, get this investment, you also land a deal, a distribution deal to get into, into Gelson's and then which is a, a chain in, in LA mainly around LA and then also other places in the west coast. And we have a sense of how important distribution is, right? Because you need to get in with a distributor, otherwise you yourself have to go door to door to door to door. And it's impossible really to, to scale your product. You need it everywhere and only a distributor can kinda help you do that, right?

3 (48m 23s):
Yeah. But then the catch 22 is the distributor won't usually take you on unless you have some stores,

0 (48m 30s):
Right?

3 (48m 31s):
Like they don't wanna build you from scratch. Right. So they wanna know, oh, you've got Gelson's on board, okay, we'll take you on.

0 (48m 36s):
Got it. So this distributor's called Nature's Best that you sign. Yeah. And was that, was that just a huge turning point for you?

3 (48m 43s):
Oh yeah. I mean it was a huge, it was the next phase, right? So now we're like moving away from the majority of our business being from farmer's markets and, and home deliveries to, okay, now we're talking about huge orders. Yeah. So more stores are willing to accept us and, and we're very focused on growth aligned with our investors at this time on just like, let's grow, let's grow this.

0 (49m 8s):
Was it hard for you to, I mean, I can't even imagine how hard it would be to all of a sudden go from just you and your husband, your best friend to a company of even 10, 15, 20 people and you gotta be the leader in the box and there's HR issues and like, and it's, it's gotta be overwhelming. Yeah.

3 (49m 25s):
And then there's the capital piece. Like, we got that money. We thought that money was gonna last us. I remember when we got the 2 million bucks, it was like, oh my gosh, we're good. Like, let's build this now baby. And then it was like gone a year later. Yeah. And, and it's not that we were reckless at all, it's just the capital for growth is really intense and immense. And so we were already having discussions a year later of doing this again. And that's, that's a lot of pressure and responsibility when I'm also the one that's still picking up the broom. I mean, so many pressures and responsibilities and growth, it's almost hard to pinpoint why you're, you're building something. So proving it, proving that you can do it. I mean so many times I think the biggest fear was not living up to that.

3 (50m 10s):
So, I mean, almost everything requires discomfort and push it. It's so in times of growth, like it's probably the hardest times.

0 (50m 22s):
Can I ask you about having a business with your husband? I mean, it's, it's you, your husband, your best friend and God that could spell recipe for disaster in many instances, right? Because cuz it could be two, the people are in a family and one person isn't. And that could be tension and also the tension with, with the two partners who are married and how do you guys manage that? There's no way, there isn't tension between at least you and, and Justin or, or, or you and Vanessa or Justin and

3 (50m 51s):
Vanessa. Oh yeah. And, and that's, that's really where the tension is me and Justin. It's not, it doesn't really sit for me and Vanessa, I don't know exactly how to explain why. Part of it is that Vanessa and I are, are wired very similarly. So I think we just really operate from the same space. I, I think that's a part of it. I think another part of it is we don't live together. So I think that separation time and then also the other thing that makes it challenging for Justin and I is we're very different. Like he and I are in some ways opposite. You know, he's the operations guy, he's the one that, you know, wants to dot the, i's, cross the T's, make sure everything is operationally sound and like structured and processed and system oriented, which obviously we need.

3 (51m 36s):
But I am a very different type of force. I am, I am the dreamer. I'm the one that like, you know, doesn't think about that stuff. And so it calls for quite a bit of conflict between the two of us at work. And I actually invite that. I'm very comfortable with that level of conflict. Hmm. In the end, we end up having a very solid dream, I guess you could say, or executable dream, but you just don't really wanna have sex. That person that night,

0 (52m 7s):
We might cut that part out. I gotcha. I hear you. You

3 (52m 11s):
Know what I'm saying though. I mean, it's, it's tough to come home and then, and then you have this other relationship to tend two, which is a much more personal one and it's just, it's hard to transition, especially with children. There's no break. It's not like you can go to your yoga class and then come back and be like, okay, now our husband, wife. So, you know, we just have had to work through that and we have

0 (52m 33s):
So, so Diana, I mean this brand, right? Healthy that, I mean that you started by fermenting kombucha in your closet. I mean, today, I mean, you're looking at hundreds of millions of dollars in annual retail sales and I think, I think you guys have raised almost 50 million total. It's just something like that. Yeah. Is that about right? Yeah. And last July of 2019, you got 20 million from Coke, which isn't just 20 million investment. That's like the backing of Coca-Cola, the biggest beverage company in the world.

3 (53m 4s):
Huge milestone.

0 (53m 5s):
Do you feel now, like you can take a breather, like you're like, ah, okay, we're gonna be fine. Like I can, I've been grinding away since, you know, 2012 on this, and now I'm like, okay,

3 (53m 17s):
I, I kind of gotta say no.

0 (53m 19s):
Okay. All right. Fine.

3 (53m 20s):
Yeah. Like, yeah, no, it feel, I will, I I will say for sure it was a huge, huge milestone. I was extremely proud and am extremely proud that we've been able to build something literally from nothing from that table to something that the biggest beverage company in the world would wanna invest at this level. Like, yeah, I mean, it's awesome, but the keep going part didn't die down. Now I will say over the journey, regardless of that investment over the journey, I've been able to, you know, pay myself more than $10 an hour like we did at the beginning. And, and sort of, I, I feel now I'm, I'm at a point where I feel fairly paid and that, and that's allowed for me to at least go on vacations.

3 (54m 4s):
And because

0 (54m 5s):
You're a board that, that approves your, your pay. Yeah.

3 (54m 7s):
Right? Yeah, yeah. Exactly. I still have to fight for it though. Yeah.

0 (54m 10s):
And, and this is the thing, I remember we talked to Andy, Donna Bonobos about this because a lot of people assume you get all this investment and all of a sudden you're loaded, oh, you're just swimming in cash. But it actually, the more outside investment you get, the less equity you have in the business. And really, most entrepreneurs until, or if they sell their, their shares in the business or equity, they're dependent on a salary that is determined by a board. And that could be a perfectly fair salary, but it's not gonna make you filthy rich.

3 (54m 39s):
Dude, one of the funniest emails we got was after we got that first money, I just, I got an email and it was like, yeah, you know, for your, for your charter flight needs, you know, think of executive charter.

0 (54m 51s):
Oh. From a company that was like, oh, this person's rich. Now they're gonna need charter flights

3 (54m 54s):
Flying pr like frying. Justin, Vanessa and I were like, oh. And I wrote back, I was like, we're still flying coach. You know, like this is, and still we are.

0 (55m 3s):
Here's, here's a tricky question for you. We've had people like Gary Erickson of Cliff Bar who owned his, he owns his company. He was almost gonna sell to investors and sell to a big, then a big company. And he didn't, we've had, you know, Sarah Kaus of Swell, she owns a hundred percent of her company. Some people say they couldn't have done what they did without outside capital, that it would be, it would've been impossible to scale their business. And some people say, I wish I didn't do it. And other people say, had I done it, we would've grown faster earlier. There are all kinds of different views on this, but there's no question that when you bring in outside capital, you do lose control. Right there. Are we gonna be people of opinions and, and they're gonna assert those opinions?

0 (55m 45s):
If you would've done it again, would you have avoided outside investors?

3 (55m 51s):
No.

0 (55m 51s):
No.

3 (55m 53s):
So much of the choice you have is, is yes, there's experience, but it's also what's the context of the situation? I mean, we couldn't get a loan if we needed it. We were totally had no choice outta cash. We had, I, it really felt like we had no choice. So I know if I was back in that position, I really still would have no choice. But to be honest, they helped us a lot in the beginning. Yeah. They, they helped us build forecasts and, and get into the right distribution. And so honestly, I think we did it exactly right. Yeah. And I would say that to all those people, if you have access to capital outside of private equity, great, go for it. But there's not only one way to do it,

0 (56m 32s):
When you, when you think about where you are right now and where you've come from, how you know how far you've come, and pretty short time. I mean, it's, I'm sure it seems like a long time. I'm sure it seems like forever and ever. I know, but in the grand scheme of things, it's pretty quick, right? Yeah. I mean, you, you've become a pretty big company quickly. How much do you think that has to do with just the grind and your hard work and, and how much cuz you got lucky.

3 (56m 57s):
Okay. It's definitely not zero luck. The initial number that came up was 20% luck. That's what I wanted to say. I would say it's 80% grit. There's definitely moments of blessings, you know, that ride along with Vanessa Health Aid would not be where it is without Vanessa. That is a blessing. You know, the phone call from the farmer's market, just when we needed investment, the guy that chose to buy a health aid and called us and said we'd want an investment. I mean, those types of things are yeah, are hard to explain. And there's, and there's more of that. But even in those, all those examples, you get a card dealt to you. It's not the whole deck. You get a card, you still have to do something with that card.

3 (57m 39s):
You have to take it and run with it. And without that grit, that card's just a card and it flies away. So yeah, I would, I would say it's 80% hard work, 80% pushing through and just like doing it when no one else would.

0 (57m 56s):
That's Dyna Trout, co-founder of Health Aid Kombucha since we last spoke. The firm that was Health Aid's initial investor, first beverage, well they acquired a controlling stake in the brand. Over the next few months, Diana and Vanessa plan to step away from the company. And after a short break, D wants to get back in the game and start building yet another business. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you enjoyed it, please spread the word. Tell someone about how I built this or post about it on social media. And if you wanna contact the team, our email address is H ibt id.wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at How I Built This and mine is at Guy Raz and on Instagram.

0 (58m 38s):
We're at How I Built This and I'm at Guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by Casey Hermann with music composed by Rapine Arab Bluey. It was edited by Sarason with research help from Darren Gales. Our production staff also includes Neva Grant, JC Howard, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Liz Metzger, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung, Chris Masini, Carla Estevez, and Sam Paulson. Our intern is Susanna Brown. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This.

0 (59m 18s):
Hey, prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon Music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear@wonderyshop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.