NetSuite (0s):
If you don't know your numbers, you don't know your business. That's true when your business is growing fast and even more true when there's a lot of uncertainty, inflation is running rampant. Supply chains are clogged and the labor market is tight. What does that mean for margins? But not every business is in the dark. Over 31,000 businesses know their numbers because they use NetSuite by Oracle. The number one cloud financial system right now, NetSuite is offering a one of a kind flexible financing program, head to netsuite.com/built. Right now that's netsuite.com/b U I L T netsuite.com/built.

AT&T (43s):
When building a business, there are tons of moving parts. One that's often overlooked is having the right network, thankfully with at T and T business, you can pick the best wireless plan for your small business and offer your employees the features they need. Plus the best at and T business plans include nationwide 5g. Wherever business takes you at and T business has the features you need. Visit att.com/b I Z U Y w. 5g requires a compatible plan and device 5g may not be available in your area. Visit att.com/five G for you for more details.

BMW USA (1m 17s):
Introducing BMW's all electric vehicle. The BMW I X in this elegant trailblazer exquisite attention has been paid to every luxurious detail. Its interior features a complete suite of visionary technology, including a free-standing curve display screen, haptic controls with an open pore wood trim, a panoramic eclipse moonroof, and more BMW. The ultimate electric driving machine. Learn more about the BMW I X today@bmwusa.com slash IIX.

0 (1m 55s):
Hey everyone. So today we're running an episode from a few years ago, it's with perfume maker, Joe Malone. And what can I say? Joe was so much fun to talk to her story is funny and amazing and also incredibly moving. Oh, and one more thing later this week, look out for a brand new episode of how I built this lab. I'll be speaking with chef <inaudible> about, fonio an ancient grain that he's now trying to sell around the world that could help change the way we eat and the way we farm. But for now here's my conversation with Joe Malone enjoy.

2 (2m 36s):
This was a real breaking point. Gary came home. He had a pizza in his hand and I just said, Gary, this hundreds of orders come in and we've got to have them done by the end of the week. And he said, let me just have my supper and I'll do it. And he sat down to eat his dinner. And of course I touched everything in the kitchen with fragrance. So his pizza tasted of not making ginger. And he said, if we carry on, we're going to end a divorce. I let's see. So I'm going to go and have a shower and just I'll come back in a minute. And I thought, oh my God, no. Cause I'd put all these seashells in the bath. And I was sending them, we'd laughing to see lavender oil. And I heard him scream as he went in and he came home and he said, okay, that's it.

2 (3m 17s):
We need to show up.

0 (3m 25s):
Welcome to how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz. And on the show today, how Jo Malone turned her homemade lotions into one of the hottest perfume brands in the world. Jo Malone, London, If a tree falls in a forest and no one's around to hear it, does it make a sound? This famous philosophical thought experiment can easily be applied to entrepreneurship?

0 (4m 6s):
The question might go something like this. If you make a great product, but you neglect the design element, will anyone notice it? Well, probably not. I mean, think about how many dish soaps there were when method debuted in the late 1990s, there's a reason why people bought method soap. The product was good, but the bottle design was what got you to try it. When Tristan Walker created the bevel razor, he wanted the unboxing experience to be as exciting as the iPhone. He even wanted to replicate that whoosh sound. When the top part separates from the bottom of the box, why did swell bottles break out in a marketplace, inundated with water bottles because Sarah couse designed them to stand out.

0 (4m 51s):
Now, all those things might sound superficial, but in a crowded marketplace, they matter. It's what gets people to hear your tree falling in the forest. And that's kind of what Joe Malone did as well. Now, if you're not familiar with Joe Malone fragrances, I assure you. You have seen a Jo Malone shop in some airport around the world, the logo and the look is really simple. A thin black frame around three words, Jo Malone, London, the perfume boxes are cream and wrapped in a single black bow. That's it? But there's something so elegant about that. Look that it makes you want to buy it, which is basically how her brand Jo Malone took off.

0 (5m 34s):
But this was after years and years and years of making lotions and creams and selling them out of her small apartment in London, Joe stories, almost like one of those magical realism novels. It involves a real magician. Her dad is 10 dwarf rabbits in mysterious Countess named and blue body and a working class childhood on the outskirts of London. Joe grew up in a council estate or what Americans would call public housing in the 1960s with her mom, dad and sister, Joe has dyslexia, which went undiagnosed for years and it made school a real struggle for her.

2 (6m 12s):
I just couldn't keep up. I couldn't keep the words in my head. The things I was really good at with things like biology, because it's visual. I was very good at history because I could listen to the stories and I would memorize those. And I was very good at religious studies. Believe it or not. Because again, they're based on stories, but mathematics, English languages, I'd struggled above and beyond. I would literally be thrown out the Closs with the others. And I was told I was lazy and stupid and I knew it was needed one of those things, but I just couldn't follow an exam paper. Multiple choice to me was the worst thing in the world because I'd put my cross against an answer and then I'd watch all the sentences and all the letters move around on the page.

2 (6m 55s):
And by the end of it, I would probably have answered three or four questions out of 20 and I'd fail. And then I would pick up a book and I would read it and there'll be no problem at all. And I would think I'm cute. And then sure enough, it would happen again. And it's, it still happens to me today. Not, not as much as it did when I was a child. I'm, you know, can manage perfectly well now, but that's probably because I'm not so anxious about it.

0 (7m 20s):
What was your parents' marriage? Like?

2 (7m 24s):
It was Cappy and very unhappy, both in the same breath. They adored each other and then they hated each other and they adored each other and they hated each other. And I was caught in the middle. So I was the adult in our household from a very young age. And listen, I loved my mum, dad desperately. And I know that they did their very best for me, but it made me grow up very, very fast, very quickly. And when they would have an argument, they would that they would do that awful thing of Joe Taleo father. His shirts are not going to be ironed. And I would go in, I say, dad, mum says your shirts, tell your mother. And they're standing in the same room. And I would sit there on the stairs, listening to them, fight and argue, and then he'd walk out and she'd walk out.

2 (8m 7s):
And I would just carry on. I go to the fridge, see what was for dinner, but they were loving parents, but they just couldn't live together. They were too volatile.

0 (8m 17s):
What did they fight about

2 (8m 19s):
Money? What does everyone, what, what am I people let's be honest money. My dad, who was the artist, he had lots of jobs. My father, my father was a brilliant, brilliant man, but did job jump a lot? So he was an architect. He was a painter. He would, he was also a member of magic circle. So he was a magician. I mean, you name it, he could do it. And he was a huge gambler. So they would Raul about money. They would rap about his gambling.

0 (8m 48s):
Would he like blow all of his money and like a poker game?

2 (8m 53s):
He and the month after? Yes. And then he'd suddenly have a huge win. I remember him one day coming home and he draws up in this amazing Jaguar where it's like, well, what you didn't have that this morning. So where's that? Well, that's one on a poker game. And at the back of the car was all these leather coats that he'd always see taken as payment from someone's factory who didn't have enough money. My mother said, get rid of the car or get rid of the coats. We don't want them. And so they were driven off up the road. So it was, there was always, there was never a dull moment. That's for sure in our house, it never made me love my dad less or love my mom less though. I could see they were both very good people. And I realized about my dad and it wasn't until I was much older that when he did those things, he was trying to do something nice for us.

2 (9m 40s):
And he didn't realize the way he was going about it made my mom feel really insecure, but I saw that actually, where he was trying to, he's trying to tell her he loved her and you know, let's get in the car, put on the coat and let's go for a drink. And even as I'm talking about it, it brings a smile to my face thinking there was so much kindness in my dad, but my goodness it did often came out the wrong way.

0 (10m 2s):
And just to clarify, your dad was a, like, I mean, he obviously an interesting guy, like he was, he sold paintings and he was a magician and

2 (10m 13s):
Yes, well, as I said, he didn't keep full-time jobs for very long. So he was a magician. He'd gone through magician school and he was a brilliant magician and I would go and be the magician's assistants. So in our little garden in Bexleyheath, we had rabbit hutches with about 10 white Netherland, orf, rabbits, which of course I had to look after. And I had to look after them in the show because they would appear from hats and hop around and do all sorts of things. So I was the magician's assistant, but he would also do his paintings. And when he wasn't in a full-time employment, he still had to have money. So we would do he and I would do all the markets at the weekend. We would go set up our little market stall and put all the paintings up.

2 (10m 55s):
And I knew that we had to sell three paintings every single day, because I knew if we didn't, we wouldn't eat. So I would, we would set it all up and I would send my father off to go and get breakfast very early. And I would try and get the first sale before he came back and I'd pocket the money. So I'd pocket it so I could give it to my mom. Cause I knew he would put it in his pocket. We wouldn't see it. So I realized that survival was an important sort of port and part of living,

0 (11m 25s):
I guess it was around when you were out at age eight, you're sort of an important turning point in what would be in your life and in your mom's life. She met a woman named Madame Lou body who had a, a skincare, like shop in London and went to work for her, who was, who was a Madam Lu body.

2 (11m 44s):
She was, oh my God, I loved her. She was such a, she was such an eclectic human being. So she was in her late seventies when I first met her. And she was this brilliant skincare woman. I think my mom went first of all, to just be the receptionist. And my mum became so involved and enjoyed very much working with her that she took herself off and got herself qualified in anatomy, physiatric acts and set to work working as Madam Labatt, his partner.

0 (12m 12s):
And this was a, like a, a skincare salon. The met him nobody's

2 (12m 15s):
It was in baker. It was just off baker streets in a place called Montague mansions, which is just around the corner from where Sherlock Holmes was rumored to her from lived and walked. And that's where my mom went to work for her, but it wasn't a shop. It was a very private skincare clinic. So at that time in London, there were two women who were the skin doyens at the time who would look off the, all the elites, one was Countess chalky, and the other was countless Liberty. And she had her private clinic. This was a point when women didn't run their own businesses and they certainly didn't weren't successful in the way that both of them were. But Madam Lavati, she was very tall. She was like 6, 2, 6, 3 blood red lipstick, the most amazed she had the most incredible smell about her.

2 (13m 0s):
It was always like crushed sandalwood and Bulgaria, like the finest rose oil. You ever smelled. She had blonde hair, cropped pixie hair. She always had a white lab coat on. She had cream fishnet, tights, very high shoes. And I would often come in if I went with my mom at the weekends, any, any chance I had at going up to a straight with my mom, I would go. And I think I got, when I first met her, it was just before dementia started to kick in, but I could see, I could see signs of it, definitely because she'd suddenly forget my name or she'd forget something. And she'd look at me and she'd say, Joe, do you remember where I put it? And I say, yes, Madam.

2 (13m 40s):
I was like a little helper, her little how eyes. And by the time I was sort of seven, eight years old, I'd spent a long time with her in the laboratory and it was this white room. And there was all these like big gloss, like old fashioned sweetie jaws, but in gloss. And they would all have Herb's then from roses to sandalwood, to slippery Elm, to camp for crystals to, I mean, you name it. It was there, there was every jar of honey. You could possibly thing. And I would watch her make face creams and make facemasks up.

0 (14m 13s):
I was mad. I'm Liberty, like a character. Was she really like a count test? What was she? English? Who, who what's her story?

2 (14m 22s):
Well, Hiro name was Doris Hilda biker. And she, but she did marry account. And you know, something, I don't know whether some of this was dementia kicking in. I hope not because she was obviously in her young twenties, she was a very sought after young woman. She told me once that she had passed messages back was in, in the top of lids of face creams. And I said, does that mean you're a spy? And she said, no, we never used that word. But I suppose some would say, you know, she was a, she was a great storyteller and I just, I loved her. My eyes were like dinner plates the whole time. And there was a moment where we walked, I took her out for tea one afternoon and she walked down the road.

2 (15m 5s):
And then she suddenly said to me, I don't know where I am. And I knew at that mine, I cry. I remember I cried and I took her hand. I said, I know where we are. And I took a home and I told my mom and, and it was at that point that we had to get help, which, and she deteriorated very quickly after that.

0 (15m 22s):
I guess it was around like 1974, Madame Lagarde. She dies. And your mom is her employee. And somehow kind of inherits the business.

2 (15m 35s):
It wasn't just her employee sheet. By that point, they had bit they'd worked as partners. So my mom had worked within the clinic and was equally she'd looked after her and helped pay for her debts. My mum was, was very good and very kind to manual.

0 (15m 48s):
And I guess we should clarify this. And I guess you will, which is like you didn't all of a sudden, overnight become rich because man, Lou body apparently was like bankrupt. Like she had no money.

2 (15m 57s):
We certainly didn't become, I don't think my family wherever rich.

0 (16m 2s):
So when, when met him, nobody died. I guess your mom decides to build her own similar type of business. Right. And, and, and continue to make face creams. And, and, and so how did that go? How did, how, how did her business go?

2 (16m 17s):
Well, I mean, very well. She ha she built a really successful business. She would go to people's houses. So she didn't have obviously Montague mansions was sold with on biker straight. And of course I knew how to make the face cream. So I'd been doing it since I was seven, eight years old. So my jobs worked to help her. And on a Saturday morning we would, you know, be in the house in Bexleyheath and mushy sites. Me, I need 50 pots of cleansing cream. Can you make them? And that was, you know, that was my Saturday. And I knew how to do it. I wouldn't necessarily measure anything out. It was, I, I did everything with such precision, as she had taught me and I would clean the fridge out and lay all the, all the kitchen rollout and I, and I'd sterilize all the utensils and I'd boil the water and put the oil.

2 (17m 3s):
And I would trust my nose to tell me when I had to put the oils in. At that point, it was like a mineral oil and a wax. So you had to wait until it all dissipated in the animal bucket, then I'd let it cool down. And the minute it's skinned, I knew that was the point of which she poured it into the face pots. And then again, I would, I would sit there and watch them and then I'd let them, and then they go into the fridge and that would be the 50 pots. And they would sell for five pound, 50 a pots. So I don't think I was proud of myself, but I was, I knew that I, when I looked at it and we'd sold it, I knew that we could eat. That was always my motivation.

0 (17m 38s):
So, all right. So your mom has this business and you are kind of helping her out and sounds like she's doing okay. And you're still a kid. I mean, we should be clear. I mean, you were still a, you know, a little girl and I guess by the time you reach what we would call high school, you decide that it's not for you, that you basically drop out

2 (17m 58s):
Well in between that. So my mum was very, very sick. And the thing that really, I think probably I woke up one day, I could see my, my dad, my dad had disappeared. He'd gone off, we'd run off with someone. And we, I was left and I could see my mum deteriorating slowly and slightly. On one day I came home from school and I found her in a chair, rocking herself backwards and forwards. And she wouldn't talk. She wouldn't say anything. So I rushed to go and get a neighbor. And she came in and she, cause she said, Joe, take, take your sister upstairs. I'm going to call the doctor. And I, you know, they never said your mom's sick, but she, your mom's having a turn. That's what, that's what she

0 (18m 38s):
Said. Well,

2 (18m 40s):
She was, my mom was having a breakdown. That's what my mum was. And she was, and you know what, when people go through, I mean, we talk about it a lot now about mental illnesses. It's not about being weak. She was, she just held it together for too long. She was strong for too long and she just couldn't hold it any longer. And then it was all down to me. And I remember social services coming round and they said that my sister and I would have to go into a home and I managed, I didn't lie, but I certainly didn't tell the truth. I am. I just said, no, no, no. There's people around one of my dad's coming home. And they said, well, where is your father? Oh, he's traveling. He's coming back. Everything will be fine. But for, for a year I managed on my end.

2 (19m 22s):
I made sure that my sister went to school every day. I take her and then I come back home nurse, my mum bought my mum, gave her a breakfast, make the face creams up, gets on the train with a shopping trolley. I'd go up to the flat that my mum worked from, sell all the product, put it in and then come all the way back and then cook dinner. And I put food on the table. And that's when I left. When I stopped going to school, I couldn't see the points of it. I couldn't see the point of sitting there feeling stupid, being told I was stupid and lazy and it's like, I'm running a business. I know how to make money. And I have my face creams. And that was probably the last day I went to school and I was one of those people that fell through the cracks in the educational system. But for that, I'm really grateful because it made me.

0 (20m 5s):
So basically around the time you were 16 years old, you were independent. I mean, you had to work and earn money to live, to, to survive.

2 (20m 16s):
I wasn't dependent. You were up right at the age of 16. Then when I was legally allowed to leave. So my mum eventually became better and I didn't realize this at the time, but it was going to happen again. And it happened twice more, but I thought she was better. And you know that I, I wanted to be a teenager or a child. So I went to live with a family friend in London with an amazing family called the souls. And for the first time in my life, I saw what a family should be. We would say, we'd never sat at a table and at a meal together as a family at home. Whereas here every night you would sit and you would talk about your day. And they, they were just the kindest loveliest people in the whole world.

2 (20m 60s):
And I kind of went to live with them. I got a job in just into blanks, in a little flower shop. I earned 29 pounds a week, but it was a really, really, really happy time. And what I noticed, I noticed that I had that my sense of smell was something that was very extraordinary. I didn't realize to what extent, but I would pick up the flowers and I'd say, I smell the bottom of the end of the thing on the top of the chip. And I'd say, they've been in the fridge for three days. I want the fresh ones. No, no, no, no. <inaudible> no, they have, I don't want those. And eventually they just knew that they couldn't, if I picked up something to smell, I could tell whether it was fresh or had been sitting in a fridge.

2 (21m 41s):
And that, that was my first job.

0 (21m 43s):
And I think Justin DeBlanc was like a high-end grocery store, something like that. And in London at the time

2 (21m 49s):
He was a brilliant entrepreneur. He wanted to be a shopkeeper. So he opened a bakery, I think, first of all, and then he opened a flower shop and then he opened a delicatessen, a really high-end delicatessen in Elizabeth street.

0 (22m 2s):
And I think, I think you worked in that delicatessen too, right? Like, like with Justin Leblanc before, before moving on. Yup.

2 (22m 9s):
Yep. And I left there, I went on to work at another flower shop. And then from there I went to work with my mum. I went back because she was very poorly again. And so that's when I went to work with her,

0 (22m 23s):
I guess at a certain point, Joe, maybe you were 18 or 17 or you went to, to, to Bible school. Yeah. I, I, the reason why I ask about Bible school was because I guess that was where you met the person who would become your partner, Gary, who would become your, your husband. Yeah.

2 (22m 42s):
He was,

0 (22m 42s):
He is, he was also a student there.

2 (22m 44s):
Yes, he was. He was studying, he would have made, we laugh now he'd have made a great baker, but he, yeah, he definitely was thinking about it. Full-time and we fell in love with each other. And I knew that structure was not for me.

0 (22m 57s):
So you, you meet Gary and you guys, the two of you got married pretty young. I mean, you, I think you were 20 or 21, 21.

2 (23m 6s):
Yes.

0 (23m 6s):
And that was sort of around the time where your, your mom had asked you to come back and help her out. And soon after she has a sounds like, I think if I'm right, I mean, she had a stroke, right?

2 (23m 20s):
She, it was like a stroke and it, but there were severe complications with it as well. So the, the woman who was taken into hospital that night never returned for me,

0 (23m 33s):
She was, it was almost as if her personality had changed

2 (23m 37s):
Completely. Yeah. Completely. And I don't blame her for that, but it was our relationship from that moment was never the same. She was never the mother that I had remembered, everything I did was wrong and she completely changed. And of course the more successful I became in the business, the more she hated me because I was living the life that she wanted to live. And we were a young married couple by the time that she came out of hospital and everything, it was just like, I just can't live like this. There was one incident where she, I was upstairs doing someone's face. And I came down to the kitchen to pick up a face mask halfway through. And as I walked through, she picks up a bottle of face cream and she throws at me and it landed all the way down my face.

2 (24m 22s):
And I stood there and it was the, it was just the after humiliation, I think of the whole thing. And I snapped and I said, that's it. And I remember going upstairs, finishing. I finished the day and I finished the woman's face and I wiped my hair and I sobbed. And I walked out of that house and thought that if I, if I stay here, I'll die. And so I made the decision that I was going to walk away that day and I did, but on Balone to me, I signed something that made me responsible for all the debts. So as I walked out of that door as a young woman, newly married thinking, I'm going to start again little did I know that I had was going to have that, that I would have to pay off for the next goodness knows how many years.

2 (25m 6s):
And I did.

0 (25m 7s):
You basically were, you're your mom's business partner, but somehow this business was saddled with thousands of pounds of data that you now were responsible for.

2 (25m 20s):
Yeah. I did what I had done all my life, which is accept the responsibility, even though it wasn't my fault and just get on and push through.

0 (25m 31s):
So, all right. So it's like 1988 or 89. You're you're about, I guess 24, your mom obviously cannot run a business at that point. And you take on like 30,000 pounds, I guess, rough $40,000 roughly of debt at the time. So what are you going to do? Like, how are you going to make money to start paying this off?

2 (25m 53s):
I went back to the four plastic jugs and the saucepan, which had been my, probably my best friends or my other life.

0 (25m 59s):
You meant, you mean you started to make face lotions and creams?

2 (26m 2s):
I just thought, what can I do? And it was by that point guy, it was in my blood. And so I set up and I would carry my massage bed from house to house and I would do people's faces. And I would go to one house and I'd say, if you've got any sisters, you know, if I can stay here and do three, four treatments, I knew that it was a really good day. And that's how I existed for a good six to eight months. And I started to build a Cleveland hill together. They were my word of mouth. You know, they did all the marketing for me. I didn't have to do it. I do the faces, I'd come home. I get a taxi or Gary would pick me up. Then I make the face creams and I get ready for the next day.

2 (26m 42s):
And that was our existence.

0 (26m 44s):
Can I ask you about face creams from, I mean, I, I'm curious, like how do you make face creams? Like, what were you buying and mixing together?

2 (26m 51s):
Well, cosmetics are either oil into water or water into oil. It's like cooking. It's like making a white sauce or a red sauce. It was in those days. Anyway, it's a little bit more complex now, but I would take the waxes down or add the oils and boil it all up, strain it through muslin that it stand for 24 hours and go back at all the essential oils of at the time we had a Juniper skin tonic, which was the most wonderful, fresh green tonic that you'd put on your skin. So I would, you know, do all of those things. And I suppose, I suppose making Juniper is a bit like making vodka or gin. It's all the same sort of pieces and it's just different ingredients and different heating points.

2 (27m 31s):
So,

0 (27m 32s):
And these are things you, you knew how to do intuitively because your mom had studied how to do it. And you just grew up as a kid helping her out, doing it with her, I guess.

2 (27m 41s):
Well, I'd watched, I'd watched, but it was also the, all the years of Madam, Madam Labonte. You know, it was all of those things like the yogurt face mask that I still make today that I learned to make that in baker street with a yogurt, a honey little bit of lemon juice to kind of sour the milk, honey sandalwood powder, slippery Elm powder, olive oil, avocado, Oho, broil, and you had to do it. And I still, you know, it's still within me. I still know and understand how to it's when you do you know what? Making 10 to 12 pots of face cream is easy. It's when you scale. It is when you get to a hundred pots and five

0 (28m 16s):
That's hard. Yeah.

2 (28m 17s):
Because you have to, you have to alter and of course, health and safety and health and hygiene or whatever didn't exist in those days today, you couldn't stand in your kitchen and be pouring face cream and, and put it in your fridge. She wouldn't be able to do that, but way back then it was perfectly acceptable and perfectly. Okay.

0 (28m 36s):
And you, and you did this all out of your apartment where, where you and Gary were living. Yes.

2 (28m 40s):
We had rented a small apartment in Chelsea and I would transform this little flat into a tiny little exclusive skincare clinic. And we decided that this business, this business was taking 14 to 16 hours a day. So perhaps we would live in the flat where we were working, but of course it was no bedroom. It was just a one skincare room, one kitchen, and a beautiful big sitting room. So we went to home base and bought a piece of blue foam. And that was our bed for probably about four or five years. And we would roll it out and then we'd hide it

0 (29m 12s):
When people come in for the treatments, right.

2 (29m 15s):
So she could luxuries and it we'd roll it up. And it would go into the laundry closet and everything will be transformed. And it would look like a little shop in the sitting room with this big book case. And it would be full of product. And by the end of every day, everything was gone. So the minute the last client went, which was about six 30, quarter to seven, I'd make myself a big, strong cup of coffee stand in the kitchen. That was just so tight. It wasn't, it was no more than two people standing there. Plastic jugs would come out and I would start and I'd look at my appointment list and he was coming and I knew that certain women would want six bottles of cream. So I would make a big super-duper thing. And by the time Gary came home hoping for dinner, he would be filling the bottles and labeling them.

2 (29m 60s):
And by about 11, 12, we'd roll out a piece of blue foam, lie down and go to sleep. And then the next day we'd wake up again. Well, and then I think the turning point was the third or the fourth Christmas. And he walked in one evening and he had a pizza in his hand. And I said, Gary, this hundreds of orders come in and we've got to have them done by the end of the week. And he said, let me just have my supper and I'll do it. And he sat down to eat his dinner. And of course I touched everything in the kitchen with fragrance. So his pizza tasted of not making ginger. He went to make himself a cup of tea and everything bubbled up over the coffee cup. And he said, I can't do this anymore. If we carry on, we're going to end a divorce.

2 (30m 40s):
And I literally saw I'm going to go and have a shower and just I'll come back in a minute. And I thought, oh my God, no. Cause I'd put all these seashells in the bath. And I was sending them with Lapin to see lavender oil. I heard him scream as he went in and I thought I'm really in trouble. And he walked down the hall and he said, okay, we need a shop. And I went, I don't want to shop. I said, no, that's it. And that night we sat down and he said, I think I should leave my job. And I think we should go into business together and I will help you all be that everything that you're not and enable you to do this, but we can't carry on living like this. And he was right. It was breaking point

0 (31m 23s):
When we come back, just a moment,

2 (31m 25s):
how Joe moved out of the kitchen and into a brick and mortar shop and how she managed to build buzz. Even before the doors opened, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this

Audible (31m 45s):
With my schedule. I am always on the go. So I don't have a ton of time to do the things I want to do like reading. That's why I love audible as an audible member, you can choose one title a month to keep from their entire catalog, including the latest bestsellers and new releases. Plus all audible members get access to a growing selection of audio books, audible, originals, and podcasts that are included with membership. So you can listen to all you want. I love listening to audible when I'm cooking or working out recently, I've been listening to George Orwell's 1984 because you know, it's kind of one of those moments in human history. Let audible help you discover new ways to laugh, be inspired or be entertained. New members can try it for free for 30 days. Visit audible.com/built or text B U I L T 2 505. That's audible.com/built or text built to 500, 500 to try audible free for 30 days. audible.com/built

Wix (32m 53s):
cyber attacks are on the rise and no business is too big or too small to be targeted. When you create your site on Wix, you get 24 7 enterprise grade security. It's fully managed for you by a team of experts who take care of threat prevention, real time detection and rapid response. So your site stays up and running in any situation. The whole platform is secure by design with threat modeling, penetration tests, and design and code reviews throughout the dev process. And it's monitored around the clock with data analysis and machine learning. So threats are identified faster weeks, meet the highest international privacy and security standards from PCI DSS, level one to SOC two type two, and even the strongest data encryption out there. AEs 2, 5, 6 with a secure website, you can grow your business with peace of mind, visit wix.com/security to learn more.

0 (33m 58s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from guy Roz. So it's 1994, Joe and Gary both decided to go all in on Joe's cosmetics business. They have about a year's worth of cash to start out with. And Gary has insisted that the business needs to get out of their apartment and into a space of its own.

2 (34m 17s):
So we walked along Wharton street one day and he'd found three sites. And I looked at them and I, I went, no, no, I just, I have this always this thing about gut, that gut feeling. And I looked at them known as he walked down the street. He was at that point, not talking to me and just, he just said, you just impossible job. And I walked past this one shop and it was a building site and I felt the shop say, it's me. And he looks at me when you have got to be joking. And I went, it's that one. And that's where we started.

0 (34m 50s):
And I guess it was just obvious you were going to call it Joe Maloney. We were going to call it that that's what the name of the shop was going to be.

2 (34m 56s):
Yeah. I mean, I didn't, I w I was Joe Malone. I didn't, I didn't even think about that. And it was by that point, of course, we have products with Jo Malone, London on it, you know, we'd done all the packaging. So yes, it was a, I don't think we even thought about that.

0 (35m 12s):
It sounds like for most of the early days of your business, you are making face lotions and creams and body oils. But today, of course, I think most people think of Joe Malone as a perfume. So when did that start? When did you start making perfumes

2 (35m 26s):
Completely topsy-turvy so normally it's a fragrance that comes first, and then what we call and salaries, right? Mine was the other way round. So I was doing, I created a body lotion. First of all, from there I created bar foil. And then from the bar foil, I went to the fragrance because of course I wasn't allowed alcohol. So you need alcohol to manufacture fragrance. And I didn't have that.

0 (35m 48s):
Why, why weren't you allowed to have alcohol?

2 (35m 50s):
When I was living in, in, in premises, I couldn't have whole of flammable alcohol.

0 (35m 56s):
It wasn't

2 (35m 57s):
Safe to me. I didn't have the amount I needed as well. And you needed, when you make fragrance, you have to let it stand. It it's a bit like it's a bit like wine, or if you put garlic into olive oil and you have to let it sit and then you have to filter it, it's very technical, but I wasn't allowed to have huge amounts of light-filled 40, 50 kilos of neat alcohol to make fragrance with. So the fragrance was the last thing that came in the line. But by that point, when we had the, one of Gary's first jobs, when he came to work together was to go and find factories. And that man literally drove around England to all the factories. And they said, well, Gary, can you give us the formulation? And we'll just follow it. And he said, unfortunately, it's in Joe's head.

2 (36m 38s):
So I had to go with him and I had to stand in the laboratories, which are very frustrating because they'd pour it in and I'd smell it. And I go, you can't smell it. Well, you can't put any more fragrance than that in. And I went, give me the thing and I'd put another light, huge dollar pen. And I go, yup, that's it. That's the level. And they said, you can't put that level in Bartholomew. You can't do that. And I said, why not? Who says I can't? And I remember someone saying to me, no, one's going to buy a fragrance called lime Bosler Mandarin. And I remember looking at them and saying, why not? That's what it is. Why are we pretending to call it something it's not, well, they were wrong. It did,

0 (37m 18s):
Joe, how are you coming up with fragrances? Like lime basil and Mandarin or nutmeg and ginger? Like, how, how are you coming up with the sense for the perfumes?

2 (37m 28s):
The way I create today is slightly different than when I did a nice, and those days I would just create single nights. And then in together like music, and I would smell it in my head and then I'd create it in a little, little jar glass jar, and I'd put it in somebody's elation or a Bothell. It's often how I would test things, first of all, and then test it, see if it worked. And then if it weren't for get it formulated, get it bottled, get out there. And that was my, there wasn't that the testing period was done on me or Gary poor. Gary used to have everything slathered all over him to see if it lost it. Cause you're not just looking at the smell of something you're looking, what does it do in 30 seconds? What does it do in a minute? What is it doing in an hour? How does it dry down?

2 (38m 9s):
What is it? So you're looking at all of those different elements. Yeah.

0 (38m 13s):
And when you talk about notes, right? You're talking, I mean, we think of musical notes, but you're talking about send notes, right? Like, like for example, the smell of vanilla or the smell of ginger, like that would, each of those things would be one note, are there multiple notes in each ingredient,

2 (38m 30s):
The record. So just think of it just like music or, or mixing paints on a pallet. So what would the, what I'm doing is I'm taking, if I look at a Jasmine and it's too Hetty, what I'm looking for is that fine mist that comes from a fountain in the heat of Malaysia in the middle of the afternoon. So I'm taking the Jasmine out and recreating it. So I'm creating these little, little notes and Accords that I'm smiling. And then I run round and I pick like crushed green Palm leaves and I'm taking that. And then I twist it round the Jasmine. So I'm looking for notes that sit together and that make the fragrance kind of bigger and tell a bigger story.

2 (39m 11s):
And then I'm delving into my memory for all the, all the memories that I have of notes from. I don't know, the riding, a horse in Montana, the leather of a saddle in a rainstorm to the smell of broth, cooking on a breech in parrot key, which is the smell of pomelo to me, the skin of a fruit. So it's, it's an awful word, but I'm telling you stories, or I'm writing poetry to you. I'm writing music. I'm just telling you and piecing together those notes and then allowing you to have your own memory with that fragrance.

0 (39m 44s):
So it just seemed like an obvious extension. You know, you're already making the lotions that, that had fragrances. So why not just, just take the fragrance out and put it in its own bottle.

2 (39m 55s):
People were asking for it. There were people saying, when, where can I buy the fragrance from? So it was a, we knew it was, it was a Wantable product. And we knew that people wanted it

0 (40m 4s):
Even in the early days when you opened the, the store. Like I read that, like there were lines of people waiting to come in before you even opened up. But what I'm wondering is how do they know about the store? I mean, where you were, were you, did you hire a PR firm or are you getting where you go and pitching newspapers and trying to get articles written about you? How did that happen?

2 (40m 30s):
So I had a nice client called Deborah Bennet and Deborah Bennett. She'd been a very dear part of our lives for a long time. And she said, I'll help you. And she did, we did a big party to launch the shop and we did an amazing piece in British Vogue, the Telegraph. I mean, everybody did, everybody came out and supported and wrote about the shop and it just, it just took off like wildfire. But by that point, we had a good 1500 to 2000 people that were loyal to the product. And that first Christmas, of course, the minute we hit January, we saw our market literally triple because everyone that had been given a product at Christmas was then coming back, buying it for themselves and then giving it as a gift.

2 (41m 11s):
So it was, it was a phenomenal growth pattern that we saw

0 (41m 15s):
At that time, 1994. Right. When you, when you opened the, the shop, did you, was the, the label like did already look the way Joe Malone products look today? D w was that the look already at that point?

2 (41m 30s):
Yes. Yeah, pretty much. And it was one of my face clients. She's a lady called Isabelle attach way, and she is one of my best friends to this day. She came and had her face down one day and I was sitting there and she said, what would you like to do with the packaging? And she sat on the floor with me with some empty cream and black boxes. And I said, well, I want this here. And it's so funny when you're successful. People always claim that they were the ones that did it. I've read a lot of things about people who said they did it. They didn't, it was Isabelle techy that did it. And she was the one that put the packaging together. And as we were sitting there, I said, it's still missing something. And she turned around on the back of the safer Gary had left her a tire black tie from an event that we'd been at and she picked it up and wrapped it round it.

2 (42m 17s):
And that was the black ribbon. And so it was her, her genius. And

0 (42m 21s):
Because it's iconic that right. It's like the Joe Malone box with the little square and the black bow tie,

2 (42m 27s):
She then took it to her graphic designer and they did drawings and whatever in the minute I saw her is like, yeah, that's it. And that was, that's what we used.

0 (42m 36s):
You know, it's interesting, Joe, cause we've done other cosmetics brands on the show like Bobby Brown and bliss. And it's interesting cause it was, this seems like it was a turning point in the industry or, you know, in the U S and in the UK, like this was a time when people started to notice these very kind of clean products. You know, these like Kiehl's is an example of that, right? Like you walked into keels in the nineties and it looked like a pharmacy. And it sounds like what a similar thing was happening with Joe Malone. Like you had a very clear aesthetic that people seemed to kind of be attracted to.

2 (43m 15s):
I think, I think we were very much the, the pioneers of the indie brands that are today. All of those people, you mentioned Bobby Brown, Masia Kilgore of bless and all of us where it didn't matter where we were coming from, whether it be color, hair, skin, fragrance, we were all really doing the same thing. It was about buying into a lifestyle. And I think a lot of the indie brands, we were the pioneers that carved out that marketplace for us. Because at that time they were the poor cousin today. They're certainly not they're, they they're the brands where everybody, you know, the big guys want to buy them because they can see that we had created things that they, with all their money and all their teams and all their budgets could not create.

2 (44m 1s):
And you could feel the personality of the founder within that brand. And I think that was a huge part of the success of it.

0 (44m 7s):
Yeah. I mean, this is the story of, of what was, what's been called disruption, right? Which is like to people like you and Gary could, could hang out in your kitchen and make a psychotic brand, but huge multinationals couldn't actually do that because they, they weren't as nimble.

2 (44m 24s):
It's just, they had lots of teams. And by the time you have an idea when it gets through to, I mean, listen, I've sat on both sides of the fence. So I understand both of them, I think the agility of a young indie brand, or, you know, these young entrepreneurial brands and the way that have an idea and they spin it and they turn it and they twist it. They're listening to the voice of the people and they're listening to their own inner creative voice. And it's that relationship that brings the product to market faster and quicker.

0 (44m 53s):
This is so, so like you, I mean, I think you opened the store in 94, within like six months, you hit your five-year revenue goal and 15 months in you hit a million dollars in sales. This is not, I mean, this is still kind of a time when entrepreneurs like yourself, we're not going to like private equity and outside investors. It wasn't like today, you might have done that at this point. Right. You would have had investors coming in. And at that point you were, your revenue is, was fueling the business, right? Your cashflow was allowing you to, to develop, you know, more products and to expand, I guess, is that sort of how, how it worked?

2 (45m 32s):
Well kind of in the beginning it did. Yeah, because there was, I mean, we hit our first million on Christmas Eve, which is, that was just makes me feel so good. So it was, it was Christmas Eve when we shut the shop. And as I did the takings on the till we were 342 pounds, I think it was shorts of our first million. So I looked at Gary and I said, open the door. We can't shut that. Shut the shop. And so we opened the door and it was all men. It was all men who were so glad we'd opened the door. And they were, it was like three that in the afternoon we opened the door and they all came rolling in and we could see it adding up. And within 10 minutes we'd done it. But the guy that took us over the million was, he said, I want the cheapest thing you've got, so I can put it in our stocking.

2 (46m 18s):
And it was an 8 95 shower gel. I shall never ever forget it. And as I wrapped it, I handed it back to him and gave him a bottle of Dom Perignon champagne. And I said, Merry Christmas. And he looked and he said, you're never going to make a great business by doing that to everybody. He had no idea, but it was him that took us

0 (46m 35s):
Over

2 (46m 35s):
Over the million. That's why.

0 (46m 36s):
Yeah. So you hit the million. And even though you were doing a million dollars in sales, I imagine that neither of you were personally getting rich because you had to buy product, you had to make product, you had to use the cash flow to hire staff and to put it right back into the business, right?

2 (46m 54s):
Yeah. If you, if you want a business to grow, you've got to invest back into it. So there was, by that point, we were growing. So we couldn't, we couldn't just buy 50 plastic bottles at a time. We were buying two to 3000 plastic bottles at a time.

0 (47m 8s):
And at this point you still had one shop on Walton street. And it, at this point, did you start to think we should open more shops? Or w were you focused on just that, that one shop on Walmart?

2 (47m 21s):
We're being hounded. When I say hounded, we had every buyer, every agency, every single person signed to Gary. We want this product from New York to LA to, I mean, you name it. They wanted us,

0 (47m 37s):
They wanted you to open your own shops, or they just wanted to import your products and sell it at their shops.

2 (47m 42s):
No, they wanted to import the product. So what happened was Dawn Mello. Who's one of the great iconic shopkeepers of out of time. And at that time she was heading a department store in New York city, which is the number one Bergdorf Goodman. And by that point, we had a lot of a New York LA consumer base that were buying from London. So there was obviously a, you know, a demand and a hunger for it. And she said, well, I'll give you a little bit of spice. And Gary turned around and said, if you want a line, you have to build us a shop. And of course we were these two tiny get, we had no money. We had no budget. And she, I remember her looking at him.

2 (48m 23s):
She was so wonderful. And she went, okay, you come to New York city and we'll talk about it. And that's what we did. So we went to New York and we had this tiny little rotunda that she said, you can have that spice in that set. And she said, anything else? And he said, yes, I want to use my own packaging. Well that they nearly all flipped and all nearly walked out of the, the meeting room at that point. And I was ready to go, oh, Gary, just, you know, we'll use Bergdorf Goodman bags. And he said, no, we're going to use Jimin lined bags. We have to. And they eventually yielded. And let us, let us use our own packaging.

0 (48m 58s):
You basically walk out of Bergdorf, Goodman holding a Jo Malone bag, not at Bergdorf Goodman bag.

2 (49m 3s):
Yup. Yup. And I mean, let me tell you that was, that was all him. That was not my, I was ready to yield on that one. And of course he had been thinking strategically. So on our run up to opening in bugged of goodness. And you know, the, the rule of thumb is as my point taking any brand or any product to any part of the world, no matter how brilliant it is, if no one knows it's there. So you have to create this Basel and you have to create the voice and you have to create the want ability. So we'd got back to the hotel, went up to the hotel room and he started to unpack this box with all these bags. And I said, what are you doing?

2 (49m 44s):
And he said, I'm making backs up. And he started to make Joe Malone bags up and put the black ribbon on the outside. I said, it's nothing in them. And he said, no one else knows that we employed people to walk around New York city holding 10 empty Jo Malone bags for the month. And the six weeks run up to opening in Bergdorf Goodman. And by the time we did, everybody had seen these diamond line bags, which had nothing in them. And everybody thought that it was a much more successful brand than it was, but it was converted in empty bags. We call it walking the dogs and we still do it today.

0 (50m 22s):
I just have people carrying empty, Joe Malone bags down the street,

2 (50m 27s):
And it worked. It was genius.

0 (50m 29s):
I have to imagine that you were constantly getting pinged by people who were, who wanted to franchise this business, who were saying, Hey, we want to invest. We want to open up Joe Malone shops all over the U S and how are you dealing with that? I mean, was that first of all, was that happening?

2 (50m 46s):
Yes. I mean, yes, it was, it was happening, but it didn't feel right. I was, I knew I was looking for three things. I was looking for people with deep pockets. I was looking for the financial bet, but I needed someone to teach us about distribution because we could see that distribution was a key. And it was probably one of the things we were lacking, but more importantly, I needed somebody that really loved what we did and what they did.

0 (51m 10s):
Yeah. So here's the question. 1999, you have this hugely successful brand. You've got lines out the door, you're at Bergdorf Goodman and you sell to Estee Lauder. I mean, why, why did you decide to do that?

2 (51m 25s):
Because I found all three and I knew I had, so those three things, you know, you can often, you can find money, you can find distribution, but it was that last part about hot. It was do. They love me and this business. And do I love who they are? That was a really important part to me. And I couldn't find that last missing piece until I met Mr. Lauder. And when I sat with Leonard Lauder, he reminded me of myself. For me, he was a great entrepreneurial spirit who loved the beauty industry and who'd walked beside his mom. So there was lots of similarities. And when we were negotiating, it was, I was going to stay for the rest of my life.

2 (52m 4s):
So it was, I needed something that I knew was going to be for the rest of my life. I wanted to stay and I wanted to continue to be Joe. And the day that we agreed it and signed was probably one of the happiest days of my life.

0 (52m 19s):
So you are now, Joe Malone is now owned by Estee Lauder. And you are essentially an employee of Estee Lauder. You become the creative director of, of your brand, Joe Malone, and you're still running it. And it, it sounds like it didn't feel a whole lot different. And, and I guess within two years or three years of, of that happening, you are diagnosed with breast cancer, which I'm sure came as a shock. You were just 37, 30, 8 years old. When, when you got that diagnosis.

2 (52m 52s):
Yes, I was. I was in New York city. I remember it vividly. I'd only just have Josh, my sauna. He was sort of two, I think, 18 months too. And I was so tired all the time and I'd never felt that I'd never felt sick or I'd never felt wary. And I was in the four seasons in New York city in the hotel one morning and I found something just on my kind of chest bone. I went back home, went to see the doctor. And that night I, as I sat, when they they'd done all the tests and I looked at the nurse's face and I looked to the doctor's face and I knew it was really bad news. I could just could feel it.

2 (53m 32s):
And he looked at me and he said, you know, I'm terribly sorry to tell you, but it looks like you have a very aggressive form of breast cancer. And we think that you need to get your life in order. They were, he was basically telling me I didn't have long to live. And I just, my, I watched poor Gary just collapsed on the floor. And I was, it was a weird, it was such a weird moment because I was dressed to go to this big party in London called the serpentine party. I remember fiddling with my earrings in my pocket thinking, okay, well, I'll just get through this. And then I'll go to the party and I'll, and then I suddenly realized that someone had given me a death sentence and it started to sink in.

2 (54m 14s):
And then, then all I could think about was Josh and Gary. That's the only, I didn't care about any of the rest of it, but my son and my heart. And I just remember thinking, God I'll never see him grow up. I'll never see him go to school. I never see him go to uni. I'll never see him get married. You know, it was always awful, awful Downing thoughts. And then I went home. Gary was just in pieces, complete pieces and trying to be strong. And I sat in the end of my bed. And I remember thinking, Joe, you've never listened to a word. Anyone has ever told you in your life one earth, are you going to listen? Now

0 (54m 52s):
When we come back in just a moment, John Malone's battle with cancer leads her to walk away from the brand, with her name, for good stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this

Burrow (55m 16s):
And this show. We like to feature brands that do things differently. Brands that are changing entire industries when it comes to furniture, burrow is setting a whole new standard with their beautiful, durable, and easy to assemble designs. Borough got its start when its two founders were in business school, having drinks and complaining about how difficult it was to buy a new sofa. They wondered why wasn't there an easy way to get an affordable high quality sofa to your apartment without the high shipping fees. So they founded burrow, burrow designs, everything in house from stain and scratch resistant fabric to solid hardwood frames, borough selects materials that will stand up to everyday life. Thanks again to burrow for supporting the show. Listeners can get $75 off their first order at burrow.com/built. That's a borough B U R R O w.com/built for $75 off burrow.com/built.

Audible (56m 22s):
We get support audible. We've all got busy schedules and I'm sure sometimes you feel like with all the things you have to do, it's hard to find time for the stuff you love to do like reading. That's why audible is so great. Audible offers an incredible selection of audio books across every genre from bestsellers and new releases to celebrity, memoirs, mysteries, and thrillers, motivation, wellness business, and more. Plus, as an audible member, you can choose one title a month to keep from their entire catalog, including the latest bestsellers and new releases. Let audible help you discover new ways to laugh. Be inspired or be entertained. New members can try it free for 30 days. Visit audible.com/listening or text listening to 500, 500 that's audible.com/listening or text listening to 500, 500 to try audible free for 30 days, audible.com/listening.

0 (57m 28s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2002 and Joe has just received the news of her cancer diagnosis. And almost immediately the Lauder family connects Joe with a specialist in New York to start a treatment.

2 (57m 43s):
So we all moved out and we ran the business from New York city and Gary would commute back with some forwards. Josh was tiny, so he was very easy to maneuver around, but I was, I was really suffered. I just suffered so badly threat, but I kept telling myself that grin and bear, which I grin and bear, it can come through this. And I had, I mean, Larry Norton just was the most

0 (58m 5s):
Incredible your doctor.

2 (58m 8s):
Yeah. He's one of those people in my life that without him, I wouldn't be sitting talking to you today. And so I did, I did one mastectomy. Then we got through all the chemo. Then I had to do the chemo all over again. And then on that last bit, when I thought it was all over, they found something else in the other breast. So I had to go through it all again. I can't tell you why was the chemo had really taken over by that point? And then one day Larry walked in and said, it's gone,

0 (58m 36s):
Wow.

2 (58m 38s):
It's it's time to go home, go back and live your life. And I said, will it come back? And he said, I don't know, but we have to go back and live your life. And, and my life was back in my hands again. And I knew that I had to do something remarkable with it,

0 (58m 54s):
Which I mean, I think for anybody who goes through an experience like that, where you are so close to death, it puts your life into perspective and you, and you came to a conclusion. I think 99% of people would come to it, including myself, which is work. And that part of me, isn't important. It's my family. It's taking advantage of life and living it to its fullest. And you decide that you've got to leave work. You want to leave because for obvious reasons, I mean, I think right, because you, you, you went through this experience.

2 (59m 35s):
I think we'll, I D the chemo had taken my sense of smell. I hadn't told anyone that, and I couldn't smell properly.

0 (59m 42s):
What's your superpower, your sense, your sense of smell.

2 (59m 46s):
It was. And I hadn't told anyone that at all, I was too scared to even admit it to myself. And I was standing in, in the shop on Madison avenue. And I just didn't feel as though I belonged anymore. Right. I was so concerned for everybody involved. I didn't want to do anything wrong with the Lauder corporation and the Lauder's cause they'd saved my life. I didn't want to see one person lose their job because that was their lives. But I knew I couldn't stay as the person I was. So I went to Leonard and I explained to him, and he, they all tried to change my mind and said, please think again, think again.

2 (1h 0m 26s):
And I was site determined guy to, to, to walk away. Yeah. So I flew back to London and as I got nearer to that day of leaving, I knew I'd made the biggest mistake of my life.

0 (1h 0m 37s):
Why?

2 (1h 0m 38s):
Because I started to realize that it wasn't a job. It was my best friend.

0 (1h 0m 44s):
It was your, it was you your identity.

2 (1h 0m 47s):
It was everything. It was about the creativity. And I realized that I would never create fragrance again. And I would never do all the things I loved and, and everybody was running and getting everything ready. And Gary was doing all the forms and, and I wanted to scream and say, please, can we just stop? And I know if I had it would have done, I know Leonard would have made it stop. And I said to him, can I be the last person to turn the lock in the key on that last day? And he said, yes, you can. And I soaped and solved as I put the bottles on the shelf for the last time. And I realized, who on earth was I ever going to be again? Who, what, what had I done?

2 (1h 1m 28s):
What had I done? But I still couldn't smell. And I'd signed a five-year lockout,

0 (1h 1m 33s):
A non-compete

2 (1h 1m 34s):
A non-compete for five years. Yeah. And I suddenly felt this big, heavy noose coming tight, tighter, and tighter around my neck. And then a month into it all being over. I woke up one morning and I could smell and I could smell like I'd never smoked before. And of course that, that's when I started to really suffer from anxiety.

0 (1h 1m 56s):
This is an important point, because I think a lot of people hear stories on our show like yours, right? Where people sell their businesses, whether it's Bobby Brown or Kate spade or Marcy Kilgore. And, you know, they, they might think, well, now she's got a mate. You know, she sold this company. She's financially secure for life and she can go and, you know, travel and do whatever she wants. But people forget that businesses not aren't about money. They're about your identity. They're who you are. They're the things that you, that animate us. Right. It was those late nights in the apartment in Chelsea eating pizzas and making lotions and getting clients.

0 (1h 2m 39s):
And it was all those things that made your life, gave you your life. Meaning up until that point.

2 (1h 2m 45s):
Yeah. Yeah. I'd laughed with the business. I'd cried with it. I built it. I'd see Nate, you know, all the emotions that you have with a human being I'd had with a business. I know that sounds weird, but that's, I was suddenly, I was suddenly walking away from my best friend. It was, didn't have two arms and two legs, but it had a heartbeat and it taught me things. And when I walked away, I couldn't even walk past the shop. I could feel myself getting choked up and I felt resentful. I felt angry. I felt hurt. I, I was what I now know I was going through the five steps of grief. Yeah. I was grieving. But you know, and people listening to this will say, what, come on, Jay, you know, you had enough money in the bank, but all I wanted to do was make a face cream and sell it.

2 (1h 3m 31s):
And I I'd signed five years of shackles. And, and it was the, it was the most miserable five years of my life.

0 (1h 3m 40s):
So how did you, I think you call it your wilderness years or it's been, it's been called that. What did you, how did you navigate those five years? What did you do?

2 (1h 3m 50s):
I went, I helped other people with their businesses. I sat on boards and all I wanted to do was, was to come back. All I wanted to do was

0 (1h 3m 58s):
Create grants and yeah,

2 (1h 4m 1s):
But of course I was living this smiley mosque and crying every single night and just thinking, and I kept, I had my first anxiety attack and I thought I was having a heart attack. And often anxiety is connected with energy. And when your adrenaline starts to come back and I realized that's what was happening to me, my body was starting to tell me, come on, you know, get ready to run again. It's time to do something. And I made a television show actually for the BBC called high street dreams. And I formulated it. And so the idea to the BBC and we made that, and I was, I was standing in a garden with a pair of Willington boots on, and I was filling bottles of chili sauce with this family.

0 (1h 4m 44s):
And you were doing this, this show for aspiring entrepreneurs on the BBC. And one of the aspiring entrepreneurs was a, a family. It was making like a hot sauce, right? Like a chili sauce. That's

2 (1h 4m 55s):
Exactly. I was filling these bottles and I could feel the liquid and screwing. And I just felt this, come on, just try one more time. So I made it, made my mind up that day, standing in that garden that I would try one more time and see if I could do it

0 (1h 5m 11s):
While you were kind of helping them out. You all of a sudden had flashbacks to the excitement of filling bottles up with stuff.

2 (1h 5m 18s):
Yeah. It just took me, just took me back. I think it was this, it was just filling bottles. It was that whole simplicity and simple acts, but it reminded me of who I'd been, who I was and who I really wanted to be. Again,

0 (1h 5m 34s):
Once that five-year period, that certain non-compete period ended, you were free to, to start a new business, but presumably you couldn't use your name. And this is, I mean, this happens with like famous Amos cookies, like Wally Amos, couldn't, he couldn't use his name and, and Bobby Brown can't use her, her name for a business in quite the same way. So presumably you could not use Joe Malone for the next business that you want it to start.

2 (1h 6m 2s):
I couldn't use J Malone. I couldn't, I still can't. I'm able to use it as the person and as my voice, but I'm not able to use it in any other capacity in, in beauty or whatever, but I was allowed to use JAG. So that was, I was, felt like I was kind of halfway there, but I had to make sure that the consumer wasn't confused. So one night at dinner, I was sitting with my son, Josh and Gary, and we were looking at all kinds of names and he'd oversee been listening to this in the background and he just lets him in. He went mum, what? Ain't just call it. Joe loves because you really love fragrance and fragments really loves you. And it was just so profound, you know, out of the bowels of an eight year old or 10 year old of think he was at that time.

2 (1h 6m 46s):
So we, we went back to the lawyers and it went backwards and forwards. And before we did anything, when we showed anyone or anyone saw anything, we took it back to the legal team at Lauder and showed them and said, this is what we want to date.

0 (1h 7m 0s):
Wow. So you launched this new company, a fragrance company called Joe loves in, I guess, 2011. And I mean, obviously you were established, you were known, but I mean, does it still feel, I mean, I don't know. What are you nervous? Were you?

2 (1h 7m 15s):
I was beyond nervous. I felt I was standing on the stage in my underwear because the world had seen me on a global stage and assumed I was still there. Nobody knew I'd left. And when we first set out with Joe loves, we ran straight into doing a pop-up in Selfridges. And we moved in there overnight and four o'clock in the morning, we were there with all the builders and I was watching it and I hated what I saw. I hated it. I just could feel it inside. And I thought, why have you done this? Why have you put yourself in this position, Joe, you idiot.

0 (1h 7m 47s):
What did you hate? What would

2 (1h 7m 49s):
I don't hate it the way it looked,

0 (1h 7m 51s):
You hated the color.

2 (1h 7m 52s):
It was. If you look at some of the images in the beginning, it was all this red on black and it's harsh. And it's, it's almost like a teenager. That's dyed her hair red and comes into dinner, screaming. That was, that was the only way I can describe it. That's what it felt like that I done. The packaging was all over the place. The, the team went. I mean, it was, it was such a mess when I think about it. And I thought you got to open tomorrow morning and you're going to have to face it. And you're going to have to work through this because if you really want to do this, you're going to have to eat a little bit of humble pie. And your you're going to look a bit of a fool for a minute. So we opened the next morning and we just couldn't get traction in this business.

2 (1h 8m 33s):
And it didn't matter what we tried and what we did. We could not, we just couldn't get those sales. And for two years I struggled really?

0 (1h 8m 42s):
Yeah.

2 (1h 8m 43s):
I re so every single day I sat and I regretted building this business because it was bleeding money, number one. And I had no sales number two. Yeah. And nobody knew I was there. It was, it was ludicrous. When I think about why I ran like a sprinted into the, onto that arena, thinking that I had thinking I had the rights to go back in where I'd left. That was, that was the biggest lesson for me. And it got to a point I was coming up to my birthday and Gary comes in one morning and he hands me this little box and he says, happy birthday.

2 (1h 9m 23s):
And I looked and I opened it. It was a key. And I just thought, what's he done? Anyway, we jumped in the car. We drove down and he says, happy birthday, go be a shopkeeper again. Cause you an absolute nightmare. And I opened the door and I said, you have no idea where we are. And he said, yes, I do. And I said, no, no, no, you don't. He said, yes, I do. You've come full circle. And I said, yes, it was the shop where Justin DeBlanc taught me to be a shopkeeper.

0 (1h 9m 51s):
It was a flower shop that you worked at as a young woman.

2 (1h 9m 55s):
It was the delicatessen, the delic. It was the deli. And it was where I fell in love with shopkeeping. I put the key in the door and I couldn't believe, I just couldn't believe that I was back home. We spent a year year doing the shop, creating it. And the day we opened the door, the same that the key was there. As I came, as I pulled up on that first day, it was, it was happening again.

0 (1h 10m 19s):
Wow. So it really took you opening that shop up to get people to know, to know about the brand because it, it, it it's, cause I guess you were doing popups and you were, you were sort of selling it at different, you know, cosmetic stores and, but really the shop was your best advertisement.

2 (1h 10m 38s):
Well, it always is your home, isn't it? You know, if you invite someone for dinner and you sit on the outside pavement and you eat fish and chips, you know it, if you might someone home to your brand, it's going to have four walls. You've got to fuel that you got to feel the warmth of that brand. And it was a huge responsibility because of course, if a pop-up doesn't work, you move on. If you sign that lease, you've got to make it work. So I had that nervousness. I had that fear because I'd had two years of feeling an absolute failure. I think having those four walls. And as I walked through, I said to Gary, we we've got to do it differently. I can't, I don't want to, I didn't want to walk in the same footsteps as I'd done before I didn't, I'd grown up.

2 (1h 11m 20s):
I was a different person. My, my life felt very different. And my creativity was much roar, a much braver than it had been, you know, 25, 30 years previous. And he said, what does that mean? And he looked at, I mean, Gary sometimes looks at me and I can see him thinking, oh, here we go. She's off. And I said, I want to create a brasserie. And he went, no, that's it. That's it. And I said, no, no, no, listen. He said, no, I'm no, it hasn't got a food license. We're not doing a brasserie as a pub next door. And I said, no, I want to create a brasserie for your nose. I could see it all in my head. I knew exactly what I wanted to do. And that's exactly what we did. We created a brasserie for your nose.

0 (1h 11m 58s):
You can go in just to describe how it works. You go in and you get a bunch of different, like things to smell.

2 (1h 12m 5s):
Yes, we, you sit as though you're just about to eat. You have a menu you have, and it's known as a tapestry off your nose and your tray comes out with a, a Tashi gene and your bath cologne though is in the Tashi. And you have chopsticks with cotton walls. So you think we're about to eat dim sum, but in fact, everything is about the sense of smell your body lotions appear from <inaudible> guns. And we paint you with hot paint, brushes all over your body. Everything is about twisting and turning the experience and causing your sense of smell to be the predominant sense. And it still with us today, it's very much part of our storytelling. And when we go around the world, we take a portable Tapper spar with us.

2 (1h 12m 45s):
Some we entertain with, with our fragrance.

0 (1h 12m 48s):
How, how much, I mean, a lot of, a lot of times when you know, you meet P I'm sure this happened to you in Gary, where people would say, how could you work with your partner? How could you work with your, your spouse? I've done a lot of interviews with partners, with married couples who built successful businesses and in some cases divorced and continued to run the business. But it sounds like in your case, like the partnership between you and Gary was really the, kind of the secret of what made this work, that both of you brought different skill sets and you both respected each other's strengths and weaknesses. And that was really what enabled you to be successful.

2 (1h 13m 24s):
We haven't always respected each other's opinions. We've, we've had some really hummed thing actually, where businesses concern though, he and I, I would say 99.9% of the time are always on the same page. We come at it from a very different perspective, but we always meet about point where we agree. I look at him and things that come out of his head and his mouth is so smart and things that I could never possibly do. There's a we're best friends. We trust. If we stood back to back, we know that each other would look after each other, but sometimes it's hard. You know, sometimes I remember in the very beginning, I would talk all weekend about, about work.

2 (1h 14m 4s):
And he would say, okay, you've got five things this weekend. Then once you've done your five things, you have to stop. Well, nine 30 Saturday morning, I'd used up my five things cause I'd already spoken about it. And I used to get so frustrated cause I had to wait until Monday. And then we realized that that just didn't work. But work to us is not a job or business or our career. It is part of our lives. It's been part of our marriage. It's been part of our family. It's part of our relationship. I think we both actually it's like a drug. I think we both love it.

0 (1h 14m 36s):
Yeah, Joe, you had been through the process of starting a business and a successful brand and then selling it and, and watching that brand grow right. All the resources that Estee Lauder had to, to really scale that brand, Joe Malone is at shops all around the world. And it's ubiquitous with, with your brand now, with Joe loves what I mean, do you have those kinds of ambitions? Do you see it as, as a, as a global brand one day? Or are, are you kind of happy with where it, where it is now and, and sort of

2 (1h 15m 12s):
Absolutely. Sorry. As a global brand, I'm passionate about what I do and it's not about just creating fragrance. I had this crazy idea that once in my life, I wanted to completely challenge and change the way the world did something in fragrance. I never didn't know what it would be, but I was determined. I was going to find it. And a couple of years ago it was sitting right by the side of me. And it was in the form of a paintbrush. And I created a fragrance paintbrush where you can paint your body and this little fragrance paintbrush. When I first presented it to my marketing guys at the time, they all looked at me and said, oh, it'll never work. It's such a gimmick.

2 (1h 15m 52s):
And I was so humiliated in that meeting and I was so angry and I thought, I'll show you at work. So I put the prototype together. I went to the factories myself and I created everything within it. Do you know what that paintbrush has been like a golden ticket, because that is the point in brands today. You have to find that part in your imagination. And that part, that, that connects with the consumer and the world that says we are going to do it differently. And that paint brush now is going around. That's the thing that is converting China. That is, that is the one single product because they've never seen it before. And suddenly this younger generation like it's art for your body.

2 (1h 16m 34s):
I can paint my body with fragrance. So I think Joe loves is, is all about this springboard of creativity in an idea, hours meter to go jump with all my crazy imaginative ideas and trust me, there's hundreds of them still there. And I run it this business and I jump and I use her as like a, like a laboratory to say whatever,

0 (1h 16m 57s):
I'm looking at it right now on the internet. And I just to describe it, it's like, it's another way to apply perfume, right? It's a, I guess it's like a sort of a gel formula with the fragrance in it. And you can just paint it on your body. And instead of spraying yourself with perfume and another way to apply perfume and people are super into it,

2 (1h 17m 16s):
They will say, I want to be a scent artist. So they pick it up and Nikos are able to use two or three different layers of painting, different parts of their body to layer it on, or it's the creativity. And it's being able to engage with fragrance in a hole with a whole different perspective.

0 (1h 17m 33s):
Joe, I'm looking at a photograph of you kneeling before prince Philip, when you received your CBE, you are a commander of the British empire, which is obviously an honorarium, but I mean, not just a big deal for, for anyone, but I mean, given your life story, right? Like you grew up in a council flat, like, you know, you had a really difficult childhood. You guys had no money. I mean, you were from a really working class background. You built this super high-end luxury brand called Joe Malone. And then a second one now called Joe loves.

0 (1h 18m 13s):
And just considering like where you came from and how you started. Right. Do you just, sometimes I don't know you and Gary too, right? Like, do you just sometimes sit back and just say, this is not, it's like, this is totally crazy.

2 (1h 18m 26s):
Every day, every day I get up and I think I was meant to be here. I really try. I think as I, when I was younger, I was so impatient to get to the next step. And as I've got older and realized, actually you've got to take time and enjoy them, but when something good happens or something bad happens, just take that time out. Don't be such a hurry to get to the next step. And the next thing, because you miss the moment you miss the, the part that you've learned or the part that you've enjoyed, the part that you've worked for, I took my son to university last year. So you're a little child there as well.

2 (1h 19m 6s):
And I never dreamed, I would see that day, that, that day when I was diagnosed with cancer, I never thought I would see him go to score, let alone, go to university. And, and I cried a lot during those times, but I realized that life is you have to treasure. The moment memories of moments are so parallel. There's Solomon's riches. They're the things that we should be really holding onto in our lives. And whether it be building a business or, you know, transforming a, a school or watching your son go to university or whatever it is, or staying married for 36 years, treasure it, you know what treasure those moments, because they all want maker, son that tenacity and that strength and that resilience is a valued part of, of a human being.

0 (1h 19m 56s):
How, how much w when you think about all of the things that got you to this point, right? And, and I think it's fair to say you've had a pretty successful life. Do you attribute your success to how hard you worked and your, your intelligence, or do you think more of it had to do with just being lucky?

2 (1h 20m 14s):
A little bit of everything? I think, I think a little bit of all of those things, I think hard work, people who work hard, us, some of the most successful I've ever met, I'm afraid. It nothing happens without hard work and determination. And that resilience my intellects, my intelligence, I started out with very little and I wouldn't consider myself intellectual in any way, but I can hold my own in most conversations. And in any conversation, you can learn something from somebody else. And I do believe in a higher power. I believe that I was, I was given a second chance at life to do something remarkable.

2 (1h 20m 55s):
And I'm determined to fulfill that. And, and luck. I've been this team many times in my life. I've been at the right place at the right time and exactly the right moment for that to be coincidence. And I think as I've got to this part of my life, now I'm a little bit more, a little easier on myself. Should I say than I have been? I think all the way through. I'm not. So I must say, yeah, I'm not so hard on myself, but I feel I've earned a lot of money, but it's time now to do something with it. We've learned from it. We can enjoy it, but, but what are we going to do?

0 (1h 21m 31s):
That's Jo Malone. She's the founder of Jo Malone. London. Joe loves by the way, Joe's shop at 42 Elizabeth street recently reopened to the public after being closed down for two years during COVID. And she's actually named a fragrance after the shop. It's called number 42, top notes of green leaves, P and a Mandarin orange. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you want to contact the team, our email address is H I B T id.wondery.com. If you want to follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this. And mine is at guy Ross and on Instagram, we're at how I built this.

0 (1h 22m 11s):
And I am at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by REM team era bluey. He was edited by Sarah Sarason with research help from rainy toll. Our production staff also includes Casey Herman, Liz Metzger, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chun, Josh lash, Sam Paulson, Catherine cipher, Elaine coats, John Isabella, Christmas Eve, and Karla estimates and guy Roz. And you've been listening to how I built this.

0 (1h 23m 2s):
Hey, everyone. So I wanted to make sure you knew of all the ways you can listen to how I built this. The show is always free and available wherever you listen to podcasts, whether it's Amazon music, apple podcasts, or wherever you're listening right now. But if you want to listen to the next episode of how I built this today, one week early, you can do that on Amazon music, or you can listen to it early and add free by subscribing to Wondery plus in apple podcasts or on the Wondery app. So please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded and get your, how I built this merchant gear@wonderyshop.com.

0 (1h 23m 45s):
Another way to support the show is by filling out a survey at wondery.com/survey. And thanks when you are scrolling through social media, how can you tell what's real misinformation can be dangerous, especially when it's related to health. Anything can be posted online without being fact-checked Tonya Zucker brought founder of the trendy high-fiber F factor diet has celebrity followers, including Megan Kelly and supermodel, Olivia Culpo, but allegations of troubling side effects with the diet began to surface and people started to question, is she selling powder or power? Emily Gellis a popular fashion influencer saw these allegations and put the diet on blast to her own large social following.

0 (1h 24m 31s):
She launched a crusade to expose Tanya and the F factor diet. What was once an online feud escalated into the real world resulting in threats, lawsuits, and a whole lot of drama from Wondery comes a new series about wealth, wellness and influence. Listen to fed up on apple podcasts, Amazon music, Spotify, or you can listen early in ad-free by joining Wondery plus in the wonderful.