0 (0s):
Hey everyone. Just a quick note to let you know that we are getting ready for a relaunch of the show in just a few weeks, nothing about this show that you know, and love will change with one major exception. We are going to start to publish two new episodes a week, not just one. So that means our team is super busy, getting everything ready to go. So in the meantime, take a listen to this episode from our archives. It's a great one. Actually, an episode that many of our listeners have named as their favorite. It's the story of Tristan Walker and how he built his personal care business Walker and company enjoy.

2 (44s):
I remember the very first pitch deck, which was a PowerPoint of graduated to keynote, but like we had a PowerPoint of like clip art. Cause I didn't have the things that I remember being so embarrassed. So I had like this 15 slide pitch deck that just sold the hope and the dream. And we pitched 50, 60 VCs and folks were turning this down and it wasn't until they started to push back that I realized, Hmm, they just don't get it.

0 (1m 20s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz. And on the show today, how a lifetime of shaving with products that you're a stated as skin inspired Tristan Walker to build a better shaving and beauty brand and women of color Walker and company. So what are the guiding principles of creativity is that some of the very best ideas come out of sheer frustration products like honesty or cliff bar or Allbirds or Dyson.

0 (2m 2s):
These all came about because their founders couldn't find the beverages or energy bars or shoes or vacuum cleaners that they wanted. So they invented them. But in the case of Tristan Walker, I think it's safe to say that he didn't just start from a place of mild frustration. He actually started from a place of being fed up, even angry because for most of his life, he had felt completely ignored, totally overlooked. Whenever he walked into the shaving aisle of a drugstore, virtually all the big shaving brands were making products that worked well on men with relatively straight hair, but Triston couldn't find a high quality razor that worked on his curly facial hair without leaving razor bumps all over his neck and jawline.

0 (2m 50s):
And he knew that like him, many African-American men were dealing with the exact same problem. So he decided to design bevel, a shaving system with a simple single blade razor that was easy on his face. And he wanted everything about the product to look and feel great, not like the dusty boxes of shading products for African-American men. That always seem to be on the bottom of shelves at the drugstore and his ambition to build a black owned and led consumer brand as big as Johnson and Johnson or Proctor and gamble. But of course, when he first tried to raise money from all those VC firms on sand hill road, in Silicon valley, he got a lot of nos, but eventually he was able to launch his company with the razor, some shaving cream, a bit of oil and a brush.

0 (3m 38s):
And over the past five years, his brand has grown to include more than 30 specialized hair and beauty products for men and women, which are now sold in lots of big retailers across the country. A few weeks ago, Tristan sat down to tell me how he did it in front of a live audience at the Lincoln theater in Washington, DC. This is like Tristan Walker central. I'll take it. So, so let's start, let's start at the beginning. Tell me about, about your childhood. You, you grew up in Queens.

2 (4m 12s):
So describe it is, you know, I had a bit of the rose that grew from concrete story. I grew up in Queens, New York projects, welfare bouts of homelessness, that sort of stuff. Right. And I realized very early, I had one goal in life and I was to get as wealthy as possible as quickly as possible. I realized three ways to do it. The first was to be an actor and an athlete that didn't work. The second was to work on wall street that didn't work. And the last is entrepreneurship. And, and thank goodness. I came to that realization.

0 (4m 47s):
When you were a little boy, your dad died, he was killed. He was killed. And you grew up with an older brother and your mom, what does your mom do for work?

2 (4m 58s):
So my mom worked three jobs, mainly New York city housing authority, administrative assistant. She spent some time working for time Warner cable and she did some retail all at the same time, within seven days. I don't know how she did it. She did it. Thank goodness for her. It was not easy, but she persevered as a result of, I think her perseverance, you had the good fortune to be first graduate college in my family. And she, she really forced that.

0 (5m 33s):
What, what do you remember about like your neighborhood growing up as a kid? It was it, I mean, I don't know. What'd you do? Did you,

2 (5m 40s):
You know, it's funny. I, I didn't do much cause I couldn't do much. Like my father was killed when I was three years old. I don't remember too much about him other than the fact that he was killed when I was three years old, which is a little bit telling to kind of the type of environment that I did grow up in. So, you know, I lived probably the first seven years of my life in Jamaica, Queens, New York, 40 projects. And by the time I turned around seven years old, we moved to flushing Queens to another project kind of development. And it was much of the same. Right. And my mother was like, you're going to be the one you're not going to go through this stuff. She was very disciplined. Stay home, get your studies done. You're not going outside. When I snuck outside, she caught me. I got in a lot of trouble, but you know, that was really kinda my life.

2 (6m 23s):
Right. Get to school, get home. Do you work? Repeat? And you know, that discipline actually kind of got me to where I am now

0 (6m 32s):
With school, easy for you as a kid.

2 (6m 36s):
Yeah. I was a good student because of the discipline that was inspired me. I always excelled. Right. I tended to be, you know, well, at least up until high school anyway, at ordinary or the top of my class, you know, and I kind of slowed down when I say that stuff, because by the time I got to high school, I realized I didn't even know what a verb was. Right. I went through this entire kind of time all the way up until my high school years doing really, really well at the top of my class. Not even knowing what a verb now and that sort of thing was

0 (7m 7s):
As a teenager, you ended up going to this really elite private boarding school Hotchkiss in Connecticut.

2 (7m 19s):
So the way I like to describe Hotchkis is it was the first time I got to see how the other half lived. I went to school literally with Rockerfeller's Fords. Right. And I learned a couple things. First name mattered to being wealthy. Wasn't the same as being rich and the last and probably the most important was I can compete with each and every one of them. While, while, while I didn't know what a verb was, I learned. And, you know, by the end of my four years there, you know, on a roll like that sort of thing, you know, it was an absolutely just wonderful experience for me, but transformative in a little bit different from how I grew up.

0 (8m 6s):
Was it, I mean, was the transition for you when you got there? Cause you were like 14 years

2 (8m 11s):
Old. Yes. I've been living away from home since I was 13, 14 years

0 (8m 14s):
Old. And we're the first few months they're hard for you

2 (8m 17s):
Academically. Yes. We get to the school and I realized I don't even have a computer and you know, all of my other classmates had computers, that sort of thing. And I went to, I believe it was the English professor who was my advisor at the time. And I remember he took me to like this basement where all the use textbooks are. And then there was this old Compaq, like <em></em> computer that we had to like haul out and take it to my room. So academically it was very tough because I wasn't equipped with the tools to compete, but over the years, that kind of accelerated and went away.

0 (8m 51s):
So you finish Hotchkiss, you go to Stony Brook university in New York to study economics. You know, most, most costumes don't necessarily know what they're going to do, but did you have a sense of what you want to pursue there and what you, what you thought you would do at?

2 (9m 5s):
Yeah, I mean, I was always thinking about the after I wanted to get wealthy, you know, I was, I was pretty singular in that hope, very singular in that hope. And you know, over time that's kind of morphed and changed and the things that are important have morphed and changed. But I knew like I was very, very, very focused on how to get there. And wall street was the next greatest option. All this Silicon valley stuff. I had no idea about my world was new England.

0 (9m 29s):
So you were thinking, I'll do this degree and I'll go into finance.

2 (9m 33s):
That was the, I mean, economics is the closest degree we had at Stony Brook to get me to wall street. And in between my first and second year of university, I got an internship and Lehman brothers and their back office halfway through. I said, you know, I want to try some of this front office stuff. So I left that and joined a trading desk at the time, just observing.

0 (9m 57s):
So when you graduate, you went actually went to work for Lehman and then as a trader, right. And then, and, and eventually to JP Morgan. And in that time, at that time period, did you still think this is what I should be doing? Like, this is my sort of path to

2 (10m 15s):
The worst two years of my life. This was 2005. When I joined the company. And as a trader, your job is to make money with other people's money too. At the end of the year, make money for yourself. Like there was just no fulfillment in it. Now I should also say I wasn't really good at it, but even if I were, I realized that there was an emptiness in it that I just couldn't live with. And also the culture. Wasn't one that I wanted to be a part of. And the last thing I'd say in all this, and I observed this and not only a lot of friends that I had, but also a lot of folks who've been around for 20, 30 years in the industry is know, wall street had a good way of locking you in.

2 (11m 2s):
They pay you more money and they pay you more money and they pay you more money. And at some point your opportunity cost gets so high that you don't want to let you're unwilling to leave. Unfortunately. And kind of, unfortunately at the time I got laid off at a time that made me not have to think about

0 (11m 18s):
You were laid off by JP Morgan at the time. This is the middle of financial crisis.

2 (11m 24s):
Well, actually it was right before. So here's the blessing. And this is a true Testament to faith. I got laid off in January of 2008. I was applying to Stanford for business school. I applied there in the fall of that year and fast-forward, I started Stanford September of 2008 crash happens a month later. Wow.

0 (11m 48s):
So you, you get to Stanford and from what I've read, like you didn't really have a sense of what Silicon valley was and what the tech world was or any of that at all. So, so what, what did you like, what was your impression when you got there?

2 (12m 1s):
So at Stanford I got there's 2008. I was 24 years old and very quickly I knew it was where I needed it to be primarily because I saw the other 24 year olds, not only making millions of dollars, but fundamentally changing the world and like, Hmm, how come I had no idea about this place? Seriously? I thought Silicon valley was a place where semiconductors got made. All right, that's it, that's it, this was before kind of, you know, Facebook became what it did. Just Airbnb, Airbnb, Uber, all that stuff. Right. Foursquare.

2 (12m 41s):
And I said, wow, I can participate in this. And I started to have that kind of Hotchkiss moment again. Right? This is something new, but I can do it. Wow.

0 (12m 49s):
You are a student at Stanford. You start to reach out to Foursquare like this. I mean, what, what, what's the story like? What was Foursquare at the time

2 (13m 1s):
Foursquare location-based app at 10,000 users at the time it was getting me to explore. My city is getting me to do things that I didn't want to do is getting me the go to the gym more. Right. I was like, how is this thing actually inspiring me and changing my behavior. And I said, wow, like, I, I want to figure this out. Found the founder's emails on the internet. This is the classic story. I emailed Dennis Crowley, the CEO founder eight times and the eighth time email me back and I'll never forget this. He said verbatim. He said, after all these ideas I share with them, you know what, comma, I just may take you up on some of this period.

2 (13m 45s):
Are you ever in New York question mark? Dan's my wife and I were watching lost. We were bingeing on loss at the time. I remember this very vividly in liver and I looked around. I was like, what should I do? And five minutes later, I said, actually, yes, I was planning on being in New York tomorrow. So I booked my flight that night flew out the following morning.

0 (14m 8s):
You show up at the office and you're like, I'm here. And

2 (14m 11s):
Really what happened? I, it was 36 Cooper square. We were on the fifth floor where they surprised to see you. I opened the door, Dennis was facing the back. He turned around and he looked at me surprised as if like, I wasn't actually going to come. And there's this awkward moment, like, what does he do now? And it's so happened that there were like two empty desks there. He was like, yeah, go over there, go over there. And throughout the day, I mean, he had a meeting, he had a couple meetings. I know when he's done with it, he came over. He's like, all right. So what do you want to do? I was like, I don't know. And you know, I sent him some ideas over email around kind of signing up merchants, that sort of thing.

2 (14m 53s):
Anyone who's familiar with Foursquare, it's very small business focused. And we wanted to get merchants on the platform to start engaging with their customers. And he said, all right, I'll tell you what, sign up 30 merchants by the end of the week and get a job. And he's like, what do you want your title to be? And I was like, ah, business development because it has the word business in it. And I go to business school. So it makes a lot of sense.

0 (15m 17s):
And how many people finally, how many people worked at Foursquare?

2 (15m 20s):
There were two and a half. There was Dennis Nevine. They were co-founders. And then Harry, who was leading engineering, but he wasn't quite full-time yet, but I guess theoretically.

0 (15m 29s):
So he's, he gives you a challenge, sign 30 businesses up at the end of the week and we'll see what we can do and what happened, signed

2 (15m 36s):
Up 300, 400, something like that.

0 (15m 39s):
Wow. So you ended up going to work for Foursquare after you, after you graduated from

2 (15m 48s):
Nope. Is actually is in between my first and second year of business school. So I worked full time at Foursquare during my second year. My school and Foursquare gave me a gift, you know, because I was so early there, I felt as it was as much as my company is everybody it's like, it was a family there. We were doing something completely different. You know, we had folks like Facebook trying to come after us. And that felt, that was the energy. I loved it. And I felt like my work wasn't done. So, you know, Dennis was kind enough to let me work on the west coast. After I graduated, he didn't ask me to come to New York. He was like, yeah, you can stay out west. The company was growing. There's a lot that I had to learn to write.

2 (16m 31s):
And through that process, and not only kind of, kind of growing the business, what does it look like to go from two employees to 150 to raise tens of millions of dollars to build something that uniquely authentic. It was an education that I wouldn't have gotten alone.

0 (16m 49s):
They're like, I think three and a half, almost four years, three years. So you decide that's run its course and I'm going to do the next thing. And it turns out that you either met or you knew Ben Horowitz, the one of the top partners of injuries in new Orleans and he convinced you to become an entrepreneur and residents there. How did that happen? How did you meet?

2 (17m 10s):
Yeah, so when, so Ben Horowitz, he was on the board of Foursquare. So they were Foursquare's largest investors. I had known Ben, not very intimately. It's just kind of as board member. And he knew of the work that I did. So when I told Dennis that I was leaving the company, Dennis reached out to the board, told them that I was leaving. And then Ben reached out to me a day or two later, he said, Tristen, I get it right. I understand you should not be an entrepreneur in residence. Right? And he gave me his reasons why. And he said, but if you're going to be an entrepreneur residence, you should do it with us.

0 (17m 45s):
And what were you going to do? As entrepreneurial residents basically come up with ideas and pitch ideas to them. And in theory, they would fund those ideas.

2 (17m 54s):
And as I think about the job, it's one of the craziest jobs in the world. You get paid to think of ideas all day. And he said, come spend six to nine months with us to figure this out. And I was like, I'm going to spend all nine months to figure this out. Being an entrepreneur in residence. It's interesting. Cause I've never met one. Who's enjoyed it. Huh? That's myself included. But it's spending a lot of time to think about things in an inauthentic way. Right. You know, the lesson that I learned in Ben taught me a lot. He's like Triston. You got to understand that you need to do the thing that you fundamentally believe that you are the best person in the world to do right.

2 (18m 34s):
When you have a unique proposition, giving your story to solve that problem. So again, if you're doing something that's like an authentic, this is hard enough, right? You can't do that. And it took me seven months to realize that I needed to do the thing. And I felt that I was uniquely positioned to do.

0 (18m 50s):
You were basically trying to come up with an idea that you thought they would back.

2 (18m 53s):
Well, I was trying to come up with a good idea and the lesson that I've learned in Ben, I have to thank him for this. He said, Tristan, usually what looks like good ideas or bad ideas. And usually it looks like bad ideas are good ideas. The problem with good ideas is that everybody tries to do them. Right. And as a result of it, there's so many people working on the same things. There's no value to be created. Like Airbnb was a bad idea. Right? Right. Like folks actually like renting out the

0 (19m 22s):
Rooms to strangers, terrible

2 (19m 24s):
Idea. But they've created tens of billions of dollars in value to do it. Right. It's those ideas that actually create the value.

0 (19m 32s):
And were you thinking at that time, tech, tech, tech tech, because you were in Silicon valley, was that where you're headed?

2 (19m 39s):
I was, I was trying to do the thing that I felt was the most ambitious that would make the folks who supported me proud of what I was doing. Right. As opposed to doing the thing that I was uniquely positioned to.

0 (19m 49s):
Let me, let me ask you about it. I mean, you come up with a bunch of different ideas. I think one was like a hair extension mail order idea. I still think

2 (19m 55s):
That's a great idea. You guys should take

0 (19m 58s):
Direct to consumer hair extensions. Right. So I, so at some point you, you come up with with this idea for,

2 (20m 9s):
Sorry, it's a good idea or a bad idea, but yeah, you get it.

0 (20m 16s):
So at some point you come up with this idea for a razor to just describe, first of all, before you told me how you pitched it, how did the idea come to you?

2 (20m 26s):
This is the first idea that came to me actually. And it was the culmination of 15 years of experience. I, when I went to boarding school for high school was in Lakeville, Connecticut. There's no retailer nearby. If you went, you know, if I had to shave, you know, you get the peach fuzz on your face. Right. And I was like, oh, it's the Rite of passage time. And I'll never, I went to, I believe there was like a CVS type store in the area. And you pick up your multi-blade razor with the shave gel because yeah. I didn't have a father at home to teach me how to shave my brother. Didn't shave that sort of thing to get home to the dorm, shaved woke up the following morning, my face completely broken out and raised him up.

2 (21m 9s):
I was like, what is this? I'm never shaving ever. That was the last time I had shaved until I started bevel. So what did I use? I use for 15 years, this thing for folks who are not familiar with it called a depilatory

0 (21m 25s):
Cream, which is like a chemical

2 (21m 28s):
It's gross. So folks who aren't familiar with it, you know, a lot of women are familiar with it. Cause Nair. Yeah. Yeah. I see a lot of black men are too, because that's all we were able to use. Right? So the ability creams as creams thick, you put it on your face. It sits for six to eight minutes and you just wipe it off.

0 (21m 49s):
And the hair is

2 (21m 51s):
Crazy, right? It was a funny, one of the most interesting things is if you actually read the back of the pack, the caution statement says, do not use this two days in a row, right? It's something that's smells. It burns your face. It discolors your skin, but there was no other option. And in January of 2013, I remember being fed up. My wife was fed up. I said, I've had to do this for 15 years. I want to shave. Cause this is terrible. So I wanted to learn how to do it. And look, I'm not thinking about a business idea at all. I just wanted to

0 (22m 29s):
Solve it. You just want to just want to solve a problem. Didn't want to get

2 (22m 31s):
Razor bumps. I did not want to get raised bumps. This is not a good luck.

0 (22m 35s):
And the entire right, the market for razors in the United States had been to three, four blades. Right. That was, that was seen as like the, you know, it was all about

2 (22m 46s):
That's right. But not everybody needs that. You know, I realize that are kind of trying to get the closest shape possible. Cause the issue. And I said, all right, if I can do this and combine it with kind of products to help ameliorate this issue for people who look like me, I know that 80% of people who look like me, men or women have this issue. I know 30% of people who don't look like me have this issue. It's the worst. And I remember walking in to the specialty retail store,

0 (23m 18s):
Art of shaving or craft.

2 (23m 20s):
I did this a couple times in different cities just to test it. I go to the salesperson and I'd say, you know, I've had to deal with this issue related to raising us my entire life. What should I use now? These salespeople are totally incentivized to take me to the on-brand like multi-blade razors, right? With a nice handle, cost, $150 and all that stuff. And none of the stores that they do that they've always taken me to use what they recommend, which are these off-brand single blade. Double-edged safety razors that your grandfather and grandfather, his grandfather used to use. Right. I was like, okay, let me try it, took it home, use it, no razor bumps on my face.

2 (24m 4s):
And that got me to try and understand why that was actually the case. Right? And I'm not going to belabor the point too much, but it turns out that a single blade cuts the hair level with the skin, not beneath, if I have curly hair and I have blades cutting the hair beneath my skin, it grows into your skin gross. And it's one clean cut. So there's no pulling or tugging or anything like that. So this solution has existed for the past hundred years, right? Just no one had the incentive to sell it because there was no more patent protection on it. And that's when I knew I had something and this was around the time when a lot of the e-commerce companies started to pop up, I was listening to their pitches. I understood the types of companies that got funded and the types that didn't.

2 (24m 46s):
And it was just great timing to start something like this. And to go back to the kind of Ben Horowitz thing, who else in the world was uniquely positioned to share that story, to venture capitalists, to raise the money, to do this, to build a health and beauty products company for the majority of the world. I couldn't think of anybody else who was able to do that.

0 (25m 5s):
So when you talked about this idea to friends of yours who had similar issues where they like, this is exactly what I've been waiting for. I need this,

2 (25m 13s):
I didn't have to talk to him. I had to give him a safety razor. They shaved and didn't get razor bumps. The following day. This was like a, a first moment of truth thing that when folks woke up the following day and didn't have to have this issue, that's transformative. My first internship on wall street, you know, you're told you got to shave every day. I remember being mortified. I was on the trading floor. They opened the doors and it was a gentleman got up. I can't curse kickers. He said, take that bleep off your face. And I was like, okay. I can't, because I don't know what to use that story scales.

0 (25m 57s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Tristen used that story and many others to pull together a very convincing pitch and why dozens and dozens of VCs looked him right in the eye and said, no, stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this Support for NPR comes from Hiscox committed to helping businesses protect their dreams since 1901, a business can start with an idea, a desire, a dream. And when you make that dream a reality, you can count on Hiscox to protect it from the risks you can't see coming with customized policies for hundreds of professions Hiscox can protect the business.

0 (26m 45s):
You've worked so hard to build quotes and more information are available@hiscox.com. Hiscox the business insurance experts.

3 (26m 55s):
Bobby was miserable mosque school. It was like making me sick, knowing that I was just wasting my life until he met someone who felt the same way and had the same secret dream to be a fashion designer. We were just looking at each other and like, wow, like you get it. How Bobby hundreds became a Titan of streetwear. Listen on the limits from NPR.

0 (27m 21s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's early 2013 and Tristan Walker has this idea for a new razor designed specifically for black men. And he goes to his current boss, venture capitalists, and Horwitz to ask him what he thinks about it. So when you, when you have this idea, you go to Bandon, w what was his name?

2 (27m 44s):
Well, in fact, men really wanted me to do the hair extensions idea. And at that point, at that point, I knew he was in because he had, he, he understood and insight that folks were unwilling to down the rest of Sandhill road. So by the time I came to him with the shaving idea, then he was really into it because he was like, that's you? Right? Like you've got it. And you have a uniqueness here that can help you accelerate, let us help you in that vision.

0 (28m 14s):
All right. So you've got sort of sign off from Ben and you've got to start to look for money to pursue this idea. And, and just, just to get a sense of where you were, what was the initial idea to just start with a razor or was it to start with a whole kind of ecosystem of products

2 (28m 31s):
Came up with the idea at January. My ninth month was April. So I knew I had to

0 (28m 36s):
Hurry up as an entrepreneur, as an entrepreneur

2 (28m 39s):
In residence. And that's when I was thinking about starting to go out and raise money. So my thought was all right, I had this razor also had kind of set of other products. There is kind of the blades, priming oil, shave cream

0 (28m 51s):
Restoring. Did you create a prototype at that point?

2 (28m 53s):
So it's a great question. Two things here, there's the razor and the design for the razor. Then there's the products that go into the bottle. And then there's like the design for the bottle. Each of which had to kind of coalesce before I actually

0 (29m 6s):
Started pitching some seed money for that. Correct.

2 (29m 9s):
So, you know, it's cart before the horse kind of thing, right. In order to kind of start with, we did you need like $2 million to do it right? But I knew that there are things that I can do to get that $2 million to do it. The first was on the razor design. I actually found some folks who were ex IDEO. Wonderful, brilliant, brilliant folks. My pitch to them and their pitch to me was as follows Triston for this razor, we can do it. We will design six types of razors that you can select from. If you decide, choose one, you just need to pay us $10,000 to do it. But if you don't, then we just get to keep these designs. So I was like, okay, let me have these designs.

2 (29m 52s):
I can put it in my pitch deck, right. And if I raised the money, you could just send us dollars. Then for the kind of oils and creams that go into the bottle, there was a website that actually had a list of all the private label manufacturers in the country. I click on the link. I point my finger out to the screen and I find cosmetic specialty labs in LA, in Oklahoma. I call them up and I say, I'm thinking about starting this concept. I think it's going to be great. I could potentially have the backing of all these kind of VC.

0 (30m 25s):
This is a company that made like lotions and shaving creams and things like

2 (30m 28s):
That. They did it for small companies and some big as well. Right. And she said, great. Like, I can get you these samples for free. Like, let me make you some samples for free. I didn't have to pay for any samples now that never happens. Right? Like never happens. So by the time the end of April comes, I have designs for razor, like a hard, good. I have formulations for the soft goods that I need. And then one of my best buddies, he's one of the best package design nerds on the planet. He helped me with some initial designs for,

0 (30m 59s):
But this was all on paper. You didn't have any physical, like prototypes

2 (31m 3s):
Yet. Correct.

0 (31m 5s):
But that would allow you to make the pitch deck to show

2 (31m 8s):
It could look like kind of the pitch deck. Actually, I remember the very first pitch deck, which was a PowerPoint of graduated to keynote, but like we had a PowerPoint of like clip art. Cause I didn't have the things that I remember being so embarrassed. So I had like this, you know, 15 slide pitch deck that just sold the hope and the dream

0 (31m 28s):
And PR I mean, you, at this point, this is like 2013, I guess. W was this the thing, the first thing since, I don't know, you graduated college that really got you excited that you thought this thing could have.

2 (31m 40s):
It was the first time I realized that I saw something that people like other people didn't, they didn't see now I had some of that for like four square, but it was the first time that something came to me that I actually had a competitive advantage based on my just being right, like 15 years of experience of trying those terrible products. Right. And I knew that I can compete here with kind of some of the best metric capital firms on the planet. Right?

0 (32m 11s):
So at this point, before you even have a prototype, right? What was your sort of value proposition? Because there were products on the market for razor bumps and you could get shaving cream that was designed to ameliorate that issue. But what was the problem with those products and your view?

2 (32m 31s):
Here's my pitch. I would walk people through this story. I always have to go to a retail store at their retail store. You have aisle 15 aisle, 15. If you look up, it says ethnic beauty aisle, the ethnic beauty aisle is always next aisle 14, which is beauty aisle, which never made any sense to me. I have to walk down that aisle in the ethnic beauty aisle, which has never really a cause it's the shelf. And then there are products and packages that are dirty with kind of old folks in it from the seventies with like Jheri curls on it. And th and this packaging has not changed.

2 (33m 12s):
So, so here's, what's, what's really, really interesting. This is exactly what I tell people. I walk them through this whole story and the VCs laugh. And the first slide that I show them are photos of those packaging. They all shut down, right? Because it hasn't changed. I don't Photoshop those things. Now what's the pitch folks of color spend more money in every single health and beauty category than anyone else, folks of color, or especially when you consider black folks, one of them the most culturally influential demographic group on the planet. When we think about folks of color, not only will be the majority of this country in 20, 30 years, we are the majority of the world, right? So if you're a VC, right, why wouldn't you invest in that?

2 (33m 56s):
And it wasn't until they started to push back that I realized, Hmm, they just don't get it. That I have their thoughts. Right. And that's just a Testament to complacency and I can compete when there's complacency,

0 (34m 11s):
Just to understand, I mean, essentially what you were saying was look, there is a, an opportunity here to create really great, beautiful products for a market that just is totally underserved. Like, was that what you wanted?

2 (34m 27s):
It was up into the right. I had the kind of beautiful inspiration and all that stuff. Like I look VC say they want founders that they've worked with in the past that have pedigree and experience with the blue ocean opportunities. Like check, check, check, check, check, and folks are turning this down.

0 (34m 46s):
But I mean, this is what I'm curious about. You're going there. You're showing them the numbers. You're saying this is a, you know, there's a trillion dollars or whatever. However much money there is when it comes to consumers of color in the United States, this is a market where African-American men particularly are spend, women are spending more money than any other group in the country. And VCs were saying, what to you,

2 (35m 12s):
Razor bumps, not a problem. Go figure. Literally I had one. BC was like, oh yeah. Is this like that, that Chris rock movie with good hair? Like

0 (35m 22s):
Literally, no, but I mean, I'm curious, you would sit, he would sit with VCs and presumably most of them were men. Most of them are white men. And people were saying, this is not something I've ever heard of as a problem.

2 (35m 35s):
They just didn't want it to be a problem. I mean, and it, wasn't only kind of the white man. Who's like folks of color too. And we pitched gosh, 50, 60 VCs. It, you know, like Silicon valley, particularly venture capitalists who are investors. Who've never operated before almost have this really interesting kind of worldview that, you know, they're always right. But you also have to realize it's their job to be wrong. 90% of the time. And I had to realize that very, very quickly, maybe it was the case that they just haven't caught up to the concept yet, but they will, you know, we spoke to 60 of them.

2 (36m 18s):
There were another 60 behind that. Like we were going to figure it out. Did you, what'd

0 (36m 21s):
You get irritated during

2 (36m 22s):
Pitch meetings? Oh, all the time. I mean like those Chris rock comments used to piss me off, but I knew like every time they were saying, no, I knew that bad idea was good as hell. Like I

0 (36m 34s):
Knew it because

2 (36m 35s):
Intuition, I just knew if they were turning them down, they're not going to find anybody else that was trying to do this. Like, if, if anybody else, like, if anybody else was qualified to do this, it was me. We didn't have any competition. And still don't, you know, it gets to some point where even if folks wanted to go and pitch this idea, they'd say, well, let's see if Tristan's works first by then. It's too late.

0 (37m 1s):
I'm curious, like for people who have straight hair, right? Most of them, most men who have straight hair don't think about shaving, they shave. And then they go to work and whatever, where you sort of trying to explain to investors like this is a really big issue. This is like something that black men, men of color don't talk about, but is sort of painful.

2 (37m 22s):
I mean, I think there's even bigger. I just, me, my trying to explain to people that people are different, you know, and that wasn't even registering. You know, if you can't even level set there, you know, you're going to have a pretty steep, uphill battle

0 (37m 40s):
When we come back. And just a moment, Tristan Walker finally launched his shaving subscription box and eventually got his products into retail stores and how that led to maybe the most transcendent moment ever experienced by anyone in a target, stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor Edmonds. The Edmund's homepage has car rankings compiled by their review. Editors from their shoppers can pick top ranked vehicles and do a side-by-side comparison by clicking on the compare box, car shopping can be overwhelming.

0 (38m 23s):
Edmunds is here to help visit E D M U N D s.com and click on Edmund's best car rankings to research and compare vehicles Edmonds. We drive it like it is. Hey, welcome back to how I built this guy Roz. So it's 2013 and after eight months of trying to raise money, Triston finally gets a handful of investors to invest in his idea for bevel, a new subscription razor company, primarily for African-American men. He's got about two and a half million dollars, a preliminary design for a razor and some ideas for the shaving products to go with it.

0 (39m 6s):
So you have the seed money. Where do you go next? Where do you get the manufactured? Who do you call?

2 (39m 12s):
So I had to pay him $10,000, the

0 (39m 14s):
Design from 10,000.

2 (39m 16s):
Now I own the racer. And then as far as the soft goods manufacturer and we started manufacturing or actually

0 (39m 23s):
Combating

2 (39m 24s):
Specialty labs. Yeah. We went through for each of the products, four or five different kinds of prototypes until he got to something that we were excited.

0 (39m 30s):
Kristin, how did you know about, I mean, you know, how did you know what ingredients to use Shea butter, cocoa butter? I don't know. Like how did you,

2 (39m 37s):
So a couple of things, number one, you relied on the experts, right? So that's actual scientists, right? That's right. And then my own experience, like I'm a black man who needs to deal with these issues, who knows that there are certain ingredients to help ameliorate these issues for us. So include those things. The Shea butter is the tea tree oil is a salycilic acid. The which like all that stuff, right. Soften skin. And the wonderful thing about like, what we have built is that we've just developed things that solve problems and it's not rocket science. We just package it together in a way that's delightful and works. We haven't kind of traveled around the world to find that ingredient that's like in the earth, right?

2 (40m 19s):
We like put into the bottle, note, these things exist. We've packaged it in a way that is proprietary to the needs of the audience that we serve. And we've continued to do that for the past six years

0 (40m 31s):
For people who are familiar with the blade, just describe what, what it, what it looks like.

2 (40m 35s):
Yeah. So a double-edged safety razor is, you know, think about this kind of single blade that has kind of two different sides. It's very, very sharp, right? So you take the single blade, how's it. Within a safe head. That's why they call it a safety razor. So there's two different plates, one up top one at the bottom. Right. And you squeeze it together, blades in the middle and you touch a handle to it. And now you can shave and

0 (40m 60s):
You shave straight down 30 degree angle.

2 (41m 3s):
That's right. So that actually started the mass market shaving industry back in 19 0 4, 19 0 5 there's this guy was king

0 (41m 11s):
Gillette

2 (41m 12s):
Razors were that's right. That's right. That's what races were. That's what razors still are today. If you find them and use them, but efficacious enough. So attaching a handle to ahead and shaving with it. You know, we know it now, today is just razors. It's just the amount of blades that you bring along with it.

0 (41m 31s):
I read that you were really like interested in like the whole unboxing experience, right? Like when you get an iPhone, it's so beautiful. It's simple. You just pop off the top, you open it up. No instruction book. Yeah. It's seamless. It's clean. What was that sort of your idea of what you wanted that later?

2 (41m 47s):
I wasted a lot of money on packaging. Boy, look, I mean, I felt if we were going to deliver an experience to folks who have not been treated well, we have to wow. Them with that experience, we went through like 10, 12 different prototypes of the amount of suction that like comes up when people lift the top box from the bottom, it matters when folks kind of lifted up and it takes that kind of two and a half seconds lift up and they see this beautiful razor underneath. That's something that they deserve. And those 10 to 12 prototypes had to happen.

0 (42m 28s):
What do you remember when you, when you got the first shipment and you saw this idea in your head,

2 (42m 35s):
The first shipment actually froze on a truck because we, we were doing the manufacturing in December and, you know, fulfillment in Oklahoma. Right. That sort of thing. And a few of the trucks actually had things freeze on it. So before we kind of shipped, we had to do like another batch run in order to

0 (42m 56s):
This was going to be a subscription model from the very beginning

2 (42m 59s):
She's in the beginning. You know, that was the thing that actually got me to get the funding that I needed because a lot of these VCs were subscription, subscription, subscription.

0 (43m 9s):
It was like Harry's and dollar shave club. What were they out in the world at that

2 (43m 13s):
I believe dollar shave clubs in the world at that point, Harry's launched a little bit before we,

0 (43m 19s):
And so there was this sort of sense, you're saying there was a sense among VCs or there was excitement around the subscription model.

2 (43m 25s):
It was the commerce. Like this was like Warby Parker day is the nobos right. Like that sort of thing. So, you know, fortunately we had good timing cause that kind of fell out of favor very quickly. But we started with subscription and the subscription model worked for us because, you know, we wanted to build that habit. Right. You got to keep shaving. And we had this promise. We had this clinically proven solution that would work if you use our product for the first four weeks. So it naturally lended itself to subscription.

0 (43m 52s):
All right. So you've got all of these boxes made and it was, the razor was going to be a system, right. Razor, shaving cream oil, a brush, but you had $2 million. How do you get the word out? You know, marketing, right.

2 (44m 5s):
Yeah. So funny enough, you know, when you build something that works, people talk about it. And that first moment of truth, when you don't wake up with razor bumps on your face, you're going to talk about it even today. Well, over half of our customers come organically,

0 (44m 22s):
A friend is like, you've got to try this razor. Right. Well, I mean, now it like nausea is rapped about it and stuff. So, but

2 (44m 30s):
Before he ask him to do it,

0 (44m 32s):
But before he talked about the fade and the blade, how did you get, I mean, okay, day one, you got to sell the products, you got a website. How do you get people to start buying it?

2 (44m 42s):
So I've, I've been fortunate particularly for my Foursquare days because we did so well and had a whole bunch of publicity, that sort of thing. I was building relationships with journalists

0 (44m 54s):
From way back when, so you had a little bit of a network. Yeah.

2 (44m 57s):
And like the, the thing, you know, Walker companies had a ton of press that we're very, very thankful for. But I was speaking to a gentleman who's written a number of articles about us around like, why is it that we've gotten so much press? And he said, you know what, Kristen, you don't kind of treat journalist transactionally, you know, like you build relationships with them. So by the time you're actually working on things, they want to talk about it. So we launched with a whole bunch of folks that were willing to talk about it. It was a time when we were talking about diversity and technology, right? So not only did I have this new company that had raised money, I had my not-for-profit, that was thriving at the time.

0 (45m 38s):
Non-for-profit we should mention it was a code 2040. It was nonprofit to help train black and Latinex coders. Yeah.

2 (45m 47s):
To get internships in Silicon valley, get them full time off for as mentorship and that sort of thing. And that's continued to thrive.

0 (45m 54s):
So you had some attention from that. We

2 (45m 56s):
Had a ton of attention from that. So it's hold a cohesive store, right. That folks are willing to continue to talk about. And that's the little push that we need. And the rest just came from people using the product

0 (46m 7s):
And we're sales brisk right away. Or was it sort of a slow, slow?

2 (46m 11s):
So, Brian, I mean, we, between the first and second year, third year, I think our kind of growth rates to 300%, first year, 200% the seconds. And then we started to get into this world where we couldn't raise money. So it started to slow down.

0 (46m 26s):
But in, but before that point, I mean, you started to attract more, more money, right? Eventually you raised, I think almost $30 million,

2 (46m 33s):
$39 million. And the story goes, and I tell a lot of entrepreneurs this, I wish I didn't raise a cent of it. Every single problem that I've had at the company was a result of our having raise money because growth,

0 (46m 47s):
They expected

2 (46m 48s):
The thing you got to realize about thinking about raising money, that a lot of people forget is you got to return it.

0 (46m 55s):
And they want to know.

2 (46m 57s):
I mean, here's, I would go and kind of pitch. I wanted to build a company that was around 150 years from now. I mean that VCs have a 10 year horizon that leads to some interesting board conversations, right? Yeah. And we weren't ready for the growth and raising more and more money, particularly in a world where your competitors are raising hundreds of millions of dollars, like $39 million, a lot of money, but not when your competitors are raising hundreds of millions of dollars. Right. VCs, weren't going to fund it. If they didn't see kind of more opportunity and more things, right. Oh, you're just a subscription company, subscriptions not hot. Right.

2 (47m 38s):
I need to see more innovation, more distribution, that sort of thing. So we accelerated kind of, you know, you started with the shave system, then we launched this electric trimmer and then we launched this haircare brand, delivering solutions to this audience. Now my biggest mistake is launching each of those things too quickly. And that got us in this, you know, now you're managing two brands, right? 36 different products, crazy supply chain, you've got to market it, et cetera.

0 (48m 9s):
And how many people were working at Walker and company was 12. And what was your life like? Was it just like nonstop grind, grind, grind?

2 (48m 19s):
It was hard. I mean, we, I was wearing multiple hats, right? I'm the CEO of a company, the chairman of the board of that company, new father, and two year old at the time. So it was challenging. It was a lot of work. You know, being a CEO is the worst job in the world, but the most rewarding one. And I can't think about anything else I'd ever do.

0 (48m 44s):
One of the things that you, that I notice you did, which were really reminds me a lot of like a way that suitcase, a travel company, suitcase company, and glass yay. The makeup company, is it, wasn't just the products that you were selling. You had websites, you had find a barber, you, you had barbers do videos. You had videos of men using the razors and testimony of how these really beautiful videos and kind of men talking about how, you know, this is the thing that I have been waiting for. Yeah. I mean, was the idea also to kind of build a self care sort of lifestyle brands. Yeah.

2 (49m 20s):
Yeah. Six months before we started and started shipping, we actually launched what was called at the time. Bevel code bevel code is this kind of online digital magazine, talking about style and grooming for men of color. Think about this for a second. You know, I'm, I'm 35 years old right now. I still to this day, do not know where to go with the exception of level code as a black man to know what moisturizer to use for my face, GQ, Esquire, all that stuff. It does not exist. And we're serving kind of this consumer by telling these stories, not only what moisturizer do you use for your space, but what it's like to feel like when you wake up with razor bumps in your face.

2 (50m 1s):
So you got an interview that morning, right? Like these are stories that need to be told, need to be scaled and people should hear it because it's real

0 (50m 10s):
You. I think by 2015 did a deal with target where at this point you, it was, you could get the razors, you get the products at target. So it wasn't just mail order. It was just direct to consumer. Why? I mean, was, was that a sort of a shift in the model or?

2 (50m 28s):
Yeah, it's a huge shift. So we started distribution in February, 2016, the way we got there, you know, I'm pretty involved in with all of our customers. I read all of our consumer success tickets. You can rate us from one to 10, how likely you are to recommend the product to friends. And then you could write your review of like the brand in it. So I remember reading it one day, there was one guy and you could see the email of the person. I'm not going to put his name, his first name dot last name@target.com wrote this glowing review. He was a subscriber of ours for a long period of time to customers beneath that first name dot last name@target.com glowing review. He was a customer for even longer.

2 (51m 9s):
So I was like, Hmm, what do I do here? So I go to LinkedIn, I realize like, all right, the first gentleman, he actually was running personal care for target. At the time he was a Stanford GSB graduate and a black man asked. I was like, I'm going to hit you up. Wow.

0 (51m 25s):
And then, so this is just like tote, like just like serendipity,

2 (51m 29s):
Sarah. And then the gentleman that was two beneath him, he ran the shave category at target. Wow. True story. So I didn't know them. And about a month later we met three months later. We were in a store. Wow.

0 (51m 45s):
Yeah. But that was only because you were paying attention to the car, like right.

2 (51m 51s):
If I was not reading those things, we would not be in target right now. And how

0 (51m 55s):
Important did target become for your sales

2 (51m 58s):
Retail now as the majority of our business? Wow. It became really, you think about marketing, it's a billboard for our brand. And I think more important. It was a statement for the movement that we were trying to create. So let me kind of give you a quick story. And this is probably the proudest moment of my entire career so far. My son was two. We started distribution and target February, 2016. So I was like, all right, I'm going to take my son. This is going to be like one of those momentous occasions, right? Like a father takes that and sees the product he's in the cart. We turn into the shave aisle. I get down about a quarter of the aisle. And then all of a sudden I hear my son say, dad, dad.

2 (52m 40s):
Right? So I turned around and I'm on one of the packages I'm on the razor box. You're face is on the, my face, was on the box. And he saw me on the box and I realized two things at the time. First, this was his first time ever in a retail store. Now he's a two year old has no idea about it. But his first experience in retail is not down this like ethnic beauty aisle, right? The fact that he's a black child, black will be black man, who is deserves this experience in his getting it, but even more important, he realized that like, or he will realize that he can also produce, right. So not only is he a great consumer, but can be a great producer for an audience that needs to, that has gone under served for so long.

2 (53m 25s):
So I say, thanks. I thank target for the movement push because that story needs to be scaled and it wouldn't have happened otherwise. And it's getting scaled as we see.

0 (53m 41s):
So target essentially takes a product from just being a direct to consumer or a product that would have been in the quote unquote, ethnic aisle. And it's

2 (53m 49s):
In, they made a bet and they made the right bet. So,

0 (53m 56s):
All right, so you guys are steadily growing. You've got this growing product line, you you're starting to gain momentum. Things are exciting. And you sell the company in 2000 and in 2018 Proctor and gamble buys the company out for an undisclosed amount of money. Now my read of this, I think a lot of people hear that and think, okay, that's your exit and you walk away and you're, you're swimming in cash and goodbye. And, but that's actually not what it was. Why, why did you sell it to Proctor and gamble when you were gaining momentum?

2 (54m 35s):
Yeah. 2018 was a crazy year. Couldn't raise money.

0 (54m 41s):
You could not raise money, not raise money because they just didn't believe in, in the,

2 (54m 47s):
I think, you know, you start to get into a weird vicious cycle when you're raising money. You know, if there's one investor who's unwilling to kind of give you the money, other investors aren't willing to do it, then if you're not raising the money, you can't kind of spend as much on innovation and marketing anymore, which makes it harder to raise. Like you get into this like really weird cycle. As a result of that. Also in 2018, we had to lose some really wonderful folks right in the layoff like it, because we couldn't a company needed to thrive. And this is all happening as like revenues are still kind of like growing. It's like this weird thing. Anyway. And at the beginning of the year, we started to get a ton of interest from all the CPG,

0 (55m 29s):
The big companies, the Unilevers and Johnson, Johnson, whoever they were, I can't say,

2 (55m 34s):
But a lot of the big companies and you realize, you know, if you're starting to have these chats, you better be serious about it. Cause it's going to take a lot of time away, right? So we came to the conclusion, all right, we're in this world, we can't raise money. We have this 150 year vision. And we want to serve this audience, continue to kind of do a weekend. But in a way that's kind of Uber competitive in September, August, September of last year, Proctor and gamble came knocking on the door and we realized very quickly our values aligned Procter and gamble reaches 5 billion people. Every single day, 5 billion people around the world use their products. Every single day, the majority of whom have people of color, right?

2 (56m 15s):
They came to us and said, Tristen, we believe in what you're doing. The way you touch these consumers, the way you speak to them is unique. It's authentic. We still want you to be an independent company. We will not touch you, but get to leverage our access to 5 billion people, billions of dollars of research and development to do what you do, right? And you know, fast forward a few months later, we closed the deal. It only makes me now think about the things that I have to do every day. I no longer have to worry about going out and raising money, right. Being distracted by that we

0 (56m 46s):
Can invest back into the company, correct.

2 (56m 49s):
I mean, Proctor and gamble has been doing this for 180 years. Right? The thing that like is really, really important for me is that we are set up in a position to maximize our ability to serve a Proctor and gamble, set us up to do that. And that's really all that I care about.

0 (57m 5s):
I'm interested because in the beginning of our conversation, you talked about your goal in life was to become wealthy. It sounds like that was changing because you could have kept the company and grown it and maybe become a billionaire or whatever. But it sounds like that that ceased to be your that's right? It didn't, it wasn't about being wealthy.

2 (57m 28s):
Yeah, no, I mean, I I'm, that changed very quickly when I had my first son, I have two sons now and my kind of definition of ambition changed that moment when I took my son to target. And he said, dad made me think about the world in a different way. And kind of the goal that I have now, you know, I reflected back on this when I was 20 years old. And I think right when I was 30, like, what did I want? Right. You know, the house, right? The wonderful wife, the children. I don't need anything else anymore. Right. This idea of like more money won't get me any where like the thing that I care most about is being virtuous, human, a virtuous person so that my sons know how to live this world virtuously.

2 (58m 11s):
Right. That matters. <em></em>

0 (58m 18s):
When

2 (58m 18s):
You, oh, and one other thing I should say, just so you folks know, you talked about this idea of not really being in an exit, what the movement means. Proctor and gamble has been around for 180 years. And I'm the first black CEO in the company's history, the amount of impact and like what we can do. And the investment in that is very, very important.

0 (58m 40s):
When you were acquired by Proctor and gamble, you also told them, by the way, I'm moving this company from Silicon valley and I want to run it in Atlanta, Georgia, which is where you are now based. Yeah. So tell me the story. Why?

2 (58m 55s):
Yeah. Atlanta, I think is the most important city in the country right now. It has one of the fastest growing economies in the country. You think about diversity, particularly upward mobility of black folks in the country. I'm raising two black boys in this country and kind of their ability to see upwardly mobile black folks matters to me and my son. We lived in Palo Alto for some time. He had wonderful education, right with no diversity. And that really started to impact me. Walker and company needs to be in Atlanta. Most of our customers are there.

2 (59m 35s):
Our highest revenues are there. Culture happens there. It is the city. And they've embraced us with wonderful open arms and Procter and gamble has been incredibly supportive of our moving their,

0 (59m 49s):
Which is what we can do a whole conversation about black tech leaders in Atlanta and entrepreneurs. How, what is your vision? How put this into context? How, how big do you want this thing to be? How, what do you want Walker and company to be in 10 years from now, 20 years from now?

2 (1h 0m 9s):
Yeah, when we started this chat, we talked a little bit about Hotchkiss, Rockefellers and Fords. And again, like I saw that there was purpose in name, right. You know, Procter gamble, you know, a lot of people ask, well, why did you put your name on it? You're, that's kind of selfish. And I think I did it because there's an accountability there. Right? And I want that accountability to this Walker name to mean something to mean something for an audience that deserves to be served as first-class citizens. So, you know, what's my goal in the next 10 to 20 years.

2 (1h 0m 51s):
And to be put in the position where I can ask that question of myself again for the company, right? This is a company that needs to be around 150 years from now. I want this to outlive me and I will be around for as long as that takes

0 (1h 1m 6s):
In 150 years for people to say, Unilever, Proctor and gamble, Johnson, Johnson, Walker, and company.

2 (1h 1m 14s):
I want people to say Proctor and gamble, Walker and company <em></em>

0 (1h 1m 23s):
Tristan. When you reflect on your journey, how much of, of all of this, do you attribute to your intelligence and your hard work and how much do you think it was? Just luck.

2 (1h 1m 35s):
It's faith. I I've learned 2018 was a trying year. I don't know if I told you this. We, it, it was the first time that I realized that good seasons and bad seasons. And, and you know, we, by the time I moved to Atlanta, I had my last kind of session with like a therapist I was working with. I started with her in June of last year. She said, Tristen, man, you've come a long way. When we started you, weren't thinking about selling the company, you weren't moving to Atlanta, you weren't having a kid.

2 (1h 2m 21s):
Right. You didn't do kind of like the layoffs you had to go through at the time. Like all this stuff happened all at the same time. And the only thing that got me through it was knowing that it had a faith that was strong enough to get me to the end of that season. And now I'm in this like wonderful season of like immense bouncy, right? Like Proctor and gamble has afforded our ability to really revel in that, but also know that season's going to end, which is fine. But I know now that like my faith will get me to the next one and the next one. And the next one, do you feel lucky? I feel fortunate and blessed and thankful.

0 (1h 3m 2s):
Hello, that Tristan Walker, founder of Walker and company. Thank you. I spoke with Tristan Walker at the Lincoln theater in Washington, DC. And by the way, if you have a minute, you should really check out some of the bevel videos. They feature tutorials, tips, and men talking about their own hair care experiences are incredibly powerful and they include guys like Ryan, Leslie, big daddy Kane, and the roots MC black thought, Hey, thanks so much for listening to this live episode of how I built this. Our show was produced this week by JC Howard with music composed by Raptiva Arab Louis. Thanks so much to our live events team.

0 (1h 3m 42s):
Jessica Goldstein, Ellie Prescott, Ellen Jorgensen, and Andy . Thanks also to Neva grant, Jeff Rogers, Casey Herman, Julia Carney, Alex Chung, Liz Metzger, Carrie Thompson, and Elaine coats. Our intern is Margaret Serena I'm guy Ross. And you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.