0 (0s):
Hey, everyone just wanted to let you know that our team is working super hard on a whole new lineup of fresh episodes for 2022, which will be ready for your ears starting next week. But in the meantime, we're going to run another one of our favorites from the archives. And as you will hear, when I did this interview with Sarah floor, back in 2020, we had no idea that a pandemic was about to hit and that the sudden shift to remote work with threatened the entire premise of her business. So be sure to listen through to the end, because I will have a little update on how Sarah and the company are adjusting to a very different world.

2 (43s):
We still continue to do trunk shows. We had revenue goals for the month. And so if we weren't meeting our revenue goals, then we would set up a trunk show stat, right? But online, it was just a totally different story. We could not sell our dresses.

0 (57s):
I have to assume your cash reserves or getting close to running out.

2 (1m 1s):
Not only do we run out, it actually went into the negatives, our bank account, I think at one point said like negative 2000 or something. And I didn't know, you could draw down beyond zero. So that was a wake up call

0 (1m 18s):
Robin PR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Raz. And on the show today, how a relentless morning routine inspired Sarah flora to build a simpler wardrobe for women, a multimillion dollar brand called mm, the floor Back in 2004 and an American psychologist named Barry Schwartz published a book called the paradox of choice, varies argument. And we've talked about it before on the show is pretty straightforward.

0 (1m 60s):
He concluded that having lots and lots of choices has actually made us more anxious and less happy. I mean, think about it. Do you ever get anxious at Chipola or in and out burger? I'm guessing you do n't because they have very few choices, burger, cheeseburger, double cheeseburger, taco burrito, bowl, case idea. You get my point, right? Having fewer choices actually decreases anxiety. Now imagine waking up every morning and agonizing over what to wear. You go to your closet and you either hate everything in it, or you can't decide what would look good. And I suspect this is not a thought experiment for many of you. In fact, this was how Sarah Fluor started her day every morning, as she went off to her corporate job at a firm in New York and Sarah wasn't alone, the research is pretty clear on average women spend a lot more time getting ready in the morning than men.

0 (2m 55s):
So Sarah decided to try and tackle this problem by tackling the, essentially by coming up with a line of clothing that was simple and elegant without too many options, that would speed up the morning routine clothes that were well-made looked great and professional at a more reasonable price. But like so many of the founders I've talked to Sarah have this ambitious plan and not the slightest idea initially of how she was going to carry it out. For starters, she knew nothing about the fashion industry. She had no idea how to make a dress or a pair of slacks. She just knew what she liked, but since she launched M floor, it's grown into a business closing in on a hundred million dollars in annual sales.

0 (3m 40s):
And a lot of the company's designs are inspired by Sarah's childhood in Asia. Her dad was an American diplomat. And for most of Sarah's childhood, the family lived in Japan where her mother was from. And Sarah grew up speaking, both English and Japanese.

2 (3m 58s):
The term that people use in Japan to describe biracial kids is half. I guess we say that to half Japanese, half American, but my parents always said, you're not half your double. You're both Japanese and you're, you're also American. And so I think they were really insistent on that fact, but I think on a day-to-day basis, like I remember when I was in Tokyo, I really didn't want to use my last name LaFleur, you know, in Japan, your last name really signifies whether you are Japanese or not so much so that Korean, Japanese people or Chinese, Japanese people, they will change their last name to signify that they are truly Japanese. And so, you know, I, I kind of hid my American last name. And then I would say simultaneously, when I came to the U S I had the opposite experience, especially around college, I went to a school that was incredibly preppy and that prep culture I had never seen before in Japan.

0 (4m 45s):
Hmm. Tell me about, about your mom. Did she, did she work?

2 (4m 49s):
Yeah, she did. And I mean, really a huge inspiration. I mean, I would say the reason I started my business in many ways goes back to my mom. She is Japanese raised in Japan and you know, very, very unusual person for someone of her generation. She worked throughout her life, continues to work today. She loves her job. She runs a business, selling travel jewelry out of Tokyo, which she started because I think in many ways it's tough being a Diplomat's wife. You have to move every three to four years. And I think the common assumption is that the wife usually gives up her career so that she can be the Diplomat's wife, host, receptions, et cetera. But she couldn't, she always says, I can't wait for Monday, which, you know, your kids are like, what, excuse me, how about us on the weekends?

2 (5m 36s):
But she just, she loved going to work. And I think that was a real inspiration for me and my sister. You know, we never assumed that we would not get jobs. That was the only thing we assumed.

0 (5m 48s):
So I mean, looking at your mom as, as this kind of inspiration for how to be an entrepreneur, I mean, I can't imagine as a kid thought I'm going to be an entrepreneur or did you, I mean, oh God. Yeah,

2 (6m 1s):
No, not at all. I mean, she didn't hide how hard it was. I'm trying to start the business with her friends, having her friends leave the business, all of a sudden, out of nowhere, financial struggles, just hard personal conversations that she was having with her business partners. And I remember as a kid, I would come down in the middle of the night to grab a glass of water. And I would see my mom sitting in the armchair with a light above her head, sipping whiskey on the rocks. And I just remember thinking, wow, it is hard.

0 (6m 36s):
So when it came time for you to go to college, you went to Harvard. I mean, it must have been a pretty good student.

2 (6m 45s):
No, I think I never fancy myself to be this super smart person. I knew I was a really hard worker. And my mom always used to say, you know, this is a Japanese , which means like, you're the kid who tries hard. And so th my mom meant that in an encouraging way, but I never, in my mind thought like, well, you know, I'm going to be the smartest person in the room. I've actually, I've probably never thought that in my life, I just knew that whatever I wanted to do, it would have to be through sheer willpower. Sheer determination. Yeah.

0 (7m 16s):
I mean, when you, when you graduated, what did you think you were going to do with your life? Did you think, okay, I'll get a job and go work somewhere and figure it out.

2 (7m 26s):
I should take a step back and say like, basically from the time I was in high school, I wanted to become a refugee camp officer. I wanted to be a logistics officer and I started researching refugee issues, got really, really passionate about it. And then I thought, gosh, that's what I want to go do. And so the summer between my junior and senior year, I had this opportunity to go volunteer at a refugee camp in Sambia wait, you

0 (7m 50s):
Did this, you did this while you were still a student. Yeah.

2 (7m 53s):
Yeah. You know, I think if I can point to one life-changing experience that I've had, that would definitely, that would be the one. I mean, this refugee camp was, I think like 10 hours from Lusaka, which is the capital of Zambia. So we would drive to the small town. I was two hours away and I would buy random pieces of furniture layer. And then we would paint this building that we fixed. I mean, it was, it was basic stuff. It was, it was basic stuff. But I think I, I also, I think simultaneously I realized that the powerlessness of it, of, of myself really being in that space, I would have people come up to me just as I was, you know, walking back to the dorm where we were staying and he would say, I would, I have aids.

2 (8m 33s):
My, my wife has died. I have one kid who's dying. Is there any way you could help me? I, this, you know, and this would have just happened on a daily, if not hourly basis. And it just fundamentally changes the way you see life. And I went with this nonprofit organization and one day the leader asked me, okay, so we are we're short on money. And so we're to have to make a trade-off, we can either continue to buy lunch or we can continue to spend on fuel. And I was looking at him being like, wait, we have to choose between lunch and fuel. What kind of a choice is that? Like, how are we supposed to work like that? And then I came back on campus senior year.

2 (9m 14s):
I had all these friends who were coming back from their investment banking internships with $5,000, $10,000 signing bonuses. And I just couldn't believe the, like, I, you know, that was more than the money I had raised all summer. And it sparked some sort of curiosity, I think for me, and then a mentor that I had, who I'd been with at the camp at the time, she was someone who had worked in investment banking. And she said to me, you know, Sarah, it's, it's never a bad idea to go learn how to work with the big boys. Kind of hate that expression, big boys. Yeah. But, but I knew what you meant and, and the money, I just couldn't believe that you could sign a piece of paper and you could have $5,000 in your checking account.

2 (9m 56s):
Yeah.

0 (9m 57s):
And I guess you sort of got drawn into that because after college you went into, into consulting, like you went to work at, at, at bane and what'd you do there?

2 (10m 7s):
I was what was called an associate consultant. And you are working on a case, which I few are at a company like Bain. It's usually for a fortune 500 company, and you are trying to solve a problem that the company presents to you, which might range from, you know, anything from we're trying to enter a new market. How should we do that too? We have to cut costs. How should we do it?

0 (10m 30s):
Yeah. I mean, a lot of the, you know, a significant percentage of people who've been on the show, I'd say more than 10% worked in consulting for a couple of years early in their careers where you you're basically paid to learn everything about a business in order to give them advice for how to be more efficient or to, to run a better operation. And, and then oftentimes these, you know, people who were in consulting are sitting around saying, wait a minute, I think I could do that better. They go on and they start a business, but it is actually really useful. I mean, it's super helpful in kind of training you in and giving you expertise in an industry that you otherwise would have know nothing about.

2 (11m 10s):
It's so true. You know, I, I mean, I didn't know how to do really basic things. Like, I didn't know how to write a business email. I didn't know how to do PowerPoint and all that. That's like, that's a life skill, but they whipped me into shape. So it really, I think set a certain standard for me that I knew I had to meet if I wanted to be taken seriously.

0 (11m 31s):
So you, I guess you stayed at Bain for about three years, which is, I think the, sort of the average length of time, unless, you know, for people who decide that they want to make a career out of it, and you've got this opportunity to go to work in South Africa.

2 (11m 46s):
Yes. I worked for a nonprofit called TechnoServe. So that was started by a bunch of former McKinsey partners. And the idea was that South Africa had a really, really interesting challenge. Having gone through a partite, you have this dual economy, you have the white economy and essentially the black economy and the two operate incredibly differently. And the question was, how can we get the, the black south African farmers to plug into this incredibly successful supermarket economy? That was, that was what I was working on. And so I think that was the moment where I discovered nonprofit wasn't for me, it wasn't the mission of the work. The mission of the work is so important, but my personality was wholly on suited for it.

2 (12m 30s):
Yeah. I think what worked me was the, the amount of delicacy and diplomacy that's really needed to push projects through in the nonprofit sector. It's a really admirable skill and you need to have it to be successful in that world. And it was not something that I naturally had.

0 (12m 49s):
Yeah. I mean, it's, it's interesting cause you are the child of a diplomat and like had had aspirations to work in, in refugee camps, but the combination of, of where you were in life and your sort of wanting to move quickly, which just wasn't the right fit at that at the time for that job, you 2011, you come back to the United States and you go to New York and get a job at a private equity firm.

2 (13m 14s):
Yes. Yeah. So you can see how I think volume my

0 (13m 16s):
Career. And you're still in your twenties at this point. And private equity is intense and you're looking for companies to invest in and it must've been exciting and you get to New York. And what was the like,

2 (13m 29s):
Well, I will start by saying it was, it was less, might be weird after saying that my dream was to work in nonprofit to say, this was my other dream job, but it really was. I thought what they were doing was fascinating. And when I got the job, I took it and I started gosh, January of 2013. And I thought this was going to be my dream job.

0 (13m 50s):
So this is January

2 (13m 51s):
Of 20, 20, I'm sorry, January, 2011.

0 (13m 54s):
All right. So January, 2011, you get to New York and you were just there for four months, which seems, seems like something happened. And it just seems unusual. What happened? Why, why were you there for such a short time? Why did you leave?

2 (14m 8s):
You know, am I loved the job? But the short of it was that it was a terrible cultural fit for me. I was a one of two female investment professionals, I think out of dozens, if not hundreds, the company culture was hyper-masculine aggressive swaggering, which all looks very cool on TV. And I'm, I'm sure there was a part of me that idolized it too. But the truth is, it was terrible for me. I was, I think I professionally had performed just fine, but internally, I mean, I, I started hyperventilating at work. I developed a weird tick. It was just very clear. I think from week one, I was like, oh, I made a mistake. What was

0 (14m 47s):
I'm breaking point? Because four months is, you know, it's a short time and there have been something that happened that you, you just said, I can't come back here anymore.

2 (14m 57s):
That's the breaking point with me, just like a crying uncontrollably and calling my friend, being like, oh, I don't want to go to work tomorrow. I just, I generally felt like a loser. I mean, here I was, I spent three years at Bain and I moved to South Africa thinking that that's gonna, that's going to be my thing. And then, you know, after a year I decided, okay, it's not for me. So let me, let me give this thing a try. And I'm, I'm there for four months. Like the narrative I had written for myself was that I was a loser. And so it was, it was really, it was just a devastating time for me.

0 (15m 29s):
When you told them you were leaving, where were they shocked?

2 (15m 33s):
My boss was surprised. I think private equity is filled with a bunch of people who are incredibly determined and want to climb the ladder. And here I was saying like, I've been here four months and I'm out. And I remember the first thing he said to me was don't you want to become vice-president here? And I was like, that's honestly the last thing I want to do. And so you, you start to have real moments of doubt about who you are as a person. And yeah, up until that point, you're always like Sarah, who goes to college, you know, Sarah who works at bay and Sarah who blocked so much of my personal identity was tied up in the job that I had. And so to go from Sarah who works in private equity, who flies on private jets to Paris, to Sarah who doesn't have a job and is worried about how she's gonna pay her Cobra payment next month, that was, that was a sucker.

0 (16m 22s):
So at this point you're like 27, 28 maybe.

2 (16m 27s):
And

0 (16m 28s):
You would rather leave without a plan than to stay.

2 (16m 32s):
And I would say wood is a, that's a strong word. Like I felt like I had no choice, but to leave without a plan I just needed to get out. So I still remember that feeling when I took the Metro north on my last day, back into the city, you can see out in front the rail way in front of you. And I just remember thinking, oh my gosh, freedom, I'm free again. And so, yeah, I left without a plan. I like cried for a month. It started seeing my psychiatrist about a few months into a couple of months into that job because I was, you know, I was a nervous wreck. And so I, you know, I was spending a lot of time actually in her office. I think it was probably going like two, maybe sometimes even three times a week just to feel normal again.

2 (17m 17s):
And that was around the time I had always had this idea for starting a clothing company for working women. Wait, you, you

0 (17m 26s):
Always had this idea or

2 (17m 28s):
I should say always as in like when I, when I was working in management consultant, because I could never find good clothes. And so I think, I think a lot of women can relate to that. So, so I had always had that idea, I guess, since working at Bain and since needing those clothes myself, but just this

0 (17m 42s):
Yeah. Idea. Like we all have ideas, right? Like, right. Like somebody needs to make a better pickle or I should do a pickles, but whatever it is, we all have these things. And this was your thing. It was like, but it wasn't really a serious, but like you weren't sitting down at night and weekends writing a business plan for a clothing company.

2 (18m 0s):
No, I mean, it was just like, well, I have to fashion. Like I'm already even interested in fashion. I just, I was like, I, but however, I am a consumer of clothes. I have to wear clothes every day. I care about looking good and gaining the respect of my peers and my clients. So I'm going to put effort into it, but God, it is so hard.

0 (18m 20s):
Yeah. But so this is like the spring of 2011, you quit your job. And now you've got time, which I sort of like one, if we're like watching one movie on this, you've got time. And then you get, you know, you're excited and you think now I can start this business, but there's another movie which is, you're going to see therapists. I have to assume that you were experiencing some depression from, you know, leaving that job. That can be a hard time to get motivated, to feel like, right. Did you just take some time to just kind of be sad and depressed or, or were you thinking I'm going to jump into this next idea?

2 (18m 59s):
I remember being terribly sad and depressed and unwell. And I also remember thinking I need to get moving or else I'm going to get stuck. And so I only remember this because I remember the dates that I signed certain contracts. I signed for a, we work office starting may one back when we work with still very small, I think they had like two buildings in New York. And then I officially registered as a LLC, June one, I'm in Delaware. So I just, I have records of those contracts, which makes me think like, okay, there was a part of me that kept, kept pushing myself.

2 (19m 39s):
Yes. But then I also remember going on a run and stopping in the middle of the run because I had to like cry for 30 minutes. And I think that was mid-July right. So it was, it was kind of a, it was a parallel process. It wasn't like, okay, now I'm done being sad and I'm going to go start my company. It was, it was, I was working through both things at the same time.

0 (19m 58s):
So as you started to, as a kind of gears in your head started to turn more and more about this idea of professional clothing for women. Did you have a sort of a solid vision of what that would be, or was it still kind of abstract? And in the spring of 2011,

2 (20m 14s):
You know, surprisingly, my vision for the product was very clear. My mom, before she started her jewelry business had worked in high-end fashion. And so I think through her, I got to see and touch a lot of these beautiful pieces of high-end clothing that she would bring home. Not because she bought them, but, you know, as samples or as gifts. And I think she dressed also in that way, incredibly tailored and polished. And I think my big question when I was starting this business was why aren't there clothes like this for regular working women? You know, the clothes that I was shopping for at the time, it was always ill-fitting. It would rip a lot easily.

2 (20m 54s):
I would always have to get it tailored. It, it just, it would wrinkle easily. I mean, there were so many things that were wrong with it and I was spending so much money trying to dress professionally for work. So I, I knew exactly the kind of clothing that I wanted to create, which is really like, I wanted to sell dresses that would sell for $2,000 for a fraction of the price. And I wanted to work with a luxury designer because I wanted my customers. I wanted regular working women to wear luxury, quality clothing.

0 (21m 20s):
So you, so you register an LLC. And I mean, what, like if I said to somebody, all right, let's go start a clothing company. Like I would have no idea what to do. Okay. I registered the LLC and then, and then what, first of all, you need money, right? So how much money did you have at the time to start this thing

2 (21m 42s):
I had about $35,000 saved up, which is not very little that, you know, in the context of starting a business, it does not get you very far. Right?

0 (21m 49s):
Well, you had saved this money over the course of your time at Bain and this

2 (21m 53s):
My entire life yet. It was like the piggy bank that I had kept.

0 (21m 57s):
Yeah. And what, like what's $35,000 going to gonna do, I mean, it's going to last,

2 (22m 5s):
It doesn't, it doesn't go very far, which was the short story. My parents also want me 35,000 Saudi Saturday,

0 (22m 11s):
70,000. Yeah. So

2 (22m 12s):
I started with 70,000

0 (22m 14s):
And by the way, the idea was to see how far you could go and then eventually fundraise. Or did you think I'm going to go for fundraising right away? Again,

2 (22m 24s):
It was. I mean, I didn't, I couldn't even think about fundraising. Like I knew through the great, fine, you know, the Banabos founders where we park our founders, both worked at Bain. And so I think, I mean, in some ways they served as great role models. You, you, you kind of saw from afar that maybe it was possible to fundraise. And so I think in those initial days, it really, it wasn't like, this is the business plan. Let's go raise some money. Let's go start this business. It was like, does anyone know anything about making clothes? Cause if you do, I'd like to talk to,

0 (22m 54s):
Yeah. I mean, when, you know, we've had conversations with founders who at this point, the first thing they do is start to reach out to anybody who will talk to them. They, you know, they'll send like cold emails and cold call people for advice. And is that, is that who you, who you are like, is that your personality? Is that what you did?

2 (23m 13s):
I would say it was more organic again. I didn't know anybody who worked in fashion. So I remembered that there was a woman who was a couple of years ahead of me at college. She had gone to <em></em> to study interior design and I think textiles and interior design. And I was like, well, that's, that's one step closer to fashion. So I reached out to her and I was like, Hey, do you know anybody who works in fashion? And she was like, actually I do know one person from <em></em> who went into fashion. So let me put you in touch with her. So she was the one fashion designer that I knew. And she me in touch with her five head hunters in fashion. Most of whom had no time for me. You know, they were like, what Bain? Like never heard of it.

2 (23m 53s):
Don't care. Like, please come back when you're serious, I've got Calvin Klein on the other line. But one of those five had hunters decided to take a chance on me. He said, let me see if I can help you out, help you out with what recruiting recruiting.

0 (24m 8s):
Oh, so this headhunter, so he said, let me see if I can help you find somebody to join you as

2 (24m 13s):
A, as a co-founder

0 (24m 14s):
Because you could not, you felt like you couldn't do this by yourself. You didn't have the understanding or the knowledge of the industry.

2 (24m 20s):
Yeah, that's right. And I think it's not only that I couldn't do it. I didn't want to do it. You know, I wanted to design the most beautiful dresses in the world and I have not trained as a designer. Yeah. And so it was really important to me that I had a high-end passionate designer. I had other designers who said, you know, why don't you just, you can do it yourself. Like you can just copy these designs, you know, add a sleeve, you know, add whatever and sell it. And I was like, Nope, Nope. That's that is not what I want to do. I don't, I don't want to create more of what is already out there. I want to fundamentally actually create something different.

0 (24m 53s):
So there's this guy, he's a head hunter and he agrees to kind of help you out. And he identifies somebody who's a fashion designer, you know, who you should meet. Her name is <em></em> Nakamura. Who was she? What was she doing at the time?

2 (25m 8s):
At the time, I think had just left Zac Posen. She was their head designer. She was known in the fashion industry. And you know, she, we were just in totally different worlds. I think that was actually my other kind of surprising moment. You know, I thought I understood when New York was about, but it was one of those moments where I was like, wow, I literally don't know anybody in the fashion world. And yet like the capital of fashion is New York city. The garment district is in New York city and in our circles did not overlap at all. So,

0 (25m 35s):
So you meet Miyako and what's your pitch to her. Like you, you say, Hey, I'm starting this company. I want to make really beautiful, you know, clothing for professional women that is, you know, relatively affordable. Is, was that how you described it to her? Yeah,

2 (25m 53s):
Basically she was like, what? You know, she, the way she described it to me and she says, I thought everything in the world that needed to be designed had already been designed. And I think she herself at that time was going through a kind of career crisis where she didn't really understand the point of design anymore because she thought it's all, it's all already been done. Like why?

0 (26m 16s):
So this is what I'm curious about. You meet me Jaco. She had been the lead fashion designer for Zac Posen, major fashion brand, you know, designer brand. You've got $70,000 in seed money between you and blown. You said you have zero experience, obviously you're intelligent, but no experience in fashion. You've got this kind of harebrained idea to start a company. And that's pretty much in a, we work hot desk. Like why, why would she say, yeah, sure. I'll, I'll go work with you. And I'm just, yeah. Wow. Why would she agree to do this?

2 (26m 52s):
Well, I am. I'm just irresistible in person. No, I'm totally joking. I, every investor that I've ever spoken to, I mean, frankly like anybody I have ever spoken to about this in any sort of detail, their follow-up question is usually like, what was she thinking and why would you come and work for you? Totally fair question. You know, I don't want to answer for her, but I think for her, it was, it just, it was so different. It was so unlike anything else that had ever been proposed to her, this idea of designing for a group of women that she didn't even really know about working women, this idea that she always says, I never actually seen my clothes on a real person. That means a non-model.

2 (27m 33s):
I've never actually seen my clothes on the street. You know, she designed Oscar gowns. I think she designed a gallon ones for Natalie Portman. You know, that was kind of the world she was moving in, but she said there, there was no practical element to the beautiful designs that I was making. And I think that was, that was a big question mark for her.

0 (27m 52s):
I mean, I, that I understand the creative side of it. Right. But you couldn't even offer her like a steady income, you know, you could offer her partnership, but like she was going to be, she was not gonna have an income for who knows.

2 (28m 6s):
Yeah. I mean, I think, I mean, all of your questions are fair. I'm sure this could have played out very differently. I think the only way to describe it is that we had some sort of connection. You know, I was actually going to go with a different designer. I had met someone else who had been the head designer for of another very famous brand. And I actually wasn't even going to meet me. I'll go. I had told the head hunter, you know, I really liked this other person. Like, she feels like the right person. Like, you know, I don't really even care to meet with another candidate. And he was like, no, no, just meet with her because I think you guys are going to really hit it off. And even when we first met and I, you know, I was telling her about the, the kind of women I wanted her to design for. I said, you know, don't, you know, those women, they, they walk to work and they're flats and they had their heels in their bag.

2 (28m 51s):
And once they get into the elevator, they change out into their heels. And she was like, no, I've never met anyone like that. And I was like, wait, what world do you operate? And she was like, everyone, I know walks to work in heels and stays on their heels all day. But at that point, like I didn't even know what was involved in designing clothing. I share this story just to level set. Just how elementary my understanding of clothing manufacturing was. I remember Jaco early on, said to me, we're going to need to find a pattern maker. And I was like, oh no, no, don't worry. We're not going to do any prints. We're only going to do solid colors. She's she started laughing in my face because a pattern maker to the uninitiated in fashion manufacturing is like the architect of the dress, the

0 (29m 37s):
Cuts out the

2 (29m 37s):
Shapes. Exactly, exactly. The person who designs on a white piece of paper, how the different pieces of fabric are supposed to be laid out and cut. And I thought pattern, she meant like floral patterns or checkered pattern to find it. Yeah, exactly. I thought that's what a platter maker. So I was like, don't worry. We're just going to do like Navy dresses. And so that is, that is how much, I didn't know

0 (30m 4s):
When we come back, how Sarah got a crash course and dressmaking, how she tried and failed to raise money and how she and Morocco discovered what it means to have a bank account with a minus sign, stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

Borough (30m 29s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor borough so much time and energy is spent worrying about how furniture looks that it's easy to forget that it's just as important to know how it works. Burrow has put function on equal footing as fashion since day one, when they launched their award-winning modular sectional, they continue to apply that same innovative approach to everything your home needs. From coffee tables to credenzas, and more to learn how listeners can get $75 off their first order. Visit borough.com/built.

Noom (31m 3s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor nuMe. When it comes to weight loss, it's easy to get caught up in habits that just aren't sustainable, new muses, a psychology based approach to help you understand your mind and body for long-term results. With just 10 minutes a day, nuMe is designed to change your mindset so you can lose the weight for good and build healthy habits that last 60% of users keep the weight off for a year or more. Sign up for your trial at noon.com/built

3 (31m 34s):
Before they built one of the biggest athlete driven businesses in the world. LeBron James and Maverick Carter, which is two kids from Akron,

4 (31m 42s):
But his mom called me furious. You know, basically you two idiots don't know what the hell you're doing.

3 (31m 47s):
Jay Williams, how Maverick Carter became the architect of LeBron James empire. Listen on the limits from NPR.

0 (31m 60s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2011 and Sarah's teamed up with a well-known designer named Miyako Nakamura. And they begin to imagine what a new line of clothing for professional women could look like.

2 (32m 15s):
I'm embarrassed to say that I once bought 20 somewhat odd thousand dollars of clothing from a luxury department store, which really only amounted to like seven pieces because each one was so expensive because I wanted to show me Jaco the kind of clothes that I wanted her to design. And by the way, I did

0 (32m 33s):
Return it. You returned them. Yes, yes I did. But

2 (32m 36s):
I was the scariest 24 hours of my life where the 24 hours where I had seven dresses in my possession, in my apartment, I was like, well, what if we have a fire? But I, you know, we, and then I just started showing her. I was like, you know, this style, it's so beautiful. It would actually be perfect for work, but it costs $25,000. Okay.

0 (32m 54s):
Describe the style, like clean lines, dark blacks, grays. Like what, what do they look like?

2 (33m 0s):
It was tailored. And I think most importantly, the fit was good. And when I say the fit was good. So I have since learned a lot about pattern making and fitting clothing, most brands, if you're lucky, the designer will fit the garment on a real fit model. Once before it goes into production. If the fit on something you buy is off, it's probably because it wasn't fitted correctly, or it went into production before all of the errors were corrected. Luxury brands can afford to do three or four fittings to really perfect the fit, whereas lower price brands they might be fitting at once, or maybe never, they might just go straight to production.

2 (33m 44s):
And I mean, there are so many things that are involved in good fit, but that was really one thing that I wanted her to understand is the way your body feels when you're wearing a well-fitted garment, it's magical. And you just can't get that at most of the price points that are out.

0 (33m 60s):
And who did you tell her to imagine she was designing for like what, and what was the job? It was, it was a woman working, doing what,

2 (34m 9s):
You know, we had always three tests. One was called the taxi test. So if you're climbing into a taxi, can you jump in without ripping your scheme? Right? The other one was the bend over test, which is, if you, if you bend over, can the person sitting opposite from you see your cleavage or your bra, right? Because that's a strike two and then strike three was, can you see underwear lines every morning while I was working at vain or private equity, I would always turn around and check the mirror to make sure that my underwear lines weren't actually showing through whatever I was wearing. And those were the three tests. And so with every garment that we were making, I said, I just want you to make sure that those three bases are covered.

2 (34m 50s):
And so I would just move around and every single garment that she made to make sure that it met those things.

0 (34m 55s):
And I guess this is a good place to, to kind of talk about confidence in, in a, in a work environment. Right. I mean, it sounds like you were like you were looking to design something that would make women feel more confident in the workplace. Is that, is that more or less, right? Yeah.

2 (35m 12s):
That's, I mean, you put it perfectly. I, I just didn't want women to have to worry working women have to worry enough about whatever it is that they're doing. The last thing I want them to worry about is the clothes that they're wearing. And I'm sure men can relate to this too, when you leave home that morning. And you're not quite confident in whatever it is you're wearing. Like maybe your sweater has a hole in it, or maybe your pants are a little bit dirty or maybe there's not quite fitting. Right. And it's always in the back of your mind a little bit. And I just wanted to do

0 (35m 46s):
I do away with all that. So once you had sort of the first prototypes or agreed upon designs, how did you get them made? Where did you get the maid

2 (35m 56s):
In the garment district of, of Manhattan? Right. I didn't realize the extent to which manufacturing is still very much alive in, in New York. And, you know, just when I was working at bay and I was working right in times square. And I, I couldn't believe that, you know, these factories were literally two blocks, three blocks south of me and you open the elevators and it was just rows and rows of sewing machines. And I just didn't even know this industry existed, but that is where we made our first run of dresses and make it sound easy. But it wasn't at all. Most factories are not willing to work with a no name because I mean, small designers come and go. And so I didn't realize, like I was like, well, I'm willing to pay money.

2 (36m 38s):
And they were like, it doesn't matter. She's willing to pay us money. Like we need sustainable businesses. So if you're not going to be around in a year, which was true of most fashion brands, then we don't want to start this partnership. And so, you know, we had to beg our first factory to make the dresses for us. And at this stage they were just samples. We weren't even doing factory runs, but I think Morocco's experience was everything. So they trusted us because Miata was doing it, you know, and I was just the woman who signed the checks.

0 (37m 8s):
So you got a factory to agree to make you just a few samples of each item. Yeah, that's right.

2 (37m 14s):
So, you know, the other thing that's scaring retail businesses is inventory. And because we only had $70,000, I didn't want to tie up my cash and inventory. And so we decided that we would do trunk shows and we would bring samples and we would bring one of every size and we would have people try them on. And based on that, we would place orders.

0 (37m 33s):
Right? And a trunk show is literally like bringing a trunk and going to someone's apartment or some small space. And hopefully people will show up inviting people to come.

2 (37m 44s):
I think we did gosh, a dozen or so in the first year. And it was hard work, you know, you're lugging around suitcases. I was looking around fabric rolls of fabric on my shoulder, through the garment district. It's a very physically intensive experience.

0 (38m 1s):
And who did you invite to the trunk shows? How did you even get people to show up

2 (38m 5s):
Friends and former colleagues

0 (38m 7s):
Coming to where

2 (38m 8s):
I rented this hotel suite, we turned the bathroom into a dressing room, the shower stall into a dressing room. I think we created one more makeshift one. And the first two trunk shows, I think, you know, legitimately, it was really just my friends and friends of friends coming to be supportive. But I think by the third trunk show, I hardly knew anybody there. And what w what started happening was women would be telling each other at the workplace. We had zero money to spend on marketing. So, you know, it wasn't like were inviting editors or taking out ads or any of that. It was women just telling other women. Remember there was a group of women from Goldman at our third trunk show. And I was like, how did you hear about us? And they were like, oh, well, Jenny saw so-and-so wearing this dress.

2 (38m 51s):
And she asked her where she got it. And here we are. And most products that people make you rely on editors, magazines, ads to spread the word it's, it's essential for your business. And I think one thing I didn't quite realize, you know, women, they're not looking to fashion magazines to tell them what to wear, to work. They're turning to each other, they're asking each other, where'd you get that? Where'd you where'd you shop for that. And so that was, that was hugely beneficial in the early days.

0 (39m 17s):
And so you and Morocco would, would just be at these trunk shows describing the clothing, or was it just you?

2 (39m 23s):
Yeah, no. So it was me, my other co-founder Nuri, who is someone I worked with at Bain.

0 (39m 30s):
You, you brought her on because you needed somebody with a different skillset that

2 (39m 35s):
No, it was actually the opposite of Morocco. I needed someone who, who could do what I was doing, because at that point I was getting stretched too thin. I should also share probably at that point, I was, you know, I wasn't taking a salary. I was tutoring to make ends meet. So usually every day from, you know, I would wake up and then I would work. I would be running around the factory, the pattern maker, the factory, that pattern maker. And then from four to 7:00 PM, my apartment would turn into a tutoring facility and I would be teaching the SATs or fifth grade math or seventh grade English. Wow. And then I would start working on my business again and evening. I mean, I just had no time to attend everything that I needed to.

2 (40m 16s):
And Noree was someone who I, I worked with. She was actually the first person I managed at bane. And so, you know, I said, I want to take this company in the next level. Do you want to come? And she said, sure. And she, she also didn't have a salary. I couldn't pay her salary. So she started tutoring too. And that's how the two of us made ends.

0 (40m 36s):
All right. So in 2012, you're doing trunk shows and you're getting some people to show up, but I mean, you can't sustain a business doing trunk shows. Right. And I have to imagine that you guys were not making any money in that first.

2 (40m 53s):
You know, I think I was after we did our first set of trunk shows. And by the way we sold out, I mean, that was, we had made about $50,000 at that point. And we said, okay, this is a quote-unquote proof of concept. We're going to go raise money.

0 (41m 6s):
So already in 2012, that's where you, you said, all right, now it's time to go out and raise money.

2 (41m 11s):
Yeah, that's right. That was like, you know what, not only do we have product, we have made money now. So this raising money thing, it's gonna be a piece of cake

0 (41m 20s):
And you haven't really made money because your money was bright. You have expenses and you had to pay for the fabric. Yeah,

2 (41m 26s):
Yeah. Generated revenue. You know, I think it was in the fundraising world. They talk about pre-revenue companies in post revenue companies. And so I was like, well, we are a post revenue company. And okay. We said, you know, I don't know, what do we want to raise a million dollars, $2 million.

0 (41m 42s):
So who did you, who did you reach out to?

2 (41m 45s):
We started with friends and family. This is a trick that I pass on to other entrepreneurs. We're trying to raise money in the very early stages. Cause a lot of people, I think women especially tell me they feel bad about asking for money. They feel nervous. What if I lose their money, et cetera, et cetera. And what I tell them is rich people get asked for money all the time. Yeah. It's you. And 500 other people asking for their money. And one phrase that I developed, which I started using in all my emails is if you or anyone, you know, might be interested, please let me know. I think the you or anyone else, you know, gave the other person an elegant out. If they weren't interested, you know, they could say like, yes, I'll think about who I know.

2 (42m 27s):
Or if they're interested, they'll say like, actually I'm interested. Right. Or they really might connect you with someone else.

0 (42m 33s):
Were you able to raise any money that in that in 2012,

2 (42m 37s):
I raised so contrary to, you know, we thought we wanted to do, which was like, I don't know, 1 million or 2 million, we raised $400,000 and it took me 900.

0 (42m 49s):
So then what you continue to do these trunk shows, cause that's not going to right. That's not going to cut it. If you're talking about other companies like Bonobos and Warby Parker, and these are e-commerce companies, right. They they've got websites where people can, can order stuff. So

2 (43m 5s):
That's right. And around this time, this direct to consumer was becoming a thing. And so online was where it was at. And I think I foolishly had this notion that if you launch a website, your customers come and they shop and you become millionaires. Yeah, of course. I think we have all learned since then that that is not the case. But at the time there was such a media frenzy around these new DTC businesses. And I just thought like, wow, it's so easy. Like let's launch a site. And so we did can never forget this, a 3:00 AM of January 1st, 2013. That was the official launch, our e-commerce site <em></em>

0 (43m 42s):
And, and the name. Mm. I mean, obviously the floor is your last name. W where did that come from? Oh,

2 (43m 47s):
It's my mom's nickname. Her nickname is <em></em> which a child's way of saying eyes and Japanese. And she has really big eyes. And so that was her nickname. And initially, actually it was called Memay LaFleur, but ma in French means Nana. So after awhile, I, I realized like Nana flour doesn't actually have the best ring to it. Like maybe we should change that. And so we took the initials of Memay, which is M M and made it M muffler.

0 (44m 13s):
All right. So 2013, you launched the e-commerce site and it was the same kind of model people would order something. And then you would have it made in the factory. No, at

2 (44m 23s):
That point we did decide to hold inventory.

0 (44m 25s):
How many of you have made?

2 (44m 27s):
We probably did a run of 50 for each, because I think that was the minimum. So we probably have 350 dresses. So 350

0 (44m 33s):
Dresses sitting in my apartment, all sitting in your apartment, you put up the website, sit back. You're like waiting for the orders to come in. And, and

2 (44m 44s):
Crickets, crickets is the short of it.

0 (44m 46s):
Like, no one is clicking on the website and

2 (44m 49s):
I don't know, maybe we get like 10, 15 orders on the day of launch. And then afterwards we get like three, two. Sure. There were days with zero. Okay.

0 (45m 1s):
And those three or two, it might be $200 or $400. It's correct. And you thought just putting up a website, people would find you. Yes.

2 (45m 12s):
That was my very naive assumption.

0 (45m 14s):
And you presumably you didn't have money to, to do a lot of marketing?

2 (45m 19s):
No. I mean, yes, we, it was really still continue to do trunk shows. We had revenue goals for the month. And so if we weren't meeting our revenue goals, then we would set up a trunk show stat and try to make some money off that. And the trunk, she was actually were always quite lucrative. You know, we knew that when our customers actually tried on the clothes in person, they, they, they loved them. So often women were buying multiple dresses, but online, it's just a totally different story. We could not sell our dresses.

0 (45m 50s):
When we come back in just a moment, has Sarah and her team figure out how to sell a lot more dresses to the point where revenues starts to double and even triple stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this.

Wix (46m 11s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, Wix. Where do you go when you want to create, manage and grow your business online Wix, a leading website creation platform create a site with designer made templates that can be customized for your business and looks great on all devices. Reach new audiences with intelligent SEO tools designed to get you found on search engines and manage it all from one place. Join over 200 million people already doing it and head over to wix.com to get started.

ClickUp (46m 43s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, click up a productivity platform. That's saving people one day every week. How it's simple, click up, brings all of your work into one place. You get tasks, docs, goals, chat, and more in one tool. So you can focus on getting work done without switching apps. It's how teams and companies like Uber, Google and web flow save time, click up is for free for ever. So try click up today@clickup.com slash NPR.

0 (47m 18s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Raz. So it's 2013, the very first year of business for FMLA floor. And it does about $300,000 in sales, which on the one hand sounds pretty good. But on the other, it's only a fraction of what Sarah was hoping they'd make.

2 (47m 38s):
I think actually the, for the first year, my goal was like a million. So we felt quite short of that. And in 2013 we had hired three other people

0 (47m 47s):
And presumably you couldn't pay them a whole lot.

2 (47m 50s):
You know, we were paying ourselves very, very little and you know, we're, we're watching the cash.

0 (47m 57s):
All right. So that first year you do a third of what you were hoping to do. You get into 2014 and I have to assume your cash reserves are getting close to running out.

2 (48m 8s):
Not only do we run out, it actually went into the negatives, our bank account, I think at one point said like negative 2000 or something. And I didn't know, you could draw it down beyond zero. So that was a wake up call. And I had to go out and fundraise again.

0 (48m 23s):
Same people, same seed folks.

2 (48m 26s):
No, no, no. I, I knew I couldn't go back to them because we haven't done what we said we wanted to do on the, on the cash that we had raised at that point. So I had to go out and fundraise again. And the most amazing part of this story is meeting Bob

0 (48m 44s):
Who's. Bob, Bob

2 (48m 45s):
. Bob was a CFO at these two insurance companies. I had gone to meet my husband's friend's father, who was a very successful entrepreneur for some advice secretly, I'm also hoping maybe he'll invest. But he said, you know, you've got to meet with my former CFO, Bob, but Bob and I have started two companies together. They sold both incredibly successful and I go and meet Bob. And I say, Hey, Bob, I'm just having a really hard time trying to raise money. Can you please give me some guidance? And he said, well, you know, the first thing we should think about is how much should your company be valued at and how much do you want to give up? And I was like, I'm willing to have my company valued at anything just to keep the business going float.

2 (49m 31s):
Exactly. And he's like, no, no, like step one, let's go do this. And so he essentially gives me a homework assignment,

0 (49m 37s):
A homework assignment to help you figure out what, what you think the company's worth

2 (49m 41s):
And how much I should be raising. And I go back to Bob and he says, this is really interesting. Like, these are the facts that you need to go out with when you go and talk to these VCs, none of the VC conversations actually go anywhere. But armed with this information, I'm able to say my company we've already generated revenue, similar companies when they were at my size, we're raising this amount of money at this valuation. Can we talk?

0 (50m 8s):
So what did you value the company at the time?

2 (50m 10s):
Gosh, it was 6 million.

0 (50m 13s):
When you, you are out of money and you've got to raise money and Bob is helping you kind of develop a pitch and you went to VCs and what was their response when you pitch them on this company? Their

2 (50m 29s):
Response was the same response that I would basically hear for the next three to four years, which is, congratulations. It looks like you started a real great niche business for yourself,

0 (50m 40s):
But we're not interested.

2 (50m 42s):
Yeah. Niche businesses, essentially. It's codeword for Lissa, small potatoes. And I'm thinking to myself, like what about working? Women is such a niche business. You know, there are 30 million women aged 25 to 45 who work in some sort of corporate environment. And these women spend on average for women making 75 K and up $4,000 a year on clothes to wear to work. And so that's roughly a hundred to $120 billion market, you know, to me, nothing about that was niche,

0 (51m 13s):
But where you pay, I mean, or you mostly pitching to men and not to, I don't want to pile on it, but, but I have to assume they didn't quite, you know, they, they, weren't going to be able to relate to this, this, this, maybe they didn't fully understand the opportunity.

2 (51m 26s):
There was a lot of that. I'm sure you've heard this from your other founders, but there was a lot of, oh, I'm going to have my wife who is a stay at home. Mom, try it, you know, nothing against her, but she's been at home for 30 years and probably has different needs for what she wants to wear every single day. Or, you know, I'll have my, my 17 year old daughter, Tara try it, but just, just kind of lumping in all women into the same category you know, the most honest thing I heard was I had an investor call me after we did the pitch. And he said to me, we really like you. We really think there's a lot to like about the business, but it's just so early. And we're four guys sitting around the room and we just can't get a gut feel on the product.

2 (52m 10s):
I've repeated that elsewhere. And people are like, oh my God, I can't believe he said that out sexist. But to me it was, it was a relief. That was the first time where someone said to me, like, it's actually not you it's, it's it's us not being able to understand the product. But then I think the, the part that I didn't share was that Bob, after seeing me go through a couple of these VC meetings, you know, I think he's seeing how determined I am to, to raise this money. He says, you know what, I'm willing to write a check, which I, I honestly, at that point, wasn't expecting, cause he's more coaching me through this process. And he was like, you know, I'm, I'm willing to invest 50, maybe a hundred thousand dollars, which is a lot of money for us at that time.

2 (52m 52s):
And he says to me, and are you interested in raising maybe a little bit more money from me and my friends? And I said, absolutely. And he says, okay, give me, give me 24 hours. And so 24 hours later, Bob calls me and he says, okay, Sarah, I've put together $400,000 for you. Wow. That is the quickest. Any single investor has put together around like that for me. And I think Bob has these very close connections with other business people, well-established business people. And, and they do deals together all the time. I think they, they pass each other deals and they move together.

2 (53m 34s):
They talk to each other, they invest together. And I just never saw that with any of my other female angel investors.

0 (53m 42s):
Here's a question now, right? Yeah. Because I think a lot of people who start businesses, this is a challenge, right? You've got a balance, you know, your independence and your vision and what you, you know, the ownership you want to retain, but you needed money. Yeah.

2 (53m 57s):
It's so true. And I think you're actually, you're pointing to something really important there. And I catch myself doing this too now, and I really try to stop myself from doing it, which is telling other entrepreneurs, like, don't just take anyone's money or be really careful who you take money from. That's all well, and good when you've got cash in the bank, when you don't, it's really unhelpful advice because it's true. You really wanna make sure who you take money from, but you also just want to keep your company alive.

0 (54m 26s):
So you ha you were in that position in 2014, which means that, you know, you had to be willing to give up, you know, quite a bit of your, of this company that you started.

2 (54m 36s):
Yeah, that's right. You know, I think that's where, I mean meeting Bob and he ended up being a phenomenal partner, but Bob could have also been someone terrible. He could have really screwed me over.

0 (54m 46s):
Yeah. Cause everyone's seen shark tank where they're like, I'll give you $25,000 for 70% of the company.

2 (54m 53s):
I was just like, I can't watch that show anymore because every time I'm like walk away, walk away. But yeah, $75,000 when you've got negative, $2,000 in the bank is pretty precious.

0 (55m 5s):
It's a lot. Yeah. It's all right. So you get this money 2014. You're saved from extinction, but meantime, you've got a website and no one's going to it. And you've got inventory piling up, which is not a good place to be in because at some point designs are going to change. Our tastes are going to change and that you're going to end up shredding all that stuff.

2 (55m 26s):
Yes. You know, we had moved into a really humble office in the garment district on 35th street, it was above a methadone clinic. And I would just walk into this tiny room and I would see it flowing to the ceiling in inventory. And I would think to myself, oh my God, we are going to die under a mountain of dresses. And I think that was the point where I was like, I saw the dresses. And I said, what if we just sent our existing customers an emails, asking them if we could send them a box of dresses because we somehow have to physically move these trusses out of here. And so we, we sent our, I think we had like a thousand customers on our mailing list at that time. And we said, we'll send you a box of products that we think you'll like, and if you like them, you can keep them.

2 (56m 8s):
If you don't, you can return them. And so that was the pitch.

0 (56m 12s):
So this was more like a, now like a, we're going to send you a box of stuff and what you want, you keep and you pay for and what you don't want you to turn to us.

2 (56m 21s):
Yeah. And 18% of customers responded to that email saying, sure, send me something. I don't have time. It would be so great if you chose it for me. And we ended up sending those hundred 80 boxes out and making more money in that one week than we ever had in any month leading up to it.

0 (56m 40s):
I mean, that model was starting to be out there. Right. There was a literally company called trunk club and stitch fix. And some of these companies that we know, and you, you guys were not doing that. You weren't picking outfits for people sending them and letting them pick and then send stuff.

2 (56m 55s):
No, we were not. You know, I think we, we just thought it was actually, it was interesting. Cause even when I suggested this initially to my team, there were a lot of when I say a lot of people, there were four people who said like, oh no, I would never want someone else to pick out what it is that I should wear. Like I want to choose for myself. Why would I want someone else to pick for me? And you know, I kind of had to say, Annie, Annie was my CMO, Andy and I were in the camp of, you know, we're not fashion lovers. Like if someone else who understands fashion better than we do told us what we should be wearing. Like that's actually a pretty amazing surface.

2 (57m 37s):
So we, we launched this, I guess you could call it a beta in February and operationally. It was a total nightmare. I mean, we sent the wrong size to people. Some people were like, why, why did you send this to me? I don't understand. There were a lot of those things, but the numbers really spoke for themselves. We, there was more demand for that, that service then than we had ever seen

0 (57m 59s):
Turf figure. I mean, how did you even know what to send to people?

2 (58m 3s):
A good number of those a thousand customers, we had met them through trunk shows. And so they had already purchased something with us

0 (58m 9s):
And data about them.

2 (58m 9s):
We had some data about what they had picked and we knew their size. And then actually that was a really brilliant moment by Annie who said, you know, I wonder if we should try this with the new customers. And so she said, you know, look, why don't we email a group of people who've never shopped with us before and ask them to fill out some basic information about themselves. And based on that, why don't we tell them we're going to send a box of

0 (58m 31s):
Dresses to you and do you call them bento boxes, right? Yeah,

2 (58m 33s):
We did. We didn't call them bentos back then. But when we launched it into the official form later that year in the fall, we called it

0 (58m 42s):
And that really actually starts to move the needle. Right? Like you, you actually started to see real revenue coming in that seem to point in the right direction.

2 (58m 52s):
Yeah. That was the moment that Silicon valley calls finding your product market fit. We launched it into official form October, 2014. And we suddenly went from not being able to pay rent to tripling our revenue, you know, oftentimes month over month.

0 (59m 9s):
And by the end of that year, 2014, did you, do you remember what your, your revenue,

2 (59m 14s):
Yeah, it was 8 million, but we had made more than half of that in the last 12 weeks of the year.

0 (59m 21s):
Wow. I mean, I mean, obviously that model, right? Like the, the choosing and sending people, clothing was working,

2 (59m 29s):
But it, it still doesn't explain to me why would just like explode in the last 12 weeks of the year? Yeah. I mean, I think when you walk into a clothing store prices, maybe one of 10 things that you're considering when you decide you want to buy that thing, you know, do you like the field? Do you like how it fits on you? And do you like how the sales person is selling it to you? Whereas when you're shopping online, first of all, it's really hard to tell what, what products actually look like. And when you see this like really simple black dress, it's not going to jump out at you. And you're thinking like, am I really gonna spend $195 on a pair of black pants? And I think what bento did in many ways as it took that decision paralysis away, because we were getting our products into our customer's hands.

2 (1h 0m 18s):
And only once they tried it on where they really understanding why these pants cost $195, you know, and then they start to say, oh, okay, I get it. I get, I get why this cost $250. I get why it's worth it. But it is really hard to make that case online and in commerce. And I think things have changed a lot since then people are buying $2,000 Peloton bikes online. So I think that that sentiment has shifted a lot, but back in 2014 it was a really tough sell.

0 (1h 0m 48s):
So I want to touch on a slightly sensitive topic, which is cost, right? Yeah. Some people might look at your clothing and say, you know, you know, I get it. It's not designers is not Chanel, but still, you know, $240 for a dress or, you know, $225 for a pair of trousers. What am I getting out of this that I can't get from Zara? Or H and M. Yeah.

2 (1h 1m 13s):
Yeah. We hear that all the time. And we were actually briefly, briefly talking to a department store, a luxury department store. And, you know, they said to us, you could sell these dresses for $700. That's what we would sell it for. And we said, exactly, but the point is we sell it for 200, 2 50, that's the, that's the point. But it's little details that I think most fashion designers wouldn't care about. And I think that's really, that's really where we set ourselves apart and, and try to justify the price point. You know, does it have pockets? Can you zip it up yourself easily? We're always checking to make sure that you can sip up yourself because you might be traveling by yourself and be in a hotel room by yourself, you know, does it, does it feel comfortable on the skin because she was going to be spending 14 hours in it.

2 (1h 1m 59s):
It's my incredibly practical nature, wanting machine washability and wrinkle resistance and comfort in everything that I wear. And then Morocco really saying I've spent 20 years training to deliver the best designs in the world. So let me figure out how I can do that for, for working women. And I think the place where those two things meet that's mm. LaFleur. Hmm.

0 (1h 2m 23s):
All right. So as you really started to, to see traction, presumably your, your biggest market was in New York. And then, and then where, where were you also, like what other markets were you seeing traction in? You know, like 20 14, 20, 15,

2 (1h 2m 38s):
New York was always number one still is number one. But when we saw ourselves growing into other markets, which was DC and then the other one being San Francisco and DC was fascinating. You know, we have a lot of Congress, women, couple of senators who wear our clothes and staffers to, you know, I was on Capitol hill a few months ago and walked into the congressional building and immediately saw a number of our customers. Wow. And then on the other end, we were seeing customers in San Francisco, which became our third largest market. And these women were saying to us, you know, I don't actually want to go to work in jeans and a hoodie. I make money. I want to wear nice clothes. And at the same time, if I dress too nicely, people think I'm interviewing.

2 (1h 3m 20s):
And in some ways the dress code is even more nebulous. Can you help me figure out what to wear? And so Morocco actually started working on what we're calling power casual, a power casual line for them where it's much more relaxed. It's a lot of pant base knit based offerings, but it's a more dressed up version of the, the jeans and the putty. And so we have a really loyal fan base out in San Francisco as well.

0 (1h 3m 44s):
So once you started to get like members of Congress, while your clothing and women in DC and San Francisco, and did it at that point become easier to raise more money.

2 (1h 3m 55s):
I don't think it had anything to do with who was wearing it. You know, what we started to see was, was traction and revenue four years into it to around 2017, a VC investor approached us and he said, Hey, we're just interested in learning more about you. Could you tell us? And I think at that point I had a big, big chip on my shoulder because we had had total failure trying to raise from the C

0 (1h 4m 18s):
You're four years in. And you had not raised any money from VCs at that point. Yeah,

2 (1h 4m 22s):
That's right. And so I was like, you know, we're going to, we're going to do this without VCs. Like, that's just the way it's going to be that. Then when we met this with him, with this investor who was just really wonderful and his wife was a customer and he said to me, you know, I know nothing about women's clothing, but I'm, I'm a good student and I'm willing to learn. So will you teach me and just came at it so differently, which really got me thinking about VCs in a, in a different way

0 (1h 4m 48s):
Until that point. And so they did invest at that point. Yeah, they did. And because up until that point, the first four years, all your money came from friends, family, and then like family investment firms are not right. And, and, and, you know, I'm sure that was frustrating. That VCs were not, you know, throwing money away. I have to imagine that that was a huge advantage because VC money can be a real double-edged sword. As we've learned from previous guests on the show,

2 (1h 5m 18s):
You know, I got to hold onto a lot more of my company because we couldn't raise for a while. But the result was, you know, we were, I think, in a position weaker where we could better absorb those financial resources. So there wasn't risk of other investors coming on and saying like, wait a minute, wait a minute. Like you got to change your, your product because this isn't,

0 (1h 5m 43s):
I'm assuming that your financials are not public because you're not a public company. But the last number I saw was for 2017, where you, you did 70 million in revenue. I have to assume it's higher now. I mean, do you, at this point now, do you know how much money you've raised in total?

2 (1h 6m 3s):
Yes, they do. We don't disclose it. And it's so funny because I think there's a real, there's a real dark side to talking about how much money you've raised. And I think what happens often in startup culture is that that is what you become known for. Oh,

0 (1h 6m 19s):
That's your legitimacy back to legitimate means how much you've and that's your status. Exactly. And it sounds like you, you were, you believed in that for a while. Like when these VCs weren't giving you money, maybe you thought that they, that money would give you this veneer of legitimacy. Oh, for sure.

2 (1h 6m 36s):
So if you can't tell already there's, this is like a constant process of self doubt. And me thinking that I'm a loser and trying to, you know, navigate throughout this process and not being able to raise from VCs repeatedly when other DTC companies are raising money, it just makes you question a lot. But I think the result is like, what I did was I ended up just spending a lot of time with my customers internally, we call our customer Samantha, but you know, where is Samantha working? How do we make her happy? How do we make her make products that she really loves? And so, by the time we took in that money, that precedent was already set like investors, you know, while I am so grateful for them and very thankful for them, they don't direct the future of the company.

0 (1h 7m 20s):
When you think about how hard it was to convince people that this was going to be more than a niche business, right? Yeah. Do you, I dunno, just part of you kind of feel like, see, I told you, so

2 (1h 7m 33s):
I feel that way the, I told you, so when it comes to working women, not being in each category, I feel very strongly about that. You know, I feel like I'm always being tested. I've never really had this moment where I've, I've thought like I've showed you. I feel like I I'm, the startup world has a way of always putting you back in your place. Yeah, sure, sure. I mean, the whiskey on the rocks in the middle of the night that never ends, I feel like I'm running a different company every two years. And the stage of the business brings a whole different set of challenges that, that the first two years did, you know, I will, I will qualify that by saying the first two years were by heart.

2 (1h 8m 17s):
By far the hardest two years of I think my life, I was, it was just incredibly lonely, incredibly hard. Getting this business off the ground.

0 (1h 8m 25s):
When you think about your, your journey, how much do you think about that? You know, that this all coming as a result of your hard work and skill versus luck,

2 (1h 8m 36s):
Oh, it's 99% luck. I always go back to that experience I had in Zambia, it is mostly luck being born to the right parents at the right time. Even just like watching how different my mom's journey was as a female entrepreneur in Japan versus me born, you know, 37 years later and the benefits and the funding I am able to get in a way that I know that she was never able to, that is all luck. And yes, a lot of hard work too.

0 (1h 9m 4s):
That's Sarah Flor, she's the co-founder and CEO of mm. LaFleur. And by the way, a business that's all about dressing women for the office has to pivot pretty fast when all the offices get shut down due to COVID. And so over the past two years, mm LaFleur has really leaned into those power of casual styles that Sarah talked about, the clothes that feel comfortable to wear around the house, but still look good in say a zoom meeting. And by the way, if you want to know more about this, just Google, how I built this resilience with Sarah floor, you'll find the interview I did with her at the beginning of the pandemic, just when she and her team were starting to make some of those changes.

0 (1h 9m 46s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week, please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded. If you want to contact us. Our email address is H ibt@npr.org. And if you want to follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this. And mine is at guy Roz. Our Instagram account is at how I built this NPR and mine is at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by Rupp teen era bluey. It was edited by Nick grant with research help from canvas Lim. Our production staff also includes Casey Herman, Ferris, safari, Liz Metzker, Julia Carney, Carrie Thompson, Elaine coats, and Harrison VJ Choi. Our intern is Katherine cipher.

0 (1h 10m 27s):
Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Ross, and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.