Wondery (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How I, Built This Early, and ad free Right. now join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts.

NPR (10s):
Think, of all the things you can do in 10 minutes or less. Scroll through social media, Check your bank balance. make a sandwich or learn about the surprising economics behind all these things. The Indicator for Plan of Money is a quick hit of insight into the economics of business, work, and everyday life. Every weekday in less than 10 minutes. Listen now to the Indicator podcast from NPR.

0 (31s):
Hello everyone. You know, over the many years of doing this show, we've come to learn that there are certain episodes that just resonate with a huge number of people, and this one happens to be one of them. We first ran this back in 2020 and be sure to listen through to the very end to hear a quick update. And now here it is.

3 (54s):
You know, I was feeling good. I, I thought, okay, well we can continue raising money for a while. And at some point we raised money from Google. Capital G is one of their investment arms. And the partner from that firm sat me down and she said, nobody else will invest in this company. If you don't figure out how to make money, you know you're not gonna find a bigger fool. We're the biggest fool. And that's when we started kind of freaking out and try to figure out how we're gonna make money. But we had no idea how we were gonna make money.

0 (1m 29s):
Welcome to How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz, and on the show today, how a perfect storm of skill and luck drove Luis van on to create CAPTCHA, then recapture, and then Duolingo a foreign language app valued at $1.5 billion. Think about the small moments or decisions in your life that actually had a huge impact on how your life turned out.

0 (2m 9s):
Maybe it was a conversation you struck up with the person next to you on an airplane. Maybe it was a party you reluctantly went to, only to meet the person you'd eventually marry. Or maybe it was a decision to stay on vacation an extra day. That sparked a new idea for Kevin Strom. It was a random remark from his girlfriend that made him decide to use filters on Instagram for Blake Koski. It was a chance meeting with a group of young Argentinians who took him to the countryside where he saw kids with no shoes that one day inspired him to create Toms. And for Luis Fanon. It was a free lecture at Carnegie Mellon University in 2000.

0 (2m 50s):
That single lecture would lead him to invent two ingenious new tools. The first was CAPTCHA guess CAPTCHAs, those annoying, twisted, and blurred letters you have to type into a website to prove you're human. And the second one was Duolingo. Now the biggest language learning app in the world. Both CAPTCHA and Duolingo were designed to harness the power of crowdsourcing to solve problems. And I'm gonna blow your mind here. If you have ever typed in a CAPTCHA or used Duolingo, there's a good chance you've taken part in a massive online collaboration that you probably weren't even aware of.

0 (3m 31s):
And it's amazing how Luis came up with all this. But let's start at the beginning. Luis was born in Guatemala in the late 1970s. Both his parents were doctors and though he was surrounded by poverty and violence in Guatemala City, Luis grew up in comparative privilege. And as a kid he spent a lot of time hanging out at the family business.

3 (3m 53s):
My mother's family actually at a candy factory, everybody is always amazed at the fact that I grew up with a candy factory. And you know, they think that it was like Willy Wonka or something. I was not all that much into the candy itself. I was into the machines because basically the candy is made by these gigantic machines that, you know, pump out, I don't know how many thousands of pieces of candy per hour. And basically all my weekends I spent playing at the Candy factory. And I would take the machines apart and put 'em back together. There would be some extra pieces after I put 'em back together usually. And that that would be a problem. Well,

0 (4m 28s):
What, what kind of student were you? I mean, were you, was school pretty easy for you?

3 (4m 32s):
Yeah, I was pretty nerdy, basically. I was really good at math. Yeah. Math was just easy to me. I, you know, what I would do during, in the summers is basically get either next years or, you know, couple years later, math books and basically do all the exercises. Wow. It kind of came easy, but the way I really got good at it is by doing hundreds and hundreds of exercises. That's

0 (4m 52s):
What you would do in the summertime.

3 (4m 54s):
Yeah. I kind of was bored. I mean, I was an only child. Yeah. I, this is, I didn't have that much to do. This is, remember, this is also pre-internet, pre everything. So what was I gonna do? And man, that's what I did.

0 (5m 4s):
I was putting, playing cards in the spokes of my bicycle and buying Jolly Ranchers at seven 11. Woo. Should have done math books. So you were, did you just love math? I mean, was it, it sounds like kids don't think about their future. They're not like, I'm gonna study math so I can be in tech one day. Like, no, you must have really enjoyed it.

3 (5m 23s):
I did. I enjoyed it. It was, it was like a puzzle for me. By the way, this is not the only thing I did. I mean, I also played a lot of video games, pirated video games in my Commodore 64,

0 (5m 32s):
Like floppy discs. Un floppy discs.

3 (5m 35s):
Floppy discs. Yeah, that's right. I wanted a Nintendo when I was eight. My mother would not get me Nintendo. She instead got me a computer, a Commodore 64, and I couldn't figure out how to use it. But eventually I kind of, I read like the manual and stuff and I figured out how to use it more. And then I figured out I could pirate other people's video games. And so I became a little hub in my, in my little neighborhood. But these were not other kids. These were adults. Yeah. Were kind of basically young adults who had a computer and they would come to my house and I would take their games and give them my games in exchange. So I then I, I collected a pretty large number of video games.

0 (6m 10s):
But, but she mentioned Right, that, I mean, because your childhood sounds pretty nice, but, but like, as a kid, I guess, or, or even as a teenager, there was a civil war in Guatemala. Right. I mean, when we know that today there's a, a lot of violence there and, and obviously there's, there's violence in the US and in other countries too. But Guatemala's been particularly hard hit. I mean, did it feel dangerous when you were a kid?

3 (6m 32s):
Yes, it did. There was a civil war pretty much since I was born in, in 79 to 1996. There was a civil war going on the whole time. It always felt dangerous. When I was at 15 or so, my aunt was kidnapped for ransom. I mean, she was gone for seven or eight days. Wow. People's cars would be stolen. I dunno, every couple of months somebody's car would be stolen. In my family going out past 7:30 PM was rare. Yeah. You needed to go out in a large group if you were gonna go out past 7:30 PM and you know it, I did. My house had walls and barbed wire and yeah, it, it felt dangerous. I mean, this is one of the, this is one of the reasons I came to the US actually. I mean, I, you know, when I was, after my aunt was kidnapped, I thought to myself, I don't wanna live here.

0 (7m 16s):
Yeah. And, and I guess you did end up leaving Guatemala for college. 'cause you went to, to Duke in North Carolina. And you had, you described yourself as a, like a math nerd in school and, and is that what you intended to do? Like to do something in math?

3 (7m 34s):
That's what I wanted to become. And I, a, a math professor, I, I was pretty certain I wanted to become a math professor. You know, at the time I thought the, the best thing that I can do is really learn a lot of math. And I really loved it. And I thought it was futile to learn how to deal with other people. And it is interesting because my job these days is 100% just dealing with other people and people's problems.

0 (7m 56s):
Wait, I'm just trying to understand this. So, so by becoming a math professor, you thought, hey, I wouldn't have to deal with people, I would just deal with like facts and data and numbers. Yes,

3 (8m 5s):
Yes. And you know, I, I'll do math research all day long and every now and then I'll teach a class, but whatever, that's like a tax. That's that's what I thought. So,

0 (8m 13s):
Alright, so you are, so you get your degree and you're following this path to go into academia and you go into a PhD program at Carnegie Mellon. Correct. And I guess you go into computer science, right?

3 (8m 25s):
Yes. I changed from math to computer science because I visited a math grad school. And what people were saying, the professor was saying, oh, I'm working on this open problem that nobody's been able to solve for the last 300 years. Mm. And I thought, Hmm, I don't think I'm smart enough. Yeah. I mean, if you haven't done it and nobody's done it in 300 years, that's kind of not for me. Whereas when you visiting computer science, I mean, this is this crazy thing. People are like, oh yeah, I solved an open problem yesterday. Wow. It's a much younger field. Yeah. And so that, I thought that was much more exciting for me at least.

0 (8m 54s):
So you are, you started, this is year 2000, you start your PhD program at, at Carnegie Mellon. And I guess like really soon after you start, you go to some talk by someone from Yahoo comes to campus to talk about Yahoo Yahoo was a big deal in 2000. Is that, what's the story?

3 (9m 12s):
Yeah, that was serendipity. Again, most of, most of the things that have happened in my life are, are serendipitous. I was a first year PhD student. I had been at Carnegie Mellon for maybe two months. I had, you know, the first thing you gotta do when you become a PhD student is find an advisor. I had found myself an advisor, and we went to a talk together. This guy from Yahoo was the chief scientist of Yahoo at the time. And, and like you said, Yahoo at the time was the, you know, the biggest tech company out there. And he came to give a talk at Carnegie Mellon, and it was, the talk was basically 10 problems that they didn't know how to solve at Yahoo. And I was an enterprising PhD student, and I thought, I'm gonna try to solve these problems.

0 (9m 49s):
And what was the problem that he said they had?

3 (9m 51s):
Yeah. So the problem for this particular one was there were people who were writing programs to obtain millions of free email accounts. Okay. So Yahoo at the time gave out email accounts Sure. For free. Yeah. And some people thought it would be good to send spam from Yahoo accounts. The problem is, each Yahoo account only allowed you to send like 500 messages a day. So if you wanna send 10 million spam messages per day, you just have to get a bunch of Yahoo accounts. And from each one of them, you send 500 messages.

0 (10m 21s):
And this is the era, and I remember this and we all remember this, where you would get hundreds of messages, spam messages, about certain bodily enhancements. You would get messages about Yes. The hormone growth things, I mean, baldness, I mean, it was, it was endless

3 (10m 37s):
Canadian pharmacy. Canadian selling you Viagra, right?

0 (10m 39s):
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Just spam. It was a huge problem. Yep. And he was like, we can't figure out how to stop these computers or, or, or programmers from making, you know, just creating all these email accounts.

3 (10m 52s):
Yeah. And so that was, that was the problem.

0 (10m 54s):
And just to be clear, these spammers were not physically setting up each individual email account?

3 (10m 60s):
No. They had written programs that would just set up millions of email accounts a day or however many per day. So I thought about it for, for weeks and months. And I talked about it with my, my PhD advisor, Manuel. And together we came up with a solution, which was the thinking here is, look, computer programs can get a million email accounts per day because well, a computer program can do things very fast. Yeah. And it also doesn't get bored. Right. Humans, human can't get very many email accounts. So how about this, how about if we make sure that whatever's getting an email account is actually a human and not a computer program? Then we started thinking, okay, well how can we distinguish between a human and a computer? Yeah.

3 (11m 40s):
And that's where this, this idea came, came about. It's this idea of a CAPTCHA where it's basically these distorted characters that you have to type whenever you're buying tickets on Ticketmaster or getting, you know, an email account or stuff like that. The idea is that a computer can generate one of these, you know, basically take some, some letters, put 'em in an image, distort them, and then it can give them out. And it turns out that humans can read these. Well, at the time, humans could read these very well, they still can, but computers could not. So, by

0 (12m 10s):
The way, I can't read them. I'm the human that can't read them. I can't read caps. Well,

3 (12m 14s):
I don't know, I don't know how much of a human you are

0 (12m 16s):
Now. They're like point to every stop sign point to every bridge.

3 (12m 19s):
Yeah. Yeah. It's changed. Yeah. But basically at the time, the idea was humans can read these distorted characters much better than computers. So let's give basically every time that somebody's trying to get an email account, let's give 'em a test to see if they're human or not.

0 (12m 31s):
And you just start doing this on your own. Like, did you tell Yahoo? Did you tell him? Or, or were you just like, this is fun, I just wanna figure this out. Like just working independently?

3 (12m 41s):
Yeah. I mean, with my PhD advisor, it was, it was, it became our research, it became a research subject. And yeah, we did not tell Yahoo because it

0 (12m 48s):
Sounds like, here's the kid getting the math, mathematics, workbooks in the summer. It's like, you just seemed like a fun thing to solve.

3 (12m 57s):
Yeah. It was fun. And, but that's like the, that's the core of the PhD program. I think, you know, you're, you're trying to find problems that, that others haven't solved. I gotcha.

0 (13m 4s):
Okay. And

3 (13m 4s):
You're, this seems like a problem that other people hadn't solved. So we, we were working on it

0 (13m 9s):
And you called it CAPTCHA, did you name it CAPTCHA? Yes. And what does that mean?

3 (13m 13s):
It's an acronym stands sounds like CAPTCHA

0 (13m 15s):
To like, to CAPTCHA. But that's

3 (13m 17s):
Not what it Yes. It's an acronym that sounds like CAPTCHA, which, you know, the idea was to CAPTCHA the, you know, the bot or the, the computer program. It stands for completely automated public Turing test to tell Computers and humans apart. So, you know, it was just an acronym, but, but now I think most people have heard of the word CAPTCHA, but do not know what it stands for.

0 (13m 35s):
And you come up with this thing CAPTCHA and what do you do? Do you like email this guy Yahoo and say, Hey, I've got your solution for you.

3 (13m 41s):
You basically, I mean, we emailed him and we said, Hey, you know, we think we have a solution. Here's some code. You know, and we explain how it works and what was amazing. And now that I know how large companies operate and how, how slow things move. Yeah. What's amazing is within about a week of when we sent them this Yeah. It was already functional. Wow. You know, alive. It was live. So I guess the problem that they had was so big that when they saw this, they were like, okay, let's, let's do it. Wow.

0 (14m 7s):
So they saw this and they're like, oh my God, this is great. And so you must have just, I mean, you were like, what? 25, 26?

3 (14m 13s):
2021. 21, 21.

0 (14m 15s):
My God. See you. Right. See, all of a sudden you're an overnight millionaire. Multimillionaire.

3 (14m 20s):
No, no, no, no, no. No money was ex no money exchanged hands here. Wait,

0 (14m 25s):
You gave CAPTCHA to them. You just said, Hey, here you go.

3 (14m 28s):
Yep. I mean, listen, you gave it

0 (14m 30s):
To a, a multi-billion dollar company. You just gave them CAPTCHA.

3 (14m 34s):
I didn't know how things worked. And you know, the truth of the matter is probably a good thing. Yeah. In retrospect, I, I, I mean, who knows what would've happened, but I, I, you know, I, I don't have regrets, but yes, that was, that's what started happening. And, and then basically every other website started, you know, they saw that it was in the, in the front page of Yahoo. So every other website started copying or making their own version. And within a couple of years, pretty much everywhere on the web, you know, when you had to get an email account, when you had to enter a comment on a, on a blog, when you, where you had to buy tickets on Ticketmaster, you had to enter one of these. You

0 (15m 7s):
Were the guy, you were the guy who made it really hard for dopes like me to get it right. I had to

3 (15m 13s):
Constantly, it was annoying. Yeah. It was annoying to people. And every time that I would be at a party or something and, you know, they would ask me what I did, and then they would get me to explain my research. I would, I would explain that I had done that. And I would

0 (15m 23s):
Say, you know,

3 (15m 24s):
What the hell? They would

0 (15m 25s):
Kick you outta the party.

3 (15m 26s):
Screw you, screw you.

0 (15m 28s):
But, but some of the research you did, I mean, you, you did actually write some software that you sold for, I think for some money this time. I mean, just, just like, could you just briefly explain how that happened and what you were working on?

3 (15m 41s):
Yeah, I mean, this is, it's funny. I mean, at the time, this was not called crowdsourcing, but my PhD research was basically on crowdsourcing. Hmm. I had worked on CAPTCHA where the idea was that humans can do some things, computers cannot. Yep. So my PhD research was basically that finding things that computers could not yet do, and then finding ways to get people to do them. And in particular, the main thing that I, that I did in that time was, was a game. And people love to play it, but as they were playing it, they were actually helping computers figure out what's inside an image.

0 (16m 12s):
How did the game work?

3 (16m 13s):
The way the game worked was this, you went to a website and you got randomly paired with somebody else who had shown up to the website. Got it. And you were both shown the same image and

0 (16m 22s):
Any image, a random image, like an elephant,

3 (16m 24s):
An image from the internet. Yes. Okay. And you were told type whatever the other person's typing, just type typing words. And if you are one of your words, matches one of their words, you both get points. Got it. What was interesting about this game is that the words that people typed, the only thing they had in common was the image. So the words that people typed were basically related to the image. Because if you're told to do this, what are you gonna type? If it's in a picture of an elephant, you're gonna type elephant. 'cause you think the other person is also typing elephant. So those words were really good labels for the image were really good tags for the image, basically. So I put it online, I programmed it, millions of people played it. And this was a game that was helping label all images on the web.

3 (17m 5s):
And at some point, actually Google in fact bought it. They just bought the technology. Yeah. And then it got, it got implemented. They changed the name from the ESP game, which I call it the ESP game because it's like es extrasensory perception. The idea was like, tried to think what the other person was thinking to the very amazing name of the Google image labeler, which is much less interesting. And,

0 (17m 26s):
And so they bought this from you and was that like life changing money? I mean, were you all of a sudden super rich?

3 (17m 33s):
No, it was not super rich, but it, it was, it was good.

0 (17m 35s):
Got it. Okay. So you, you went on to earn your PhD and, and you get a job at Carnegie Mellon. Correct. You're a young professor. You're, you're on tenure track. And by the way, early on in your academic career, I should mention this, you were granted a very, like, one of the most prestigious awards, the MacArthur grant known as the Genius Grant. Basically, they pick a few people a year and give them like half a million dollars of unrestricted money to work on, on whatever they want. I mean, it, it, it must have been mind blowing

3 (18m 7s):
Yeah. That, that was, you know, I, I've gotten a number of awards in, in my life, but I mean, that was a particular, that was probably the most impactful one Yeah. In terms of just how I felt. And also they do this crazy thing where they don't, you, you have no idea that you're being considered or anything. And Yeah, they, they call you randomly. Yeah. They figure out your phone number one day you pick up and then they just tell you, you know, have you ever heard of the MacArthur Fellowship? And you know, you say yes, and then they just tell you and you're like, wow, what the hell? First you think it's a prank? I thought it was a prank. Yeah.

0 (18m 38s):
And I guess like around this time too, I don't know if this is apocryphal or not, but I read that Bill Gates personally called you to try to convince you to leave your job at Carnegie Mellon and to go work for Microsoft. Is that true?

3 (18m 54s):
That that is true? It's

0 (18m 56s):
Like, what did you pick up your cell phone? It's like, please hold for Mr. Gates, or, or it was like, he on the line. It

3 (19m 1s):
Was pretty much like that. It was pretty much like that. I mean, it was somebody, you know, basically said that, please hold for Mr. Gates.

0 (19m 8s):
And you were like, okay. And he gets on the phone and he is like, Luis, it's Bill Gates here.

3 (19m 15s):
That's exactly right. I had been an intern, I had been like a year and a half before that I had been an intern at Microsoft. And so I had good ties with Microsoft and they really wanted to hire me for Microsoft Research. And so that is, you know, bill Gates spent, I don't know, 45 minutes to an hour trying to convince me to go there. I was very flattered, but, you know, at the time I just wanted to do my own thing. Be be a

0 (19m 34s):
Professor. How did you say no to Bill Gates? What you were like, oh wow. Thank Mr. Gates. I really pretty, so nice. I'm so honored, but I just, you know, no,

3 (19m 43s):
I didn't actually say no. I said I would think about it and then, and then I said no to like a recruiter. But yeah, it, it was not easy. I mean, he's a, a major hero of mine. I mean, he's, he's just an amazing human being. But I just wanted to be a professor at the time. I thought I wanted do my own thing. I wanna be a professor. And that, that's, that's what I wanted to do. Yeah.

0 (20m 0s):
Was money. Im important to you. I mean, you know, was it important to you to

3 (20m 4s):
It it mattered and it, interestingly, I guess it mattered more than it does now. It was nice to know that I, you know, I could, I could buy a nicer car or get a nicer apartment or something. So it was nice, but it was, it's never been my driving force, I would say. Okay.

0 (20m 16s):
So you decide I'm not Bill Gates. Thank you. No, thanks. I'm not gonna Microsoft, I'm gonna stay doing this work. So you are, now were you lecturing, were you teaching classes?

3 (20m 27s):
I was teaching, I was teaching a huge class. It was called Great Theoretical Ideas in Computer Science. It's just a fancy name. It's basically a, a discreet math class. Right. The people who don't do well there usually change majors

0 (20m 38s):
And, and you're like, not like John Nash, but I'm thinking about that movie. You're in front of a, like a big blackboard or a whiteboard and doing equations and problems in front of 250 kids.

3 (20m 48s):
Yeah. Slides had already been around. Okay. So I used, I used PowerPoint. I use PowerPoint. Okay, I got you. It's not that old. Right,

0 (20m 53s):
I got you. Yeah, you're, you're right. Okay. So you're teaching and you had done CAPTCHA and lots of people are saying, Hey, it's annoying. And you are like, yep, I hear you. And, and people kept saying that to you, like kept hearing that.

3 (21m 7s):
Yep. Yep. And, and that's, that's when I started thinking, each time you do it, you waste about 10 seconds of your time. And I just started, this thought just came to me of, wow, how much time am I wasting of humanity? And, you know, I did a little back of the envelope calculation and realized about 200 million times a day, somebody types a CAPTCHA, and that's when you get 200 million times a day, times 10 seconds. So humanity as a whole is wasting about $500,000 a day typing these captions. And, and that's when I started thinking, huh, related to, you know, all my research that I have done, is there something we can get humans to do while they're typing a CAPTCHA that is also useful and we get them to do something useful? Yeah. And it occurred to me that, yeah, we could get them to help digitize books.

0 (21m 50s):
How did, sorry, pause. How did you come to that idea? So like when you type in a random, random letters from a CAPTCHA, you were thinking, wait, how do we have a secondary use for this? And maybe it's books, digitizing books. How did you even, how did that even occur to you?

3 (22m 8s):
I, I was thinking for a long time, can we get people to do something, but at the same time kind of extract valuable computational effort from it until it finally occurred to me, oh, there's all these projects out there trying to digitize all the world's books. Google had announced a really, yeah. At the time it seemed kind of insane. An ambitious project that we're gonna take all of the world's books. Yeah. Everything that's ever been written is a hundred million books ever written. And we're gonna put 'em online. This is what we're gonna do. And now in this process, the way the process works is you take a book, a physical book, then you scan every page, and then the computer needs to be able to decipher all of the words in those photographs. Now, the problem is that computers cannot rec, or at the time, could not recognize many of the words, about 30% of the words computers could not recognize.

3 (22m 53s):
And the reason for that, by the way, which is this amazing thing, is the same reason why computers could not read CAPTCHAs. Basically, this looked kind of like distorted letters

0 (23m 1s):
And, and distorted letters are just inherently difficult for computers to recognize. Like, like that's the point of CAPTCHA.

3 (23m 7s):
That's right. And so it, it occurred to me, oh wow, what if we just take the words out of a book that the computer could not read, and then we send them to people while they're typing captures on the internet. So basically next time you type a CAPTCHA, the words that you see are actually coming from a book and whatever you enter is in fact used to help digitize a

0 (23m 24s):
Book. Do you remember when you came upon that idea? Was it, was it like in a flash or was it just like, did it occur to

3 (23m 30s):
You? Like, I do remember I was, I was driving from Washington DC back to Pittsburgh because I had been to some National Science Foundation panel or something like that. Then I spent the next, you know, few weeks just kind of going over it and go over going over it. And I thought, okay, this, this will work. And, you know, I started building the system, but then I, I recruited a guy who was, his name is Ben Moore. I, he was maybe a freshman in computer science at Carnegie Mellon. He was one of my students. He was in my class, in my large class. He was the best student. And I thought, you, you can help me build this. And so together, we built this system that would take a scan of a book and extract all the words that the computer could not recognize and then send them as a cap.

3 (24m 15s):
Now we decided we're gonna go to big websites and we're gonna tell them, Hey look, we have this CAPTCHA service. It's free, it's better than yours. Yours is relatively crappy. This one's pretty good and we'll give it to you for free. But all we have to be able to do is see what your users can type are typing during this so that we get to digitize the books.

0 (24m 33s):
And, and did websites start, like start to use this tool?

3 (24m 37s):
You know, some small websites started using it. The first largest, it wasn't even large. The, the largest website for a while that was using us was called Online Booty Call.

0 (24m 46s):
Nice.

3 (24m 48s):
And they were to get an account in Online Booty Call, you had to, you, you had to type a CAPTCHA. And it was our CAPTCHA. And every time, every person that was getting an account in online Booty call was starting to help digitize

0 (25m 1s):
Stuff. God bless them,

3 (25m 3s):
God bless them. Indeed. And at some point, a website that was relatively new at the time decided they needed to put a CAPTCHA on their, on their registration flow. And they called us up and it was, it was a website called facebook.com. And they, they were relatively new and they were like, Hey, listen, you know, we, we saw that, we came across it, it seems like you have a good CAPTCHA. Can we, you know, can we put it up

0 (25m 25s):
This in 2007? Sure.

3 (25m 28s):
Probably 2006. 2000. Yeah. You know, we said, okay, cool. And they did it. And that website was growing very fast. And so pretty soon we just had a ton of people using our thing. And then at some point I was giving a talk somewhere in Dallas about this system and how we could digitize books, et cetera. And the guy who was the CTO of the New York Times was in the talk. And he said to me, Hey, you know what, we have this archive of 130 years of content from the New York Times that we have not been able to digitize, particularly because computers cannot recognize the words. How about you digitize it for us? And

0 (26m 3s):
Just, I'm just, just out of curiosity, eventually I'm, I'm assuming you thought this could make money.

3 (26m 8s):
We thought, we thought, but we really didn't. It was, we kind of thought we could make money, but we didn't know how. And what happened is this guy, you know, he then sent me an email. He said, no, I was serious. Let's do it. How much would you charge me to do this?

0 (26m 19s):
Charge them to do what? To digitize, to,

3 (26m 21s):
To help digitize their content to

0 (26m 23s):
New Old New York Times

3 (26m 24s):
The, the entirety of the New York Times archive. And so, you know, we kind of scrambled and we, we had no idea how much to charge him. Yeah. And then we just thought to ourselves, okay, how much would this person have to pay people to digitize? Because the only other solution is people. Yeah. So we came up with something and we said, okay, divide that by four. Yeah. And that's what we're what we'll charge you. And it, we ca the number we came up with was, for every year of content, we will charge you $42,000

0 (26m 48s):
For every year of content in the Times. Okay.

3 (26m 52s):
Yeah. So for every, if you take one year, all additions of that year, we'll charge you $42,000 to digitize that whole thing. That's the number we came up with. And then they, they said, yes.

0 (27m 1s):
And how many years of, that's like 120, 30 years of

3 (27m 5s):
Yes, this several million dollars of a contract there. But they said, okay, we'll pay you per year. Let's do it in one year, then another year, then let's, let's see what happens. And so they sent us the first year we did it, and it turns out because Facebook was already using our CAPTCHA, we actually were digitizing relatively fast.

0 (27m 19s):
Like how quickly would it take to digitize a year of

3 (27m 21s):
A year was being done in about a week. What

0 (27m 25s):
A week of people typing in captions could digitize a whole year of the New York Times.

3 (27m 31s):
Yes. So that's, that's what was going on.

0 (27m 33s):
I'm just, here's here's a question, right. Which is say I'm, I was getting on Facebook in 2000, this is like 2008 I think when the Times approaches you, right? Yep. Yep. So I'm on Facebook in 2008 and I, I sign up for it and I gotta write a CAPTCHA. And the word that I've gotta decipher is anxiety, except one of my favorite words. And I type that in. But how do you know, how does CAPTCHA know that I did that accurately?

3 (27m 59s):
That's a very good question. So what happens is, for you, we actually give you two words. We give you. One is the word anxiety. It's a new word that we just got out of whatever the New York Times. And then the other word is a word that we already have digitized. We already know what the answer is for the other word. Okay. And then we don't tell you which one's which we just tell you please type both. Yep. And if you type the correct word for the one for which we already know the answer, we assume you're a human. And then we also get some confidence that you type the other word correctly. Got it. And if we give this new word to like 10 different people and they all type the same, you know the same word, they all type anxiety, ah, then, then, you know, it's Right then agree. Okay, then

0 (28m 35s):
We know it's right. So your accuracy was pretty high.

3 (28m 38s):
Very high. Yeah. Wow.

0 (28m 40s):
So, so within a week or so, you get this first year of the New York Times digitized. And then presumably they're like, okay, let's keep going.

3 (28m 48s):
That's right. And so what started happening is they started sending us checks for $42,000 coming in pretty quickly. Nice. And, and by the way, we had no company. We had nothing. And at some point Carnegie Mellon got wind of this and they're like, wait a second, you're kind of running a company here, but not really because there's not even a company. You gotta get outta here. Yeah. They had a standard deal that's says, okay, if you're gonna start a company based on, on something that you came up in your research, we'll take 5% of this company. And, and so that's what happened. So we just said, okay, how about you keep 5%, we'll start a company. And so we did, we started a company, I got a lawyer, we formed a company and pretty soon we were making, you know, $42,000 insane every few days.

0 (29m 25s):
And and did you call it Recapture?

3 (29m 28s):
It was Recapture Inc. Yeah.

0 (29m 29s):
And did you leave Carnegie Mellon or did you stay on as a as if

3 (29m 32s):
No, I stayed as a professor. This was a really a side hustle. Everybody I stayed as a professor. Love this Ben, who was also working on it, stayed as an undergrad. He was like a, by then he was like a sophomore. He's like, you just stayed as an undergrad. Wow. I stayed as a professor. It was a side hustle, but it was making quite a bit of money for, for us not doing all that much in there. It's

0 (29m 48s):
Incredible. I mean, you basically have a side hustle where all of the work is being done for you by people who, who aren't, don't even know and wouldn't really care. 'cause it takes them two seconds and they're getting a free Facebook account. Meantime, they're digitizing the times and you're getting $42,000 checks every couple of days from the times.

3 (30m 9s):
Yep. That was the, that was because of what was

0 (30m 11s):
Going on. It's like one of the most genius businesses ever. Like, I can we, can you, we talk after this interview is over to figure out a, a thing like this. 'cause this is amazing. You don't, you don't have any employees. It's just incredible.

3 (30m 24s):
Yeah, it was, it it was pretty good. But then, you know, that, that went on for, for some time. And then actually Google in fact bought it for their own book digitization process.

0 (30m 34s):
Process. Wait, hold on. They approached you. They saw this and they saw that this was really, and they, and they said to you, Hey, we can use this for our books digitization. Yes. And, and what they like threw a number on the table.

3 (30m 47s):
Yes. I mean, multiple numbers were thrown and out and in the end we, we decided this was a good home for it. So we, you know, sold it to Google. And this time I did go to Google for two years. So I took a leave off of being a professor. Okay.

0 (31m 2s):
So you were running this company, this small business, Google buys it from you, which is just incredible. You're still at this point really young, this is really life changing.

3 (31m 14s):
Yeah. Especially since we didn't have, we didn't have investors or anything. It's all the money went to us.

0 (31m 18s):
And and your startup costs were relatively low.

3 (31m 21s):
Yeah.

0 (31m 21s):
Wow. Alright. So you get acquired by Google. You are still a professor at Carnegie Mellon in Pittsburgh. But, but you went to California to Silicon Valley to, to go work at Google.

3 (31m 33s):
Google happens to have an office here in Pittsburgh. Ah,

0 (31m 36s):
Okay.

3 (31m 36s):
Right. And so I was spending about halftime here in Pittsburgh and halftime in

0 (31m 39s):
California. And what were you doing at Google? Were you still just basically running recapture?

3 (31m 43s):
Well, the first order of business was to integrate Recaption to the Google infrastructure. That took about a year, but I was still a professor. And even though I was on leave, I still had PhD students. And towards the end of that first year, I started getting very, very interested in the, the project, which happened to turn into Duolingo.

0 (32m 1s):
And, and, and presumably Luis, I mean, given that you'd already turned down Microsoft like four years earlier, you were not gonna become a Googler. You, you really, I mean, this is part of the deal you had to go

3 (32m 11s):
No, I wasn't

0 (32m 12s):
Work with Google, make this happen. But it sounds to me like you're so restless. You, you were not gonna just work in a big organization for the rest of your career.

3 (32m 20s):
I wasn't gonna do that. Yeah. I it's not, it's not my thing. I mean, I, I I kind of have to do my own thing. What

0 (32m 25s):
Do you think the reason for that is?

3 (32m 29s):
I don't know. I mean, I, you know, I probably, because I'm an only child, I don't know.

0 (32m 32s):
Are you just, just restless?

3 (32m 35s):
I'm, I'm restless and I'm also obsessive, I obsess on one thing, and this is, this is what happened with Google in the end. I mean, I was starting to get obsessed on this new project Duolingo. And this is, I, I just had to leave and, and by the way, leaving cost me quite a bit of money because some of the recapture payment required that I stay there for three years. Yeah. And I did not stay for three years. Hmm.

0 (32m 54s):
So, so you had to give up some of the money. But, so in the meantime, you're still at Carnegie Mellon teaching, and I guess you've got a graduate student there who would eventually become your co-founder at Duolingo. And I think his name is Severn Hacker. Is that right?

3 (33m 12s):
Severn Hacker. Last name is Hacker. I mean,

0 (33m 14s):
It's like a movie name.

3 (33m 16s):
And by the way, the way I met him, I was literally sitting in my office one day minding my own business. And then this lanky guy shows up super tall and super skinny. And he says, hi, I'm Severn Hacker. And I just said, what? They didn't even par it. And then he just did hand gestures. Severn, he did a, a gesture that is like basically cutting his arm Yeah. As if he was severing it. Yeah. And then Hacker, he just did like, as if he was like moving his fingers on keyboard typing with the computer. My God. And then I'm like, oh, Severn hacker. Wow. And he said, yeah, I'm here and I I would like to do research with you. Can I work with you? And I said, Deb, sure. Your name's so amazing. I'll do it

0 (33m 58s):
When we come back in just a moment. Hello Luis and yes, Severn Hacker. Take the Recapture business model and try to use it again to teach people foreign languages for free and how they discover that particular model is just not gonna work. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

Squarespace (34m 31s):
I've talked to hundreds of founders on How, I, Built This, and I've heard time and time again how important it is to have a strong web presence in order to really grow a business. Squarespace is an all-in-one platform for building a brand and engaging customers online. Squarespace lets you easily create a dynamic website and sell anything your products and services and even content you create. Squarespace makes it really easy to get started with best in class website templates for all types of businesses that can be customized to fit your specific needs. Squarespace also provides the tools you need to run your business smoothly, including inventory management, a simple checkout process, and secure payments. And with Squarespace email campaigns, you can build a community of email subscribers and customers. Start with an email template and customize it by applying your own brand ingredients like colors and logo. And once you send built-in analytics, measure your email's impact. Go to Squarespace dot com slash built for a free trial. And when you are ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

Sonos (35m 40s):
Raise the bar of your entertainment with five Sonos most powerful speaker. Use five to experience vividly clear room filling sound for music, streaming vinyl and more five's unrivaled. Acoustic design features three high excursion woofers within a sealed architecture that eliminates reverb and echo when positioned horizontally. Five automatically separates the left and right channels for impressive stereo sound. In fact, I have one in my house. And it's not just a beautifully designed piece of equipment, it is an incredible sound. It's like you're in a concert hall when you put music on. And it's also really easy to connect whichever devices you have, whether it's through Bluetooth or through the three and a half millimeter Jack. We can connect our turntable CD players, a projector and tons of other devices directly to the five. And with Sonos, we started with one speaker and then expanded over time. Sonos makes pairing super easy since Sonos speakers connect over wifi. That means you can group speakers in different rooms and play music throughout your entire house. Head over to Sonos dot com and enjoy up to 20% off the most wanted speakers and sets offer valid through December 18th or while supplies last.

0 (36m 56s):
One more thing before we get back to the show. Every time I run into a How I Built This fan, the first thing they wanna do is tell me about their favorite episode, which is so awesome. So now I wanna share your favorite episode with the millions of people who listen to this show episodes they might not have heard or might wanna hear again. So here's what I want you to do. Grab your smartphone and record a short memo short, like less than 30 seconds. And tell us your name, where you live, and which episode is your favorite, and why you loved it. So for example, I might say, Hey, it's Guy Raz here in San Francisco and my favorite episode of the show is the one about Hamdy, Lakaya and Chobani.

0 (37m 37s):
Because I learned so much about how to just push through and nothing seems to be working out. And it gave me a whole new perspective on being resilient. So that's it. Something like that. You know, and by the way, that's not my favorite episode. I love them all equally. Anyway, once you're done with the recording email or message it to us at ibt at id dot Wondery dot com and we'll share your favorites right here in the ad breaks in future episodes. Thanks so much. You guys are the best. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz.

0 (38m 18s):
So it's around 2012 and Luis has been working at Google for two years and he's got one more year to go to get fully paid out, but he's itching to get going on his next project. So he walks away from Google early. Interestingly,

3 (38m 36s):
What motivates me started changing quite a bit after the recapture acquisition because I really thought, okay, I'm in a really fortunate position in my life. I've now, you know, I don't particularly need to worry about money. Can I do something that helps people? And so I really started thinking about education. And sever, fortunately was also very much into education. So we started thinking, can we do something with education that gives it away for free? And, and the thinking really was, there's all these people that I grew up with in Guatemala, very poor. And a lot of people talk about education as something that brings equality to different social classes. But I always thought as the opposite, as something that brings inequality. Because what happened, at least, you know, in my case, those who have money can buy themselves the best education in the world.

3 (39m 18s):
And those who don't barely learn how to read and write,

0 (39m 21s):
But you're thinking along the lines of like, what is something that can be free? But that would kind of be self generating. So for example, many business models offer a free service with advertising. That's Facebook's model, that's Google's model. Yep. They, they CAPTCHA your data, but you get this service in return. But you were thinking, how can I create something that doesn't cost people anything, but that can be sustainable.

3 (39m 46s):
That's, that's what I was thinking. I was thinking, can we make it sustainable and can we make it free? And languages in particular changed. I mean, Duolingo is a way to learn languages. We, we ended up going to languages particularly also because in both of our cases we're not native English speakers.

0 (40m 2s):
Severn was not either, no,

3 (40m 3s):
He's a, he's a, where is he from? He's from Switzerland. He's a Swiss German native speaker. And so in both of our cases, learning English completely changed our lives. And I just knew, you know, when I was growing up, everybody in Guatemala wants to learn English and nobody could afford it. And turns out that in most countries in the world, if you know English, you can double your income potential. Hmm. So we thought, okay, can we figure out a way to teach people language in particular, teach you English in a way that's, that's free and, but also self-sustaining. Like how can we make it so that it kind of pays for itself?

0 (40m 37s):
Okay, so you've got this language, you think language is where it's gonna be at because that's, that's how we can actually help people increase their income, for example, especially in other countries. And then the next question is, okay, what does that, what does that thing look like?

3 (40m 52s):
Yep. That's what we were thinking. And then eventually we came up with this idea, which is pretty similar to recapture. Turns out today Duolingo does not work this way. It is a good idea, but it is a, a relatively impractical idea.

0 (41m 6s):
And what, so what was

3 (41m 7s):
It? So the idea was this, we're gonna give the service entirely for free, but instead of having people pay us, we're gonna get them to help us translate stuff. So look, there are all these companies that wanna translate stuff. For example, CNN would like to translate all their news that they publish from English to Spanish. They're currently paying people to do that translation. We thought, okay, what if we get these people who are learning English on our platform, what if as a part of their way to practice, you know, the after they learn some stuff we tell, we tell 'em, Hey, here's the CNN article, can you translate it? It's in English, you're learning English, can you translate it into Spanish? And then if we get multiple people to translate the same thing and they kind of collaborate with each other to make a translation at the end, we'll we'll get a translation.

3 (41m 52s):
And we thought, okay, we could sell that translation back to somebody like CNN and make money that way.

0 (41m 59s):
And, and you would use the same technique as used with recapture. Like if 10 people got got the same exact sentence, you knew it was right.

3 (42m 5s):
I had to be a little smarter than that. It turns out, if you give a sentence to 10 people, they'll all translate it differently, but okay. Yeah. Right. Generally, yes. I mean we, we would use, you know, kind of, they had to be pretty close to each other. Then we also had another step where, and the exercise to the person wasn't translate this, but tell us whether this translation's right or wrong. Right? So some people would, would check the translations, but in the end, we built the system actually, but worked pretty well that basically you could give it a text in English, there were people who were learning English or who could be learning English. And then they would be, they would help translate it and then the system would pop out a translation that was made by people. And the translation was very good.

0 (42m 45s):
It's instead of CNN paying some translation service, they would just pay you. Yes. And you would, again, like the New York Times, sending you 42,000 objects, they, you would just have your students learning a language, but they would also be translating these articles into their native language.

3 (43m 1s):
That's exactly what the idea was.

0 (43m 3s):
So, okay, so you have this really great idea, by the way, and, and I'm assuming you're funding the whole project, right? Because

3 (43m 10s):
Yeah, it was a Carnegie Mellon project and it was being funded by a grant from the National Science Foundation and also from my MacArthur grant at Carnegie Mellon. Got it. Okay. And funding at the time, what it meant is basically paying for severance salary. Yeah.

0 (43m 23s):
And so at what point did you say to Severn, alright, let's spin this out and start a business and figure out who you

3 (43m 31s):
Know, this was also an interesting thing. We, okay, we thought, okay, we're, let's do this. This is a good idea. We're convinced this is a good idea, let's do this. But the first thing we need to do is hire more people. 'cause the two of us just can't do it. So we started hiring people, but all inside Carnegie Mellon, we realized actually hiring people was pretty expensive inside a university. And then we thought, okay, well what I need to do is apply for a bigger grant from a National National Science Foundation. And I started working on that. And these, these grant applications, this is like 30 pages long and you have to wait like a year to hear whether you get it or not. And it's like a couple million dollars maybe. And so I was working on that and then suddenly I got connected to a venture capital firm, union Square Ventures.

3 (44m 15s):
And you know, I talk to them about this and very quickly they get back to me and they're like, Hey, we could fund this. I didn't have to write 30 pages. It was much easier to get that money. So we thought, okay, well

0 (44m 28s):
They, they wanted to just, they wanted in on this because, well, first of all, you had a track record.

3 (44m 33s):
It was mainly the track record. In retrospect, I, you know, I know I'm have a relatively good relationship, like close relationship with the unis score folks. I mean, they've now told me, look, we'd never thought this would work, but you had a really good track record, so why not?

0 (44m 45s):
They wanna invest in you. So when they, they approached you, they said, we wanna fund this, we wanna invest in this. And at this point, you had not dealt with an outside investors in

3 (44m 53s):
Your career? No, we had not. And also this, this was still not a company. So at that time we just thought, okay, well let's make it a company and let's take some funding. Yeah.

0 (45m 2s):
And how did you do that? Did you, was there, I mean, seven was your student, so was there an uncomfortable conversation or was it pretty clear you're like, listen, it was my idea, I'm the boss so I'm gonna have X percentage. You know,

3 (45m 13s):
Severn is just, I think it's partly because he's Swiss or because he's like a computer. He's like, Mr. Spock, he had that conversation with me, I didn't have it. He sat down and he said, I want us to write a contract, but it's not a lawyer contract. I just want to write basically a, a Word document that we write. Few lines long that just basically says what our understanding is and we're both gonna sign it. And we wrote down a contract that was just really simple. It's like, we'll go in it half and half. Yep. And all decisions related to hiring we're gonna do together. All decisions related to, I don't even remember what else, but there's like three or four bullet points. Yeah.

3 (45m 53s):
And then it just said his name and my name and we signed it and that was it.

0 (45m 58s):
So, alright, so you create a company and you've got some in interested investors and I think you raised like three plus million dollars from a bunch of different investors, right?

3 (46m 8s):
It's 3.3 million, which at the time this was a normal series A, so it's $3 million from Union Square Ventures and 300,000 from a combination of Tim Ferris and Ashton Kutcher.

0 (46m 21s):
Ashton Kutcher. He was like way ahead of the rest of Hollywood. Now everybody wants to be Ashton

3 (46m 24s):
Kutcher. Ashton Kutcher was a very smart guy in that respect. I mean, very smart guy. Yeah. Yeah.

0 (46m 28s):
He's, he's way ahead of, he was way ahead of the game. I mean everybody now wants to be an Ashton Kutcher. Yeah. They're like, right. It's like there's LeBron James and there's Serena Williams and there's, anyway, alright, so Ashton Kutcher with that money, did you get an office? Did you get a staff? How many did, were you able to hire a bunch of people? Yeah,

3 (46m 45s):
We hired a few people. We did get an office very close to the Carnegie Mellon campus and you know, we started working on it and, and at the time, pretty much everybody told us, you're not gonna be able to beat Rosetta Stone. Like, why would anybody use this? You know, we just kept on saying, well, because it's free, this is gonna be free. And that was our, our main selling point. We didn't know if it was gonna work, but we, you know, we worked on it and we launched, we launched Duolingo dot com in 2012 and it was very fortunate that I had given a TED talk about this. As soon as that went online, we got a ton of people come to Duolingo dot com and

0 (47m 23s):
To try it out. To

3 (47m 23s):
Try it out. And it started growing pretty fast because it was a free way to learn a language. And, you know, at the end of your lessons we would say, Hey, here's this article. You wanna help us translate it? And we, we landed a contract with CNN and a contract with Buzzfeed that we were gonna translate all their news from English to Spanish.

0 (47m 44s):
How, by the way, how did you convince? I mean, it was, it was it relatively cheaper?

3 (47m 49s):
We were, it didn't cost us any money to, to get the translations. Sure. Our users were doing it. We just said, oh, how much do you, you know, pay for? At the time it was like they paid like 10 cents a word. We said, oh, we'll do it for five. Right. 5 cents a word. I gotcha. And it worked. But you know, the translations worked and everything. There was one problem. The amount of money that we were gonna make was actually relatively small. And it's because translations are, it's a pretty shitty business translation. Yeah. It's 5 cents a word. But then pretty soon, suddenly, you know, the, the people from I Buzzfeed found somebody else that would do it for 4 cents a word because Sure. And then we're like, fine, we'll do it for three. It's

0 (48m 25s):
A race to the bottom,

3 (48m 26s):
It's a race to the bottom. And then computers are getting better at it.

0 (48m 29s):
And by the way, you, you, I'm assuming you didn't wanna found a translation service. You were founding an education company.

3 (48m 35s):
That's right. And when One thing we realized is as we were executing on these contracts, we realized that's where the money's coming from. So we're spending more and more of our effort making sure the translations are accurate as opposed to teaching. Well,

0 (48m 47s):
And and it was, there was no ads. Ads. It was, ads was just a website initially. And But you had a lot of people who signed up, right? Like a couple of million.

3 (48m 55s):
Yeah, exactly. We were growing, it was good. But then a couple of things happened. The first thing that happened is we realized this was not gonna be a great business. The other thing that happened is we hired a, well, one engineer and summer intern, they started on the same day, on a summer. And we told them, Hey, the two of you, you don't know each other. We've heard these apps are the thing now, instead of websites or they're starting to become the thing, can you two make a companion app to Duolingo to Duolingo dot com? Let's try that. That's gonna be your, you know, kind of summer project. Let's make a companion app to Duolingo dot com. They came back at some point, they said, you know what? It doesn't have to be a companion app.

3 (49m 35s):
We can actually do all the functionality of Duolingo. We can fully learn a lot of aspects of the language from this app. So we developed it, we launched it, and we were at exactly the right time because there were other apps to learn a language in the app store, but they were pretty crappy and also cost money. And so very quickly this became the most downloaded education app of all

0 (49m 59s):
Apps. Wow. And you guys were there like, right? As apps were like totally starting to explode.

3 (50m 5s):
Yeah, that's right.

0 (50m 7s):
And how were you, I'm just curious how were, I mean, you did not have an, I mean you're an educator, you're a professor, but how were you building a curriculum in different languages? Were

3 (50m 16s):
You, this is great. I mean, yeah, we didn't, we had no idea. I mean, we went and read some books about how to teach languages and first of all, most everybody does not agree on what the best way is to teach a language. And then, so we thought, okay, this is pretty hard. Let's just take what we can from the books and put it out there. Hmm. So I made the first Spanish course myself because I'm a native Spanish speaker. Severn made the first German course himself. And

0 (50m 42s):
This was gonna be just like, kind of the gamification model where it was just level up, level up, level up, level

3 (50m 48s):
Up. Yes. That's the other thing that we realized in the process. When we started making the first versions of the courses, we had people try it out and people would say, oh my God, this is really boring. The hardest thing about learning, learning something by yourself is staying motivated. So let's make it fun. So fortunately early on, we made something that was both fun and also thought your language.

0 (51m 11s):
Got it. Alright. So you, so you launched this thing. Is it pretty clear to you, you know, by the end of that year, by 2013, I mean, I think you got 15 million users by the end of that year. Yep. Was it pretty clear to you that it was not gonna make money, it was not gonna be sustainable just by doing contracts with news organizations? It

3 (51m 30s):
Was, it was, and particularly because we couldn't figure out how to make the translation stuff work on our app, just people couldn't type that much in the app, et cetera. So we just couldn not figure that out. And the majority of our users were in the app. So I made the difficult decision, though, to cancel those contracts and forget about trying to make money and just raise more venture capital. And sure enough, we, we, we had some very good investors who decided to invest and that's how we were sustaining ourselves.

0 (51m 58s):
So you are basically sustaining yourself off investment cash, but did you feel like you had to, you had to change your business model?

3 (52m 6s):
I mean, that, you know, this by the way, has been one of these biggest struggles with Duolingo. Our mission from the beginning has been to give free language education. This is why we started the company. That is the thing, that's an easy way to make money here, which is just charge for it. And so when we talk to investors, the first thing I would tell 'em is, look, the, the one thing that will not change is I'm not gonna charge for people to learn a language here. And so, you know, people would invest and I think a lot of times they would invest and they would think, okay, eventually they're gonna charge. Yeah. But I told them, you know, I'm not gonna charge. And so we, we raced funding. I mean, we raced, I don't know, at some point we had raced close to about a hundred million dollars.

3 (52m 46s):
And

0 (52m 47s):
Wow. Wait, hold on. Stop. Pause a hundred. I mean, you're not manufacturing a product in a factory. Why? I'm just thinking it's ones and zeros in a computer. You got what? Tell me why it's so expensive.

3 (52m 58s):
Here's the thing, you want to hire really good engineers and really good designers. Yeah. And really good product managers. They are not cheap.

0 (53m 6s):
I got you.

3 (53m 6s):
You gotta pay 'em. And that's, that's, that's the expense,

0 (53m 10s):
Right? These are the most expensive software engineers, not the most expensive part of, and but you're based in Pittsburgh. You're not based in California. Correct.

3 (53m 18s):
And you would think that because we're based in Pittsburgh, you cheaper. Yeah. It's not true. There's a reason. From the beginning, we decided we were gonna hire only the very best people and the very best people have offers from companies in California. And they say, I have this offer that is for, you know, I'm just graduating from college. I have this offer that is for $130,000. Are you gonna match it or not? Yeah. And so what do you do? But we had no idea how we were gonna make money. I mean, the first way we tried, which was these translations we had given up on, and at some point we raised money from Google. Capital G is one of their investment arms. We raised money from them. It was, it's, I believe it's 45 million bucks that we raised from them.

3 (54m 0s):
Wow. You know, I was feeling good. I, I thought, okay, well we can continue raising money for a while. Like, whatever, I don't know. I don't need to figure out how to make money. We can just continue raising money for a while. And the partner from that firm sat me down and she said, you know, you're not gonna find a bigger fool. We're the biggest fool and nobody else will invest in this company. If you don't figure out how to make money, if you have zero plans to make money, nobody else is gonna invest in this company. And that's when we, that's when we started kind of freaking out and try to figure out how we're gonna make money

0 (54m 30s):
When we come back in just a moment. While Luis says no to one of the most obvious ways to make money and why he ultimately decides to say yes, stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

Mint Mobile (54m 53s):
Give yourself the gift of insane savings this holiday season with Mint Mobile's best wireless deal of the year. Right now. When you switch to Mint Mobile and buy any three month plan, you'll get another three months for free. That's six months of premium wireless service for the price of three. Mint Mobile lets you order and activate from home while saving tons on phone plans, starting at just $15 a month. Seriously, I can't think of a better gift than turning an overpriced wireless bill into just $15 a month with Mint Mobile. If you're still looking for a gift, mint Mobile's best offer of the year is here. Or if you're looking to get something nice for yourself, you can use your phone with any Mint Mobile plan and switch easily and effortlessly with eim. For a limited time, buy any three month Mint mobile plan and get three more months free by going to mint mobile.com/built. That's mint mobile.com/built. Cut your wireless build of 15 bucks a month@mintmobile.com slash built.

Wow In The World (55m 58s):
As the host and creator of How I Built This, I get the opportunity to share inspiring stories about companies creating amazing innovations. What you might not know is that I also co-host another podcast also about innovation, but designed for the curious kids in your life on wow in the world. My co-host, Mindy Thomas and I dive into scientific innovations that wow both kids and their grownups. Like about how a shade of white paint could help fight climate change, or how spider silk could be a key component to reducing plastic consumption. Invite the curious kids in your life to experience the wows of innovation and new technologies with wow in the world. The number one podcast for curious kids and their grownups. Listen to wow in the world early and ad free Right now on wondery Plus.

0 (56m 56s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Roz. So it's 2015 and Google has just invested $45 million in Duolingo, which is great, but Luis still doesn't know how it's gonna make money. And one thing he doesn't wanna do is sell ads.

3 (57m 14s):
We were very precious about this. We cared a lot about the user experience in Duolingo. Yeah. And we thought, first of all, we're never gonna put ads in here. Secondly, we're never gonna charge people. And basically Layla from Google was like, well, I don't know how you're gonna make money because these are the standard ways of making money, but you gotta figure it out.

0 (57m 33s):
This is an important point because I think a lot of businesses start out this way with really strong principles that seem right. Yep. But when you say that, you actually kind of put your box yourself in because sometimes there are reasons to do some of those things in order to accomplish the bigger goal of, for example, of delivering a free product.

3 (57m 54s):
You are completely right. Right. So

0 (57m 56s):
You had to basically do a 180, you had to have hard conversations with people and say, Hey, you know, we, we gotta start thinking about maybe advertising on our site. And maybe

3 (58m 5s):
We, we did at the time, we had, I dunno how many employees? 60. But it's funny because the people we had hired early on, they had offers from, you know, companies that were, had much bigger names than us, Facebook, et cetera. And the reason they had come work for us is because they really believed in our mission of kind of giving free language education. So we had ended up with basically 60 to 70 zealots who all just wanted to The mission free education. Yeah. The mission. Like we're here for the mission to this day, it is still like that. So, which is great, but we had a year of turmoil where basically we're like, okay, well we need to figure out how we're gonna make this sustainable because we're not gonna be able to raise much more funding, you know, if we never make money.

3 (58m 47s):
Yeah. And so, sorry, but this gotta be a way to make money.

0 (58m 50s):
And if you don't have money, you don't, you don't have a business. If we

3 (58m 52s):
Don't have a business and we're not gonna be able to reach the number of people we wanna reach. At some point, enough people got convinced that, okay, we'll put an ad at the end of every lesson. I remember we showed it to our head designer who Yeah. He, he almost vomited.

0 (59m 9s):
I get it. I mean, did people say to you, or did you get the feeling that like, I don't know, people thought that you were selling out?

3 (59m 16s):
Yeah, I think so. And now I, you know, I don't think it's too many people because I, I think I myself went through a transformation that took me, it took me several months to go through this transformation. Yeah. So I, and, and you know, we put the ad at the end of every lesson and fortunately that actually it gave us quite a bit of money. I mean, as soon as we put that ad our run rate went from zero to like 10 million bucks a year. Wow. One tiny ad. It didn't even cover the whole screen. What

0 (59m 40s):
Was the company?

3 (59m 41s):
Oh, we, you know, we used Google Ads, so, okay. You used Google. Google Ads. Okay. They came from everywhere. Everywhere. So random, random places.

0 (59m 47s):
Not latenight booty call.com though, I hope.

3 (59m 51s):
No. And soon after that, we got a bunch of people who would tell us, Hey, I don't like ads. Can I pay you to turn off the ads? Huh? And we thought, okay, how about we launch this subscription service where the main thing is you can pay us to turn off the ads. It turned out, and this is just, we really just didn't realize this subscriptions made us a ton more money than the ads.

0 (1h 0m 14s):
And, and what, what, what was it, what it cost to subscribe?

3 (1h 0m 17s):
9 99 per month.

0 (1h 0m 19s):
Okay. So a little bit more than Spotify, but, and, but through that you could do any language you wanted, any course with no ads. Right.

3 (1h 0m 26s):
And if you didn't want to pay, you just had to watch, you know, see the ads at the end of a lesson.

0 (1h 0m 31s):
And so all of a sudden you had people who were willing to pay some money. But still, I mean we, we, of course I know we know the advertising model and podcasting and it's still a small percentage of people when you get a freemium version. Right. Even Spotify, most people are still getting it for free and dealing with the ads.

3 (1h 0m 52s):
Yes. So, well, at first it was very few by now, I mean, it's been a couple of years since we added our subscription. By now 3% of our users pay for the subscription,

0 (1h 1m 1s):
Which is a lot. 'cause how many total users do you have?

3 (1h 1m 4s):
A lot. I mean, this is tens of millions. Yeah. I mean, active users, right now we have about 40 million monthly active users and about 3% of them are, are paying subscribers.

0 (1h 1m 15s):
Alright. Now here comes the, the, the tough part, which is Duolingo of course is free. So, you know, it's a free offering. But of course, even with free offerings, there's, there's gonna be criticism. And you know, there have been professors who, who specialize in this have said, you know, you can't really get that proficient with Duolingo. You know, I, maybe I can learn some words or phrases, but it's not, doesn't really actually teach me a language. And, and before we dive into this, just in general, when you hear this criticism, does it make you defensive or does it make you think like, maybe we gotta make this a little better?

3 (1h 1m 52s):
The truth is, there's a lot of marketing out there that tells you that you can learn a language in nine days. This is not true. Actually learning a language takes years. This is, this is the first thing to, to understand. Yeah. Secondly, there's, there's various levels. of course Duolingo teaches you pretty well from zero. So starting from the beginning to about intermediate, depending on the language that you're learning. Yeah. If you want to use Duolingo and start from zero and get to the point where you're the poet laureate of that country, that is unlikely to happen with Duolingo by itself. That's just not going to happen. But the way we see it is, A, we keep getting better and better.

3 (1h 2m 34s):
B, if you look at a, any single method, I mean take the, for example, the single method of US high school education. Yeah. It kind of doesn't work very well. How proficient are people who take Spanish throughout high school at the end of high school, on average, not that proficient. Right. And our goal with Dualling, and we're not there yet, but our goal is to get people from zero to a level of the language. It's a level called B two, which is where you can get a knowledge job in that language. Hmm. You know, Google for example, employs software engineers here in the United States whose English level is B two. Okay. That is our goal. We're not there yet.

0 (1h 3m 11s):
So we interviewed James Park who created Fitbit and Fitbit. The genius of Fitbit was, it was like a gamified exercise, right? Like Yep. People are like, ah, I did 10,000 steps today, or, you know, I made it, it's hard to get humans to change habits. So how do you get, let's say a, a significant percentage of people to finish a language program? Yeah.

3 (1h 3m 29s):
This is what we spend a lot of our time on. And you know, this is one of the things that when we get criticisms, one of the things that they don't take into account is a lot of the research about how to teach a language is done with people who are in some sense held hostage in the classroom. Right? Yeah. The hardest thing about learning a language is staying motivated. So we spend a lot of effort trying to make Duolingo more motivating and more fun. And the way we do that is just by adding game elements. I mean using Duolingo, a lot of people refer to it as playing Duolingo is just, it feels a lot like, like, like playing a game.

0 (1h 4m 3s):
You get a, you get rewards, you get like level up kind of thing.

3 (1h 4m 7s):
That's exactly right. And, and, and other things we do, for example, here, this is another interesting thing we do. We want you to use Tingo every day. I mean, the truth is, if you actually wanna learn a language, you gotta turn it into a habit. One thing that is really powerful for us is send, we send you notifications. So we have a pretty sophisticated artificial intelligence system is one of the most sophisticated things we have that figures out when to send you a notification and what to say in them. Yeah. And for example, one of the most powerful things we, you know, we've done is after about five days, if you haven't come back, we send you a notification that says, these notifications don't seem to be working, we're gonna stop sending them for now that turns out to be an extremely powerful way to get people to come back,

0 (1h 4m 45s):
Huh?

3 (1h 4m 46s):
Because they feel guilty that we're stopping to send a notification so that gets 'em to come back.

0 (1h 4m 51s):
Yeah. It's like, hold, you gotta hold people accountable. Yes. This, which is very hard. This is why people have personal trainers because otherwise they won't go to the gym. Yeah.

3 (1h 4m 59s):
But

0 (1h 4m 60s):
Why would somebody pick Duolingo over any other language app? You mentioned Rosetta Stone, for example. Right. And I'm, I'm sure you've looked at it and I mean obviously you're a competitor, but they probably do a decent job teaching languages. So why, why wouldn't you just like do that?

3 (1h 5m 16s):
Yeah. I mean, before we launched Rosetta Stone was the biggest thing in the world, and everybody told us you're not gonna be able to beat them. Yeah. By now, I, I would say we probably have 50 times more uses than they do. Our revenue is probably five x their revenue. Oh

0 (1h 5m 31s):
My God.

3 (1h 5m 32s):
Something to that effect. There's a big reason. It's the fact that we're free, and this is one of the things that our mission, which is really giving free language education, I think is actually good for business. Yeah. We don't spend very much in marketing. We have all these people. 97% of our users don't pay us. Yeah. So it's just, I think we just have this huge user base of people who are basically our marketing engine. But a lot of companies in education eventually turn into marketing companies. Yeah. For the following reason. You realize, man, making improvements in how well you teach is hard and it really is very hard. It's, it takes years. So for every dollar you have, you quickly realize it's actually better to spend your dollar marketing your product rather than making your product better.

3 (1h 6m 18s):
Hmm. I've been, you know, hard liner on this. We spend all our effort just making the product better. And the main reason is I think we're really in it kind of for the long term. And I think in the long term, the better product will win. And this is why we don't spend so much money on marketing

0 (1h 6m 33s):
Luis in December of 2019, your company was valued at $1.5 billion. So what's the exit? I mean, you got investors obviously, they convinced you, were convinced that you had to keep it sustainable and to grow it. And you now valued at $1.5 billion and sounds like you're, you know, keeping the lights on pretty well. What, what's the, what's the end game at some point? You know, it's sell or go public,

3 (1h 6m 60s):
The end game here is to go public. That's what we've been working towards. We have the revenue now to be able to go public. We are cashflow positive. Hmm. And one of the things that I think is really important is the way I see it, we have so much more still to go. Yeah. In terms of how much better we can teach and, and also teaching all this stuff. We recently released an app to teach reading to young kids. It's called Duolingo, a, b, CI think there's a huge amount of impact that we can do with that. Yeah. So I, I mean, to me it's just keep going with this. I, that's, that's the goal.

0 (1h 7m 36s):
Luis, given all of the things that have happened to you, I mean your incredible success, how much of that do you attribute to your intelligence and how hard you worked and how much do you think it's because you were lucky?

3 (1h 7m 47s):
I was definitely lucky. I mean, I, launching an app at the time we launched the app was exactly the right time. And launching an app in late 2012 was a really good time to launch an app. So, you know, I've, I've been incredibly lucky. I I think that, and I think just hard work on the same thing. I I get obsessed with the same thing. I mean, I've been, I've been working on Duolingo for now eight years and I'm pretty obsessive about it. So I think it's both.

0 (1h 8m 17s):
That's Luis von Co-founder of Duolingo. We first ran this interview back in May of 2020 and a little over a year later, the company did in fact go public at a valuation of nearly $5 billion. And today it's valued at nearly $9 billion. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And as always, it's totally free. This episode was produced by Casey Herman, with music composed by Ramine Arablouei. It was edited by Neva Grant. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Sam Paulson, Alex Chung, Malia Aga, John Isabella, Chris Masini, Kerry Thompson, Carla Estevez, and Catherine Cipher.

0 (1h 9m 3s):
I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. If you like How I Built This, you can listen early and ad free Right now by joining wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts. Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon Music. Before you go, tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at wondery.com/survey.