Up First (0s):
We live in a world, a country, and a moment in time where there's so much important news and it is constantly changing. That's why up first is here for you. It's NPRs daily morning news podcast. In about 10 minutes, you can start your day informed. Listen to up first on the NPR one app or wherever you get your podcasts.

Hulu Ad Manager (20s):
Are you a small business owner looking to advertise on a streaming platform with some of the hottest shows on TV, Hulu ad manager, lets you get your brand on Hulu for as little as $500 per campaign. You can choose your audience, set your budget, upload your ad and track performance in near real time. It's simple. Go to Hulu ad manager.com/stream to get started.

AT&T (45s):
When building a business, there are tons of moving parts. One that's often overlooked is having the right network. Thankfully with at and T business. You can pick the best wireless plan with the features you need for your small business. For example, your teams can work remotely with phone to laptop, tethering and up to a hundred gigabytes of hotspot data on the best plan from at and T business. Wherever business takes you@andtbusinesshasthefeaturesyouneedvisitatt.com slash B I Z U Y w after a hundred gigabytes with our at and T unlimited elite plan. Hotspot speed is slowed to a max of 1 28. Kbps

1 (1m 20s):
Hey, it's guy here. And just a couple of things before we get to the show today. First, I've got something very cool to share with you all after months of hard work and even some electronic sweat and tears. I can finally say the, how I built this shop is now open. Check out this curated collection of products for every idealist and innovator out there. In fact, I'm wearing my, how I built this hoodie as we speak. So if you want to get your own or maybe a high bill, this hat or t-shirt or mug check out Wondery shop.com to find all of your, how I built this gear. The second announcement is that later this week on how I built this lab, I'll be talking to she's a shy head of the Malala fund and founder of our place, the brand behind that cookware that you see all over Instagram, but for today's show running an episode from a few years back, it's the story of Sarah couse who created the swell water bottle.

1 (2m 18s):
The episode first ran in April of 2020, just a few weeks after most of the world shut down because of COVID back when it seems strange to interview somebody while they were sitting in their bedroom. Anyway, it's one of my favorites and I hope you enjoy it. You went to a trade show and you literally saw a table with knockoffs of your bottles. There is, is that right?

3 (2m 46s):
Yeah. So not only were there swell bottles at this trade show, but the swell bottles had one in a ward and had a ribbon on a display case at the trade show.

1 (2m 57s):
Was it the same logo with the S apostrophe? Well,

3 (3m 0s):
Yeah, it was the same logo and it had the trademark symbol on the side of it.

1 (3m 4s):
What was your first reaction? Like

3 (3m 7s):
I almost passed out.

1 (3m 15s):
Welcome to how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Ross and on the show today, how Sarah cows turned the humble thermos into a sleek accessory called swell and watched her business grow by the tens of millions of dollars. So one of the common threads you might've noticed on the show is the element of design design matters a lot and not just design of your product, but the design of your business, the logo, the colors you use, the customer interface, all of these things differentiate successful brands, especially when they're trying to break out of the pack.

1 (4m 7s):
So for example, think of Spindrift sparkling water. That is a crowded space, but Spindrift stands out not only for the quality of its product, but for the simple and clean design of it or soul cycle. The founders of that company spent months coming up with the colors, gray, black, yellow, and the simple geometric logo, a bike wheel with spokes. So design matters and that is in part the story of swell. It's a water bottle. Yes, a very good water bottle. But when Sarah coulis launched it back in 2010, there were already lots of good bottles out there.

1 (4m 46s):
Thermos bottles that kept her drinks hot and cold Camelback bottles with those foldable straws, squeezy plastic cycling bottles, but almost no bottle that looked sleek and beautiful. A bottle you'd want to put on your Instagram feed. And that was Sarah couches. Great insight. That is how she broke through the pack. And as you will hear, she didn't have personal wealth and lots of her friends wondered why she was throwing away a perfectly safe career in accounting to pursue water bottles. But Sarah had a hunch that lots of people would want a better bottle. People who didn't want to buy and throw away single use plastic people who wanted a functional and nice looking bottle at the same time.

1 (5m 34s):
And she was right in 2016, just six years after it launched swell, reportedly did about a hundred million dollars in revenue. And by the way, Sarah managed to scale a company without ever taking a dime of outside money. She did it by building swell, methodically and strategically. Anyway, right now the company is dealing with the same economic anxiety that everyone else is facing. And I'll ask Sarah about that. And because of the current situation, I couldn't interview her in a studio. So Sarah joined me from her home in Florida, which is where she grew up.

3 (6m 11s):
I am sitting in my bedroom and Jupiter, Florida. The reason I'm sitting in my bedroom and not my home office is my son. Who's just under two likes to come and knock on the office door and say mama Mala. So this was the quietest place in my house that I could hide. So it's a beautiful sunny day in Jupiter. I'm watching the boats on the Loxahatchee river go by. It's it's a bit bizarre that it's so pretty out given what's going on in the world.

1 (6m 38s):
And, and that river you're looking at, you actually grew up like by that very same river, right?

3 (6m 43s):
Yes. Life simple life was easy. You know, you could ride your bike outside and have all kinds of adventures. You know, there was always some kind of something to be discovered, you know, something to be built. It's a beautiful place to have grown up.

1 (7m 1s):
Yeah. And tell me about what your dad did for a living.

3 (7m 5s):
He ran and owned a carwash. He built and ran that business for 40 years, you know, five, six days a week working at the carwash, which also had a gas station, a little shop and a few tenants, including an ice cream store that my mom ran and a plant nursery that he rented out. So he was a small business owner in Florida.

1 (7m 26s):
We, all of this was at the gas station. There was an ice cream shop and a nursery and a gas station and a carwash.

3 (7m 32s):
It was genius. So you, it was, you dropped your car off on one side and you had to walk through the retail establishments to pay for your car wash. And of course you had to wait 15 to 20 minutes until your car was done. So why not buy a plants, an ice cream cone and maybe some greeting cards while you're waiting. So it was, it was sort of one-stop shopping.

1 (7m 53s):
Yeah. So was your mom and dad basically worked together every day. I mean, your dad was kind of running the facility, your mom was running the ice cream shop. It sounds like they made it work.

3 (8m 2s):
They made it work. Yeah. They're, they're still really very close. And I think that, you know, building a business, building a family, you know, going through all that together, it's a unique opportunity to sort of talk about your day and talk about your lives together, but they certainly made it work.

1 (8m 17s):
What kind of kid were you in high school? What do you remember about you as a high school student?

3 (8m 21s):
Oh, I was as awkward as they come in high school. I terrible hairstyle. I wish somebody had told me at the time that those big banks were going to come back and haunt me in later years. I was certainly not a popular girl. I, you know, I was a bit of a nerd. I was co-president of the save the Manatee club with my best friend. I was, I was at a club called DECA. It was a business club and I went to state and national conventions working on business problems. When my senior year I was voted most likely to succeed in business. You

1 (8m 56s):
Were already into business in high school. Like you were. I remember those kids in high school, they would be mocked, you know, there's that kid in the business club and some of them were carried briefcases, but you were kind of like that.

3 (9m 10s):
I was definitely like that. I actually, I think because I grew up with entrepreneurs that were always running a business. I think that I knew that I would go into business in some form or faction from a pretty young age.

1 (9m 22s):
Yeah. So you went off to the university of Colorado and you studied accounting, which is a very practical thing to study. And I guess you, your first job out of college was with Ernst and young as a trainee or a junior CPA,

3 (9m 39s):
Correct? Yeah. So I, I took the CPA exam right out of college and I went to work at Ernst and young, I think the weekend after I graduated and I, I was in Denver for two years working as an auditor. And then I moved to Los Angeles and I was still at EOI and I worked in the tax division for two years.

1 (9m 56s):
And basically that means that you were your first two years, you were sent to a client and you would just go through all their books and just make someone's life miserable by asking them what's this what's, this what's that right? I mean, is that sort of what you did?

3 (10m 10s):
That's basically right. I mean, I wouldn't say we were there to make everyone's lives miserable, but I can't say there was a single client that was ever happy to see us coming. You know, they would give you this audit room somewhere in the basement without a heat or air conditioning or window and say, oh, how long are you staying? Can you leave tomorrow?

1 (10m 26s):
Woo. Here come the auditor's welcome. All right. So you do that. And then you do tax auditing to after your first two years.

3 (10m 34s):
Yeah. After my first two years in Denver, I was getting a little bit itchy to try to do something different. And this was 2000 where all the.com companies were really quite exciting. And I kept reading about the clients that I had had in California, and they were all the.com companies. They were mostly new media companies and really the first DTC companies that I went to go work with. And it was really a bit of the wild west because a lot of these internet companies were transacting, you know, potentially for the first time. And we were helping them think about and solve questions and problems that were absolutely brand new. So is non-glamorous as a tax roll sounds.

3 (11m 15s):
It was actually pretty interesting work just because of the types of individuals, our clients were.

1 (11m 20s):
It's amazing because this really does speak to how you were really kind of whether consciously or not laying the groundwork for what you would eventually do, because all of those skills would be crucial when you started your business. Eventually. I mean, just having that knowledge and the ability to think about financial issues from the beginning gave you a huge advantage.

3 (11m 41s):
I agree. Absolutely. You know, in hindsight, almost everything that I did help lay the groundwork for where we are today, but it didn't feel like that at the time I was such a restless soul. Right. Was I, I just couldn't wait to do the next thing and find myself and figure out what the universe had in store for me that I didn't realize that all of that was potentially very valuable and necessary steps to get to where we are now.

1 (12m 7s):
Yeah. All right. So you do your thing at Ernst and young, and you decided to go to business school to Harvard business school. And did you make that decision? Cause you thought, all right, I've done this now. I need to build a network of people or I need some new ideas about the next thing to do, or was that the thinking

3 (12m 26s):
It was after a few years of really working with these clients, I, I just wanted to become one of my clients. And one of the common themes that my clients had were a lot of them had gone to business school. And so it was more just the gift of time of a couple of years to try to come up with some idea or some kind of what's next for me, because I realized that E Y I didn't aspire to be my boss or my boss's boss, but, you know, I met so many amazing and fantastic people in business school that I wasn't really networking with to help me with my business. They were just my knucklehead friends that were helping me get through this experience of school that now happen to be the movers and shakers of business.

3 (13m 10s):
So I don't know that I needed to go to school to learn finance or marketing or operations. But I think for me, it was the combination of the confidence. Plus the network of friends that kind of helped support me through the times that I need it.

1 (13m 24s):
Now, you were there from, from 2001 to 2003, and I should mention right. That you were there at a time where I don't think entrepreneurship was really being emphasized. Right? Like most students were really kind of going there and they would end up at McKinsey or at a big finance firm on the partnership track. Is that, is that right? Like entrepreneurship, wasn't really a thing quite yet.

3 (13m 47s):
That's right. It really wasn't a thing. When I was in business school, I think I took one half class on entrepreneurship, but it was more how to finance a business than how to start and grow a business. You know, now of course there's whole centers devoted to it. And there's a lot of resources that I wish that I had had, but no, it really wasn't a thing. Back when I was in school.

1 (14m 5s):
Do you think that going there in the back of your mind, you had this idea of maybe I'll graduate and become an entrepreneur? Was that your thinking or not quite yet?

3 (14m 14s):
You know, it was, I mean, even my essay before I went into business school, I wrote about how I wanted to start some company at some point and do something. I just really was looking for that big idea when I was in school. And, you know, unfortunately I didn't find the idea while I was in school. I was still searching for it. When I finished school. I was actually at HBS during the time of September 11th. So the economy took a real change from the time when I started in 2001 through the time when I left in 2003. Yeah.

1 (14m 44s):
Yeah. So you, you finished in 2003. And what did you do when you graduated?

3 (14m 49s):
Oh, I, I had a really hard time finding a job when I graduated. So myself and just a couple of my friends. We actually wound up staying at Harvard business school and the school created jobs for some of us. So you're working in a position that, you know, quite honestly I was making less after business school than I did before. You've got a massive amount of student loans and you also just don't know when the economy is going to get better. And it was, it was a really strange and difficult time for myself and a couple of my friends that wound up basically kind of sticking around and not finding our next step.

1 (15m 22s):
All right. So you, so you get a job at working at HBS for awhile and then, and then I guess eventually you got a job with a real estate development firm.

3 (15m 31s):
I did. So my, my previous roommate from before business school, when I worked in California, she said, well, there's an interesting job at my company. I know you have no real estate experience, but they're looking for someone. And I was able to talk my way into international real estate development role for a number of years, helping to build big private partnerships for mostly laboratory buildings for scientists.

1 (15m 58s):
Huh. Tell me about your, kind of your state of mind then. Were you happy? Was your life interesting? Were you thinking, all right, I'm on the right track now,

3 (16m 8s):
You know, I was really unsettled at the time. I liked my job. I liked the people, but professionally I found myself sort of really wondering why is this all that there is, you know, I, I certainly was finally, you know, making a pretty good, normal, decent salary, you know, being a VP at a public company. I had some, some stock options that, you know, invest over time and, you know, it was obviously helping me with my savings account, but, you know, helping me pay off my loans, I just, I sorta started to get a little bit itchy, almost the same way that, you know, when I was at EYA I knew that I didn't want to become my boss's boss. You know, it was certainly a really interesting challenge to see if I could figure it out, but it wasn't necessarily the thing that was making me feel really excited about my career.

1 (16m 54s):
And you were living in New York at the time, by the way

3 (16m 57s):
I was, my company had put me up in a month, a month rented apartment because I was doing a real estate project there. So I was really living in nomadic life. They, they put me up in a studio apartment there.

1 (17m 8s):
So did you have time to think about, or did you make time to think about what else you could do? Did you talk to people about it or did you kind of keep it inside?

3 (17m 19s):
I kept it inside. You know, I, I would say that from the outside, everyone thought that, oh, things were going pretty well. I think I was at the point in my life that I didn't want to whine and moan about. They seem to be high class problems about, oh, you know, I'm not feeling fulfilled, but I was working so much. And I wasn't really making the time to think about what came next. I almost had to go on a vacation with my mom and really step away from the day-to-day of my busy life to even have any type of, you know, reflection time. I literally had to get outside of my own life, you know, in a place that required you to put your Blackberry at the time away and not be so focused on, you know, the next ping that you're going to get on your email, because I wasn't really making the time to think about my own personal situation and what came next.

1 (18m 8s):
Alright. This is, this is an important moment because I think it's around 2009. You, your mom going on vacation, hiking trip to Arizona, I guess your mom had been cancer free and was celebrating.

3 (18m 22s):
Yes, it was a really big, exciting moment. My mom had had breast cancer and was so brave and so strong and, and really got through it to the other side and was done taking all of the horrible medicine. And we said, you know, if, if you can just get to the other side of this, we're going to go away and have a, you know, a fancy spa vacation. So we went off to Tucson, Arizona, and it was one of those moments that because we were celebrating her, her health and, and really having those deep conversations and those, those thoughts about, you know, life, you, you get one and you know, what are you going to do with it? And how do you want to spend your time? And what's really important. And my mom started it and she said, you know, if I had to do it all over again, I would have been a painter.

3 (19m 6s):
Wow. She said she loved to paint and she taught painting classes in high school, but she wanted to have a career and raise her family and she studied something else and she did something else. And she said, you know, now that I got through this cancer thing, I'm going to take painting lessons. And she said to me, she said, what is it that, that you voice want it to do? And don't wait for health scare. Don't, don't wait for, you know, until you get my age to go do it. You know, what is it that you wanted to do? And wow, I don't, it just, it all came out of me, just, just in that conversation.

1 (19m 39s):
All right. So you'd run this hike. You're this is intense, man. I'm like, your mom's survive. Like she's telling you all these things and you're like, oh my God, it must've been, you must have been crying a lot and laughing, like it must be superintendent, because this is really the beginning of what would be the rest of your professional life. What, what happened on that hike?

3 (19m 60s):
It was one of those things sky that it was everything. Everything just came together. I just, you know, I was walking with my reusable water bottle. So I, for many, many years have gave up single use plastic. I think part of it was, you know, Boulder being part of me going to see you and, you know, being a very environmental school and, you know, I grew up recycling. So there was, I always use a reusable bottle, but it was as hot in Arizona and we're hiking for a long time. And so I'm, you know, I'm walking with this metal bottle on a hot day and drinking hot water. So the first thing that occurred to me is wouldn't it be great if somebody invented a water bottle that actually kept things cold. Right? And then I had just recently been at my business school reunion at Harvard, and they had a professor that made a presentation about climate change and talked about how those that are affected by the water crisis.

3 (20m 50s):
We're only going to become worse in the future. And so I had this idea on the hike that if there was a company that, that was creating a better water bottle, and you try to tie it to a social mission by, by working on plastics and climate change and educating people about the water crisis, it could be really interesting to do something good while doing something good.

1 (21m 16s):
Wow. So you're thinking, all right, maybe there's something to do with water, water bottle, a better water bottle. You finish your hike, your trip to Arizona ends. You say goodbye to your mom and you go back to New York and you go back to your job. But does this idea like, like when, when you are on the flight back to New York, when you get back to your apartment, like, is this idea now planted in your head?

3 (21m 42s):
It was, I started writing a little bit of a business plan. It's embarrassing to call it that now, but it was more of an outline, a manifesto of, of what I thought this company could be.

1 (21m 52s):
And what did you write?

3 (21m 53s):
Oh, I, I wrote that we were going to be the, the water bottle partner to fashion week and, and the Ted conference and sold and Bloomingdale's and changing the world. And, you know, I, I sat down and just started writing. Like, if, if a product could do all this, you know, how, how would it work? You know, of course there weren't any practical bits in there. There wasn't anything in there about the financial statements or, you know, how to do processes or procedures or manufacturing. It was, it was more of just a thought piece about what could happen if this really worked.

1 (22m 26s):
So what was your first, what do you remember your first step being, I mean, here you are, you are working for a real estate development company, no background in manufacturing or supply chain or, or design, even. What was the first thing that you, you remember doing after writing down your manifesto?

3 (22m 45s):
Well, I remember going to the sporting goods store, Paragon sports, and union square. And I purchased a one of every water bottle on the market and started using the myself and passing them out to my friends and asking them to use them as well. Just to try to get some feedback on how it could work better, how it could look better, how it'd be packaged better, really just trying to educate myself on what was out there and what I wanted to build.

1 (23m 11s):
And what did you find out?

3 (23m 13s):
Well, I mean, I found out that there were a lot of bottles out there, right? This, this was a very crowded marketplace, but what I discovered was there wasn't anything that really looked great. I mean, everything was appropriate for the gym. Everything was fine for hiking. Right. But there wasn't anything that I thought could catch like wildfire, like a fashion, accessory, a thing. And so I thought it really needed to catch your eye. When I designed this, it really needed to be beautiful for lack of a better word. And there were some bottles that were functional, but they were marketed for extreme camping and hiking. And that wasn't the market I was going to try to go after.

3 (23m 54s):
And so I just thought if I could convert the non-converted, so if I can convert people to use a water bottle, that haven't because it, it, it actually works. Right. It's like the thermos, it keeps things hot and cold, but in a way that it's the thing to do instead of the, you know, the Evians and the Fijis and the SmartWaters, you know, if I could try to go after sort of that set that was using what they were drinking as more of a statements, the bottle needed to really be a statement piece.

1 (24m 26s):
Yeah. When you started to talk to friends and other people about this, I'm assuming people were like, Sarah, there are millions of bottles out there like that, you know, are you sure you want to get into this too? Did anybody say that?

3 (24m 42s):
No, that's, that's exactly what they said everywhere. Everybody, you know, closest friends included, thought this was a foolhardy idea. I actually went to a business school, a classmate's wedding, and I was explaining, oh, I, you know, I just quit my job and I'm just getting ready to launch this company. And I, what do you think about the idea? And one of my good friends jumped into the conversation and felt the need to defend me. And she said, but she used to have a really good job. And she felt so uncomfortable for me that I was explaining myself to a pure, perfect stranger at this wedding that she almost wanted to defend by honor, by saying, well, I used to have a business card that made sense to people.

1 (25m 23s):
What did it take for you to quit your job? I'm assuming when you quit that job, you figured, well, if this doesn't work, I can get another job. Like it, I gained. Is that what you were thinking?

3 (25m 34s):
That's right. I think my downside risk protection was, you know, I still had my CPA at the time, so I thought, okay, if this really doesn't work out, I guess I could always go back to, you know, helping people with their taxes, which I really didn't want to do. So I was super motivated, but yeah. So I always thought there would at least be something for me to do if this went sideways

1 (25m 55s):
And how much money did you have to live off? Like, what was your runway?

3 (26m 0s):
So I had $30,000 in the bank

1 (26m 3s):
At the time saved up from your job.

3 (26m 5s):
Correct.

1 (26m 6s):
And that was going to last, you, you know, it could last you awhile, but you also need that money to, I guess, to start the company

3 (26m 12s):
Right. To start the company, to buy the first initial inventory, build the first website. It seemed like a lot to me at the time. But when I really started getting into, you know, beginning to build the business, it actually, wasn't going to take me very far.

1 (26m 27s):
So let's start with how you began to build the business. First of all, you have an idea for a water bottle. That's going to be a beautiful bottle. That's going to do everything that really good thermos does, but it's going to look cooler. Who, who do you call? Like, where did you go?

3 (26m 42s):
I started designing the product actually in PowerPoint. Of course, now we have, you know, 3d printers and engineers on the team. We do things properly, but you know, back then I, I started with a line drawing that I had made myself and I thought, okay, how do I take the strong and turn it into an actual product? And I just wound up taking my business school friends out for coffees and say, this is what I'm struggling with. This is what I really need your help. You know, how do I find a factory? How do I do this? And I wound up finding a friend of mine in school whose, whose dad had made some products and could put me in touch with the right people and kind of send me on my way.

1 (27m 17s):
Wow. So eventually you land on a, on somebody who can help you design the bottle. Correct. And how, how did you land on that design of the bottle that most people listening that will, will recognize?

3 (27m 29s):
You know, I wanted it to be really classic and really simple, you know, I wanted it to be something beautiful and iconic enough that could be sold in the MoMA store, but it didn't want it to be like the ones in the sporting goods store with, you know, the Cara beaners on the top and, you know, the neoprene on the side and the neon colors with the reflective tape. And I just wanted it, you know, the whole idea was just to try to encourage people to drink, tap water and not to use so much plastic. And so I wanted it to be as sleek and elegant as possible. And so I, I really just tried to make it functional more than anything.

1 (28m 7s):
All right. So you've got a prototype and then where do you get it made? Is it again like the father of that friend from business school kind of connected you to possible like factories in China that could make a prototype?

3 (28m 20s):
Yeah. So I actually originally really wanted to make the bottle in the U S and spent a fair amount of time reaching out to factories in the U S and I couldn't find anyone that was interested in working with me. We just didn't have the scale. And we, you know, I couldn't say that I wanted to make, you know, thousands or millions of pieces kind of day one until I had the demand. And so I wound up finding that the, the factories that I had been connected with in China were willing to take a risk on small entrepreneurs and do a small run until we were really up and running. So,

1 (28m 52s):
So what was your initial run? How many bottles?

3 (28m 55s):
So I made 3000 pieces and they were all blue. They were all the same size. They were all exactly the same. And I had them shipped to my apartment.

1 (29m 4s):
How much did that cost you?

3 (29m 6s):
Oh, it was the majority of my savings at the time. I actually convinced the factory to let me do a 50% down payment and a 50% payment, 30 days later. So that helped a little bit, but I had a bit of a fire under me to sell.

1 (29m 25s):
And the name swell was on the side, the logo and everything was art was printed on it. Yes. How did you come up with it?

3 (29m 33s):
Oh, I wish I could say that. I came up with the name myself. Unfortunately, I'm an accountant at heart, so I actually originally named the company can't live without it, because I thought you can't live without water. Yeah. I thought I was a genius. I actually spent a thousand dollars on the URL. Can't live without it.com and which is available if anyone's interested. Yeah, no, it, it turned out that was a terrible name for a water bottle company because I, so I actually hired a team to help me build the first website and I had them sign an NDA and I tell them my big top secret, you know, idea for starting this water bottle company. That's going to change the world. And they said, okay, what are you going to call it?

3 (30m 15s):
And I, I told them can't live without it. And they just started laughing just like you did just now guy. And they said, you know, we like you, and we're going to tell you this, no, one's going to buy this product. If you call it can't live without it. And so, even though I hired them to create the website on the side, they helped me come up with some other names and they actually came up with the name swell. And as soon as I heard it, it, I knew that that was the right name.

1 (30m 39s):
But I'm imagining that swell existed, like swell.com or there was there companies like swell it's

3 (30m 46s):
It swell existed. So swell actually turned out to be really difficult to register, but it was actually a business school friend of mine that said to me, you know, how are things going with swell? And I said, oh, we don't get, we can't use the name. We have to go back to the drawing board. She just, she was a banker. I don't know how she came up with this idea, but she said, well, why don't you put an apostrophe in the word swell? And then it's a logo and not a word. And of course I called my attorney and said, Hey, could we, can we do this? And he said, sure, yeah, that's no problem. Of course, this is after he had billed me for lots of time and hours and expenses, and didn't come up with the idea itself. But it was, it was the way that we were able to register.

1 (31m 24s):
It's crazy. Cause you look at it, you think it just works perfectly.

3 (31m 28s):
Yeah. I think the word swell. I mean, it works perfectly because it's so positive, you know, it's, it's so old fashioned of a word. And the, I, the idea of, of swell is so old-fashioned, you know, I was trying to harken back to the time that people weren't walking around with plastic water bottles and they were drinking water out of the tap or their filter at home. And the fact that we build wealth for people, you know, we bring clean drinking water to people in need, you know? So the fact that we're separating the S with the word, well, sort of leans into the mission of what we're doing. It's, it's everything that I was looking to do, sort of wrapped up into a word, which it turned out quite lucky for us.

1 (32m 4s):
All right. So it's 2010. You are in New York, living in New York, still correct. These 3000 bottles arrive from China. And then what, like how, how do you start to think about getting people's attention and getting, creating awareness around it? What did you do?

3 (32m 20s):
I, I literally just packed up and went into stores and I asked to speak to the buyer or speak to the owner in the case of smaller stores. And, and just explained that this is me, I'm Sarah, this is my product. This is what I'm trying to do. How many can I put you down for? And

1 (32m 36s):
Were you nervous doing that?

3 (32m 38s):
I, I was really nervous. I have to say, I am not a natural born salesperson, but I had to sell the inventory because I had to pay off the other.

1 (32m 48s):
Were there days where you would have like walk around store to store and walk in and just feel like there was no, no interest or

3 (32m 56s):
There are days and weeks actually that I would, I would sort of pound the pavement and try to find people to buy the product. And I would only get nos. It was a bit depressing in the beginning. You know, I wrote that manifesto that, that small business plan and said, you know, we're going to be sold in Bloomingdale's. And buyer said, no way, we don't sell water bottles. You know, in those early days, I got a lot of nos before I got a few people to start saying yes,

1 (33m 24s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Sarah got those buyers on board and how swell began to get a lot of attention, including from people you don't want to get a lot of attention from copycats and counterfeiters, stay with us. I'm guy Ross, and you're listening to how I built this.

AG1 (33m 52s):
Our next partner has a product I use literally every day I started taking ag one because I wanted a way to get clean nutrition without any weird ingredients, with one delicious scoop of <inaudible> you're absorbing 75 high quality vitamins minerals, whole food sourced, ingredients, probiotics, and adaptogens to help you start your day. Right? I've actually been taking it every morning before I work out right now. It's time to reclaim your health and arm your immune system with convenient daily nutrition. It's just one scoop and a cup of water every day. That's it? No need for a million different pills and supplements to look out for your health to make it easy. Athletic greens is going to give you a free one year supply of immune supporting vitamin D and five free travel packs with your first purchase. All you have to do is visit athletic greens.com/built again. That is athletic greens.com/built to take ownership over your health and pick up the ultimate daily nutritional insurance.

Justworks (34m 59s):
Hey, small business leaders. Are you looking for an easy way to onboard and manage remote employees just works, makes it easier for you to start, run and grow a business. Let me tell you how just works can help your business. Just works. Can relieve you of some of the administrative work. You don't love, you know, things like running payroll or managing benefits or figuring out state by state rules and regulations just works, makes it simple to hire and manage remote employees across all 50 states with just works. You can take the guesswork out of employment and tax regulations and requirements and save hours on time that syncs with payroll, manage your remote team and run your business with confidence. Find out how just works can help your business by going to just works.com. That's just works.com for more info.

1 (35m 57s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's 2010. Sarah couse has 3000 brand new swell bottles in her apartment, and she starts pitching them store by store in New York city. And when she can't get any traction with stores,

3 (36m 14s):
Yeah. I'd say, you know what? I really think if you use the product, I really think if you tried it, you would understand how great this is. And lo and behold, oftentimes when we get a call back and say, you know, I tried this, I put ice cubes in last night, or I made tea before I went to bed and it's still hot. It's still cold. Come back and tell me a little bit more about this product. So, you know, I had to take a little bit of a risk and give away some product in some cases to try to get people to really understand it worked. Like I said, it was going to,

1 (36m 43s):
So did you eventually sell all 3000 of those bottles?

3 (36m 48s):
I did. I did. So it took a number of months, but I eventually sold all of those bottles, some on the website on swell.com

1 (36m 56s):
And who knew about the website? How would people even find out about it?

3 (36m 60s):
I put it on my Facebook page. I told my friends and family members, and I asked if they would repost it as well and created a swell Facebook page. And I just asked people to start liking it. I also started to reach out to the press at that time as well, myself.

1 (37m 14s):
How did you do that?

3 (37m 15s):
So I went to Barnes and noble and I didn't buy the magazines, but I wrote down the address of almost every editor, mostly women's fashion magazines. And I started writing letters. And every day I tried to send out a couple of boxes to different editors with a letter and saying, you know, this is my product. This is what I'm trying to do. And here's a sample. I would love it if you could try it. And if you like it, could you write about,

1 (37m 39s):
And how would you know that it was the right editor? I mean, cause you know, a person could be a features editor, but the person who writes about products could be an assistant editor and you would never know.

3 (37m 49s):
I would not know, but I would hopefully guess that if this, what I thought was a beautiful product would show up on their desk and they weren't the right person that potentially they would pass it along. I also had a hunch that even if they weren't the right person and a product arrived, that they might just use it anyway. And that, you know, maybe that's one way that I could win people over, you know, having a swell bottle, sit on the desk in someone's office, as they're trying to think of story ideas, you know, potentially they'll think about us.

1 (38m 19s):
And when you initially reached out to the editors, did you write a letter saying, Hey, I'm Sarah couse, this is me. Yes. I started this business. I'm making it. Did you tell a little bit about yourself?

3 (38m 30s):
I did. I, I told them about myself. You know, I told them about what I was trying to do. I talked about how much was in the ocean. And I talked about how many people, women and girls primarily are affected by the water crisis and how we're trying to give back to UNICEF and make a difference in the world. And I talked about the product, you know, I said, this is, this is a hydration, fashion, accessory. This is not a water bottle. You've never seen anything like it before. And this is why it's important to your reader.

1 (38m 54s):
Were you thinking initially that this should be something that women would want to use out and about particularly women?

3 (39m 3s):
Yeah, so actually my, my target in the beginning was women because I was really making something for myself and you know, friends like me and I thought, you know, women also do a lot of the shopping for the household. So if you really want to get in with a group, if you target someone, why not try to make this a fashion, accessory and appeal to not just women, but to their spouses and their families, their kids. So, you know, it really did start with women as the target. Now we're actually pretty balanced in our customers being women and men. But that's really where the idea started. In the beginning.

1 (39m 37s):
Meantime, did you order more bottles from China or, or did you still, did you kind of hold off until you sold all 3000?

3 (39m 44s):
Well, at this time I was still working through my first 3000 and I got a call back from Oprah's magazine from the O magazine, quite sent one of my samples to,

1 (39m 56s):
Because you can imagine, oh, magazine, they get a thousand samples a week or

3 (40m 3s):
A day

1 (40m 4s):
Or a day.

3 (40m 4s):
What happened was the editor called and said, I got your bottle. I took it on my family vacation to Peru and it worked. I use it every day. I kept my water cold. We really want to run this product and we want to run it on the old list, which is the must have list for the summer. But the catch was, she said, you need to send me one of every color you have, because color looks good on a page

1 (40m 27s):
And you only have them in blue.

3 (40m 29s):
I only had blue. And of course I still remember what I said. I said, well, I'm standing in the warehouse right now,

1 (40m 34s):
Which was what your apartment?

3 (40m 37s):
Yeah. Like my kitchen living

1 (40m 38s):
Room type apartment. I was sitting in the warehouse. I

3 (40m 41s):
Can bring you as many as you want, but they only come in blue. And it was just heartbreaking moment because she said, well, call me back when you have more colors, because we really need colors to go on the page.

1 (40m 52s):
And so you said,

3 (40m 54s):
I said, I will. And I literally hung up the phone. I walked out the door, I went to Barnes and noble. I purchased a Pantone color book. I picked out six additional colors and I called the factory and I said, listen, I need you to make me two bottles each. And these six colors and FedEx them here. I need one for Oprah's magazine and one for myself to take pictures, to put on the website. So we can, we can show the result of these products. And that's how we went from one color to seven. And we were featured then in the summer of 2011 in Oprah's magazine, which was a really big milestone for the business.

1 (41m 33s):
Yeah. We talked to Sara Blakely three years ago on this show. And you know, there was the Oprah effect for Spanx. What happened to swell? I have to imagine like people, all of a sudden your web traffic

3 (41m 46s):
Gwen up so much that we, I say we, I was still the only employee I had to really work on the backend of the website because it'd be crashed immediately. So there was absolutely an Oprah effect, but I would say more than anything, it was sort of this stamp of confidence in the business that, that either gave me more confidence as I went into retailers or it gave retailers more confidence to try the product and put it on the shelf. I made a little sign that said, you know, as featured in Oprah's magazine and that certainly helps, you know, opening up retail doors.

1 (42m 17s):
How were you fulfilling web orders? I mean, there must've been a lag time between the time somebody ordered it, because now when you order something, you expect to get it in two days or three days. But I imagine you didn't have the, you weren't able to fulfill all these orders that were coming in through the website quickly.

3 (42m 33s):
Well, at the point that I had ordered the additional inventory, I realized I was going to need a fulfillment center. So at that point I wasn't actually sending the orders myself from the post office. So I had set up a fulfillment center luckily and, you know, worked with a company that basically works with direct to consumer companies. So surprisingly, even though we were pretty small company orders were going out in a day or two.

1 (42m 57s):
All right. So you start to fulfill orders and you're now getting more interest from smaller boutiques, but you also had a pretty big turning point in addition to the O magazine 2011, when you landed a deal with crate and barrel, they ordered a few thousand bottles. How did that happen? Did they approach you? Do they hear about you through, you know, just media attention?

3 (43m 18s):
I, you know, I think crate and barrel did hear about us through media attention, but the way that I actually met them was through a trade show. So I had been going to some of the gift trade shows and standing in a little booth, almost like a science fair booth, you know, where you stand there next to your poster board and you say, oh, hi, this is my product. And I remember being very excited to meet the buyer from crate and barrel. And, you know, they said they were going to put us in all of their stores, but also their catalogs that would go to so many homes in America. So that was a really big, exciting turning point

1 (43m 46s):
That first full year, which was 2011. Do you remember how many trade shows you went to?

3 (43m 52s):
I went to 17 trade shows that year and it was exhausting, I would say on a friend's couches and start doing customer service for the e-commerce site or billing credit cards, you know, being the only employee and doing all of the jobs, you know, and of course my friends would want to talk. You hadn't seen him in years. He'd said, oh, can I crash at your place in Atlanta? The last thing you want to do after talking about a water bottle all day, talk to anybody. So those, those were trying times that's for sure.

1 (44m 21s):
But that must have been really, I mean, go into all those trade shows. Must've been absolutely crucial because that's where you've got the critical mass where you meet those retailers and distributors. Correct. So Creighton barrel, was that a huge deal for you? I mean, you'd already had the O magazine thing, but was the crate and barrel and even bigger thing

3 (44m 38s):
You crate and barrel is a bigger thing because it gave us a bigger stance. It gave us, you know, national attention and in some cases, from a press perspective, they really want a retailer to tell their readers to go to. And so we started to sort of get a little bit more press because we had better retail placement. It was also the first time we figured out how to make a barcode sticker, crate and barrel was our first national account. So it was the first time we had to read a vendor guide.

1 (45m 6s):
So

3 (45m 6s):
They have these requirements that said, you have to actually have a skew number and a barcode sticker. So I Googled how to do it. And I, I printed out the barcode stickers on my home. Frencher invited my girlfriends over and we had pizza and wine and stuck all the stickers on. I actually shipped the bottles from my warehouse to the house to put the stickers on because I, the stuff that was in our warehouse, wasn't compliant with their vendor guide. And so it was a real learning opportunity to say, Hey, listen, if you're going to start working with some of these really big partners, you're going to have to get smarter on how to service them.

1 (45m 40s):
Meantime. It's just you, you are the company, you are swell.

3 (45m 44s):
It was just me.

1 (45m 45s):
Wow.

3 (45m 47s):
Yeah.

1 (45m 47s):
Whoo. Do you remember what your sales were in your first year?

3 (45m 51s):
I think my sales in the first year were just under a hundred thousand dollars.

1 (45m 55s):
All right. So by the way, did you ever think, okay, now I got to go out and raise some money. If I want to scale this thing,

3 (46m 4s):
I considered it, but then quickly discounted it because I thought, you know what? This is going to be a big waste of time and I'm not really sure if it's going to work. And so why don't I just wait until we're bigger and more successful because we'll have a better pitch and a better story to tell to investors, if that's the path we want to go down.

1 (46m 19s):
So your idea was, let me get some traction and then I'll find the money to scale it.

3 (46m 24s):
Exactly.

1 (46m 25s):
Right. Okay. Makes sense. So you continue to kind of get attention and you're in crate and barrel and by 2012 you did like $2 million in revenue. Did you, I'm assuming by that point, you had to hire people to help you.

3 (46m 42s):
I did. I hired my first employee that year. Her name is Katie and it was her first job out of college. And she showed up to come work with me. She was very brave.

1 (46m 52s):
I remember the first time I saw a really crystal notice, a swell bottle was at the Ted conference in 2013. Was that a deliberate strategy in your mind? Like, let me put these in these, in the Ted bags, cause you have to cause right. It's a barter system. Like your head is not really buying them from you. Your

3 (47m 9s):
Intent does not. It's a donation, it's

1 (47m 11s):
A donation, your

3 (47m 12s):
Expensive There's, you know, two, 3000 people that go every year. And so, you know it, but it was, it was very deliberate because as you can imagine, being a scrappy as I was starting swell, I didn't have a marketing budget. And so I thought, how do I get my bottle in the hands of influencers of people that are sort of on the cutting edge of ideas, you Ted being one of those real obvious places. And I had sent a bottle to Ted and said, you know, again, this is my bottle and this is my story. And, you know, surprisingly, they called me back. And even though that's really what I wanted, it was a huge decision to pull the trigger and make the donation because it was expensive and it was product that I had to basically give away and not sell with the hopes of, you know, something coming out of it.

1 (48m 3s):
How did you know that donating all these bottles into the Ted gift bag? How were you able to track whether that was going to be, you know, whether there was going to be a return on that investment?

3 (48m 13s):
You know, it is hard to track, but we can try to see where orders come from, you know, on the website, we have a little, how did you hear about us line? So we try to see are people talking about Ted there, but we have a pretty big corporate business where we actually work with big companies and we put their logos on bottles. And some of the first bigger corporate orders that we received were CEOs and founders of companies that had, had attended Ted. They actually wrote to us from the Ted conference,

1 (48m 41s):
We wanted the same thing.

3 (48m 42s):
Yeah, exactly. And so in a couple of years ago, a Shonda Rhimes was one of the Ted speakers and she wrote into, you know, info at small bottle herself and said, oh, hi, I'm Shonda. And I just got a swell bottle at the Ted conference. And she purchased swells for all six of our shows at the time. And the cool thing about that was then you had the likes of, you know, Kerry, Washington and all of the amazing stars that she has access to because of her shows all walking around with a swell bottle. So it's really hard to really quantify, but when you pull back and you think, you know, how did I meet Shonda, how to be meet LinkedIn? You know, how did, how did we get a bottle to <inaudible>? It was a big, you know, calculated expense, but at the same time, it, it certainly has paid off for us.

1 (49m 24s):
Now I read that like a year after you started swell, you, you went to China to go visit the factory that was making the bottles for you. And then you went to a trade show in Hong Kong and you literally saw a table with knockoffs of your bottles. There is, is that right?

3 (49m 41s):
That is a true story. So I had gone to so many trade shows, you know, over the first year and here I am in Hong Kong and I saw a big promotion for a trade show and I thought, great. I spent all my free time at trade shows. Now, why don't I go check out the show and see what it's like? And not only were there swell bottles at this trade show, but the swell bottles had one in award and had a ribbon on a display case at the trade show.

1 (50m 8s):
What

3 (50m 9s):
Yes.

1 (50m 10s):
Was it the same logo with the S apostrophe? Well,

3 (50m 13s):
Yeah, it was the same logo and it had the trademark symbol on the side and it was all of our colors. It was everything. It was, it was as if we had gone to the show ourselves.

1 (50m 23s):
Yeah, my God, what was your first reaction? Like what's going on? Like I

3 (50m 26s):
Almost passed out. I shouldn't believe it. And I was there with my boyfriend at the time. Who's now my husband. And luckily he kept his wits about him and went over and started talking to someone, standing by this, you know, display case.

1 (50m 39s):
Hey, what are you doing

3 (50m 40s):
Here? He said, Ohio, tell me about this. And the, the gentleman that was working in the booth was super smiling and happy and he pulled out his business card and gave it to us and said, oh, hi, I'm from swell. And his business card also had swell on it. Of course I had never seen this man before.

1 (50m 55s):
So what'd you do?

3 (50m 57s):
We contacted the officials that were running the show and showed them my business card and showed them the swell website in the U S and said, listen, this is a counterfeit company. This is not swell. We are not showing at the show. We found someone that had the keys to the display case, and we took all of the samples out, stuffed it all into our bags. And we went back to our hotel. I mean, we couldn't believe wow, what we had just seen.

1 (51m 28s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment. Sarah gives one of the biggest pitches of her life in a Starbucks to the man who founded it, stay with us. You're listening to how I built this.

Klaviyo (51m 54s):
Ready to turn your small e-commerce business into the next big thing. Klaviyo can help. It's the easy to use email and SMS platform that gives you everything you need to build genuine relationships with your customers. And even if you're new to marketing Klaviyo can help you become an email expert with drag and drop design templates, simple insights, and made for e-commerce reports and recommendations. Give it a try with a free account at klaviyo.com/built. That's K L a V I Y o.com/built.

Principal (52m 29s):
No one is slowing down in this hiring race for the best talent and offering the right benefits may help you reward and retain your team, helping them feel valued, motivated, and ready for the future. And that can make all the difference for your business. Principal offers retirement and group benefits plans customized to help you meet your goals. Your company's future depends on its people. Show them they are valued and give them the tools they need to succeed. Talk to your financial professional today about the right benefits and retirement plans from principal and visit them at principal.com/business. This message was brought to you by principal financial group, but it's important to their wonderful lawyers that we share their legal name, which is the principle life insurance company, Des Moines, Iowa, for important information about their products visit principal.com/disclosures.

3 (53m 27s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy rise. So it's 2011, not long after Sarah started swell, and she's just found knockoffs of her bottles at a trade show in Hong Kong and has no real way to stop them. I had done the, you know, the initial registration of the patents and design patents and intellectual property, but, but certainly didn't have a lawyer on staff or really the budget. You know, unfortunately we did have to hire some attorneys and we really did have to try to get to the bottom of it to make sure that this was stopped immediately.

1 (54m 2s):
You did eventually win a lawsuit. You received $19 million in damages against defendants that were accused of trademark infringement. These were similar. These are just knockoffs. These were counterfeiters who were making bottles and calling them swell.

3 (54m 19s):
Correct. So we've had a number of lawsuits that one included of individuals and companies that are they're making products that directly a fringe upon our intellectual property rights.

1 (54m 29s):
I mean, we, we talked about this a little bit with Randy Hetrick of TRX because TRX straps, massively counterfeited. He spent years and years and years in litigation eventually won. I mean, it, it can eat up a huge part of a company's budget and take away from marketing and other things and just time and like mental space, right? I mean, just dealing with all that is a lot.

3 (54m 54s):
I think it is a lot. I mean, it absolutely affects the bottom line. I think it's hard to quantify, but I think you're right. I think more than that, it's the brain space. It's the, the opportunity costs of time when you have your time and attention or your team, or the fact that you're spending money on legal and not on product development or marketing, it really creates a lot of stress and strain on the organization. It also creates a fair amount of confusion for customers in the marketplace. We hear from customers, the customer service that they bought a swell, what they think is as well. And it's not working, it's not keeping things hot and cold or dense, or the paint is coming off and we ask the customer, Hey, send us a picture of it.

3 (55m 35s):
And it's not real. I think that's the thing that I have the hardest time with is it's not just that they didn't buy the product from us. It's just that customers are having an inferior experience and it could really be turning customers off from our brand because they're not getting the real thing. And I think that's where it really gets my blood boiling.

1 (55m 56s):
So as you were growing 2012, you do 2 million in revenue, 2013 Starbucks approaches you. They want to put your bottles in some of its stores in two cities, Atlanta, and Austin, they did great. They sold out, but you, you wanted them in all the Starbucks. How did you get them into all the Starbucks?

3 (56m 16s):
So I actually was at Starbucks headquarters for a meeting with our buyers, talking about the program that we were doing and in Austin and Atlanta. And it was very fortunate because at the time this was in December, 2014, they were opening this new store in Seattle called the roastery. And it was sort of this Willy Wonka chocolate factory coffee experience. You see the beans roasted it's, it's the newness. So my buyer said, Hey, there's an opening tonight of a new store. Why don't you come to the opening? And so I go to the roastery opening and who's standing at the coffee bar waiting for his espresso, but Howard Schultz.

3 (56m 56s):
And so, yeah, I just had this moment where I realized that this was my time to try a much bigger pitch for swell at Starbucks. So I asked my buyer, I said, Hey, do you want to come with me? I think that's, that's your boss over there? And she said, oh God, no. She said, it'd be way too nervous to speak with a CEO. And so I said, okay, well here hold my bag. And so I give her my purse. I grabbed my swell bottle and I be line over to Howard before anyone else can get to him. And I just told them my story and said, Hey, listen, we're both CEOs here. I'm running a much smaller company. You're running a much bigger one, but we could be doing so much more business with you. If you could just give us the opportunity to sell in more stores. And he listened, he said, okay, well here's my card and why don't you contact me?

3 (57m 40s):
And after the holidays, we'll sit down and have a meeting. And he was true to his word. He had me in for an hour and a half the following February. Yeah. And we hatched a plan. We, it was, it was one of those incredible moments where I really would have kicked myself if I hadn't done it, but I still can't believe I actually did it.

1 (57m 58s):
And that meeting led to Starbucks, putting swell bottles in like, I think 14,000 of its locations around the world.

3 (58m 7s):
That's right. So I think 10,000 stores in the U S and Canada twenty-five countries in Europe, all over Asia, Russia, South Africa, I beat it was incredible.

1 (58m 19s):
And if you hadn't done that, if you hadn't, you know, had the courage to go up to him, had you been too nervous that may never have happened?

3 (58m 28s):
Absolutely. I had a moment before I went to go talk to him and I was grabbing my swell and thinking about what I wanted to say. And I just thought, how am I going to get on the plane tomorrow, back from Seattle and live with myself. If I don't go do it. I mean, the worst that can happen is he says, no, thank you. Leave me alone. And the best is that something comes to this. And so I thought, well, I've got absolutely nothing to lose. And it worked out, you know, from that, you know, we sold a lot of product, but more than that, you know, we became more of a household name. We had a sign in all the Starbucks that said, you know, Starbucks, favorite hydration, fashion, accessory is swell with our logo bigger than the Starbucks logo.

3 (59m 10s):
I mean, that's better than sales that's brand recognition.

1 (59m 13s):
That's incredible. I think by 2015 that year, your sales hit $50 million. You would not raise any money you had not gone to. Did you, at that point kind of give up on that idea and say, I don't, I don't need to do this anymore.

3 (59m 26s):
We were actually having some investors come to us and we had some really interesting conversations, but at that point we were just so busy and trying to scale this company, or like painting the plane after we took off, we didn't really have time to think about an investor pitcher or really what that would look like. So luckily we were, self-funding pretty well at that point. We really didn't need the outside capital.

1 (59m 50s):
It's amazing. I mean, did, did any investors kind of not maybe say this directly, but sort of suggest that like, Hey, look, if you don't take our money and you don't, you know, scale up even faster, you're going to get crushed because some other big brands are just going to make a similar bottle and crush you.

3 (1h 0m 6s):
I mean, he definitely heard that from a few people, but I honestly was so focused on what I was trying to do that I wasn't really that concerned about what others were doing. And I had a lot of confidence in swell and in myself and what I was doing. And, you know, I have met some really nice investors. I just didn't meet anyone that I thought was really going to be that helpful to what I was trying to do.

1 (1h 0m 34s):
I, I'm curious about this idea of confidence, right? Because some people just have it, they're born with it. And, but I think most of us aren't most of us, we grow into our competence and confidence can come and go, right. Depends depending on your circumstances in life and where you are, but as you built this business and as you saw more and more people buying it, I'm assuming that your confidence grew more and more as well.

3 (1h 1m 0s):
I would say yes. Although I think with every phase of the business, there was always something that sort of put me on the back foot. And so I didn't have time to have too much swagger or overconfidence because there was always something that I could have done better. I should have known, or, you know, a person or a process or a system that, that needed to be upgraded. And so, you know, I think why I really have come full circle on the confidence piece is being able to admit that sometimes things aren't working perfectly and to be able to be honest about that imperfection and ask other entrepreneurs, or even just, you know, other employees for advice or help.

3 (1h 1m 44s):
Because I think that if I had been over confident in any step of the journey that it might have blindsided me or the company for sort of that next big step forward on, on the growth perspective.

1 (1h 1m 58s):
So as you got to a point where your sales are huge, I mean, and you are, you know, you kind of grow the company and you got to build it out and you got to get a space. And, and how did you hire and what did you do? How did you manage all that chaos happening while still, you know, with all that growth,

3 (1h 2m 19s):
It was chaos for sure. You know, it was drinking out of the fire hose or, you know, any one of those analogies, but it was, it was a really interesting, fun time, you know, it was trying to figure out, you know, how did you get six months ahead of yourself instead of always being three months behind, but it was a lot of fun. I mean, I had, I had a really energized, you know, team. There was something that was a bit magical to our scrappiness, that, that we seem to be able to get through a lot of that chaos and make, I don't know, thrive on it really.

1 (1h 2m 51s):
Yeah. It's amazing that even in the lesson, swell, jumped onto the scene. I mean, over the past 10 years, pretty much every airport has a water filling station. It's a common thing. Parks, public parks have water filling station, not water fountains, but stations where you put your bottle under. And there's a, you know, there's a sensor and I have to imagine that swell as part of that. Right. Don't don't you think?

3 (1h 3m 15s):
I like to think that we really did create part of this movement of people carrying a reusable water bottle. You know, part of why I started as well was I was trying to get people to stop drinking so much single use plastic. And so it makes me very happy to see so many water filling stations pop-up and so many people carrying a reusable bottle.

1 (1h 3m 35s):
You mentioned earlier your ex-boyfriend cause he's your husband, Jeff who joined the company, I guess in 20 16, 17 as the COO as how has it been to work with your partner?

3 (1h 3m 49s):
It's been great. Honestly, I, the poor guy, you know, he never applied for a job. He, he basically got kidnapped one day. It was one of those situations where I would come home from work after, you know, something had happened, you know, the website being down for example, and being my partner, I really just needed to vent about it. I would say, oh, this happened today. And I just needed to get off my chest, but he would spring into problem solving mode and he would stay up until two in the morning, fixing the thing, fixing the website, fixing the thing, coming up with a new system for it. And so he said, listen, Sarah, why don't I come in for a half day, every Tuesday and help you get in front of these things instead of you coming home after the fact.

3 (1h 4m 31s):
And it was, it was one of the classic cases of escalation of commitment. You know, that half day on Tuesday basically just escalate it to, you know, him working full time for the company. And you know, it's not what I would have expected having met him, you know, after swell was started, I never would have thought, oh, I'm gonna make this guy come and work for me and fix all of my problems. But it's been so incredibly valuable for the company to have him there by my side. I really couldn't do it without him. There's no way that that swell would be the company that we are today. You know, if he wasn't willing to sort of put his ego aside and say, listen, I'm going to drop what I'm doing to support you and your dream and your company.

3 (1h 5m 15s):
So all of this will

1 (1h 5m 16s):
Work. Yeah. Your business. I mean, I know that you don't really see financial information anymore. I think in part, because of all the counterfeiters, is that right?

3 (1h 5m 28s):
That's correct. I found that the more that I talked about our revenue numbers, the more that we seem to have a bit of a target on our back,

1 (1h 5m 35s):
But I mean, you still own a hundred percent of the company.

3 (1h 5m 40s):
I do. I do.

1 (1h 5m 41s):
Wow. I mean, it is, it's pretty, it's pretty insane. I mean, it's pretty crazy, right? I mean, you, in the very, very few businesses that have been on the show where the, you know, the, the entrepreneur who founded it still is Sara. Blakely's a good example of this, where they still own the entire company, unless they were independently wealthy at the beginning and just had, you know, endless supplies of cash. I don't know. I mean, when you think about success that you've had with this brand, do you attribute that to, to skill, to hard work or, or more to luck or a combination?

1 (1h 6m 23s):
What do you think?

3 (1h 6m 24s):
You know, I think I'd has to be both, you know, I, I would say that it absolutely has been hard work. It's been a lot of hustle, you know, no one's ever gonna outwork me and I, I live for swell and this is, this has really been my, my life's work these last 10 years, but I have to say luck has played such an incredible role in our success. I was lucky to be born to parents who are entrepreneurs, you know, who taught me the power of hard work and positive thinking and doing the right thing. I was born in a country and a society that values education for girls. And I went to great schools and I have a network of friends who supported me on this journey. And the power of timing was so lucky. You know, I started swell because I had a personal mission to eliminate single use plastic bottles.

3 (1h 7m 9s):
But at the same time that I started the company, there were so many people around the world waking up to the issue of climate change and global warming and, and how they potentially had the need to take personal action. And so, yes, it's been a lot of work, but all of the stars aligned in a really lucky way for that work to have turned into something.

1 (1h 7m 33s):
Sarah couse, founder of swell, swell recently became an official B Corp, which means the company is now legally required to consider the impact of all its decisions on its customers, workers, the community, and the environment. And by the way, remember the original name Sarah had for swell can't live without it. Well, the domain name can't live without a.com is still a perceivably owned by Sarah. But should you be interested? You can still register. Can't live without it. Shop can't live without it. Biz can't live without it life and many other variations.

1 (1h 8m 13s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you want to contact the team, our email addresses H I B t@iddotwondery.com. If you want to follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this. And mine is at guy Ross and on Instagram or at how I built this in I'm at guy dot Ross. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by team era of Louie was edited by Neeva grant with research help from rainy told our production staff also includes Casey Herman, Liz Metzker, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chun, Josh lash, Sam Paulson, Catherine cipher, Elena coats, John Isabella, Christmas Sini, and Carla Esther, this guy Roz.

1 (1h 8m 57s):
And you've been listening to how I built this. Hey everyone. So I wanted to make sure you knew of all the different ways you can listen to how I built this. The show is always free and available wherever you listen to podcasts, whether it's Amazon music, apple podcasts, or wherever you're listening right now. But if you want to listen to the next episode of how I built this today, one week early, you can do that on Amazon music, or you can listen to it early and add free by subscribing to Wondery plus in apple podcasts or on the Wondery app.

1 (1h 9m 44s):
So please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded and get your, how I built this merchant gear@wonderyshop.com. Another way to support the show is by filling out a survey at wondery.com/survey. And thanks.

Wondery: American Scandal (1h 10m 5s):
Hi, I'm Lindsay Graham, the host of wonder show Americans scandal. We bring to life some of the biggest controversies in us history presidential lies, environmental disasters, corporate fraud. In our newest series, we look at the story of Edward Snowden, a whistleblower who changed the national conversation about privacy on the internet. As a contractor for the NSA Snowden had access to a range of top secret government programs. But as he learned more about these clandestine operations, he came to understand a devastating secret. The government was conducting mass surveillance on its own citizens. Snowden would go on to leak more classified documents than any whistleblower in American history. He became the subject of an international manhunt, and as he fought to expose the truth, he would risk his own freedom and his family's wellbeing follow American scandal on apple podcasts, Amazon music, the Wondery app, or wherever you're listening. Now, listen one week early and add free by joining Wondery plus.