0 (0s):
Hey everyone. So the cookie brand that we are featuring on today's episode is something that today you can find just about anywhere food stores, pharmacies, liquor stores, gas stations, bed, bath, and beyond. But back when it began, there was only one place you could buy one of those trademark crispy chocolate chip cookies. And that was a little farm stand on long island. And the story of how Tate's cookies got from there to here is pretty extraordinary. We first told it about two years ago, but I promise you if you haven't heard it, it's worth listening to. And even if you have it's worth another listen, so enjoy

2 (41s):
They at driven my business $600,000 into debt. I realized, even though I was fired and had no job, I was responsible for one third of that debt and all the money that the company had was gone. And I had to fight them. I had to get free of them. I had to get my, my business back

0 (1m 7s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm guy Raz and on today's show how Kathleen King started out selling cookies from her family's farm stand for 59 cents a bag and spent the next four decades building a brand that eventually sold for half a billion dollars. It's hard for me to think of a more simple and elegant enterprise than a lemonade stand. It's kind of like a laboratory where you can test out a whole bunch of hypotheses around marketing and price structure and human psychology.

0 (1m 55s):
Take, for example, the experience of my own children, their first lemonade stand was just lemonade, a dollar, a glass, and it did fine. They made about 40 bucks. The second lemonade stands sold lemonade and freshly baked cookies, $2 for a lemonade and they cookie, and that did better. They cleared about $75, but the third stand had the lemonade and the cookies, but also a hand drawn sign hanging from the table that red, organic, handmade lemonade, they had an additional sign that said 20% of all profits go to the humane society of the United States.

0 (2m 38s):
Now that lemonade stand totally crushed it and passers by would literally hand them five and $10 bills and tell them to keep the change in a span of just two hours. My then eight and six year old cleared $150 in profit and donated 30 bucks to the humane society. That's 275% growth between lemonade stand one and three. Now imagine doing this every day for an entire summer, depending on how many hours and weeks you work, you could at this rate, realistically clear about $5,000 by labor day, which is kind of what Kathleen King discovered as an 11 year old girl, except her cookie hustle turned into a business called Tate's bakeshop that Kathleen would eventually sell for half a billion dollars.

0 (3m 30s):
Tate's cookies is a brand now owned by Monda. Lee's the huge food company that also owns Oreos. Jim's a toy and Ritz crackers, but long before any of this happened, Kathleen started a small bakery in south Hampton on the Eastern end of long island in New York for 20 years, she grew her little bakery into a sustainable business until, as you will hear, she lost almost everything in a bad partnership deal. And so at the age of 42, Kathleen had to start all over again. And even though she grew up in the Hamptons, Kathleen did not exactly cross paths with a glamorous celebrities and rich financier's who go there in the summertime.

0 (4m 14s):
Her mom was a nurse and her dad ran the family farm, where he raised chickens and cows.

2 (4m 20s):
When I was growing up, it was about 30 acres. And my dad used to sell the milk to Schwenk dairy, which was a local dairy. And on the cows we had maybe, I don't know, 30 or 40. So everything was small chickens, maybe a thousand, you know, nothing, nothing

0 (4m 38s):
Big. I'm going to get many kids in the

2 (4m 40s):
Family. I'm the youngest of four, two brothers and one sister. We had a lot of responsibility. We were nurtured emotionally, but we grew up in the sixties. You know, you fall down, you know, you get up cry, I'll give you something to

0 (4m 56s):
Cry about. And you all work on the farm. That was just expected.

2 (4m 59s):
We did it. It was just expected. It was a given. There was there weren't options. So occasionally a brother or sister would escape from time to time to go do something fun. But I had to collect eggs and pick vegetables and wait on the customer. As we did everything there, the interesting part of my growing up was we didn't have any role playing. Cause my mother was ahead of her time. So we had to work outside and inside the girls and the guys, the boys had to do the same thing.

0 (5m 30s):
What was your dad's business sustainable? Was it enough to support the whole family or were there, were there times when you know

2 (5m 38s):
The struggle? No, it was a struggle. Yeah. My mom, she worked and she brought a consistent paycheck into the house. <em></em> like, my father used to barter, like, you know, a half a steer to the dentist to get our teeth done and we had everything we needed. We just didn't. We didn't go to restaurants and go on vacation.

0 (6m 1s):
Yeah. Tell me about baking at your house. I mean, you're on the farm. You've got responsibilities and chores that you have to do was baking. Just something that was going on at the house all the time.

2 (6m 15s):
My sister and her friend were baking brownies and bread and cookies and selling them at the farm stand. But then when they turned 14, they wanted to get a real job so they can be boys. So they want it until the local ice cream parlor. And I was the youngest. So my dad said, okay, Kathleen, you're going to start doing these cookies. You're going to start making cookies and sell them at the farm. So you can buy your own clothes for school next year and blah, blah, blah. So I was just like, okay. And I just started baking them. Like we didn't, you know, nobody was coddled, then nobody taught us. You

0 (6m 47s):
Know? And, and what was the recipe you

2 (6m 49s):
Were using on the back of the Nestle chocolate chip bag?

0 (6m 52s):
That was chocolate chip cookies, right? Yeah. And did you sell directly to people passing by in their cars or anything like that?

2 (6m 58s):
Yes. We had a farm stand in the yard and a matter of fact, when I was baking cookies, I would look out the window and see a customer pull up and then I'd run outside, wait on the customer. And then sometimes I'd have to say the customer I'll be right back. I got to run in because I knew my cookies were going to be done around that time. And I just baked them and I put them in a plastic bag and put them on the counter. Did

0 (7m 21s):
You get to keep the earnings from the cookies

2 (7m 23s):
From, well, yeah, in the beginning my dad said he would buy all the ingredients and everything. I just made the cookies and made all the money. Yeah. And then as I started selling a lot of cookies, he said, we need to discuss our arrangement and you have to start buying your own ingredients. And, but I always got, I always got the eggs for free,

0 (7m 43s):
By the way, I make my kids pay me for the ingredients for the lemonade stand. Is that

2 (7m 48s):
No, that's what you should do. Unfortunately, people don't do that anymore. I mean, I want to go up to lemonade stand sometimes where I say kids and I'm like, why are you selling Newman's own? Which should be making your own. You get a niche, you get a niche, get one step above the others.

0 (8m 2s):
All right. So you are so you're making cookies at the farm stand, but, but what, what accounts for the fact that you were increasing? Like the demand for them was increasing

2 (8m 12s):
Really good and it just started to spread, but what was

0 (8m 16s):
So special about them? Did you change the recipe?

2 (8m 19s):
Well, when I was 11, I was probably measuring a little haphazardly and then created the cookie the way I liked it. I don't like KCI cookies at all or a thick cookies. And I made them, they were like five inch diameter, at least because back then that was before supersizing. So I wanted to do something that, you know, drew attention to them. So I made them very large and they were thin they weren't crisp, like Tate's are today, but they were, they were thin with a little crispy chewy and people would drive there sometimes just for the cookies. So as I got older, the, the amount of sales grew.

2 (8m 59s):
So by the time I got into high school, I was baking in the summertime seven days, a week, 10 hours a day in my mom's kitchen. And she just allowed me to sprawl all over.

0 (9m 10s):
So by the time you were in high school baking cookies at the stand I'm like where you making significant pocket money or even more than pocket money?

2 (9m 18s):
Oh yeah. Yes. I bought my own car, you know, like a secondhand car, like kind of car you play for two, a thousand or $2,000, you know, in the summer I could earn like five grand. Wow. And yeah, I would just stand there all day and, and, you know, and that kind of like fueled my loaner side a little bit, because I never had like a real summer job where, you know, there were lots of kids and people did things and they went out and all those things, I just stood there in the kitchen baking cookies.

0 (9m 49s):
All right. So you're, so you're actually making some serious dough people coming by buying cookies, just, you know, and I'm assuming that when you were 18, when it was time for you to go to college, you didn't think that your life was going to be the life of a cookie baker, that you were going to go to college and figure out what you're going to do and get, sort of get a quote unquote real job, right?

2 (10m 8s):
Yeah. You know, I went to two years, SUNY college, Coldwell skill. I started in restaurant management and just kind of went to school and I dunno, I had ideas in my head or maybe I'll work on a cruise ship, you know? Cause I thought I might like to travel. I hadn't. And then I graduated in 1979 and went home to make cookies again for the summer because that's where I could make the most money. And my mom said that summer, so what are your plans? And I was like, I don't know. And she said, well, this is your last summer making cookies here.

0 (10m 49s):
Why didn't

2 (10m 49s):
You say that? Because my mother was also like my father independence and standing on your own feet. That was everything. And, and then she said, you know, there's a bakery for rent in town. So I, I went to the bake shop and it was a fully equipped bake shop. Two bakeries had been there prior to me, both have both failed. And so I looked at it and I was like, oh, this is perfect. This will work for me. So I just rented it. I needed to work. And my goal when I opened the shop was, you know, really to just to rent an apartment and get a car.

0 (11m 26s):
And by the way, how, I mean, how much money did you need to, to start this bakery? Did you, yeah. Did you have any money? I mean, did you have some savings?

2 (11m 34s):
Yeah, I, I had 5,000 or so that I saved before I rented and I had to borrow some money and of course I couldn't get it from the bank. So my brother lent me a little bit of money because I had to buy my chocolate chips was $2,000 and the store wasn't pretty, I took old barrels from the farm and I painted them and turn them upside down and put plywood on top and I made it a tablecloth and put that on top. And then my labels, I wrote by

0 (12m 5s):
Hand. And what did you call the shop?

2 (12m 7s):
Started out as Kathleen's cookie, but then to expand, I changed the name to Kathleen's bake shop because I sold more things than just cookies.

0 (12m 16s):
And w how long before you actually opened it to the public?

2 (12m 21s):
Well, I think I rented it in like November and then I opened in may. So what I did that winter was just get things prepared as much as I could and develop the recipes on a larger scale. So I did blueberry muffins, carrot cake, apple pie, like all like the top 10 typical American baked goods.

0 (12m 43s):
All right. So may of 1980, you're like 21, 22 years old, something like that. Yes. 21. And it's just you and you open the shop.

2 (12m 52s):
I opened the shop, my sister-in-law Robin king. She helped cause she was working on the pie. She had a baby at the time and my niece, Christina, we used to just put her in a box and the floor had a blanket in it. And you know, my father was my PR guy. So anyone that went to the farm, he would say, you know, my daughter's opened a big shop, but pop up, Emma, I had an ad back then print ads. And the, you know, the community was always very supportive of me so people can,

0 (13m 24s):
So that summer of 1980, right? All of a sudden you get the summer crowds into the Hamptons. How was business?

2 (13m 31s):
It was good. I did really well. And, and right before Memorial weekend Florence Fabricant came in from the New York times,

0 (13m 38s):
The miss food writer, floor and fabricator. She just happened to come in like randomly,

2 (13m 43s):
She lives out there. She may have been shopping there prior to coming in and requesting an interview. Did you even

0 (13m 49s):
Know who she was?

2 (13m 50s):
No, I didn't have a New York times was like, what city people read?

0 (13m 54s):
So a couple weeks later, this article gets published in the New York times. Yeah. Did people start to clamor to come try your cookies?

2 (14m 2s):
They did. They did. And that was not expected because I didn't know the power of the times and people would tell me, like, what do you mean? You're going to be New York times. You, you need to blah, blah, blah, blah. And I would be like, really? Oh, okay. You know, I have so naive.

0 (14m 18s):
So that was so you've got this pretty good summer, great summer for summer, but then the summer ends and you know, a lot of those people go home and people come for summer jobs, leave. What happens in the fall? Does your business start to kind of slow down significantly?

2 (14m 34s):
The business slows down tremendously and then weekends are okay. And, and you know, for a while, you're really grateful for the rest. And then things get progressively slower. And, and I thought I needed to change that. So I went into the city because that's where most of my customers were from and just had my cookies in a shopping bag and just went door to door to places. You know, some customers would tell me, oh, go to, Balducci go to Zabar, go to Dean and DeLuca.

0 (15m 2s):
Oh, your customers are coming out to the Hamptons. We're saying, you know, you really should make these available in the city.

2 (15m 7s):
Yeah. And I re I remember walking into Balducci cold calling and I'd be like, hi, I have cookies. Maybe you want to sell some. And they were like, yeah, let's see what you got. And they would try them. And they were like, yeah, bring me a hundred bags next week. And then I go into another store and then someone would not be so nice. And he would say, you know, my mother could make cookies like this, or I made better, blah, blah, blah. You know? So I just walk out. I've always had confidence with my cookies, not so much myself all the time when I was younger, but with my cookies, I was like, you're just wrong.

0 (15m 39s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Kathleen decides to take on two business partners, a deal that winds up turning into a total disaster, stay with us. You're listening to how I built this from NPR

3 (16m 6s):
Support for this podcast. And the following message come from the American Jewish world service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and equitable world. Learn more@aigws.org.

0 (16m 33s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's the fall of 1980. And Kathleen has started to make trips into Manhattan, to pitcher cookies, to specialty stores. And it's still pretty much a do it yourself operation so that when she makes the trip back to south Hampton, she is doing most of the baking and the packaging.

2 (16m 54s):
Yeah. With my, my hand printed label, which now I got printed, it was all handwritten, but then I got it printed. I thought that was major because now I didn't have to sit at night and write them all. But we'll put how

0 (17m 6s):
Customers know to buy your cookies. Like they had a choice.

2 (17m 9s):
Well, because remember this was the early eighties there wasn't competition. Like there is now, you know, finding like a homemade cookie product in the stores was a great find. You know, people recognize them from the Hamptons and, and knew them then. And then, you know, word of mouth just spreads. And that's how most of my whole career was established.

0 (17m 33s):
So what is it at this time where the recipe for the chocolate chip cookie has started to resemble what we know of Tate's cookies today?

2 (17m 43s):
Yeah. Because after a couple of years with Kathleen's cookie, I, people, I feel didn't want, everything is big. And so I just started making them smaller. And when I started making them smaller, that's how they came

0 (17m 55s):
Out. It just came out crispy.

2 (17m 57s):
Yeah. And I was like, oh, these are good. Yeah. You know, when I used to create new products at the big shop, I used to watch my staff taste the product. If they taste it and they would be like, oh, this is good. And they walked away and didn't turn around and come back for another bite. I said, it wasn't good enough, but

0 (18m 18s):
What were you doing differently? I mean, were you adjusting the butter? Were you making brown butter? We're using more brown sugar. What was it that you were doing?

2 (18m 27s):
You know, I can't really tell you everything, but there's no, you know, there's, there's one little trick, nothing major, but I can't tell you what that is.

0 (18m 37s):
Listen, it's a half a billion dollar brand. I've got to protect

2 (18m 41s):
That product. I know.

0 (18m 44s):
All right. So you, you start selling these cookies to these shops in New York city. And is that like, does that become a significant generator of revenue for you? Yeah,

2 (18m 55s):
Because off season is long, you know, Hampton season is so short and people think, oh, everybody's making him money, hand over fist. I'm like, well now take that two months worth of money. And you've got to survive the next 10. So I started building my brand mourn in the city and was selling that's when it was busy. So I would be selling there all winter long. And then of course in the summer I had to maintain it. So I, I got another van or so, and then I hired drivers and they would deliver,

0 (19m 28s):
I mean, what your, what your day is your average days were like when you were, oh, 22, 23.

2 (19m 34s):
When I first opened my first shop, I would go to work at like two o'clock in the morning and then bake and then open the store and then get home at like eight at night. Then I've changed my hours. Cause that wasn't very healthy. I would drive to work at like two in the morning wanting to like hit a tree. So I go to the hospital and rest because you know, it's very depressing driving to work at two o'clock in the morning and everybody's light is off and you know, they're in their bed. So then I changed my schedule, but I worked like 18 hour days, six days a week. Wow. It was not easy. It was, you know, I gave up my youth really.

0 (20m 14s):
Was it overwhelming for you? I mean, you were baking and if you weren't baking, I'm assuming you were like doing the business stuff. Yeah.

2 (20m 22s):
Yeah. It was really hard. Yeah. It was really hard, but I was always kind of like, we'll just, you just keep working harder, you know, that's how you just try to figure it out, stay afloat.

0 (20m 35s):
What was the thing that kept you going

2 (20m 38s):
Pride? I didn't know how to say I can't do this

0 (20m 41s):
Pride in the other side of that coin is the fear of failure.

2 (20m 45s):
I didn't have a fear of failure. I just had more of the fear of saying, I can't do this,

0 (20m 50s):
But you just told me that there were times where you wanted to hit a tree, so you could go to the hospital and sleep. So, right. So I mean, a part of you felt like you couldn't do this, that this was not sustainable.

2 (21m 1s):
Right. But I just kept working because that's how, kind of like how I was raised. You just keep going. You just keep, you just keep pushing.

0 (21m 11s):
So as you kind of, this business was, was kind of growing, I guess there is a building in south Hampton that becomes available for purchase. Yes. And you decide to purchase this to kind of bring your big shop into that new building. Was that, was that because you had to expand, you were, you needed more space or

2 (21m 34s):
Outgrowing my current location. I didn't like having a landlord. And so can, my mom says, well, you know, there's a building for sale up the road. And I was like, oh right. And she said, well, it doesn't hurt to call. So I met with the owner, it was $350,000 for the building and he wanted $50,000 down payment. And he would, he himself would hold the mortgage for 300,000 at like nine and a half percent interest back then. Right. And I had $40,000 saved

0 (22m 5s):
From the business, from sales, from the business.

2 (22m 8s):
And I had to somehow find that 10 and my family didn't have any money. And, and then my father used to help this older woman with her chickens. She had chickens in her yard, I guess. So he helped her from time to time. And one, I was looking for the $10,000 she died and she left my father $10,000. Wow. And he lent it to me.

0 (22m 34s):
I talk about lock, right. Yeah. All right. So you have now a pretty significant mortgage to pay down right on this business. So what did that mean for the, for your business? Did you have to really ramp up sales to cover your costs?

2 (22m 50s):
I did. I had to, I knew I had to double my business in order to pay for the mortgage and my business plan back then was okay. I can do that. That was my plan.

0 (23m 2s):
All right. So you start out sort of early to mid eighties, right? Mrs. Fields exploding all over shopping malls in America, and there's famous Amos. There are a couple other national brands that are starting to come about. What do you think it was about your cookies? Was it that it was in the Hamptons and people were on vacation and it was sort of a go-to place or, or, or what?

2 (23m 27s):
Well, you know, it was kind of like a go-to place because it was something that was part of their part of people's weekends. I mean, I have kids that are fully grown and married now that come in and say, oh my God, I, you know, and I remember them, they were raised on my cookies. The cookies, you know, are thin and crispy, delicious. They were different from Mrs. Fields and David's cookies, which is a nice concept, but more of a fad, you know, they were hot, served off the tray type of cookies. And I always used to think, how can they grow? Because you can't eat their cookies cold. They're only good warm, and now you're really stuck.

0 (24m 5s):
So, all right. So you are kind of, it sounds like, like the business was growing, but it wasn't really your, you didn't have a, really a plan for, to grow. It's just kind of a, an organic, slow growth. This was your business. This was a, this was a lifestyle business. It was a, you were able to pay rent and even save some money and put it back into the business. And did you start to actually, was there a point where in those days in the eighties where you started to actually earn even more money for yourself and even your parents earned? Oh yeah.

2 (24m 37s):
But that wasn't hard

0 (24m 38s):
Break. Cause they weren't making a whole lot of money. Right. And so with your kind of growing the growth of the business, were you able to buy a house and, and, and all those things

2 (24m 49s):
I bought, I bought a little tiny house in the village. I paid the mortgage off from my family's farm and, you know, I started getting time off. I'd get like a day off and then I had two days off and then I had weekends off and could go on vacation.

0 (25m 9s):
So basically Kathleen for almost 20 years, yes. You were running the bake shop. You were distributing the cookies mainly to Manhattan or a little bit beyond their,

2 (25m 21s):
No, beyond also the Manhattan and the long island. Then we, we also ship cookies to Texas. We did some cookies in California. We did like, spottings all over.

0 (25m 30s):
We're still a small business pretty much. Oh yeah. And how did you feel about it? Did you, I mean, you're now in, you're starting to approach your forties. Right. Did you feel like you needed a change or you wanted a break or, or did you,

2 (25m 45s):
Yeah, I, you know, I was like 40 years old and had made good money. You know, I had, had gotten married and divorced, no kids now I was 40. So like the kid thing was over. And so I was like, just me. So I said, well, I wanna have, you know, more of a life. I want to have less responsibility and, and more time.

0 (26m 11s):
So how are you going to do that?

2 (26m 13s):
Well, I decided I would, if I could sell my company, that would be great, but I wasn't really fully prepared to retire. So I took on two partners. I had a bookkeeper, he didn't have any money, but he was interested in becoming a part owner of the company and, and paying me off along the way. And, but he insisted along the way that his brother also become involved, which I wasn't a hundred percent comfortable with. I didn't really know his brother, but I don't know what happened, why I just went along with it.

0 (26m 54s):
Wait, let me try and understand this. He says, I want to buy into this. Right. And okay. And so, okay. So he brings his brother in and they agree to pay, you know, I read it was about like $900,000 total, but they were not going to give you any of this money upfront. They were going to pay you in installments over time, right?

2 (27m 15s):
Yes. And so if he and his brother took over running the business and I still was part of it, but I had more time. And then I was part of the, the profit system and then they would pay me for the business over time. I was like, okay. That's okay. Because I don't need, I don't need any more. I don't need a lump sum of anything. I'm cool. So basically

0 (27m 41s):
You kind of brought them in as partners and, and did they have, what was the share? How did you divide it up?

2 (27m 46s):
We each had one third.

0 (27m 48s):
So you said, yeah, I'll give you a third. I'll take a third. Your brother will have a third. Right? You guys run the business all, but, but that meant that you gave up two thirds of your business.

2 (27m 60s):
I always thought one-third one-third one-third was equal. I know it's ridiculous. Naive.

0 (28m 5s):
Well, did anybody, did you go to a lawyer to Emmy say, Kathleen, I don't know if you want to do this or, or were the two seem totally like a great idea.

2 (28m 12s):
No, I went to a lawyer and everything. I did have like second guessing and, you know, and I just said, well, you know, I, I gave my word. I, I, you know, I can't back out now. I had no idea how horrible the deal really was.

0 (28m 31s):
What, what is it that they promised you that they wanted to do with the business? Because you're in the Hamptons

2 (28m 35s):
Grow the, grow the business, obviously, because it definitely had the potential.

0 (28m 39s):
Did they have any experience doing this where they marketers or they do they have any of that? No. No. And what was their plan? What was the first thing that they did?

2 (28m 47s):
Well, first I started, you know, at the bake shop and then they went to Virginia to put together a cookie plant production down there.

0 (28m 58s):
So they said, Hey, Kathleen, we want to open up a production facility, a bakery in Virginia. And you thought, okay, great. You were fine with that.

2 (29m 7s):
Yeah. I thought, I thought it would be okay because the cookie business was what really was a value and to expand on that.

0 (29m 15s):
So what happened? They moved down there and you stay up in south Hampton

2 (29m 18s):
And I stayed in south

0 (29m 19s):
Hand. And you just communicate by phone a couple of times a day. Yes. When did you, when did the tension start to arise?

2 (29m 26s):
Very early on. Because anything that they made are sent from the factory in Virginia was horrible. Like

0 (29m 35s):
Terrible cookies. We're not good. We're not cause

2 (29m 37s):
He's wearing good. The pies were terrible. I, and I wouldn't sell it. But what was the issue where

0 (29m 42s):
They were using? I mean, they have the recipes,

2 (29m 44s):
They had the recipes, but that's like anything you can, nobody was trained properly. Nobody was making anything correctly, like an apple pie. I remember finding with a whole apple inside, then I'm supposed to be running the south Hampton store and depositing the money which I'm doing. But they, they were meeting payroll, but they weren't paying any local vendors. So I got frustrated. And so the money that the bake shop made, I started paying the local vendors because that they were the ones that were making the money from the bake shop.

0 (30m 20s):
Vendors would call you and say, Kathleen, we're not getting paid. What's going on. Yeah.

2 (30m 24s):
It's like what? Because I always paid my bills and they weren't, weren't paying people. And then that's when I put my foot down and I started to pay the local people with the money that I, I was making.

0 (30m 38s):
You started to pay the vendors yourself. What did the, what did your partner say?

2 (30m 44s):
That they were really angry and they, and I was like, well, you know, this is what I have to do. And then they, I was supposed to go away for the month of January. Yeah. On a cycling trip and a guy that worked down there that moved down there to work down there that I knew he called me. And he said, Kathleen, they're planning on coming up when you're not there and taking over, getting rid of you. So I didn't go on my trip. And I waited. And one day I came to work. They were there. I walked into the office and they handed me papers saying that I was fired.

0 (31m 32s):
When we come back in just a moment. Kathleen watched everything. She built over 20 years collapse and how that turned out to be the best thing that ever happened to her. So stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, click up, meet a productivity solution. That's guaranteed to save you one day, every week, click up brings all of your work into one place, tasks, docs, chat, and goals.

0 (32m 19s):
So you can focus on work without switching apps. It's how companies like Uber, Google and web flow save time with 10,005 star reviews and used by 200,000 plus teams click up is one place for all your work and it's free forever. So try click up today at click.com/npr. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's early 2000 and Kathleen and our business partners, the Webbers who basically had a total meltdown, they disagree on just about every aspect of how the business is being run.

0 (33m 4s):
And so the brothers, they fire her and of course they can do that because they control two thirds of the company. Anyway, according to the records and media reports from the time Kathleen basically thought the brothers were running the business into the ground and she was devastated,

2 (33m 22s):
You know, I would just hold my breath all the time. I think that was the only thing I could control. And so I started holding my breath and I was like a DOE in headlights. And, you know, there were moments that were really hard. And then there were moments that were great, you know, because I was just so grateful for waking up in a house. You know, I just, the simple things of really going down to like the bare bones of gratitude, because you can always get worse. You know, you try to go, you get to that place. When you get down that far, you're not getting.

0 (34m 2s):
And what about your business partners? But what was the plan?

2 (34m 5s):
I had to fight them. I had to get my, my business back and I wanted to get out of the contract because they had, at that point had driven my business, $600,000 into debt. I realized, even though I was fired and had no job, I was responsible for one third of that debt and all the money that the company had was gone. So, okay.

0 (34m 32s):
So at this point, the lawsuit start, and this is a super complicated story as these things usually are, but, but sort of long story short, you Sue them, they Sue you back and this goes back and forth. And this is just over, like over two years after you first formed this partnership with the Webers. Yes. I mean, wow. I mean that, that how quickly that became a nightmare,

2 (34m 58s):
But the community was incredible. People would call me, people sent me cards, simple encouragement. The community really rallied for me. It became like a hallmark made for TV movie. And I said, I can spend my days and focusing on the evil of, of two people or I can spend my days and focusing on all this kindness and support that I had, no idea was there for me.

0 (35m 30s):
Meanwhile, what's going on to the bake shop. Are people still coming into work?

2 (35m 36s):
People are still coming to, but you know, a lot of people were not shopping there any longer. So the business was going down and what a hundred percent was going on there. I really don't know. You know, like some of the employees I would gather at my house, they were very supportive. Yeah.

0 (35m 56s):
Yeah. So, I mean, obviously this is a super stressful situation and everyone knows that like that, you know, litigation can take years and of course the lawyers are expensive. So, so I guess in the middle of 2000, you guys decide to settle. You decide to settle with the brothers. Yes. And as part of that settlement, you drop, you gave them the name, the name Kathleen's bake shop became theirs. You got to keep the location in south Hampton, the building.

2 (36m 28s):
Well, yeah, I always owned a location, but unfortunately they were the tenants of the location. So I had to get them to release the lease to get them out.

0 (36m 39s):
And then as, as you mentioned, the business had like $600,000 of debt at this point. So another part of the settlement I read about was, was an agreement to divide up that debt three ways. So that means of that total, you owed around $200,000 and, and you lose your name, your name, your own name. You cannot use Kathleen's bake shop or presumably Kathleen's cookies or anything like that. First of all, that, that must have been, how did you get to a point where you were able, you were able to let that go?

2 (37m 14s):
I don't know. It's kinda like how I opened the first big shop. You just do, you know, you just, you just do, because what's your choice

0 (37m 23s):
Where you bitter, where you just, I mean, cause I can imagine I would be right where you just like saving.

2 (37m 29s):
I don't know. I, I can't say bitter. I don't, that's not, that's not my nature either. I was angry, but which, you know, helped me to recreate a new brand. But

0 (37m 45s):
The whole point of starting this partnership with these two people was to give yourself some freedom and space to kind of, you know, enjoy life. You'd worked really hard at 20 years.

2 (37m 56s):
I know go way more than I bargained for.

0 (37m 59s):
And so now you find yourself two, you're like 42 you're back in the situation where you have to, if you want to keep going, you've got to completely start from scratch. You've got to be a startup all over again. Yeah.

2 (38m 13s):
I was, it was very draining, I would say, opposed to like rage and bitterness and all of that. I was really kind of more, I walked around kind of a little bit in shock. I had felt that, you know, every emotion that I could have ever had was stripped down to the bone and I don't know what I had left in me truthfully. I didn't have any choices. Like I, I couldn't go get a job anywhere else because I didn't know how to do anything else. I just had two years of college and the things that I didn't know how to do, I used to hire people to do so really.

2 (38m 58s):
I didn't have a choice, but to start again and do what I knew. That's how I,

0 (39m 6s):
So you, you decide that you are going to, you're going to reconstitute this business and by the way, keep your old employees. Yes. And so what, what, where are you going to call it? Tate's bakeshop and how did that, where did that name come from?

2 (39m 19s):
Tate's it was, my dad's name was just a nickname, but everybody called him that. So I wanted a name that was like a local name, that, that was genuine and integrity and kind. And that was like my dad. So I thought that that would fit nicely for the bake shop. And I ended up, I had to get open for August because it was the season in the August. At least I could make some money.

0 (39m 47s):
And you'd been out of the kitchen and the business since February, you were locked out, right? Yes.

2 (39m 53s):
Wow. You know, my employees, they all rallied to work hard and I ended up remortgaging the bake shop because I had already had it paid off because it was a 15 year mortgage. So thank God for that. I remortgaged to the vape shop. So I got some money, so I could have some cash floating to make more money. Yeah. And then I ended up hiring a business manager because I was in such financial trouble. I needed to have a business creating income. And this,

0 (40m 24s):
That, the business manager. Who, who, who was he and how did you find him?

2 (40m 28s):
His name was Michael Naomi. He was in the city and he became my, my business advisor, which really was a godsend for me because I am very instinctual. But of course I make mistakes from time to time.

0 (40m 43s):
And when you, when you hired Michael to help you launch, Tate's where you, I mean, after, imagine a part for you was still kind of standoffish, right? Because you've just gotten burned really bad. I mean, were there like trust issues there?

2 (40m 58s):
No, he was great. I was like, he felt, I felt to me like a lifeline, but it was safe because I could walk away anytime I wanted, you know, I wasn't bound by any contract or money or anything. I find not trusting people way too exhausting. And it's not the way I want to live my life. So I was very, very naive and I used to trust blindly. Now I still trust everybody, but I trust with my eyes open.

0 (41m 31s):
All right. But now you have to reestablish your brand right. As Tate, it's the same cookie, but you got to, re-establish a brand new brand

2 (41m 39s):
At actually make a better cookie because I had to compete against Kathleen's bake shop. Yeah.

0 (41m 43s):
So their meantime, those guys are down in Virginia with plans, presumably to take your brand that you'd spent 20 years building up and really expanding that to where you did that. Cause anxiety for you. Did you think, oh my God, they're going to take my name, my brand. And they're going to go all over the country and people are going to think it's me.

2 (42m 3s):
No, because I don't think about what others are doing. And I just had to think about what I had to do. And of course my goal was to take them down.

0 (42m 15s):
Your goal was to beat them. Yes. To be better. So did you continue on with your previous strategy of baking in the retail shop and baking for wholesale, M and mainly kind of gourmet, you know, shops in, in major cities in the U S

2 (42m 32s):
Yes. And when Michael came on board, we went through all the products and the products that had the highest margins is the ones we focused on selling. So we just kind of really zeroed in on the cookies, you know, starting Tate's was about surviving. So, you know, when you're in a survival mode, those things, those kinds of decisions, weren't hard. They just had to be executed. They just had to be done.

0 (42m 59s):
So where were you guys? I mean, did you start to expand your distribution?

2 (43m 4s):
Yeah, first of all, I had to get, I had to get all of long island in New York city back because my whole story was so public, some stores welcomed me with open arms. Some stores stuck with the Kathleen's brand. A lot of stores carried both. Right. And that's how it shook out. And then even when I was some vendors I had for 20 years and when I opened up Tate's they treated me like I was a brand new customer. Others were just so helpful and just said, okay, I know you owe us this $40,000. You know, you pay that off when you can. And, and we're standby. You, you know, it's amazing, you know, just the difference people just amazing.

0 (43m 47s):
So when you re launched the company is Tate's, you had wanted to take a break in your life. You knew that was not going to happen anytime soon, because all of a sudden you got to start up again. Right. And so where are you back to that hamster wheel? Back to those crazy long hours?

2 (44m 4s):
Only for a short time, because when I opened tapes, then I had a plan and I had a

0 (44m 10s):
Goal. And what was your plan? Well, what was the goal?

2 (44m 14s):
I had to have an exit strategy. My goal was to sell when I was 55.

0 (44m 18s):
So you knew when you reconstituted this thing and you relaunched it, there was a time horizon. Yes. And you were thinking maybe some local business would, would buy it or something like that?

2 (44m 28s):
No, I thought I did think bigger than that. I didn't think as big as I went, but, you know, I was going to sell at 55 so I could retire.

0 (44m 34s):
I mean, you're still a pretty small shop at this point. Right. It's still 40 or so employees

2 (44m 40s):
When I first opened Tate's yeah.

0 (44m 42s):
And in those first few years of Tate's like, what was your annual revenue?

2 (44m 46s):
I mean, I would say we might be started out a couple million, but as we start to expand, I, I, a couple of years down the road, I rented a 5,000 square foot, additional kitchen, and then I needed to, we outgrew that. And so then we needed something bigger. So I purchased a school in east Moriches.

0 (45m 9s):
You turn that into a bakery to start to bake more cookies.

2 (45m 13s):
Yes. We turn that into a commercial kitchen first making it 15,000 square feet and then adding on at, cause it had, we had space to add on and we added on as, as we needed.

0 (45m 24s):
And by the way, your former business partners who have the name Kathleen's bake shop, I mean, they were still trying to compete with you. Right. But, but then I guess just a few years after the lawsuit and then the settlement, they actually go out of business. Yeah.

2 (45m 41s):
I never even know what happened to them.

0 (45m 43s):
You have no idea what happened to them.

2 (45m 45s):
I don't know what happened with the name of the brand. No, nothing. I just doesn't exist as far as I know.

0 (45m 52s):
So was it pretty clear to you pretty soon after you launched tapes that you know, this wasn't just about survival mode that this could actually grow, this could actually get bigger than, than Kathleen's

2 (46m 3s):
A yes, because that was my plan, but how

0 (46m 6s):
Are you going to do that? Because you know, food companies, the big guys, right? The general mills and Kellogg's, and they, I mean they, and they have a huge distribution networks. They decide what goes on the supermarket shelves. Where, how are you guys negotiating and getting big companies to pay attention to you and to continue to agree, to distribute and put your stuff on their shelves.

2 (46m 29s):
That took time. I mean, first of all, we started where first we had our own trucks and we went for small guys with like 10 to 12 . And then we would strategically pick areas of the United States that we were going to go sell to start to build our foundation with upscale gourmet shops. That's going to kind of like the first year when we were building our brand. And then as we started to get bigger, we went into the second tier, which was like the whole foods, the fresh markets, the, you know, Cinderella.

0 (46m 60s):
How would you get, how would you get those meetings? You would, I mean, I'm assuming some buyers or Wholefoods may have seen your products at some of these smaller stores.

2 (47m 6s):
Yeah. I mean, some, some buyers, you know, would contact us. You know, Michael was also a great sales person, so he helped negotiate some of those deals to get into various locations. And because Michael was such a great numbers guy and forecaster, we did then do every year, he would say, okay, this here's the plan. I drew up three forecasts for you. We can do a, B or C. If you do this route, you'll make this. If you do this route, you'll make this. And if you did this route, you'll make this. And then he would say, which, which route do you want to take? And I would say, okay, this one works for me.

2 (47m 46s):
And then we would do it.

0 (47m 49s):
So as you were kind of re branding and growing again, I mean, you started to get attention again. I mean, I think Rachel Ray, he wrote like it was on her, on her show. She said, yeah, this is the best cookie in America. And then

2 (48m 1s):
The consumer reports voted Tate's big shot, the best cookie, right.

0 (48m 5s):
Consumer reports did that. Oh, you know, 2011. When, when consumer reports called you the best cook in America and after Gwenyth Paltrow and Rachel Ray and all these people are saying that about your cookies were the, were the lines starting to go out the shop?

2 (48m 18s):
You know, we were always busy. Like, I can't say the lines out the door, but we were always increasing, you know, Tate's, you know, had like a 30% or more increase per year. Wow. Yeah. Which is

0 (48m 31s):
When, when, I guess when you started to get closer to age 55, you were serious. This really was your plan. You were sticking to this plan. I am going to, I want an exit. Yeah. And so how did you even begin that process? Who, who, how do you, what do you do, do you tell, how do you put your business up for sale?

2 (48m 50s):
You know, my business matters and I, we would discuss it a lot. And, and a lot of, you know, investment bankers, they're all watching, but this time around, I was going to do everything right. And I wasn't going to leave a penny on the table. So I interviewed a couple bankers and I settled with TM capital in New York city.

0 (49m 13s):
And they were basically a goat. Could I take your company and say, all right, it's available

2 (49m 18s):
And who's going to sell it. Right.

0 (49m 21s):
And this is 2014, I think, rendered in 2013. Yeah. So they started to, to do that. And because this was already a pretty strong brand, it had name recognition. It had value. I mean, were there lots of bidders? Yeah.

2 (49m 35s):
Well, there was, we'll start it off with like, like something like 50 people that showed an interest. We narrowed it down to like 12, you know, put in another bid and then it came down to like five.

0 (49m 49s):
I think that, I think eventually a private equity or investment firm, Riverside, but a majority stake. Yes.

2 (49m 58s):
In the end we settled on a Riverside and I ended up selling 80% of the company because I was really ready to return.

0 (50m 10s):
Well, they paid a hundred million dollars for it in 2014. Was that just insane to you? I mean, wow. You started this out of a farm stand in 1970. I mean a hundred million dollars. Did, did you even imagine that that's what it would go for?

2 (50m 25s):
No, you know, it went like twice for what I originally thought. And I remember the closing over the telephone. I was in my own office, everybody's on the phone and then it was over and it was done and everyone's like, okay. Yay. Thanks. Bye. And I walked out of my office and I think I went home and made dinner. I don't know. I was so, you know, kind of another deer in headlights moment.

0 (50m 53s):
I mean, I wonder given the fact that you grew up in a pretty modest environment, right. Watching the, sort of the rich and famous come to the Hamptons, you know, when you were a kid, I mean, suddenly you had a lot of money. Like you sort of become one of those rich people and in the Hamptons. Right.

2 (51m 14s):
I didn't become that. But other people thought I became that. I thought I lived great before. Really haven't changed the way I, I live because I liked the way I live. Like I'm all about freedom and time. Yeah. You know, I can, I can donate more and I can be more generous, which is great. The one nice thing is, you know, I was able to buy my dream property of childhood that I never thought would have ever been an opportunity in my lifetime. But other than that, everything else is the same. I like to ride my bike. I like to wear jeans and a t-shirt. I like to watch movies on my own TV, a lot of stuff, you know, it, it creates a burden.

2 (51m 58s):
I don't want anything I can't use. I don't want anything I have to guard just doesn't interest me.

0 (52m 4s):
Kathleen. Think about this for a moment. You sold this company, majority stake in 2014 for a hundred million Riverside, four years later, sold it to Mondilise. They make Oreos and trips away for half a billion dollars. Your brand Tate's this brand that you kind of reconstituted from the ashes of this terrible venture, this disaster. I mean, the, the, the irony of the crisis that you went through in 2000 is that without it, you would have never built Tate's and you, you may not have become the kind of person who could build a company like tape.

2 (52m 42s):
Yes. That, that, that is true. I, you know, that the biggest disaster of my life was really became the greatest gift of my life. And like, when I started Tate's, I said, I'm not giving blood for this company because I did that already for Kathleen's. And I ended up standing there with nothing. And the thing I regretted losing the most was my youth. I worked my youth away. You can't get that back. You can't buy that back. It was quite an eye-opener to realize we are a society of feeling like we have to give up everything and sacrifice everything and work day and night in order to achieve and get ahead.

2 (53m 25s):
But in the big picture, it's really not true. You have to do it for a period of time. But the key point is knowing when to let it go yes. To create something from nothing requires that kind of dedication of day and night. But a lot of it is, is self-driven of nobody's as good as I am. Nobody can do it as good as I can. And that keeps you trapped because you're too focused on all that emotional attachment that comes with creating something from nothing.

0 (53m 58s):
And you were able to shed that emotional attachment with the disaster of the first business, I guess.

2 (54m 5s):
Yes, because I was basically stripped of everything.

0 (54m 8s):
Yeah. When you think about all of the work you put in the sacrifice that you made, and, you know, you talk about kind of giving up your youth, like you had to kind of give that time up, given what happened and the exit and the incredible success that you, that you saw, do you regret it? Do you regret any of that book? Because I think a lot of people listening would say, Nope, it was all worth it. Would you say that's the case?

2 (54m 36s):
No. I've asked myself that several times. And sometimes when I see young people working like really, really hard, like in the, in the corporate circle, going round and round, I say to them, you know, try to always keep the balance because if I had to ask myself, if I would do it all over again, would I, I still don't really have an answer.

0 (55m 0s):
Do you feel Kathleen? Like what happened to you and, and the success of this company is due to the work you put into it, you're just, you're relentless hard work. Or do you think that it had more to do with luck?

2 (55m 13s):
Ah, no. It's not luck. I think it was more, I've worked really hard putting it together. I never gave up. I never let it success. Get the best of me if anything and not luck. I think sometimes it was my destiny. I think.

0 (55m 31s):
No, I know Kathleen, that to your folks passed away recently, but they did get to see you achieve incredible success from this cookie stand.

2 (55m 46s):
They didn't see the mandoline sale, but they saw the Riverside sale.

0 (55m 52s):
And what do they think? I mean, what did your parents think that, I mean, you were selling us these cookies, farmstand, et cetera. I mean, your dad was a dairy farmer. Like what did they think about this?

2 (56m 2s):
It's very funny. You know, because, you know, I sold, it was in the paper and they never said a word about money, not a word. They just were like, oh, congratulations. I'm proud of you to that because that's who they were. They never once mentioned the money. My father always told me as I was being coming successful, never forget where you came from.

0 (56m 32s):
They must, they must've been so proud of you.

2 (56m 36s):
They really were.

0 (56m 41s):
That's Kathleen King, the founder of Kathleen's bake shop. And Tate's bakeshop by the way, Kathleen still likes to bake cookies at home and she loves spotting, tastes cookies out in the wild. In fact, a while back, she was on a bike tour of the Natchez trace Parkway. And at one point her guide stopped to take a break. He reached into his backpack, pulled out a bag of Tates handed one to Kathleen and asked, have you ever tried these cookies? They're amazing. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show. This week, this episode was produced by Casey Herman with music composed by rep team era, Louie. He was edited by Neeva grant with research help from David jaw.

0 (57m 20s):
Our production staff includes JC Howard, Julia Carney, LA coats, fairer safari, Liz Metzger and Harrison BJ Choi. Our intern is Catherine cipher. Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Ross. And you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.