1 (1s):
This is my voice. It can tell you a lot about me, and I'm not changing it for anyone in NPRs, Black, Stories, Black Truths, you'll find a collection of NPR episodes centered on the black experience search NPR r Black Stories Black Truths, wherever you get podcasts.

2 (23s):
This advert is brought to you by McMillan Cancer Support a registered charity. Are you worried about your test results? Have no idea how to tell your mates about your cancer diagnosis. Sometimes it's difficult to open up to someone you know. You just wanna talk to someone who understands what living with cancer is like. The McMillan Online community is a free online cancer forum where you can get support 24 7 from people who know what it's like to have cancer browse groups. Ask questions to an expert. Share your experience, or just see what others have to say. You can also discuss and find support on money and work worries, practical concerns, and help with how you are feeling in addition to questions on cancer types.

2 (1m 5s):
Whatever the question you can find support from day one. Search McMillan online community@community.mcmillan.org.uk. Hey, it's guy here. And before we start the show, I recently heard a great business story from the music world. I was interviewing the rapper, Macklemore, and he took me back to a time when record labels were offering millions of dollars and he had to make a choice whether to stay independent with more risk and more reward, or take the upfront money and the security that comes with that to hear how it played out. Check out my interview with Macklemore on my other podcast. The Great Creators just search for the great creators with Guy Raz, wherever you listen to podcasts.

2 (1m 47s):
And now onto today's show,

3 (1m 53s):
Running an airline is a miserable thing. It's 24 7 and everything goes wrong. and I said, the guy that was making money off this project is the guy in Arizona.

2 (2m 6s):
Not you,

3 (2m 7s):
Not me.

2 (2m 8s):
You're losing money on every flight unless it's totally packed.

3 (2m 12s):
Yeah. Or almost say 90% full. And that was a turning point mentally in my life. I was losing money and he's making money.

0 (2m 29s):
Welcome

2 (2m 29s):
To How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz. And on the show today how Steven Udvar Hasi fled Communist Hungary as a kid, started two companies worth billions, and became a force in global aviation. You might not know who Steven Udvar Hasi is, but there's a good chance you've flown on one of his planes. That's because around half of all commercial flights happen on planes that are leased, not owned by an airline.

2 (3m 13s):
And Steven's company, Air Lease Corporation does a lot of that leasing. It owns more planes than Air France and British Airways combined. And it's a big business, a business that's made Steven Udvar Hasi a billionaire many times over. I first heard of him about a decade ago, and I went to one of the most amazing aviation museums in the world. It's called the Steven Udvar Hazy Center. And it's just outside Washington dc Inside that Museum, there are some of the most historic spaceships and aircraft ever flown, and it was his massive donation that helped finance the Museum Steven, who also goes by. Steve was actually born in Hungary, but after the Soviet Union invaded the country in 1956, his parents managed to get him and his brother out.

2 (4m 2s):
As a teenager, Steve would go to airports around Los Angeles and watch planes take off and land. He'd memorized schedules and timetables. And by the time he got to college at U C L A, he was offering his services as a consultant to airlines. This was the dawn of the jet age. And Steve soon realized that the gold wasn't in the gold mines, but rather it was in selling the pig axes and shovels. And in his case, owning the planes and charging the airlines to use them. How he made his money is a story of an obsession, an obsession with airplanes that started from an early age.

3 (4m 41s):
When I was six years old, my father took me to an air show, which was completely mesmerizing for me as a six year old. And there was civilian aircraft, aerobatic aircraft, military aircraft, flying and on display and, and living in a Communist totalitarian Marxist country. I found that airplanes and aviation was sort of a fascinating dream almost to be able to ultimately get away from this Communist Marxist country that I was living in.

2 (5m 17s):
Steve, were your parents political in any way?

3 (5m 21s):
No. No, no. My father refused to join the Communist party, and that did not enable him to progress in his activities, because if you're not a member of the party, you're not part of the elite. And so therefore, we lost all of our possessions My parents had to make due with whatever they could, they could earn. Hmm. And the Russian army came in and, and, and basically retook complete power.

2 (5m 53s):
So your family eventually decides to, to get out, to leave Hungary for good, but I, it was really hard for Hungarians to get outta the country at the time. So, So, what did, what did you do? How did you guys leave?

3 (6m 7s):
So my father lined up a, a guide on the Austrian border. Austria was the only country that was a non-communist country with a border. Yeah. We took a train out to the west, maybe I, I don't remember exactly which station we got off, but my guess it was about 10 to 15 miles from the border. And then my dad hired this gentleman, I remember, had these like big boots to get through the mud. And then he had a, a horse with a, like a wagon. And he took us, my guess is maybe a couple of kilometers from the border.

3 (6m 49s):
And we start walking. Hmm. And as we kept walking toward the, the border, it, it kept snowing harder and harder. And, and I remember this guide became more like agitated. Hmm. He became more and more concerned because there were mine fields Hmm. On both sides of the, of the barbed wire. And we kept going for maybe another half hour or so. and I could already see the, the opening in the barbed wire fence because other people must have gotten out there. And, and this gentleman was just increasingly worried. Wow. He just made a decision kind of at the last moment.

3 (7m 31s):
He said, look, this is now we're risking our lives, you know, one of us is gonna get blown up. So my parents were very scared that something might happen and we turned back. Mm.

2 (7m 44s):
So you had to go back to Budapest basically? Yes,

3 (7m 46s):
Yes. Yes. At that time we tried to figure out a, a way to get out.

2 (7m 52s):
Hmm. And, and I think the way your family eventually did get out is essentially you got an exit visa to Sweden. But, but I mean, it was complicated. 'cause I think at the time the, the Hungarian government wouldn't allow entire families to leave the country together. Right. So you, so your family, you and your brother and your parents, you have to, I guess you got passports under, under separate names.

3 (8m 14s):
Yes. We kind of went through separate. In those days there was no, you know, t s a type screening. We went through and I, remember my mother told me when we got dressed in the morning, she says, wear three layers of, of shirts because we are only gonna have one bag for each of us. And she said, look, your name is Raz, which is my mother's maiden name. And, and she explained, look, that's that's who I You are. Yeah. And we're, we're gonna act like we don't even know each other when we're at the airport.

2 (8m 47s):
That must have been so nerve wracking for your parents. I can't imagine how scared and how nervous. I can't imagine.

3 (8m 56s):
But actually I was looking forward to flying. They were worried about being detained and I was like all excited to fly in this Douglas DC six. Yeah. And fly that four engine propeller plane, you know, anywhere.

2 (9m 10s):
How did the Hungarian authorities not catch you? I'm just, were they just incompetent? I mean, it's,

3 (9m 15s):
They were incompetent and probably have drunk and they were more interested in the soccer game, you know, that was gonna take place later that day. And they just, you know, I mean, we were lucky God was watching over us.

2 (9m 27s):
I mean, the, the Hungarians would never have allowed an entire family to leave. No. Did you, do you remember being at the airport just ignoring your dad and your brother? Like not Yes. Pretend like you didn't know them

3 (9m 37s):
On the way to the airport. My mom kept telling me, do not acknowledge your brother. Do not acknowledge your dad. Just totally ignore them. Yeah. And, and when they get in line, don't e don't even get close to them. Like they're, they're a bunch of strangers.

2 (9m 53s):
I, I'm just like, because you guys could have been, I mean, your parents could have been arrested.

3 (9m 56s):
Yeah. And maybe, you know, it could have been 10 years in prison or work camp or whatever. Wow. But look, this is the quest for freedom that millions of people experienced coming out of Eastern Europe. Yeah. and I wish more young people today in, in America and in Europe would understand that, that the socialism, communism, Marxism was not a friendly, you know, desirable place to grow up as a, as a, as a child. So that, that was really a, a turning moment when that plane took off and headed north toward Denmark. We knew we made it. And so that was really a, a very emotional experience for me.

3 (10m 38s):
Yeah. As a 12 and a half year old.

2 (10m 41s):
I can't even imagine it. So you, you stay in Stockholm, in Sweden for, for a few months and then I guess around 1958, your family's eventually able to make its way to the us 'cause I guess your, your, like your dad had a sister in New York, and, and so you, you landed there.

3 (11m 2s):
Yes. But when we landed at, at that time, it was called Ile Wild Airport, which is not John F. Kennedy Airport. Yep. And they were friendly. The, the officials, you know, stamped your paperwork, everything else. And my, my aunt was waiting for us. She had a nice Buick car, which I'd never seen before. I think it was like a 1957 Buick. you know, she drove us into Manhattan. And then once we get into Manhattan, I see all kinds of people that look completely different than where I grew up. That there was all kinds of interesting kaleidoscope of people that I'd never seen before as a 12 year old.

3 (11m 47s):
Yeah. So it was kind of a culture shock. I didn't speak the language. I knew about 10 words. So it was kind of a, a shock for a child.

2 (11m 57s):
Hmm. So, alright. So your family kind of settles in Manhattan where I guess you initially lived on, on your mom's salary. She was, she was working as a seamstress from what I understand. and I guess, I guess you assimilated pretty fast into American culture, right? You went to a Catholic school and, and, and did you, did you do well there?

3 (12m 19s):
Yes. Yes. And

2 (12m 21s):
From what I, and from what I understand, you already arrived to the US with this fascination with airplanes, which, which a lot of kids have, you know, at 10, 11, 12 years old. But yours was a little bit more intense. Like I, I read that you used to go just walk, just go to LaGuardia, like take the, the subway out there and just watch the planes take off and land and sometimes even like, get into the control tower.

3 (12m 46s):
Yes. In the afternoon I would work at my aunt's office, and then I would tell my parents that I'm going to the library to study. And instead of going to the library or going to my aunt's office, I would take the subway out to Queens. And, and the station was, I don't know, about a mile away from LaGuardia. And at that time, there was no security. and I would talk to the ticket agents, I talked to the station managers, I'd go to the American Airlines hangar, which was just left of the terminal a couple of times I talked my way into the control tower saying that I was doing a term paper for school, for science class.

3 (13m 28s):
And so that's what I would do. and I had a little notebook where I would write in what airline was flying, what kind of plane and where it was going. Almost like a little memo of, of airport activity. and I would be out there for like two or three hours, then I would go back home and I would never tell anyone. I went to the airport and I was totally obsessed with the different airlines and airplanes. And, and then I would, I would go to the library and dig into it some more. Like, if I saw a certain kind of airplane, I would go to the library and try to get more information on it. So this became almost like a obsession, I dunno.

3 (14m 10s):
Or a passionate obsession, let's call it. So when I started going to school in America, there was this void in my life because I wasn't into baseball or, or basketball or American football. Whereas a lot of my friends were doing that. So the, the aviation almost filled that vacuum. Yeah.

2 (14m 31s):
Did, did you, and this was obviously the pre jet age, right? These are, these are propeller planes. Yes. And, and some of them beautiful planes, constellations, and corvets and Yes. Did you, I mean, as a kid right, looking at going to, to LaGuardia and, and watching those planes take off and land, did you dream of being a pilot?

3 (14m 50s):
Yes. Yes. In fact, I had a, a girlfriend, her name was Erica. And sometimes I would dream that I'm flying a DC seven. Hmm. And she's waiting for me at the airport somewhere up in New England. And I'm actually this pilot of this DC seven. and I would taxi in, in front of the terminal with the window open, the cockpit window open, and my arm hanging out. And this young lady would be waiting for me. This is the kind of stuff I would dream about, which is totally, you know, oddball and different. But it was all part of this fascination about aviation.

2 (15m 24s):
So today, if a, if, if, you know, you are sort of a 15 year old kid really obsessed with airplanes and, and you know, would go to the airport and check it out, like you, you know, it would be cool, but you, you might be a little bit odd or you know, because most kids that age wouldn't do that. But, but maybe at the, this time in the mid sixties, like air, air travel was still so new. It was so

3 (15m 47s):
More glamorous. It was very glamorous. Yep. Yeah.

2 (15m 50s):
Yeah. And so your obsession, like when, when, when your parents are like, oh, you know, Steve is, he's really into air. He goes to the airport and just like writes down serial numbers. They, they, people weren't like, oh, that's a little odd. They would be like, oh, cool. I mean, what, how would they react?

3 (16m 5s):
My dad sort of felt, look, he, he needs to pursue whatever his passion is. And my mother said, why can't you be like a normal person and become a, a doctor or an engineer? And that made no sense to me at all. And my dad said, let him be a rebel. He's gonna be okay. And of course, I didn't tell my parents everything I was doing vis-a-vis aviation because they felt that was taking away from my academics.

2 (16m 34s):
Hmm. Alright. So your family eventually moves to, to California. So to LA I think your, your brother attended U C L A there, so when, when you, I mean, I mean you continued this in high school, like you would go to L A X or you'd go to, to Santa Monica Airport.

3 (16m 52s):
I'd go to Santa Monica Burbank, I'd go to L A X all the time. I'd collect all the timetables in those days, you know, we have no electronic access to schedules. Right. So, I would go to all the terminals that L A x collect all the timetables. I would go to the maintenance area where there was Continental Airlines and flying Tiger on the west end of L A X. Hmm. and I would talk my way in there again, saying, I'm doing a term paper, I'm doing something for school. and I just basically pushed my way in. So I was still in high school and there was a small airline based in San Francisco called Pacific Airlines.

3 (17m 34s):
They were flying these 40 seat small planes. Right. So, I became obsessed with this airline because I, in my 16 year old mind, I thought I could run this airline better than the, the guys that were running it. So I analyzed their schedule that I'm blue in the face, and they had about 20 airplanes. and I said with 15 airplanes, I could put together a better schedule than what their schedule was. So I actually put together almost like a spreadsheet of a new schedule saying, you know, this flight leaves San Diego at 7 0 5, it flies to L A X, then it goes here, Bakersfield or Fresno. I put the schedule together and the turnaround times were shorter and I sent it to this president of the airline called Harry White in San Francisco at the airport.

3 (18m 23s):
and I said, look, I'm an airline consultant. I didn't tell him how old I was.

2 (18m 28s):
I'm a 16 year old airline consultant. Yeah.

3 (18m 30s):
And here's a schedule I think is optimized and, and I think the airline would be much better operating this type of a schedule than what you have now, the status quo. And he wrote me back a very nice letter saying, we don't need consultants, thank you, but we're not really interested in pursuing this. Hmm. Okay. So it was a real slam because I thought I put all this work in dozens of hours and, and this guy thinks I'm an idiot. So about three or four months later, I'm at L A X collecting schedules.

2 (19m 3s):
And these are paper schedules.

3 (19m 4s):
Paper schedules.

2 (19m 5s):
Like you would just go and pick them up like a brochure.

3 (19m 8s):
They were like maybe four inches by eight inches. Okay. you know, and you'd fold them out. Anyway, I go to L A X three or four months later, I don't know exactly when I pick up their schedule. I didn't pay any attention to it. I get home, didn't do anything that weekend. I look at the stupid schedule and you won't believe it. 80% of the schedule is what I sent them

2 (19m 29s):
To Pacific Airlines. Yes.

3 (19m 30s):
At least four out of the five. and I mean it was like, arrive in Redding, California at eight 13 in the morning and depart at 8 28. That's not something any crazy person would know. It, it was an exact copy, not a hundred percent, but at least 80% of my schedule Wow. Was adopted by the airline. So that to me was a turning experience. Even though there was no monetary benefit, I realized that maybe I, I could add some value to this industry that I thought aviation was a growth industry, that I, I felt that aviation with the jet age. Remember in October, 1958, pan Am had its first flight on a 7 0 7 from New York to London.

3 (20m 15s):
And then about half a year later, the Douglas DC eight took disguised with, I think it was Delta, United National with the first three airlines, just about this time that I'm translating my passion to some kind of a inquisition into the knowledge of airlines. Yeah. That's when the Jet H began.

2 (20m 36s):
I, I have to say, just as an aside, your memory for details is quite remarkable. I've interviewed thousands and thousands of people and you have a very, very good memory of these details is amazing. So

3 (20m 49s):
Yeah. My wife says I'm crazy that I remember the, the serial numbers of the airplanes we bought in 1977. and I say to her, well, each plane's like a child to me, So, I remember them very distinctly. Yeah.

2 (21m 2s):
You followed your brother to U C L A. Yes. For college and I think, I mean, you were there, like you had a very different experience, but you were at U C L A, like around the same time as like Jim Morrison and the guys from the doors, like, who had a completely different experience and took something different out of it. But you were very single-minded. Like you were there to get your degree and figure out what you were gonna do in, in, in in airlines.

3 (21m 30s):
Yes. Remember I told you a story about Pacific Airlines and the schedule. Yeah, sure. I had a similar sort of vision about an airline in Ireland called Air Lingus. And it wasn't about their schedule, it was the hodgepodge fleet that they had of different airplanes. Okay. and I thought I could come up with a streamlined fleet and I I wrote to them and sent them telegrams and stuff like that

2 (21m 55s):
And wrote to them saying, Hey, I think you have too many different kinds of airplanes Yes. Aircraft.

3 (22m 0s):
Yes. This a government owned airline.

2 (22m 2s):
And this information was not ea easily, like there's no internet. Like you would have to go to the library to find out what Planes Lingus flew. Yes,

3 (22m 10s):
Yes. And get their schedule. Okay. And, and then do the research and then send them telegrams without saying, saying, without revealing how old I am or

2 (22m 20s):
Anything else. Saying what in the telegrams? Like what

3 (22m 23s):
Was, well, I set up, I set up a company when I was 19. Okay. It was called Airlines Systems Research Consultants. How do you like that? A S R C I like it. Great airline systems research consultants. Okay. and I had letterhead made up and everything else. and I took out one of those offices, which is like a PO Box on Sunset Boulevard in Los Angeles. Yeah. And so this, this looked like a legitimate consulting firm. Yep. So, er Lingus, I sent them an outline of what I was thinking and they said, oh, this, this is actually very interesting. Wait,

2 (22m 56s):
What were you thinking? That they should, they should have fewer, fewer aircraft types? Yes. Okay.

3 (23m 1s):
Yeah. They, they had, they had f F 20 sevens, they had three DC four carves that were converted to be able to fly cars across the Irish channel. It was a hodgepodge fleet of airplanes, which I thought was crazy. And they were losing a lot of money. So I sent them an outline. They said, okay, this sounds really creative. And they sent me a ticket and they said, come over,

2 (23m 26s):
Wait, based on this telegram they sent, because they're thinking, oh, this is a smart consultant from the United States. Yeah. Let's, and he's, he's, he's just cold proposing this idea. Let's bring him in.

3 (23m 37s):
Yeah, exactly. Okay.

2 (23m 39s):
Flew amazing

3 (23m 40s):
So I flew, I flew to, I flew to Dublin.

2 (23m 43s):
They send you a flight, they send you a ticket to go to Dublin, to

3 (23m 47s):
A round trip.

2 (23m 48s):
Okay. And was there a contractor

3 (23m 49s):
On first class? On first class.

2 (23m 50s):
Okay. And they were gonna, they were gonna g pay you a consulting fee to work with 'em for some time, basically. Yeah. Okay.

3 (23m 56s):
It was not defined. It, it wasn't defined what the consulting fee would be.

2 (23m 59s):
Okay. and you were, and by the way, you were how old?

3 (24m 1s):
20. Okay. So I show up in Dublin.

2 (24m 6s):
They didn't know this by Yeah, right.

3 (24m 7s):
I show up in Dublin. They're in shock

2 (24m 10s):
Because you're not barely shaving.

3 (24m 12s):
Yes. I, I went to lunch with them for like two hours.

2 (24m 15s):
Okay.

3 (24m 16s):
And they were pretty, I would have to say they, they were pretty impressed. Hmm. And

2 (24m 23s):
Because you knew about, studied their business.

3 (24m 26s):
I studied, I, I, well, one of them said, you know more about our airline than we do. Wow. So I. I really did my homework. I felt if I didn't do my homework and knew my stuff, this would be a bust.

2 (24m 38s):
Yeah. So

3 (24m 39s):
They immediately hired me that afternoon and said, we'll pay you $4,000. That was a lot of money then.

2 (24m 46s):
This is like 19 65, 66.

3 (24m 48s):
Yeah. 66. Yeah. They said, you can come as often as you want, either from New York or Chicago. We'll give you a ticket. I mean, because the plane was only half full anyways, so it was no big deal. And, and you work on this fleet plan, we send you $4,000 next day. They wrote me a check, a check in US dollars. They said, when you go home, you can cash the check. So I worked on their fleet plan and they pretty much followed it. And

2 (25m 15s):
The plan was basically you were going to say to them, this is what you need to buy and this is what your fleet needs to look like over the next five years. That was your basically all you had, not all, but that's what you were gonna do.

3 (25m 27s):
That was the essence of it. Yep.

2 (25m 30s):
So, alright. So you have this consulting business and you got this first gig with Air Lingus, and now you get a second gig with Air New Zealand. How does, what, what is that gig? What what, what's the story out?

3 (25m 41s):
So here's what happened. I got a, a, a letter from Air New Zealand saying that they plan to sell a Lockheed Electra, which is a four engine turbo prop. And they wanted sell that aircraft because they wanted to order an additional DC eight from Douglas. Hmm. So they said, if you're interested in this Electra, please let us know because

2 (26m 2s):
You let them know that you were a buyer looking for a plane.

3 (26m 4s):
Yes. Yes. Okay. Or a broker. An agent.

2 (26m 7s):
A broker. Okay. Yeah. Gotcha.

3 (26m 8s):
So then I found an airline in Alaska called Revolution Airways So. what I arranged is that I got free tickets again for him, the airline owner in Alaska and myself to go down to Auckland, New Zealand to inspect this plane and potentially buy it. So we get to, we get to New Zealand. I've never been there before. These guys have a heart attack when they see me, because I was like 21. Okay. 21. Okay. The gentleman from Alaska, by the

2 (26m 39s):
Way, did you have a mustache?

3 (26m 41s):
Yes. You

2 (26m 42s):
Did. Okay. So you looked a little older.

3 (26m 44s):
My girlfriend at the time wanted me to have a mustache. Yeah.

2 (26m 46s):
Okay.

3 (26m 47s):
Okay. So anyway, we get to Auckland, the guy from Alaska, Bob Ree falls in love with the plane. It's clean, it looks like new. He says, I'm interested, but I also need a spare engine and a spare propeller and some other stuff. So they said fine. 1 million, $50,000 for the whole lock, stock and barrel.

2 (27m 7s):
Yep. And why the, was that a good deal at the time? I mean, it seems like,

3 (27m 11s):
I thought it was a good deal for a quality airplane. Got it. Okay. I still have models of the plane before and after. Anyway, air New Zealand and I make a deal. They're gonna pay a 5% commission

2 (27m 21s):
To you. So you're like the real estate broker?

3 (27m 23s):
Yeah, 5%. Okay. Now this is pretty, is this is January of 1968? Yeah. Okay. 50 grand today. I don't know what's half a million dollars. I don't know what it's, I I was still in college. I was, I was like a junior,

2 (27m 39s):
$50,000. You would get off that in 1968.

3 (27m 42s):
Yeah. From making one trip and a few telegrams.

2 (27m 45s):
That's, and as you say, it was, it would be like half a million dollars today.

3 (27m 48s):
Yeah. you know how much the hotel cost was in New Zealand. I think it was like $12. That's

2 (27m 53s):
Crazy. So you, I mean, you were making, you were gonna make more money from that one deal than your parents had ever seen in a lifetime.

3 (27m 59s):
Yes. Yes. Okay. And then a few months later, a company called Hughes Air West was, was trying to sell a 7 27. and I found an airline in Brazil called ero. And on that deal, I made $45,000.

2 (28m 16s):
Wow.

3 (28m 17s):
And I never even went to Brazil. They came up to California. So anyway, I thought I was smarter than I really was because I was dumb.

2 (28m 26s):
And now you had 95,000 bucks.

3 (28m 29s):
Yeah. and I said, I'm gonna take half of that money and start Airline. Airline. Which is the stupidest thing I ever did. Ever did. Plus I bought a Mercedes two 80 sl, which is a two seat convertible Mercedes. Really? J Jazzy.

2 (28m 43s):
So you, you beca so you're like a, you're like a player now. You're like, Hey, I'm rich. Yes. I'm a player. I'm 22. I'm gonna buy myself. And and what did your, by the way, I'm just curious, what did your parents think? I mean, they must have known, they're like, our son has, you know, almost a, you know, a hundred thousand dollars lot wonder for that. I mean, that's crazy money. Yeah.

3 (29m 3s):
Yeah. Part-time. Part-time. But I was the full-time lifeguard in the summer for the county of Los Angeles. and I loved that job down in Manhattan Beach. Redondo Beach. and I would make probably about $1,200 a month. Yeah. For three months, which I thought was pretty cool. and I had a convertible Mercedes. you know, I, I was a cool,

2 (29m 24s):
People must have been like, wow, how does this lifeguard of a convertible Mercedes,

3 (29m 28s):
I was, I was an oddball. I'm sorry. you know,

2 (29m 31s):
I mean, it's unbelievable. You have $95,000 from doing and you're, you're a student at U C L A. I mean, it's, yes. It, it's, it's, I mean, I'm trying to think. Like today, if you were just a, a, a solo person and you wanted to be a consultant for airlines, like, it would be almost impossible to get those gigs because they're corporate. But back then, what? You could just write to some name that was publicly listed and say, Hey, I'm a consultant, you wanna hire me? And it was like that. Yeah.

3 (29m 57s):
Yeah. Now it's k y c, they would've to do a background check. They look on Wikipedia, they would check you out,

2 (30m 3s):
Request for proposals. You'd have to go through a nine month process. Yeah. Right.

3 (30m 6s):
They want references today. It would be a bureaucratic nightmare. It would, it couldn't be done today. Yeah.

2 (30m 12s):
Alright. So you've, you're now flush with $95,000 in cash and you decide around this time to start your own airline.

3 (30m 22s):
Yeah, exactly. That was the dumbest, that was the dumbest idea I ever had.

Squarespace (30m 29s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Steve loses a good chunk of that $95,000, but in the process figures out a way to make much, much more. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This. I've talked to hundreds of founders on How, I, Built This, and I've heard time and time again how important it is to have a strong web presence. In order to really grow a business. Squarespace is an all-in-one platform for building a brand and engaging customers online. Squarespace lets you easily create a dynamic website and sell anything your products and services and even content you create. Squarespace makes it really easy to get started with best in class website templates for all types of businesses that can be customized to fit your specific needs. Squarespace also provides the tools you need to run your business smoothly, including inventory management, a simple checkout process, and secure payments. And with Squarespace email campaigns, you can build a community of email subscribers and customers. Start with an email template and customize it by applying your own brand ingredients like colors and logo. And once you send built-in analytics, measure your emails impact. Check out squarespace dot com slash built for a free trial. And when you are ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

Lands End (32m 3s):
Uniforms are an important part of making your brand recognizable and memorable. Like, think about Home Depot's iconic Orange Apron. It's so distinct to the Home Depot brand. Anyone can just slap a logo on a boring generic shirt. But with LAN's end business, you can get made to order uniforms that become part of your brand. They offer timeless style that fits every body type with the widest range of sizes in branded apparel. See your logo in Vivid Colors on t-shirts, outerwear, hats, mugs, water bottles, and more. Hundreds of products perfect for any trade show event or holiday gift. And when you order from Landsend, you get email, chat and phone support from a customer service team eager to help set up an online store where employees can order items they need without worrying about inventory. See why thousands of companies count on Landsend business. Go to business dot LANs andt com slash built and use promo code built for 20% off your order. Show support for How I Built This by going to business dot LANs end dot com slash built and use promo code built for 20% off your order.

3 (33m 13s):
One more thing before we get back to the show, please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And it's totally free. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This.

2 (33m 31s):
I'm Guy Raz. So it's around 1969. Steve is In his early twenties and has about $95,000 in the bank from his consulting business. And with some of that money plus help from a few friends and family, he raises a little over 200,000 to start his own airline. And he calls it

3 (33m 51s):
Astro Air.

2 (33m 52s):
It's a great name. Modern Future Astro Air. Okay.

3 (33m 56s):
And the logo was like, almost like a, a science fiction logo.

2 (34m 0s):
Like a, like, like an neutron or like an atomic.

3 (34m 4s):
My girlfriend at the time came up with the name. She was an art major. She says I like that name. Astro Air. So anyway, we had to apply to the California Public Utilities Commission, p u c, we had to go through hearings, we had to deal with the f a A, there was a lot of bureaucracy, which I hated. But here we are and we get licensed to be an airline. And we were gonna fly to an airport that's very close to Vanderberg Air Force Base.

2 (34m 32s):
Sure. In California. Yeah. Yeah.

3 (34m 33s):
We charged $15 to go from l a x to a city called Lompoc.

2 (34m 38s):
A a And the idea was you were gonna service, you were gonna basically serve the, these military folks, you was gonna be an a a a cheap way to get around for them Yeah.

3 (34m 46s):
And contractors. And also serve Santa Maria, California and Lampoc, which is about halfway up the coast. Yeah.

2 (34m 52s):
And you had a a what? A one plane that you leased?

3 (34m 55s):
Yeah, we had one plane. It was a carstead jet liner. Okay. Which was, they stretched the ha and dove. Okay. With turbo prop engines. How

2 (35m 4s):
Many people could it see? 15. Okay. So if it was full, if your plane's full, we

3 (35m 9s):
Made a little money. If it was three quarters full, we'd lose money.

2 (35m 12s):
Three quarters full. You would lose money. Yep.

3 (35m 15s):
If we had 12 passengers, I, the breakeven was probably about 13 passengers.

2 (35m 21s):
Okay. and you leased this plane, you did not buy it. You couldn't buy it. It would be, it would

3 (35m 25s):
Be rented and it was $4,500 a month for the lease.

2 (35m 30s):
The rent. Okay. Yeah.

3 (35m 31s):
And it was leased from a company in Phoenix, Arizona called Apache Airlines. Yeah. and I met the guy who was the president and he said, look, I can do it one less plane because, you know, business is a little slow. Yep. So I'll lease you this plane for 4,500 a month. And this was a turning point in my life because whether five passengers showed up for our flight, or 10 or 12, this guy got $4,500 a month no matter what

2 (35m 57s):
If all your seats were full, he got $4,500 a month. If one of your seats were filled, he got 45. It didn't matter. Yeah.

3 (36m 3s):
Or if the weather was bad and we had to cancel and you couldn't land flights.

2 (36m 7s):
Yeah.

3 (36m 8s):
You know, if the airport up there was fogged in, he still got this $4,500. And that was a turning point mentally in my life where I decided running an airline is a miserable thing. It involves people, regulations, fuel, airports, reservations. It was just a nightmare to run an airline. It's 24 7 and everything goes wrong. and I said, the guy that was making money off this project is the guy in Arizona,

2 (36m 42s):
Not you.

3 (36m 43s):
Not me. Yeah. I was losing money. And he's making money. You're

2 (36m 46s):
Losing money on every flight unless it's totally packed. Yeah.

3 (36m 49s):
Or almost say 90% full

2 (36m 52s):
Because your fixed costs were higher than your

3 (36m 54s):
Exactly. Insurance. Right. Rentals airport. The

2 (36m 59s):
Pilots, the

3 (36m 60s):
Pilots, the chief pilot was $750 a month and the other pilots were $600 a month. Yeah. So anyway, we finally decided this thing is losing money. I found a buyer for the airline out of Las Vegas. And So I decided then and there, I'm never gonna have an airline again. I'll work with airlines. Yeah. But I don't want to be an operator of an airline.

2 (37m 24s):
So you basically lost most of that 95 grand that you'd earned.

3 (37m 29s):
Yes. I would say I lost about half of everything I've earned up to that time. Right. On the airline venture. But I also had a lot of people, relatives and friends of my parents and other acquaintances that invested in the airline. Some, you know, a thousand dollars, some $5,000. and I made a pledge to pay them back. So over the next several years, starting in 19 69, 70, 71, when I was about 23, 24, 25 years old, I paid everybody back.

2 (38m 7s):
Hmm. So So I mean when, when that, when that all sort of fell apart, you must have felt really terrible. I mean, these are family friends and other people who had invested money in this venture.

3 (38m 20s):
Yes. So there was two sides to it. It's, there's this, there's a sense of failure Yeah. And a recognition that at that age a person is somewhat naive. But at the same time, I thought it was a very valuable lesson about running a business. and I did have an appreciation that I went through this experience early in life rather than, than later.

2 (38m 48s):
Hmm. Right. Okay. So this was, so 1969, you begin to wind down Astro Air. Yes. You're 23 and you had seen who was making the money, the, the, the person, the people making the money. When you were running Astro Air wasn't your airline, it was Apache Airlines, the leasing company that was leasing you this airplane. 'cause they had to be paid whether you landed or not, whether you had a full plane or not. Whether the the weather halted your flights or not, they got their money. And so Exactly,

3 (39m 16s):
Exactly

2 (39m 17s):
That. And that experience sort of planted a seed in your mind. Like that's where the money is. I gotta go there. I've gotta, I've gotta service, I've gotta sell the pickaxes and shovels. Not try to dig for the gold.

3 (39m 29s):
Exactly. But the key to that was it required capital on a much larger scale. Yeah. Both equity and debt capital and So I felt that for a few years, I need to continue amassing capital through the various transactions that I was doing before. Right. And in fact, I increased the intensity of that activity.

2 (39m 55s):
You went back to helping airlines find planes to buy and essentially taking a broker's fee.

3 (40m 1s):
Exactly. And also helping them with their route planning,

2 (40m 4s):
Consulting. Yes. And so you do a bunch of these deals and over time you, you start to accumulate some, some cash for the, the business that you really wanna build, which is a your own leasing company. You wanna be the guy leasing planes, you wanna do what Lockheed did.

3 (40m 19s):
Right. Exactly. So maybe I'll give you an example. And one of them was Aro Mexico, which was the government airline to Mexico. And they needed a d c eight. I found an airplane in Miami that was owned by National Airlines. and I talked Bud Maytag, who's president into selling that plane to us with four brand new engines for about $2.2 million. I didn't have $2.2 million, but I figured I'd put up around 150,000 equity and then get a bank loan. Mm. Aro Mexico didn't wanna buy it. They wanted to lease it.

3 (40m 59s):
I went to a lot of banks, they all said, no thank you. We don't want to finance a plane that's gonna be registered in Mexico. So I went around, went around, went around until I found one bank in California called United California Bank that said, yes sir, if you get a government agency guarantee, then we will give you a $1.7 million term loan. So I went down to Mexico City and I asked Aro Mexico to arrange a meeting with a, a government agency that had credibility. And they made an appointment for me at 10 o'clock at night. I remember Mexico City with the head of that agency, there were armed guards and so on, and there's a conference room with two bottles of tequila on it, nothing else.

3 (41m 50s):
The end result is by midnight, I convinced this gentleman that signing this co-signing the lease and guaranteeing the lease payments of another gov, another government owned entity was not a risk. and I said this would bring in thousands of tourists and will help the Mexican economy and blah, blah, blah. So he, he, after five glasses of tequila, he asked his secretary to bring out his big seal and the wax and the ribbon. And he just put that they'll unconditionally guarantee the lease. Bingo. I went back to LA the bank said, okay, this is exactly what we wanted. And on September 20th, 1973, I bought a Douglas d c eight for $2.2 million from National Airlines and leased it to Aro Mexico, which today is one of our best clients in Latin America.

3 (42m 44s):
Yeah.

2 (42m 45s):
Alright. So in, in 1973, you have the seed money to start your company. What, what became International Lease Finance Corporation, you actually went into business with, with two friends of the family, Leslie and Louis Ganda. And these guys were Hungarian. He was a Hungarian businessman. It was a father and son and, and I guess they became co-investors and, and partners.

3 (43m 10s):
Yes. Yes. Yeah.

2 (43m 12s):
And you were and

3 (43m 13s):
I was the president. Got it. We were not in a position at that time to buy any new aircraft. We didn't have the resources for that. You

2 (43m 21s):
Had one plane that you could buy? Yeah, we

3 (43m 22s):
Had one plane. Yeah.

2 (43m 23s):
And it was, and it was a 7 27. No,

3 (43m 25s):
A McDonald Douglas dca. A four N

2 (43m 28s):
D C. Yeah. Right. Yeah.

3 (43m 29s):
Oh, it looks almost like a Boeing 7 0 7.

2 (43m 31s):
Right. Okay. So you had, so you had that one plane. And when, when you started the company with the Bandhas, what was the, what was your thought? I mean, did you think this was going to be a relatively, you know, small to medium sized business where you might have five 10 aircraft that you were Exactly.

3 (43m 49s):
That

2 (43m 50s):
Was, that's what you thought

3 (43m 51s):
Our ambition was. Maybe we could have eight to 10, maybe 12 planes and we'd make a nice living off of it and I could still continue to do some of the other stuff. Brokering consulting. Yeah. We had no idea that within a few years we would develop into the largest aircraft leasing company. We had none of these

2 (44m 13s):
Ambitions.

3 (44m 14s):
I think, I think we had ambition, but we underestimated the potential of the market.

2 (44m 21s):
I, I think So basically, it sounds like for the first couple of years you were working with Aro Mexico, right? You had that plane. Yeah. And then, I mean, did you, how soon after that were you able to buy the second plane? You had cashflow coming in presumably by

3 (44m 36s):
November.

2 (44m 36s):
By November, yeah.

3 (44m 38s):
A month and a half later. Wow. It was another interesting coincidence. So the, I may have mention to you that there were these airlines in the Western US that merged together and became Air West. And then Howard Hughes bought that company became Hughes Air West, and they had around 20 some of these 40 seat turbo prop, what was called Fairchild F 20 sevens. And they were transitioning to more jets and phasing out these turboprop Fairchild aircraft. And so we made a deal to buy 10 of these planes. Okay. We didn't have $3 million or 2.8 million

2 (45m 19s):
10 of these planes. Yeah. So you didn't have the cash. Yeah,

3 (45m 21s):
We made a deal with Hughes Air West to buy 10 of 'em. Okay. Like one a month.

2 (45m 27s):
So how did you do that with no cash?

3 (45m 29s):
Well, we gave him a $10,000 per plane deposit. Okay. Okay. So while you're going through that routine, you concurrently run a marketing campaign and try to locate potential customers? We, we give 'em a, a a hundred thousand deposit and then North Canada Air was, was willing to lease three of them for like $7,500 a month each. Right.

2 (45m 57s):
I mean, this speaks to the idea, and I've heard this from people before, which is you can actually invest in things and buy lots of things without any money if you can figure out how to do the deal. Like, and very wealthy people buy properties and make huge investments without money because they will figure out a way Yeah. To do a leasing deal or something like this. I mean, this essentially, you didn't have the money to buy the planes,

3 (46m 25s):
But I had a piece of the action. Yeah. Right. So to speak. Yeah.

2 (46m 28s):
Right. Wow. Alright. So as you're building this business up, something happens, which I have to imagine had a massive impact on your business, which was the Airline Deregulation Act in 1978. Which, which I guess the result of that was it would increase, it did increase competition and it did lower cost. It deregulated the air airline industry. How did that affect your business?

3 (46m 50s):
Well, it had a major effect. So in 1977, a year before deregulation, we bought our first brand new plane, brand new 7 3 7 from Boeing. And we leased it to a, a British airline called Britannia Airways, which was the largest charter airline in Europe. Hmm. So we, we already reached a level of activity where we could buy a seven and a half million dollars brand new plane. It accelerated the fleet modernization of airlines in the late seventies, early eighties. And that really gave our company a tremendous amount of tailwind. And just as a side note, we were very, very prudent with our money.

3 (47m 32s):
I mean, when we started International East Finance, I remember our salary was $600 a month, and maybe three or four years later, it was still like a thousand dollars a month. So we were not very extravagant. Yeah. And also, it's a very volatile industry. You have several years of positive growth and profitability. Yeah. Then you have oil price thrown aways or high interest rates or a recession. And the airline industry is very vulnerable to those changes. And so you could have multiple years where airlines are suffering and losing money. Yeah. So you have to endure and survive these, these, this rollercoaster.

2 (48m 14s):
So So I mean, were you guys financially healthy during this period? I mean, were, were you profitable or not profitable? Oh

3 (48m 21s):
No, we were profitable, but we could scale up using er partnerships. And Leslie NDA was extremely supportive of this company. And he brought in some of his friends to invest 50 or a hundred thousand dollars in a, in a, in a deal, international lease finance court would be the general partner. And we would also invest money, but the limited partners would invest most of the equity and then we would get a management fee. So in other words, for every million dollars of equity we had, we really had five or 6 million of equity because we leveraged it with these limited partnerships.

2 (49m 1s):
Right. 'cause you basically could get, get these partners who had cash, who could finance these planes. Yeah. Right.

3 (49m 8s):
And they all made money. No one ever lost a penny. They all made money. They all did very well. Now then we had a number of, of companies like EF Hutton and other Solomon Brothers came to us from Wall Street saying, why don't you guys go public? You've got a great future, blah, blah, blah, blah. So we, we gave that a try in 1982, but the markets were very

2 (49m 33s):
Yeah. That was a extra recession year. Yeah.

3 (49m 35s):
Yeah. And so we decided this is not a good time to go public. But the following year I suggested to our team that we focus more on the, on the smaller investors rather than the big institutions. We did lots of road shows to probably like 40 different cities, and we raised $26 million in an I P O on Nasdaq, you know?

2 (50m 1s):
Yeah. And that presumably supercharged your ability to, to grow to buy more planes.

3 (50m 7s):
Yes.

2 (50m 8s):
And, and so basically 1983, you become a public company and you become the C e o. Right. The c e o at of a publicly traded company. Yes. You had eight people when you went public. So did you need, by the way, did you need many more people? I mean, given that now you had more money to buy more planes, did you have to Yes.

3 (50m 25s):
You did. Yeah, we needed more people. In fact, the underwriters were teasing us that we should hire a couple of part-time, like college kids or something. So we could say that we had more than 10 employees and then let 'em go the day after the I p O. But we didn't do that. So, but it was kind of oddball to have a, a public company with eight employees, including the three founders.

2 (50m 53s):
So tell me about, I mean, we're, we're gonna come to 1990 when you were acquired or a company was sold, but in that period between 1993 and 1990, when you went private again, what I mean, was it just, again, just growing, growing, growing every year, like buying, you know, five, 10 new aircraft a year. I mean, what gimme a sense of what that period of was like?

3 (51m 17s):
I think the major change, which had never been done before was that in 19, what we did after going public is we would buy new and used aircraft when we could match 'em up to an airline. But then I realized that we could get much better leverage in discounts and, and, and basically more weight if we could buy aircraft in bulk. And that was really a landmark gutsy decision because it was the first time that Boeing would sell quantities of aircraft to an aircraft less soar, who couldn't even identify where these planes are gonna go.

3 (52m 1s):
But we had a lot of confidence that we would place the aircraft. And then we did a deal with Boeing and ordered 130 brand new planes speculatively. People thought I'd lost my mind. Hmm. Including 7 4 7 400, which was the largest plane in the airline industry.

2 (52m 23s):
So you obviously, as you were growing, you cut the attention of, I mean, you were a public company, but you cut the attention of some suitors, including a i g the, the huge insurance group. Yeah. And they made an offer to you to sort of buy you out, I guess it was a stock merger, essentially, where you could, you could get Yes. Correct. And it was a, and it was a huge offer. It was like a $1.3 billion offer

3 (52m 52s):
For a company that went public for 26 million less than seven years before that. Yeah. So it was at 50 times greater.

2 (53m 1s):
So your investors were gonna get a huge return.

3 (53m 4s):
Yes. I think 68% of the company was still owned by the insiders. Wow. The Gandhis and myself and my family and the public had I think 32%. So they did really well. We decided that we would each take one and a half million cash, the three of us and the rest we would exchange our shares for a i g stock.

2 (53m 29s):
Wow. And so then at that point, you become, I mean, a i g becomes your boss. Right. But essentially you continued to run I L F C. I mean you were, I mean, did it, did, did it substantially change how you ran it? I mean, did, did you have no oversight from a i g or

3 (53m 48s):
The, the benefit was that I think there were only one of half a dozen companies in the world that were AAA rated. Right. Credit rating. So immediately I C'S credit ratings, which were separate, a i g never guaranteed one penny of our debt, our credit quality immediately went up,

2 (54m 8s):
Which meant that you could get massive loans to buy more planes

3 (54m 11s):
And we could get it cheaper than our competition. Right. A i g was doing extremely well in, in the 1990s, and I was like, I was like the third largest shareholder of a I g. So by the time a i g stock peaked, it was in 2000, our holdings in a i g stock were considerable.

2 (54m 34s):
Yeah.

3 (54m 35s):
It was about five times more than when they acquired the company.

2 (54m 39s):
Wow. When we come back in just a moment, a perfect marriage of timing and opportunity turns into a perfect storm when the 2008 financial crisis hits, stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This.

5 (54m 58s):
In the first part of the 20th century, the Hilton family had a lock on the hotel industry by offering upscale service at a modest price. The company was expanding fast in buying up iconic properties across the country like the Plaza and the Waldorf Astoria, but their unchallenged rise wouldn't last. An ambitious Mormon named JW Marriott decides to pivot from restaurants to hospitality. And he's after Hilton's business developing modern hotels across the world. But both the Hilton and Marriott families will have to contend with their share of drama in finding a successor while also fighting to stay solvent in a high stakes business. Hi, I'm David Brown, the Host of Wondery Show Business Wars.

5 (55m 39s):
We go deep into some of the biggest corporate rivalries of all time. In our latest season, Hilton and Marriott are in a race to expand globally and secure the loyalty of fickle customers. Make sure to follow business wars wherever you get your podcasts. You can listen ad free on the Amazon Music or Wondery app.

2 (56m 3s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So during the 1990s, Air Lease Corporation is in pretty great shape. It's new parent company, A i g is doing well. And because Steve Hazy is now a major shareholder in a i g, he is also doing well. So well in fact that he gets approached to make a major philanthropic donation.

3 (56m 25s):
A couple of gentlemen called my assistant in, in Century City, California said, we'd like to have an appointment with Mr. Hazy. We want to talk to him about an aviation Museum. Yeah. To take a big plot of land at the Dulles Airport to eventually build a new Museum that would open in 2003, which would be the 100th anniversary of the first flight of the Wright Brothers. So I listened to this and I said, oh, that's really nice, blah, blah, blah. and I said, well, what is this thing gonna cost? They said, it's gonna cost anywhere from 120 to $130 million.

3 (57m 6s):
And that was their estimate. So I said, okay, in five minutes, I just thought about it. I said, okay, I'm in for 60. Okay. So these two older gentlemen thought that what I meant is I would contribute $60,000. Yeah, that's kind of what they expected. and I said, no, no, no, not 60,000, 60 million. And they just about had a heart attack. This took about five minutes.

2 (57m 34s):
Wow.

3 (57m 36s):
I said, if I don't do it, nobody else is gonna do it. Somebody's gotta jumpstart this project. So they were in shock. And then later on, a few months later, they said to me, well, the Regents and the government and the Smithsonian board, they wanna name this Museum after your family. I said, well, that's not the reason I'm doing this. The reason I'm doing this is I want other young people in the US and visitors to be captured by the, the thrill of flying and aviation and space. And then they said that the budget had gone up to 130 million.

3 (58m 19s):
So I said, okay, we'll go to 65 million. And then the project was go full steam three shifts a day. and I just felt for what America has done for me and my family, this was the least I could do to, to give back something to America that had value to millions of people and children.

2 (58m 43s):
Yeah. It's an just an incredible Museum. And so that really was kind of your first public, I mean, you know, the first time you were sort of public, right? 'cause you were relatively, you know, quiet, private and still are to this day, but still Yeah,

3 (58m 58s):
We're low profile. Yeah. We try to be low profile.

2 (59m 1s):
Yeah. And do you, I mean, by 2007 right? You have I L F C has I think something like 820 plus Boeings and air buses. That was, that was more than by far, more than any airline in the world. Yes. I read that that's correct. That you owned more than Air France, Lufthansa, British Air was combined. Correct. And so things are going well. I mean, it's, it's, you know, IIL F c is a great company. It's a strong company, but you're about to hit a massive dark cloud.

3 (59m 33s):
Very dark. Yeah.

2 (59m 34s):
But dark cloud may be an understatement. I mean, I mean a, a, a disaster. And AI and I g is right in the middle of that disaster. 'cause the financial crisis hits and a i g is the insurer of all of these banks

3 (59m 50s):
And guarantees and instruments and, and, and subprime mortgages that were then packaged into various derivatives that were bought by all kinds of investors. And

2 (1h 0m 3s):
When you found out about this, 'cause I, I have to assume that you didn't really know, I mean, that's not your business insurance you were in, in you, you were running the airline division essentially of a I g I guess a i g was insuring these loans. It seemed secure, but that had a massive impact on your ability to run your business.

3 (1h 0m 23s):
Yeah. So here's what happened. A I g was a very, very capable insurance company. Yeah. But they went off tangent with this guaranteeing other people's obligations, and they really had no business guaranteeing subprime loans. And so when everything started to crumble around September, October of 2008, a i g would've become insolvent immediately had everybody called in the guarantees.

2 (1h 0m 54s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 0m 56s):
Okay. And that's precisely why the US government did an emergency rescue of a i g by injecting $185 billion, which was more than the whole automotive industry. The whole high tech industry received, no other company got as much financial bailout as a I g and of course, Congress and the government came down really hard. How could you have allowed yourself to be in this situation to begin with? And, here we are. The company just made a billion dollar profit, and we're now right in the middle of this thunderstorm.

2 (1h 1m 32s):
You're talking about your company I L F C. Yeah.

3 (1h 1m 34s):
Yeah. I L F C.

2 (1h 1m 35s):
Yeah. Which was essentially, you are sort of a, a subsidiary Right. Of a of of a i g

3 (1h 1m 41s):
Yes. But we had, we had our separate debt book. Right. And so they owned our equity. We owned a i g equity

2 (1h 1m 49s):
And you own and they owned all your airplanes, which was collateral. Yeah.

3 (1h 1m 52s):
And that basically, a I g turned out to be a huge disappointment that almost caused the collapse of the, of the global financial system. There's nothing I could do to

2 (1h 2m 3s):
You were part of a toxic brand.

3 (1h 2m 5s):
Yes. Yes.

2 (1h 2m 7s):
So all of the money you were making was now going to pay back the government's bailout.

3 (1h 2m 12s):
Exactly. And we became paralyzed. We couldn't buy, we couldn't sell, we couldn't finance. We had our existing book of business. Airlines continued to pay rent. you know, we had an ongoing business, but it, it was like in a, in a cage like, you know, an animal that's in a cage.

2 (1h 2m 31s):
And, and Steve, I have to assume that your personal wealth was, took an enormous hit because you had enormous shares in a i g stock.

3 (1h 2m 41s):
Yes.

2 (1h 2m 42s):
I mean, their, their stock price plummeted probably 70, 80%, maybe more, I don't know.

3 (1h 2m 46s):
Yeah. I think it was more than that. Yep. It was a, it was a great tragedy. And the company would've gone under had it not been for the US government.

2 (1h 2m 57s):
So you, you decide basically, I'm done. I'm outta here. and you, you resigned.

3 (1h 3m 5s):
Well, I retired.

2 (1h 3m 6s):
Retired, forgive me. You retired. Yeah. In, in 2009. Yes.

3 (1h 3m 10s):
We had a family council gathering with my wife and our children, and we said, okay, we can e either continue this status quo or we put this chapter behind us and start fresh. Yeah. And the unanimous decision was made to start fresh. So on February 3rd or something of 2010, I submitted my retirement papers.

2 (1h 3m 37s):
Yep.

3 (1h 3m 38s):
And that was it. They were in shock. But I said, look, we've had our fun. I've tried. Yep. And this is not what I want to, you know, spend the next 10 years working for the government.

2 (1h 3m 50s):
Yeah. So you stepped down from I L F C, this company that you founded, and, but you, you knew, you must have known that you were gonna start a new company pretty soon after, right? I mean, already in your mind, you, you probably

3 (1h 4m 6s):
Do that the next day. We filed the incorporation of air lease in

2 (1h 4m 11s):
Delaware. Air Lease Corporation. Yeah. So you basically said, I'm done running I L F C. Yeah. I'm gonna start my own company again doing essentially the same thing.

3 (1h 4m 21s):
Yeah. But maybe on a smaller scale. Yeah. I didn't want to have a thousand aircraft and $50 billion balance sheet. But we learned a lot in those 35 years, and even in the years before International East Finance. So we said, okay, let's, let's start it. At that point, I didn't really involve any of the other people at the company. I didn't want, and you

2 (1h 4m 45s):
Had no, you had no non-compete clause. You, you were allowed to do this,

3 (1h 4m 48s):
Nor was I soliciting any, any employee or, or officer.

2 (1h 4m 53s):
So you were gonna start with a completely new team?

3 (1h 4m 55s):
Completely new team. But we were across the street from Isla Sea in a new building

2 (1h 5m 1s):
In Los Angeles Yeah. In

3 (1h 5m 2s):
Century City. And so as word got out that Steve Ey starting a new aircraft leasing company, my phone started ringing. And so most of the senior officers said that they, they've had it with, with a i g as well.

2 (1h 5m 19s):
And they wanted to come work with you.

3 (1h 5m 20s):
They wanted to come.

2 (1h 5m 21s):
Wow. It does speak to the loyalty that you engendered and the people around you. I mean, I mean, I'm sure there were times where, you know, maybe you, you, you got mad at people or you lost your temper. I don't know. Maybe not, but, but clearly you have, you had and still have a lot of people who are loyal to you.

3 (1h 5m 38s):
Yes. Well, and, and it was also I think, an opportunity to create a new, a new enterprise and to create, to create wealth. Because not only my family lost a lot on this, but every executive at I L S C that had a i g stock

2 (1h 5m 58s):
Lost probably everything.

3 (1h 5m 59s):
Yeah. So they understood what was going on.

2 (1h 6m 3s):
You had, you were coming to the table with so much experience at this point and in such a great track record that you were able to raise money quite quickly. And, and I mean from, from big banks, like a over a billion dollars. You were able to raise that? Correct.

3 (1h 6m 19s):
We raised about 1.2 billion, and I said, we, we will provide a hundred million dollars of equity, cash equity, and then we'll raise another billion from outside investors, including banks and well-known private equity firms and international institutions. And that was oversubscribed. So we, we raised about 1.2 billion within a few weeks after the company was formed. We didn't have any airplanes, but we already had capital lined up.

2 (1h 6m 58s):
And obviously you knew how to source those planes. Within a year you went, or a little over a year, you went public and you, after the races, and you raised like $800 million.

3 (1h 7m 10s):
I think it was almost 900 million. We raised JP Morgan and Credit Suisse were the two underwriters.

2 (1h 7m 18s):
Did, did you see I L F C as your competitor now? Were you, were you trying to, were you chasing them

3 (1h 7m 24s):
A little bit? We look, the, the clientele that we had were generally airlines that also were leasing planes from I L F C. But I would say that once we left and started air lease, most of the airlines went with us. They did it either know or very little future business with I L F C particularly since it was still under this government a i g umbrella.

2 (1h 7m 56s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 7m 57s):
So I would say a large number of the customers that I L F C had migrated to air lease on their own volition.

2 (1h 8m 4s):
Yeah. Yeah. I I have to assume that you recovered your losses more than recovered than with your, certainly with your new business. And now you have, I mean, you're, you know, you're, you're still running this business and you are, you know, not an old guy, but you're not, you know, 23 anymore. And, and I wonder, I mean, you have obviously enormous resources to do whatever you want and you've got a foundation. But I wonder, what do you think you're gonna do? I mean, you can't possibly spend a fraction of the money that you've made in your lifetime. So, what do you think you'll do with it?

3 (1h 8m 41s):
That's a good question. Look, the idea of retirement doesn't have a lot of appeal. I'm not a good golfer. I'm not a retiring type. Yeah. So I plan to continue to work and, and hopefully add some value to the industry and creating this Spark in young people about aviation and aerospace. Yeah.

2 (1h 9m 6s):
Steve, when you think about, you know, the, what, what you've built and, and, you know, starting this business so young and where you are now and, and, and you really are, I think of red. I mean, people consider you to be the most influential person in aviation. Full stop. How much of, of where you are today do you attribute to how hard you worked and, and your intelligence, and how much do you think had to do with luck?

3 (1h 9m 31s):
I think you need all of those. I was fortunate that my father exposed me to aviation at such a young age, and that I immediately connected myself to that. I think having come from a background where I grew up in a Communist oppressed country, but then you have a certain amount of energy that propels you to achieve greater things, and that comes from within. It's not something you can learn in school. So I'm very grateful for what America has enabled our family to achieve.

3 (1h 10m 15s):
And, you know, having this passion for aviation and the airline business is just, it's been the fuel that kept things going.

2 (1h 10m 27s):
That Steve Udvar Hasi founder and executive chair of Air Lease Corporation, by the way, do you ever get scared in an airplane when you're flying today? No. Never even massive severe turbulence or whatever. You just No,

3 (1h 10m 40s):
No. Because I know how airplanes are designed and built. Yeah. So I adapt really quickly and I can sleep easily anywhere like a horse, I can sleep standing up.

2 (1h 10m 52s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click follow on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode. And is always, it's totally free. This episode was produced by Kerry Thompson, with music composed by Ron Arablouei. It was Edited by Neva Grant with research help from Sam Paulson. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, Carla Esteve, and Ramel Wood. Our engineers are Gilly Moon and Patrick Murray. I'm Guy Roz and you've been listening to How I Built This Hey Prime members. You can listen to How I Built This early and ad free on Amazon Music.

2 (1h 11m 34s):
Download the Amazon music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.