0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

1 (9s):
What if the greatest tragedy of your life was just covered up? I have never seen any, anything like that before or after. This is the story of the worst Marine on Marine friendly fire in modern history. A story kept from the public. It's like, what did y'all have to hide?

2 (24s):
Listen to NPRs embedded podcast and its latest series taking cover.

0 (30s):
Most entrepreneurs are looking to solve a personal problem, and that's exactly what founder Amanda Bradford did when she created the league. It's a dating app designed to help driven career-oriented singles meet their equal. Both Warren Buffett and Cheryl Sandberg claim, the most important decision you can make for your career is who you marry. So when it's time to settle down, pick a partner who will support your goals and challenge you to dream big. Boasting one of the highest match rates in the industry. The league presents users with a curated batch of prospects each day, rather than an unlimited stream of profiles. Their wait list and vetting system is in place to build a community of people with like-minded standards and ambition.

0 (1m 12s):
Committed to finding a long-term relationship so you can save time, energy, and your swipe thumb ready to find the other half of your power Couple. Download the league for free and meet your equal today. The Spark Cash plus card from Capital One helps you earn unlimited 2% cash back on every purchase. And with no preset spending limit, your purchasing power can adapt to meet your business needs. Jorge Guvera, founder of Mai Enda Reinvests his 2% cash back to help grow his business with new products. And I really love the idea behind Masa. It's a supply chain company connecting Mexican heirloom corn farmers with restaurants, chefs, and consumers. And while Masie is connecting more people to the culinary and cultural richness of the Mexican kitchen, it's also elevating traditional heirloom farmers that work in areas that live below the international poverty line.

0 (2m 3s):
Imagine what the Spark Cash plus card from Capital One and unlimited 2% cashback on every purchase could do for your business. Capital One, what's in your wallet? Find out more@capitalone.com slash spark. Cash plus terms and conditions apply.

4 (2m 22s):
We ended up going from zero to 800 homes in a matter of four weeks. And I have to tell you, I thought that this was it. Like this was our rocket ship to the moon. You

0 (2m 33s):
Thought we made it, we're here, we got

4 (2m 35s):
It right. If, if you build it, they will come and look what's happening. And so we get introduced to 20 investors in Silicon Valley. 10 of them reply to our email, five of them meet us for coffee. Zero invested in us

0 (2m 57s):
From npr. It's how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built on today's show. The story of how a side hustle to pay rent led Joe Geia to build a company that now has more rooms than the biggest hotel chain in the world. 10 years ago, even five years ago, most of us would've thought the idea of renting at a room in our home to a complete stranger, a little creepy. Even spending the night in someone else's home you never met would probably seem weird, especially on vacation or a business trip.

0 (3m 45s):
But now it's not just normal, it's actually the preferred way to overnight for millions of people around the world. Even celebrities do it. And the company that made all of this normal, of course, is Airbnb. And the guys who started it had no background in travel or hospitality or even technology. Joe Gaia graduated from art school at the Rhode Island School of Design. Brian Chesky, his co-founder was Joe's College buddy. They played pickup basketball together. And after they graduated in 2005, both Joe and Brian moved out west. Brian went to la, Joe went to San Francisco. And in that first year, Joe, who was designing book covers at a publishing house worked really hard to convince Brian to move up to San Francisco to start a business.

0 (4m 31s):
And as Joe tells the story, after some prodding, Brian agreed,

4 (4m 37s):
Both of us simultaneously quit our jobs. He left his, I was at Chronicle books full-time at that point and and I left to to dream up something with him.

0 (4m 46s):
And you guys were like in your mid twenties or 25. So you didn't need a whole lot of money, presumably

4 (4m 54s):
At this point? No. We're just a couple college grads, you know, eating ramen. Yeah.

0 (4m 58s):
Why does everybody eat ramen? Everybody eats ramen. It's so cheap. There's like ramen, ramen, ramen. I mean, you can get rice,

4 (5m 5s):
Rice cereal too. I mean,

0 (5m 7s):
Anyway, so you guys are there. You're eating ramen and what? You're just like spitballing ideas

4 (5m 12s):
We're spitballing ideas. And that first week was so exciting. You mean the first

0 (5m 16s):
Week he comes, you're, you're like, oh

4 (5m 17s):
My God. Yes. I mean that first week felt like RISD again. The place was full of ideas and then something ominous happened. A letter came in the mail, I open it up, it's dressed to me. I pull it out and it's from our landlord. Yeah. Who politely states that our rent is now 25% higher than it was the month before. Wait,

0 (5m 40s):
Just in one month. He raised it by 25%.

4 (5m 42s):
25%.

0 (5m 43s):
And that's legal.

4 (5m 45s):
It was not under rent control. Okay. Believe me, I looked into it. Yeah.

0 (5m 48s):
And so were you like freaking out?

4 (5m 51s):
Of course. I went, ran to my, my online banking and, and was like, oh my God, oh my god, can I make rent next month? And Brian did the same thing and we realized that we, we almost couldn't, we weren't getting paychecks at this point. Yeah. So this is a moment where our backs are against the wall. And I, I feel like all the creative training that we had received started to pay off. Cause we started to think about, okay, well how can we design our way out of this? And that was when I, I reflected on a previous experience that I had back in Providence the day before that I, I, I drove cross country. I sold off all my stuff. And when I was having that yard sale, this guy, guy pulls up in this, the red Mazda Miata and he starts looking at my stuff and I'm getting pretty annoyed cuz I'm ready to go home.

4 (6m 37s):
But he ends up buying a piece of art that I was selling. So we get to talking and he tells me all about how he's about to go into the Peace Corps and he's driving cross country and he doesn't know a soul in Providence. So I invite him out for a drink that night and I make the mistake of asking him, so where are you staying tonight? And he makes it worse by saying, actually I don't have a place. And I'm thinking, oh man. And what do you do? Yeah.

0 (7m 4s):
You have to give him a place like

4 (7m 5s):
We've all been there, right? Yeah. Like, do I host this guy? So before I know what I'm saying, I'm like, Hey, you can stay on an air bed in my living room. So that night I set him up in the living room and I I I go to bed and I try to fall asleep. I'm staring at the ceiling thinking, oh my God, what have I done? There's a complete stranger in my living room. Yeah. What if he's psychotic? So I get up, I tiptoed my door and I lock my bedroom door. The next morning we wake up, we get breakfast together. It turns out he was not psychotic. And the piece of art that he bought hangs in his classroom. He's a teacher now and

0 (7m 41s):
He's still, I'm presumably you're still in touch with him.

4 (7m 43s):
Yeah, his name's Joseph. We're still in touch. So

0 (7m 46s):
The, so this is the dude that inspired what would eventually become Airbnb. So how did you, so you're in your apartment, your rent's going up 25% and what you, you say, let's just rent out a room in our apartment?

4 (7m 56s):
Well, I'm looking at my laptop and there's a design conference that's coming to San Francisco, the industrial designers conference. Right. And on the conference website, in big red letters, it said, hotels sold out. And I'm thinking, oh man, what a bummer. Designers won't wanna come last minute, they're not gonna have a place to stay. And in that instant, I look up and I'm looking around the living room and I go, wait, we have so much extra space here and I have airbeds in the closet. And the idea of hosting people in airbeds had gradually become natural to me. And the thinking is, there'll be more than just the place to sleep. We can cook breakfast in the morning, we'll pick 'em up from the airport, we'll give them a neighborhood guide and a map to San Francisco.

0 (8m 38s):
So did, how did you get the word out? How did, how did the designers noted that this was available?

4 (8m 42s):
Well, we, you know, we didn't want to use any of the classified websites cuz there's gonna be people in our home. So we made our own.

0 (8m 49s):
What do you mean you made your own?

4 (8m 50s):
Well, we designed your own website. But how

0 (8m 52s):
Did, so you designed your own website that said what?

4 (8m 55s):
Well, it said who we were, it said about the, this concept of stay with us and we'll, we'll provide these things for you.

0 (9m 2s):
So this, a website was just for the design conference. That's

4 (9m 4s):
It. You made it for This is meant to be for one weekend and

0 (9m 7s):
What did you call it? The website. It was

4 (9m 9s):
Literally called Air bed and breakfast.com. And we start to get emails from around the world designers who needed a place to stay. Emails from London, from Brazil, from Japan. People actually started sending us their resumes, their LinkedIn profiles to, to vie for one of these, these limited three airbeds. And, and

0 (9m 33s):
And for how much was it for

4 (9m 34s):
$80 a night you could stay in San Francisco with Brian and I. That's

0 (9m 38s):
A great deal.

4 (9m 39s):
It was an amazing deal.

0 (9m 40s):
And do you remember who your first guests were?

4 (9m 43s):
Yeah. So it was Mole, Catherine and Michael were first three guests. And you know what, what happened next? I don't think we could have predicted they stayed with us and we got to show them San Francisco. They got to, they got to feel like they, they belonged there in the sense that they didn't feel like outsiders. You know what I mean? Like Yeah. And you know, I'll never forget saying goodbye and, and watching the door, the door click closed. And, and thinking with Brian, wait, what if we made it possible for other people to also share their experience and and to host guests in their home and, and show off their city.

0 (10m 20s):
Yeah. Wait, at what point did you and Brian look at each other and go, okay man, I think this is our business. Was it like right after that door closed and clicked and they left?

4 (10m 29s):
I wish, I wish it was, but I can't say that I thought it was the case. So that December, we both went home for holiday. And at a respective New Year's year parties, everyone would asks, so what are you doing in San Francisco? Say, well, we're entrepreneurs. Well what are you entrepreneuring? And we didn't really have very much other than to say, well, let me tell you about this time where we hosted these three guests on airbeds in our apartment. And one of two things happened, people who said, oh my God, that's the coolest thing in the world. Where can I do that? Or they said, that is the most bizarre creepiest thing I've ever heard. And they left the conversation. Yeah. And I think one of the things that I've learned is that great idea is I think they usually start out as polarizing.

4 (11m 10s):
They're not kind of like, eh, that's kind of okay. They either really tug on somebody's emotions or an a latent desire that they have that's never been answered before. Or they really perturb them in some way. But as long as there's people who, who really gravitate towards the idea, to me that's a signal that you might be on to something.

0 (11m 29s):
So what'd you do? How what'd you guys do next?

4 (11m 32s):
Well, we knew that we needed great technical expertise. And funny thing, the roommate who moved out so that Brian could move in was a guy named Nate Buchar. Nate was an engineer who found me on Craigslist. And as we lived together, there were some similarities in how Nate and I worked, which is that we come home from our day jobs and in the evening we would both work maniacally on our own projects and I'd look over my shoulder. I remember thinking to myself, this guy has a work ethic just like I do. Hmm. If I ever need an engineer, I think I'm gonna call Nate. So here we are, January of 2008.

4 (12m 16s):
So I meet Nate for a drink. I I tell him about this, this weekend experiment with these three guests. And Nate loved the idea. He's like, we can use the internet to actually get people off the internet. How cool is that?

0 (12m 29s):
And he had these, like this coding experience that neither you nor nor Brian had.

4 (12m 34s):
He was a computer science degree from Harvard. Yeah, he sure did.

0 (12m 37s):
So I guess at this point you have your, your team assembled. You've got your idea, you have your website. So when do you, when do you really decide to launch it? We

4 (12m 46s):
All agreed that we would launch the next version of our site, air bed and breakfast at the next big tech conference. Because actually we thought the original opportunity was housing for conferences. Right. So the next big one that was coming up was South by Southwest. And every year the same thing happens. Hotels sell out months in advance, people scramble for housing. And it's also the, the, the place where some of the, the tech greats had launched before us. Twitter had launched their four square and others. And we thought, well, this is perfect. We're just gonna follow the rocket ship that all of them did. Yeah. So at this point, we have about three weeks to build before South by Southwest. I'm doing design tune the coating. We're we're just pulling, pulling the pieces together

0 (13m 28s):
And no money at this point.

4 (13m 29s):
Oh, no money at all.

0 (13m 30s):
Just doing this. Just like a shoestring,

4 (13m 34s):
Half a shoestring. Yeah. So we get it out just in time. We ship it. When

0 (13m 38s):
You say you ship it, what do you mean?

4 (13m 40s):
We release the next version of the site. Okay. And we think this is, this is the next greatest thing.

0 (13m 45s):
And at this point there's not a single listing on it, right?

4 (13m 47s):
Not yet. Okay. We actually had six people put up listings in Austin, and we had two people book those listings. Oh. One of them was Brian.

0 (14m 1s):
Wow. So

4 (14m 2s):
It was not a smashing success at all. This was

0 (14m 4s):
Did you get, were you guys like sad or were you laughing about it? Or were you

4 (14m 8s):
No, this was completely demoralizing. Yeah. Here was this idea that we were so excited about and nobody took us up on the idea. So we learned two things from Austin. The first was that exchanging money in person is really awkward, especially inside of a home. So we thought, well, why do people have to exchange cash in person? What if we just bring the transaction online? What if we allowed people to seamlessly pay with our credit card same way you would for traditional accommodations on the internet, but instead you get somebody's home. Right. And suddenly we realized we had a business model.

4 (14m 49s):
We said, well, maybe we'll just take a transaction fee fee as we flow the funds from guests to host. The second thing we learned is that there were people who did want to travel where there weren't conferences taking place. They're emailing us, including our first three guests, Kamo and Michael Remos, Hey, I'm going to Vancouver next week. How do I stay in somebody's home? I had such a good experience with you guys. And we're like, well, is there a conference going on? And we said, well, why does there need to be a conference? Maybe this is just a travel site. Hmm. So we went back to Nate and we said, well Nate, what's, what's add payments and let's make this a travel site. And Nate started to warm up to the idea, but had some real questions about how to get a marketplace like that started.

0 (15m 30s):
So he started to build something even more ambitious. Well,

4 (15m 34s):
Actually he moved back to Boston No. To be with his girlfriend. And so kind of, you know, the band's falling apart a little bit. And that's when we had an idea, which was what if we relaunch this new version of our service? And we do it at the crest of a tidal wave of press, which in summer of 2008 was Barack Obama and specifically Obama speaking at the Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado. Yeah. Where there was a housing crisis because a hundred thousand people were anticipated to see Obama speak. And there were less than 30,000 hotel rooms, most of which were picked up by, you know, delegates.

4 (16m 17s):
So this is a real problem. In fact, the mayor of Denver at one point thought about opening up the city's parks so people could camp out. Hmm. And we thought, well, what if we timed the relaunch of our service? This will be the third launch during the dnc. We can ride the coattails of all the Obama press to bring a lot of awareness to this marketplace. And so that's exactly what we did. We hustled, we flew to Denver, we met people on the ground. We got local press, which turned into regional press, which turned into national press and eventually international press.

0 (16m 46s):
Wow. And so this is still weeks before the convention, right?

4 (16m 49s):
Yeah. This is like July, 2008.

0 (16m 52s):
And what happened?

4 (16m 53s):
Well, we did a live interview with CNN from our living room, and we had about a hundred people actually book and pay with a credit card through our service, which this was like the first sign of, of a working viable marketplace, even to the point where we were getting customer service calls for the first time. Yeah.

0 (17m 15s):
And that just like was your cell phone?

4 (17m 17s):
Yeah.

0 (17m 20s):
How did it go?

4 (17m 22s):
It went great. We ended up going from zero to 800 homes in a matter of four weeks.

0 (17m 27s):
So 800 homes are on this site called Air Bed and Breakfast.

4 (17m 32s):
That's right. And I have to tell you, I thought that this was it. Like this was our rocket ship to the moon.

0 (17m 38s):
You thought we made it, we're here, we got it.

4 (17m 40s):
Right. If if you build it, they will come and look what's happening. Yeah.

0 (17m 43s):
And they came. Yeah.

4 (17m 44s):
And then the convention ended and all of those numbers came crashing right back down. Hmm. So here we had a dilemma because at this point we had also started talking to investors. We thought, well, this is a great time to talk to investors. Our numbers are up. Yeah. Look, it's actually working. We have stories that we can share. We've got press. We get introduced to 20 investors in Silicon Valley. 10 of them reply to our email, five of them meet us for coffee. Zero invested in us.

0 (18m 14s):
Wow.

4 (18m 15s):
It was completely demoralizing. Yeah. Like 2008 was the worst year of my life. Really? Oh my gosh. Yes. Because you've put so much into this thing, right? Like, I didn't have, there was nothing else going on in my life except this. And to put it in front of very credible investors, the guys that have picked the Googles and PayPals and YouTubes of the world, and for them to look you square in the eyes and go, well, this is weird. I'm not investing in this.

0 (18m 38s):
What did they say? What, what? Why?

4 (18m 40s):
Well, they didn't say this, but here's the underlying reason is because we've all been taught since we were kids that strangers equal danger. Right. No one in the right mind would invest in a service that was based upon this pitch that we want to build a website where people publicly post images of their most intimate spaces, their bedrooms, their bathrooms, the kinds of rooms that you usually close when people come over and then over the internet, they're gonna invite complete strangers to sleep in their homes. It's gonna be huge.

0 (19m 12s):
So, so this is like after the conventions, you're thinking, we got it. We're gonna get all this, make all this money and all raise all this money and, and all of a sudden you get back to San Francisco and nobody wants to give you any money.

4 (19m 22s):
Exactly. Nobody. So

0 (19m 25s):
How are you keeping the, the business going if you didn't have any, any cash? We

4 (19m 30s):
Did raise around to financing. We call it the visa round,

0 (19m 34s):
Which means you, you maxed out your credit cards.

4 (19m 37s):
You know those binders where you keep baseball cards? Yeah. I had one of those, except there weren't baseball cards in it. There were credit cards. We would go through Visa after Visa to MasterCard and then final to Amex just maxing out credit cards. And that's how we funded ourself. And I can tell you like there's no, no worse feeling than getting a credit card statement. That's only going up with no hope of ever paying it down. Yeah. There's a name for this, by the way. In the startup world, there's a name for this phase of a company where you have a product in the market, but they don't fit yet. It's almost like two gears that don't touch. There's this mysterious gap between these, these metal gears. Yeah. That you can't figure out how to close the gap.

4 (20m 18s):
And they call this the trough of sorrow. It's this long period of time where you don't have product market fit. And in the data or the analytics, it looks like the, the Midwest of analytics because it's perfectly flat. There's zero growth.

0 (20m 35s):
And then this is when people tend to quit.

4 (20m 37s):
This is when people tend to quit

0 (20m 43s):
In a moment when we come back, how Joe Gaia and his partners eventually climb their way out of that trough of sorrow. I'm Guy Ross, and you're listening to how I built this from npr. You probably already figured this out, but I'm sort of a nerd for innovative ideas and products and I love to cook. Well, today's sponsor, Thermador has been making some huge new breakthroughs in the kitchen with their industry leading induction cooking appliances. What makes Thermador induction cooking products best in class are not only their sleek clean lines and quality craftsmanship, but their professional style performance.

0 (21m 26s):
Thermador induction is powerful enough for searing proteins and precise enough to simmer the most delicate sauces. You can learn more and explore the entire groundbreaking induction innovation collection, including all new wifi enabled induction ranges coming this summer at thermador.com/built. That's thermador.com/built. If car designers can make cars look like anything, why are there so many boring cars? Nissan dares to design what others won't By approaching each project in a completely different way? Nissan Design gives you everything from the adventurous frontier to the Zs iconic sports car styling to the futuristic aria all in one brand.

0 (22m 9s):
Each Nissan vehicle has its own story and identity. Nissan knows that thrill isn't just about zero to 60. Thrill should start the moment you see a car from the arc of the roof to the way the headlamp meets the grill. Every detail of a Nissan vehicle is designed to get your heart racing before you ever press start. Nissan knows what thrill looks like because they design it into every vehicle they make. Learn more about the 2023 lineup@nissanusa.com. If you're

5 (22m 36s):
Struggling with stress, burnout, anxiety, or have trouble sleeping, cerebral can help. Cerebral offers 100% online personalized mental healthcare plans that include therapy and medication management. You can choose your clinician from cerebrals, vetted and trained team of experts, and attend all your sessions from the comfort and convenience of your own home. Get started with or without insurance and only pay one flat monthly rate. And for mental health awareness month, this may, you can get an exclusive 50% off your first month with cerebral.com/wondery. That's cerebral.com/wondery for 50% off your first month.

0 (23m 22s):
Just one more thing before we get back to the show. We've been incredibly inspired by the hundreds of stories you've sent us about the companies you are building. Let me just read a few examples here. We heard from Seth Hill, he's got a company that's taking pre-orders for a product that grew out of a camping trip. And on that trip he says, we grabbed our nylon hammock, strung them up on a little little island in the middle of a lake and froze our butts off. So he's now got a prototype for a product he calls Sway. It's an insulated hammock that he says solves cold butt syndrome, which is a real thing. Look it up. We also heard from Leah Farini. She started Selina artisanal Pasta two years ago in Los Angeles.

0 (24m 5s):
She's never had a business before and she's had some real hurdles. Like she says, she engaged in some hand to hand combat with her pasta extruder and she lost. But Leah is doing okay. Her organic pasta is already for sale online and in whole food stores in Southern California. We also heard from Larry Moss of Rochester, New York. He writes, I built my business out of thin air based on a product that typically lasts a week. And Larry is talking about balloons, like the kind you make balloon animals out of, except his balloon sculptures are gigantic. They can literally fill a whole building. You can check out his story and the amazing pictures on our Facebook page. And while you're there, we'd love it if you'd like us.

0 (24m 48s):
And if you wanna send us your story about what you are building, go to build.npr.org. That's build with ad.npr.org. It's how I built this from npr. I'm Guy Raz, so it's 2008. Joe and his partners have no investors and a lot of credit card debt, and they're trying to figure out how to raise cash.

4 (25m 17s):
It was at this point that Brian and I are in the kitchen late one night. It's like two in the morning and we're just trying to keep each other's spirits up. And it's during the, the peak of Obama versus McCain. This is like September about eight. And we're riffing on this idea of being airbed and breakfast and providing maybe we gave our hosts some breakfast cereal to give to their guests. Oh, wouldn't it be funny if it was politically themed? Oh yeah. We could call it like Obama owes the Breakfast of Change or maybe Cat McCain's a maverick in every bite. And we actually ended up making breakfast cereal.

0 (25m 53s):
Wait, you made breakfast cereal, like actual cereal to eat?

4 (25m 58s):
Well, it's a good question, which is how do you make breakfast cereal? Yeah. And how do you do it with not zero budget but a negative? You're in a deficit, by the way. Yeah. So, you know, I picked up the phone, I called Kellogg or General Mills and started going through the pitch and then I, I go, hello, hello. They had hung up on me. And then a dawned on me, well, maybe we don't have to make cereal. Maybe we can just go to the grocery store, buy some cereal off the shelf. We could design our own box and, and put the bag of cereal in our own box, seal it up and, and sell it that way.

0 (26m 32s):
Just sell it on the street.

4 (26m 33s):
Well, maybe it would make a website. We know how to do that. So this

0 (26m 36s):
Would be, this would be instead of Airbnb or in addition to it. You

4 (26m 40s):
Know, at this point we weren't really sure. Yeah. Then the question was, well, how do you make the boxes? So I found an illustrator, I did the art direction, pulled all the pieces together, and I found a RISD alumni in the East Bay here in San Francisco that I went in and, you know, I, I poured it all out to this guy. I said, you know, here's the idea of the concept we're really excited about. Here's the mock-ups and the sketches. And he goes, all right, here's what I'll do. I'll make 500 of each box. You guys don't have to pay me upfront, but pay me a commission based on every sale. And it dawned on us that with 500 of each box, well that was a limited edition. That was a collector's item. We could number them on the top of the box outta 500.

4 (27m 21s):
And suddenly we decided we could sell a box of Obama OS and KA McCain's for $40 a box.

0 (27m 28s):
What, this is just a crazy story. I don't even, I don't even, I've forgotten about Airbnb. Where, where are we going? What's going on with this interview? So we

4 (27m 38s):
Make, look, it's, it's an entrepreneur bender for going on here. So we make obamas.com, we get the boxes of cereal, we put a hundred boxes together and we mail them out to all of the press that we, that we could mail to like every morning show had a box of these. So we ended up getting featured on all of these different shows. CNN did a live interview with us about breakfast cereal and we were the number one politically themed video on cnn.com for an entire day. And after that CNN and interview, we ended up selling out of Obama owes, which is incredible.

0 (28m 14s):
But like where did you think you were gonna go from there? Like did you

4 (28m 17s):
Well, it almost didn't matter because at $40 a box times 500 boxes, we made $20,000 in breakfast cereal. Yeah, that's

0 (28m 25s):
Breakfast cereal, which

4 (28m 26s):
Barely just enough to pay off our credit cards.

0 (28m 28s):
Alright, so you pay off your credit card bills and, and then what? You go back to airbed and breakfast? Well,

4 (28m 34s):
We go out to this, this sort of fateful dinner one night with one of our mentors. It was Michael Sebel and Justin Kahn. And so we're out to dinner with them and they had been helping us the last couple months and we're kind of like at the end of the rope and they can tell and they're like, you guys need some help. You should participate in this incubator program called Y Combinator. So we're at dinner and we look it up on our phones and the deadline was the night before. So we're like, ah, come on. But they end up emailing the guy who runs it, a guy named Paul Graham who they knew and they say, you know, Hey Paul, there's these guys, they've got this concept and and they'd really benefit from being in your program.

4 (29m 14s):
You know, would you take a look at their application if they send it to you? And Paul writes back and says, yeah, if they get it to me by midnight tonight. Wow. So Brian and I race home, it's like 10 o'clock at this point. We start to fill out the application. It's pretty intense. Yeah. This is the next day we get this call back that our application got accepted. So we got to the next round, which was an interview. So we, we prepared in advance, we would grill each other with all these really tough questions. What's your growth rate? How do you plan to expand internationally? You know, what's the next big feature you're gonna build? Et cetera, et cetera. Hmm. And so we go into the interview, it's in the small tiny room at the Y Combinator office and there's four partners around the table. We sit down and the very first thing at a Paul Graham's mouth is, you mean people actually use this?

4 (29m 59s):
And we go, yeah. And he goes, well that's weird. Wow. Let me say that's not a great way to start an interview of any kind. It kind of went downhill from there. We're walking outta the room kind of thinking like, this is our last chance effort. And it didn't go so well. And that's when I remembered that I had brought a box of Obama owes to give to him as a gift. So I go running back into the room, I whip out the box, I hand it to him, I go, Hey Paul, we got this for you. And he goes, oh, where'd you buy this? And I go, well, we made it. And he goes, what do you mean you made it? And I told him the story in 60 seconds. And he goes, wait, so you guys funded your company based on selling breakfast cereal?

4 (30m 40s):
And he immediately turned around and put the box of cereal on the shelf behind his desk. On the ride home. We get a phone call from Paul Graham to inform us that he'd like to offer us a spot in the Y Combinator program. And we later found out that the reason we got in wasn't because of our idea. It was because through the breakfast cereal we had proven to him that we had hustle, we had grit, we had the, if we could figure out hustle, breakfast for $40 a box, we could figure out how to make our website work.

0 (31m 13s):
All right, so you get into Y Combinator and what, what does it, like, how, what does it do for you guys? What, what happened there?

4 (31m 23s):
Y Combinator was a game changer for us. And I'll never forget the first office hours that we had with Paul Graham. He, he sits down with us and he goes, where's your market? And we look at each other and we're like, we don't really have a market. No one's really using the website. But we go, you know, New York is showing some promise. We have 30 hosts in New York who are renting their, their extra rooms out in their homes. And he goes, so let me understand your, your customers are in New York City, but you're here in Mountain View. And we're like, yeah, we're here for your program. And then he goes, what are you still doing here?

4 (32m 5s):
Go to New York City. And he points his finger at you. He's got this thing where he like, looks at you and points his, his finger. And it was in this moment sitting in this room, this tiny room where something profound change for us. Hmm. Because up until this point we had subscribed to the mythology of Silicon Valley. Yeah. Which is that you have to solve things in a scalable way. Right. Because what happens when one day the rocket ship takes off, you don't wanna get left behind because your code held you back. And so we had tried to solve our problems by, by coding our way through it. And if you remember, that didn't get us anywhere cuz we were in the, the Midwest of, of analytics. Right.

4 (32m 45s):
And so here comes Paul Graham who gave us permission to do things that don't scale, such as fly across the country and meet the early adopters of your service. Yeah. And it was in that moment that we felt so much more free to think even more creatively about how we could get our service off the ground. If you could do things that don't have to scale, what else could we do? And as we start going through the search results and looking at the hosts, we identified a pattern. And the pattern was this, people just generally didn't know how to take a good photo of their home. Hmm. So the photos were really bad.

0 (33m 21s):
So, so the photos that you had on the site at that time were just like crappy photos? Well,

4 (33m 26s):
You know, people were using their camera phones at the time. It was like flip camera phones, which is even worse. Oh yeah,

0 (33m 32s):
Yeah.

4 (33m 32s):
They were taking pictures at night. It just wasn't, they weren't merchandising their home in a way that you would wanna stay there. So therefore no one was booking them. And we thought, you know, I, I went to art school. I, I took some photography classes. I I've done photography my whole life. In fact, as a hobby, I'm willing to bet if we just flew out there for a weekend, we could probably take some nicer photos and we wouldn't charge 'em for it. We'll do it for free. So that weekend we bought plane tickets, Brian and I flew to New York, we emailed our hosts, all 30 of them. We rented a really nice camera and went door to door throughout Manhattan, Brooklyn and, and other parts of New York. And it's funny cuz I'd knock on the door and then they'd open the door and I'd introduce myself as, you know, Hey, I'm, I'm Joe, I emailed you from Airbnb and they're kind of like looking over my shoulders.

4 (34m 18s):
So Yeah. Where's the professional photography you promised? I go, well, that's me too. I'm also gonna take the photos for you. Yeah.

0 (34m 24s):
So you're the guy taking the photos.

4 (34m 26s):
So yeah, I'm taking photos and what's cool is that the photos are looking pretty good. I'm getting the lighting right, the composition, you know, I'm kind of staging the place a little bit. Just, you know, fluffing the pillows and, and making sure that the, the place doesn't look cluttered. And I'd show the photos on the back of the camera, say, Hey, what do you think? You know, do you like these? And these hosts were like, oh my God, my apartment looks amazing. I can't believe it. Do, do you want to stay for some tea coffee? And so I'd end up spending a few hours sometimes in their, in their homes just talking with them. And this is where instinctively we went into design research mode, which is going out and talking to the people that you're designing for, such that you can understand the world from their point of view to inform your point of view.

4 (35m 15s):
Yeah. And so I call this enlightened empathy, which is seeing the world so closely in the shoes of the person that you're creating for that you can see the world of the way they see it. And you bring those insights back and you combine it with your own design point of view to create something new. So here we are in the living room, they pull out their, their laptop. I say, could you show me how, how you check your calendar? Show me how you message with guests. And in those moments, we saw how our perfectly designed interface completely and utterly failed what we, what we thought took two or three clicks to get done.

4 (35m 56s):
People were taking 10, 12 clicks, they were stumbling around getting lost within our own website.

0 (36m 2s):
And you guys did not know that up until that point.

4 (36m 4s):
We had no idea. And so it wasn't until we actually sat down next to our, our early adopters, some of our most passionate early customers, and they revealed to us the mysterious gap between our product and our market was the inefficiencies of our user interface.

0 (36m 23s):
Yeah. I mean what's what's interesting about this is that you don't strike me as like an egomaniac or somebody who doesn't like feedback. You strike me as somebody who really wants it. And it's surprising that it took you guys so long to discover this. I know

4 (36m 35s):
It's like

0 (36m 36s):
Right.

4 (36m 37s):
I know. But once we did it was, it was like, it was like a jackpot. Yeah. So we, we came back with all of our, our discoveries. Something interesting happened. Our numbers that second week went from $200 a week in fees, which is what we were making for six months. Right. Which is not sustainable. Three guys cannot live off that in San Francisco. Yeah,

0 (37m 1s):
Right.

4 (37m 2s):
Our numbers jumped to $400 in one week,

0 (37m 6s):
The one week just from pictures and making a couple of simplified changes. Well,

4 (37m 10s):
I looked at Nate, I said, Nate, is there a bug in the system? Because that's just, that's just crazy. Yeah. How did we double in a week? And sure enough, we had done more reservations with the hosts that we had met. Huh. And what's what's very interesting guy is that we didn't know this at the time, but because New York is such an international destination, we had guests coming from Berlin, we had guests coming from London, from Sydney, from Vancouver, who were coming as guests experiencing this new service of staying in somebody's home. They'd go back to where they came from and they'd have this epiphany moment, this aha. They'd go, wait, I have an extra room, why don't I rent that on the site? And

0 (37m 49s):
They would sign up,

4 (37m 50s):
Then they would sign up. Yeah.

0 (37m 52s):
So, so at what point did you, were you able to actually attract money from investors? Was it around that time?

4 (37m 59s):
It's precisely around this time. So what I've learned is that when the gears start to click, investors can hear that. And they actually, this time they came to us and we had offers coming in from a variety of different groups. And the one that shocked us the most was Sequoia Capital, which was a pre, it is a preeminent venture capital firm in Silicon Valley that we thought, well, maybe one day, like a year from now, we'll go talk to them. But actually they were knocking our door, our door to talk to us and we ended up closing a deal with them. We got our first round of financing, which was a huge relief. We could pay rent comfortably and we could hire, start to hire a team.

0 (38m 44s):
I'm wondering, at, at what point do you remember sort of sitting with, with Nate and Brian and saying, I think this is gonna be really big?

4 (38m 51s):
Well, one night, this is in two, 2010, it was probably like 1130 at night. I was really tired. I'm at the, at this point we have an office and I used to look at every listing that got added to Airbnb. I I would go through it at night and just click through each of them and I come across this one that says Fiji Island. And I'm like, Hmm, what's that? I click on it and sure enough, somebody out in the South Pacific listed a five acre private island on our site.

0 (39m 23s):
Wow.

4 (39m 24s):
Complete with personal chef, complete with, you know, water sports. And I'm looking through the photos of this thing going, holy cow, this is incredible. And it was in that moment where I realized the, the power of this platform is that we, we put it out there and the creativity of the people who have, who have contributed back to it, has gone beyond any of our expectations.

0 (39m 55s):
So you guys have, have obviously grown much, much bigger since then, bigger than, than most or all hotel chains. And you have some similar challenges to, to companies like Uber with some cities saying, Hey, you know, you guys should be regulated like hotels. So how do you, how do you respond to that?

4 (40m 14s):
I think about that question in the context of innovations over the last a hundred years. Hmm. And there are three examples that come to mind of new ideas that entered the world that had a pretty rough start, but are now so commonplace in every day that you'd laugh if you thought like, oh wow. Like people were against that at one point. So ATM machines at one point in, I think it was the 1970s, were had a lot of criticism and I think there were actually laws being written against them in certain states throughout the US because it was this new and different way of, of banking where you didn't have to go inside and, and, and talk with a, you know, a person behind a desk who could maybe upsell you on other services.

4 (40m 54s):
You just went to a, you know, a computer and a wall and, and retrieved your money. But of course, can you imagine today without ATM machines? No. The VCR, I think is another great example. It was first patented in the mid 20th century, but didn't really become a product until the, the eighties, the early eighties because it was met with such resistance from incumbent industries that didn't want people to watch movies at home. The car is another example where when the Model T came out in 1908, you know, it represented a new way to travel, a new way to, to a new form of transportation. And there were certain cities that were against the car and there were actually laws drafted to, to, you know, outlaw cars.

4 (41m 41s):
But, you know, after a year of trying a new more efficient way of transportation, the people demanded that they didn't wanna go back to horse and buggy. And so the policymakers, you know, had to modify the laws to, to what the people wanted. Yeah. So yeah, I think the world is ready for our invention given that there's been over a hundred million people that have stayed in homes all over the world. And the good news is that as cities come to learn about what, what we do and what we offer, they, they tend to wanna work with us because they see that there is an economic, economic impact that allows people in their cities in different neighborhoods to, to benefit.

0 (42m 18s):
When you, I think last year Airbnb was valued at like 20 billion and probably more today. I mean, does that, is that crazy to you? Does that shock you when you think that you just started this thing and as an idea that really went nowhere for the first couple years in your apartment in San Francisco and it's now worth like billions of dollars, like with a b does that mean anything to you or to you? Is is it just a number on a piece of paper?

4 (42m 46s):
I don't think about it too much. I mean, yeah, those things can change. If you look@thefirst.com, you know, when I was growing up in Georgia, I was so enthralled by every day there was this new story of a new company that started in Silicon Valley or San Francisco and that planted a very deep seed with me that one day I wanted to, to be a part of that. And so I also remember in the first.com of companies that were here today, gone tomorrow. Yeah. You know, there's, there's a list of 10 of the hottest companies from the 1990s, one of which you would still remember. It's because technology moves so quickly that if you're not thinking about what's next, the world around you can change faster than you do.

0 (43m 29s):
Joe Gebbia, by the way, the company that he first tried to build before Airbnb was called Crit Buns, which are basically, and I am not making this up, but cushions for art students. The company kind of went dormant after Airbnb's success, but there is still a website for it.

4 (43m 47s):
And every now and then an order still comes in and I still run down to the garage and pack 'em up and inside.

0 (43m 52s):
Wait, how many crit buns do you have in your garage?

4 (43m 55s):
I think there's a few hundred.

0 (43m 57s):
Wow. You have a few hundred crit buns still in your garage. You know, it's like,

4 (44m 0s):
It's a funny thing cuz it reminds me of like where I started. Yeah. And it's very grounding. Wait,

0 (44m 6s):
What's a website? Is it? Is it crip buns.com? Literally

4 (44m 9s):
Crip buns.com. Okay.

0 (44m 10s):
We're gonna plug this. Go on to crip buns.com and order, order Your Crip bun, only 600 left.

3 (44m 20s):
Hey,

0 (44m 21s):
Thanks for listening to the show this week. If you wanna find out more or listen to previous episodes, you can go to how I built this.npr.org. And if you have a chance, please subscribe to our show through iTunes and let other people know about it. You can also write us directly@hibtnpr.org or tweet us. That's at How I Built this. Our show is produced this week by T Alu, who also composed the music. Thanks also to Neva Grant, San Oz Meshkinpour and Jeff Rodgers. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This from npr.

0 (45m 3s):
Hey, I wanna invite you to come see how I built this live on stage at the now Hear This Podcast Festival on Friday, October 28th in beautiful Anaheim, California. Now here, this is a three day festival of your favorite podcasts. October 28th through the 30th with shows like NPRs Pop Culture, happy Hour Dinner Party download, and WTF with Mark Maren. We will be doing a live episode of How I Built This on Friday, October 28th. So if you can only make it for one day, make sure it's Friday or you'll miss out on our show Ticket Tickets and information about the full lineup, go to now hear this fest.com. Hope to see you there.

8 (45m 54s):
Hey everyone, I'm Patrick Wyman, host of Tides of History, the podcast that covers thousands of years of recorded history, taking you back in time and placing you in the lives of those who came before us. With five seasons and over 250 episodes, there's something for everyone. If you're interested in the Iron Age, check out the entire season devoted to that era which explores myriad topics, including classical empires like the Neo Assyrians, the Phoenicians and Greece's Dark Age, or listen to our deep dives into Renaissance Italy, the invention of news, the Protestant Reformation, witch hunts, and even the Black Death. And if you prefer more contemporary history, listen to our episode about the unparalleled rise of capitalism. Whether you are a history buff or just have a passing interest, tides of history will fill you with wisdom and wonder for everything that came before.

8 (46m 40s):
Follow tides of history wherever you get your podcasts. You can listen ad free on the Amazon Music or Wondery app.