0 (0s):
When building a business, there are tons of moving parts. One that's often overlooked is having a network that connects your business. Thankfully with at and T business, you can pick the best wireless plan for your small business and offer your employees the features they need. Plus at and T business wireless plans include nationwide 5g. That's fast, reliable and secure. Wherever business takes you at. And T business has the features you need. Visit att.com/get biz unlimited. 5g requires a compatible plan and device 5g may not be available in your area. Visit att.com/5g for you for more details, the great resignation supply chain hiccups, digital finance.

0 (45s):
There's no shortage of volatility in business today, but volatility isn't the problem doing nothing is within all of these challenges, lie, hidden opportunities and better ways of doing things with specialized experience and audit advisory and consulting Crow can help you embrace volatility in today's economy. Visit embrace volatility.com to see how Crow can work with you. Once again, that's embrace volatility.com. If you don't know your numbers, you don't know your business. That's true when your business is growing fast and even more true when there's a lot of uncertainty, inflation is running rampant.

0 (1m 28s):
Supply chains are clogged and the labor market is tight. What does that mean for margins, but not every business is in the dark. Over 31,000 businesses know their numbers because they use NetSuite by Oracle. The number one cloud financial system right now, NetSuite is offering a one of a kind flexible financing program, head to netsuite.com/built. Right now that's netsuite.com/b U I LT netsuite.com/built. So I wanna tell you that we're coming to the twin cities for a live event on Wednesday, July 17th. I'll be talking with Dan and Angie bastion co-founders of Angie's boom chick pop, how a history teacher and a psychiatric nurse started making popcorn and eventually got it into stores from coast to coast.

0 (2m 17s):
The show was supported by American express and our other live events have sold out fast. So to get tickets, go to NPR, presents.org and hope to see you there. And one more thing before we start the show, I wanna tell you about a brand new discount for the, how I built this summit, which is happening this October in San Francisco. We have a new deal for group tickets through June by four summit tickets get the fifth absolutely free. So bring your co-founders your leaders, your innovators, and your dreamers, and grow together at the, how I built this summit supported by American express to take advantage of group discounts, email H IBT summit, npr.org.

0 (2m 58s):
And I hope to see you in, in San Francisco,

2 (3m 4s):
I would find myself at dinners with friends who are kind of early thirties now at the stage of their career, where things are starting to, to take off and, and we'd go out for dinner and go around the table. And I would dread when it would come to me and people would ask what I was doing. My body would curl up into a little ball and I would sort of say wool shoes. And when we'd leave the dinner, people would pat me on the head and say, that's, it's lovely that you're pursuing this little thing and good luck with that little fella. And it was just, it was awful

0 (3m 40s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built. I'm guy Ross, and I'm today's show how an environmentalist and a professional soccer player from New Zealand teamed up to create. What's been called the world's most comfortable shoe, all birds. So for every human being in New Zealand, there are six sheep. Let that sink in a six to one sheep to human ratio. And that's down from a peak in 1982, when there were 22 sheep for every human in New Zealand.

0 (4m 25s):
Now, as you probably know, new Zealand's population is pretty small, a little under 5 million people, but the country produces more than 10% of all the wool we use. And what New Zealand is particularly good at is producing a type of wool that is considered to be among the best it's called Marino wool. And it comes as you might have guessed from a Marino sheep it's softer, lighter and less scratchy than the type of wool you might find in say a thick Christmas sweater. Now, for years, Tim brown was aware of his country's prized export, but it would take him more than a decade to realize that it was the perfect material to build light, comfortable and breathable shoes.

0 (5m 6s):
The kind of shoes you could slip on for a run are just wear around the house. In 2015, Tim partnered up with Joey's Willer to figure out if they could actually find a market for these shoes. They raised about a million dollars from investors to launch Allbirds in March of 2016, and almost instantly Allbirds were dubbed the world's most comfortable shoe by time magazine today, just three years on their shoe company is valued at 1.4 billion, but what's also incredible is how unlikely it is that they even met in the first place. Joey grew up in Marin county in California, Tim of course grew up on the other side of the world.

0 (5m 46s):
And even before he seriously got into shoes, he was playing soccer professionally. He even competed at the world cup. Tim was raised in Wellington, New Zealand in the 1980s and nineties. His mom was a nurse. His dad worked in nonprofits and from a pretty early age, he found himself being drawn into the world of soccer first as a fan. And then as a player,

2 (6m 10s):
You know, it's a really popular sport and a nation that loves its rugby. So the joke always was is this went on to be, become more, more a part of my life that certainly some of my mom's family were disappointed that it was, it was soccer and not rugby, but it was something that, that I loved to do and, and kept doing it. And even when I look back, you know, by the time I was 16 and 17, that was my identity. And that was what my friends were doing. And I was starting to get a, a sniff, you know, of something that I could do well and something where I could carve out, you know, if not a career, certainly a pathway, it was, gosh, if I could make the New Zealand under 20 team, you know, I could die happy.

0 (6m 50s):
Yeah. I mean, you must have been a super talented soccer player cuz you got a scholarship to, to come to the us to go, I guess, to the, to the university of Cincinnati to play soccer. How did you end up there?

2 (7m 1s):
I, I ended up getting about six scholarship offers and then I found in Cincinnati a design school, which was the subject that it was starting to really connect with me. And so Cincinnati was where I was, where I headed and I hadn't visited. And it was, it was probably, I feel like the first adult decision, big decision I'd made when my, when mum and dad were like, we'll make it, we'll make it work. And I remember as part of the application, they put their mortgage, you know, they put their house as sort of part of the credit that sort of said, you know, he's good for this. You wanna do it? Go we'll back you a hundred percent. And so off I was on a plane to Cincinnati is an 18 year old.

0 (7m 39s):
Okay. So you end up in Cincinnati on the soccer team and what, what was, what was school like? Was it intense? Was it, you know, cuz you're doing soccer for 40 hours a week and school.

2 (7m 51s):
Yeah. The, the design program was difficult. I, it was a five year program. They wanted to break you down and build you up over five years, literally in the first foundation year, cutting paper and not using a computer and literally going through a very, very traditional sort of design education. And it was difficult because the whole athletic department kind of had their trainings in the afternoon. And I had a studio every just about every day from nine to 12 and then from two to five and I can still remember sprinting across campus changing and I'd, I'd structured some agreement with a coach that I could kind of be a little bit, I could miss the warm up or something and then I could do the studio and I somehow made it work.

2 (8m 36s):
But it was, it was intense from the beginning when I looked back on it, I, there was, I was, there was, it was a fair amount of pressure, but I I'd found something that I, I was in love with.

0 (8m 47s):
What was it about art and design that connected with you?

2 (8m 52s):
It was the, it was the solving of problems. I'd found a place that was like a catchall for my curiosity and was a process that I, it took me a little while, but I, you know, with the help of a couple of these professors, I realized this was it. The design was, was actually not about the, the output. It was a, it was a process of problem solving. And if you applied it, you could apply it to all sorts of different things.

0 (9m 15s):
All right. Let's pause there for a sec. And I'm gonna turn to Joey for a little bit. Yep. So Joey, you grew up in, in the bay area. Yeah. And when you, I mean, you know, you grew up here and then you end up at Berkeley, which is a great school, but was that, was that your sort of idea you wanted to stay in this area you wanted to, yeah.

3 (9m 33s):
I wanted to go to a great place that challenged me, wanted to do engineering and I also wanted to try and play soccer. And so those are the two guiding factors that ended up leading me by deduction to get to Berkeley.

0 (9m 44s):
Were you a good soccer player?

3 (9m 46s):
I was alright. Yeah. I ended up playing. I played at Berkeley as well until I got injured. Wow.

0 (9m 52s):
So you were also a great soccer player as a kid.

3 (9m 55s):
Well, yeah, we, we, Tim and I go in the, go in the alley and, and challenge anyone take

0 (10m 0s):
Customers. Gotcha. Okay. All, so you were, you finished Berkeley and you, what do you wanna do with your life at that point? I mean, you know, 22, 23, whatever, most people don't really know. What are you thinking? Maybe I'll go to law school, maybe I'll do something like, you know, like that. Or did you have a sense of what you wanna do?

3 (10m 20s):
You know, I real, I really didn't. And then some point I, I just, I, I latched onto this concept of business consulting, which I think was marketed to me as if you don't know what you're doing, this is a great way to get a taste for a lot of things. So I was like, okay, cool. That sounds good, cuz I definitely dunno what I'm doing. And so I, I just went to a couple of those little info sessions that they have on campus and thought this company, Deloitte sounded amazing. I ended up jumping into there and, and did their consulting group.

0 (10m 51s):
You, you know, a lot of people that we've had and how I built this, did consulting work. They, they saw, you know, they had experienced sort of consulting with different industries and that's sort of how they got their ideas. What was some of the consulting work you were doing?

3 (11m 6s):
Probably my most transformative one was I worked for a, a client was a garbage, a garbage company. Hmm. I was a second largest garbage company in the country. And I was, I looked at fuel. I was looking at something esoteric, like fuel surcharges. Yeah. And I was negotiating all these trucking fleet contracts. I was literally doing deals in landfills. I would go to a landfill and it would, you know, you'd walk in and the guy was running. The landfill would be like, yep, smells like money cuz it would smell really bad. But that was what they thought was, was business success. And it was really, I was really eye opening. It was very scrappy and it was, it was something I, I, I actually really loved it and, and I ended up, I ended up leaving consulting cuz I, I, that, that really early taste of entrepreneurial business just got me and, and being in the bay area, you almost can't help it.

3 (11m 55s):
Sure. You kind of like, and this was in, I guess 2005 and I latched onto this concept of environmentalism through business and using business for good and doing it for the environment. And so I decided that business school would be a good opportunity to kind of refine my interests and help really focus on getting into that sector.

0 (12m 20s):
So I guess you go to Penn to the Wharton school, would you, I mean, was business school, like, did you love business school? Was business school, like a sandbox where you thought, you know, I'm just gonna come up with some ideas and then get outta here and, and create

3 (12m 33s):
It. Yes. Actually I was searching with the, all the engineering schools at Penn to find a clean tech oriented company that I could help take the technology outta the university and start the business. And then I also got to just come out to the west coast where most of the clean tech style of business was happening right now. Right then it was, it was solar wind biofuels biochemicals. And that was a big shaping experience too.

0 (13m 2s):
All right. So you are you graduate with an MBA and you went and got a job with a, like an environmental technology company it back in the bay area,

3 (13m 15s):
Right? Yeah. The company was called so enzyme and so enzyme was doing something really unique in the biofuel space. They were using microalgae and, and doing it in a totally different way. They were growing this microalgae in huge fermentation vessels. Hmm. And I was completely captivated by the technology. The vision was to basically be the, the next source of, of liquid fuel and chemicals for the entire world.

0 (13m 43s):
You could make oil sort of a biofuel from algae.

3 (13m 46s):
Yeah. You could turn it into fuel and it was, you know, potentially incredibly high impact for the world. If we could get the technology right. And get the cost down to, to a place that was meaningful.

0 (13m 58s):
What was the response to your, your idea?

3 (14m 1s):
The response for the company was incredible. I mean, we were, I joined in 2009 and we ended up going public in 2011. We raised over a billion dollars of money for the business. Wow. And it was, it was, it had a legitimate shot of, of doing something special. And you know, towards the end of my, my time there, I think I learned a huge amount about what not to do. And it ended up, I think, unequivocally being, being a pretty big failure, what,

0 (14m 31s):
What was a failure,

3 (14m 32s):
The entire business. It, it got it, it went bankrupt and then has been acquired since for some of the remnants of the technology.

0 (14m 39s):
So every, so the investors lost their money on that. Essentially a

3 (14m 42s):
Lot of money

0 (14m 43s):
And you and the other people who made a commitment to that company probably lost out as well. Right. Because you probably got some equity and then

3 (14m 51s):
Sure. Yeah. I mean, we, we, we had dreams of, of fortunes I suppose, but, but yeah, what, what I took away from that experience was incredibly rich. And towards the end of that, I started looking around at a ton of different opportunities cuz I had refined what I wanted to do and I, and I saw what I thought was a path to make a different kind of a company where the output of that business was really high impact.

0 (15m 16s):
Okay. Joey, let's just, just pause for a sec. Cause I wanna turn, turn back to you, Tim, because you eventually would, would graduate from, from the university of Cincinnati. And then you went to, I guess, to Virginia to, to play soccer professional semi-professionally for a while, but then you eventually go back and play professional soccer in New Zealand, right?

2 (15m 36s):
Yeah. And I found myself signed on a multi-year deal to play professional sport in my hometown. And I was now a part of a New Zealand team that had set its target of qualifying for the world cup in 2010. And I was, I was kind of on my way. Wow. And I wasn't the quickest and I wasn't the most technical, but I'd found a way where I could carve out a career that involved me doing a couple things really, really well.

0 (15m 58s):
What, what were they

2 (16m 1s):
Being fit and running around a lot, kicking people and tackling people and getting the ball off the opponents and giving it to the good players on our team.

0 (16m 10s):
You were a defender. I

2 (16m 11s):
Was a midfielder, but I, I, I, you know, I, I had a, a kind of a, a sort of a defensive responsibility that was about tackling and about aggression and about running around wow. And getting the ball. And then it was about scoring goals.

0 (16m 22s):
Were you getting lots of penalties called against you?

2 (16m 24s):
Yeah,

0 (16m 24s):
I, were you getting kicked outta games?

2 (16m 26s):
Yeah,

0 (16m 28s):
Because you don't strike me as an aggressive kind of guy, but I get

2 (16m 33s):
The competitiveness was something that burned in me, whatever it took to win that's, you know, that was within me. And it took a little while to realize that, but it was, it was there and I, I just was competitive.

0 (16m 49s):
So you were, I mean, this is in your sort of twenties and into your thirties, did like how did you think about structuring your life? Did you think, okay, I'll play soccer and then I'll get into like soccer management or something like

2 (17m 1s):
That. You know, I hadn't thought about that. I, I was probably starting, I was singularly focused on this, on the sporting career and, you know, I was being paid a good living better than my friends that had gone to university and were getting consulting jobs and it became a job for the first time. Wow. And I got a taste of playing for my country and what that meant. We, you know, we had a small group of players that realized that we had a, a potential shot at a world cup. And it, that was the, the special source that drove me to kind of get through the, the humdrum, you know, routine and professional sport and keep driving and keep improving and keep working because there was this larger prize there and this larger sense of purpose

0 (17m 40s):
And the prize was getting to the world cup in South Africa in 2010. Yeah.

2 (17m 44s):
For my country.

0 (17m 45s):
But this was also the period in your life. I guess when you sort of start to come up with the idea for what would become Allbirds.

2 (17m 53s):
I, one of the other cool things that happened is I got a sponsorship deal from one of the big sportswear companies that shall not be named. And I, that felt like a moment and I could go into the shop and get what I wanted really, but I was wearing logos all the time. And as a, I was a, I was a minimalist and I remember still, my dad probably got this from my dad, but like picking logos off, off clothes. And so the idea that this was there was logos over everything that I was wearing was just like this weird. It was this weird thing, completely the antithesis of everything I stood for from a, from a design point of view that had been ingrained to me, the university of Cincinnati. And I guess the other thing that was happening is I, I just had a, I had my afternoons free.

2 (18m 35s):
I was training in the morning and I was incredibly focused on sport, but I had a lot of free time. And so I started to get curious about, about this particular problem, particularly in, in footwear,

0 (18m 48s):
The problem of

2 (18m 49s):
The problem of something simple, it was impossible to find. And in New Zealand it was sort of

0 (18m 55s):
Just like a nice slip-on or something

2 (18m 57s):
Like a lace-up sneaker, right. It either had logos on it or you bought, you bought a Chuck Taylor. Right. And there was there wasn't too much. And

0 (19m 5s):
Chuck Taylor's, they're great, but they're not super comfortable.

2 (19m 7s):
Yeah. It was, I, it was one of those ones. I, I just saw a problem. That was, that was my own, I didn't write a business plan. Yeah. And so in the off season of one of my soccer seasons, I wanna say it was the 2008, 2009, you know, you get a month off at the end of the year where you kind of go off and you rest. Yeah. And I, I found a, a footwear factory online and I went and visited one.

0 (19m 29s):
Where

2 (19m 29s):
Was it? It was in Indonesia.

0 (19m 30s):
So you were serious. You were like,

2 (19m 32s):
No, no, I'm gonna go build

0 (19m 34s):
This. You're you're like, I'm gonna build a comfortable shoe.

2 (19m 36s):
It wasn't about comfort. At that time, it was a design, it was a design observation about a category that I thought was super complicated and overcrowded and overlo

0 (19m 45s):
And you just said, I wanna make a shoe. That's sort of a high top, like a Chuck Taylor, that logos.

2 (19m 51s):
Yeah. I'm gonna, I'm gonna go do it. It was that simple. And I tried to do it in New Zealand and realized that that industry had long since disappeared from, from

0 (19m 59s):
Nobody was manufacturing. It was all in, it was all in Asia. It was all in, in China.

2 (20m 3s):
And I, and so I said, well, okay, well, let's go, let's go see, see if we can do this. And I had greatly underestimated as I'm sure Joe would attest how complicated it is actually to make a shoe,

0 (20m 13s):
By the way. Did you know how to sew? I mean, you probably learned that you didn't learn that in design school. No, but, but you make patterns, you cut them out. Like you didn't have a sense of how to,

2 (20m 22s):
We had like 2d drawings that we made of just this form. And I had photos of other examples of, of shoes that I thought were kind of close, but that was it. And I thought, I, you know, you could go make this. And I think if, if you could make it, you could sell it. And there's potentially a business here. And I, I had started to get really, really interested in this idea of entrepreneurialism and building a business and of making things. This

0 (20m 48s):
Is why, you're why you're still a soccer player,

2 (20m 49s):
Still a soccer player. And I'm, I'm kind of 80% folks, I mean, on the world cup. Like that was, yeah, I bet that was everything. It was training. It was diet, there was, there was not room for it, much else, but this was my mental escape.

0 (21m 1s):
This was in 2009. You would not actually really start to make a shoe for like five more years later, which we'll get to

2 (21m 8s):
Not, I'm not, not really. I, I made, I made shoes

0 (21m 11s):
Straightaway, you made shoes straightaway.

2 (21m 13s):
And I sold them to my teammates.

0 (21m 14s):
Okay. So, so you made them at this factory.

2 (21m 16s):
I made them at this factory and they showed up and I had

0 (21m 18s):
Just, how many, how many did you order?

2 (21m 19s):
I don't think it was a thousand pairs. The first time

0 (21m 21s):
You ordered a thousand pairs of these shoes. So you actually put all your cash into

2 (21m 25s):
This store. I put some cash into it and my brother was helping with some of the selling.

0 (21m 29s):
What were they made out of

2 (21m 31s):
Canvas? And I, you know, some leather, some New Zealand leather that I was shipping over. Okay. Which was another eyeopening experience where I walked into a tannery for the first time and started to understand like how bad that material is.

0 (21m 43s):
Yeah. Right. All the chemicals that go into making leather leather. Right.

2 (21m 46s):
And just understand just generally just, you know, where these materials were coming from. And I remember the samples would come and you'd open the box and it would smell like

0 (21m 54s):
Just, yeah.

2 (21m 55s):
And I think that opened up the idea of exploring different materials.

0 (21m 59s):
What were your shoes called

2 (22m 1s):
At that particular time? I think the name was, were my initials. It was like two B.

0 (22m 6s):
And, and the idea was a no logo shoe that was comfortable made out of canvas. Yeah.

2 (22m 12s):
There was a couple of different styles. It was a high top and a low top. And I sold 'em to my teammates

0 (22m 15s):
For like 40 bucks or

2 (22m 17s):
No, I made them pay full price. And how much

0 (22m 20s):
Was that?

2 (22m 21s):
I think it was a hundred and hundred 50

0 (22m 23s):
Bucks. And so you sold them, but you couldn't have sold a thousand pairs. We

2 (22m 27s):
Did a, we did a pop-up shop in Wellington. And, you know, I, I think it was the beginning of, of an interest in this category because I, I realized too, in the process of selling of selling the shoes, the design story was, was one part of it. And I think it resonated with people, but it needed something more, both for me and for the product, the product was okay. But it wasn't, it wasn't differentiated. Yeah. And you know, I, I think I remember reading a magazine one day about the wool industry in New Zealand and we'd actually, we'd put some wool, felt experimented on some wool felt on the outside of some of the sneakers. And I was like, gosh, wouldn't it. Why is wool not used in shoes? And, and, and what if we could do that, that would be hugely interesting.

2 (23m 10s):
And so I, you know, with the help of, of, you know, some, some friends at the time put together a grant on a whim to develop a woo and textile for, for, for making the upper of a shoe

0 (23m 23s):
Out, you applied to the New Zealand government for, it was like

2 (23m 25s):
A wool funding board. Okay. And it was

0 (23m 28s):
To research how you could turn wool into shoes

2 (23m 31s):
To, to actually make that textile okay. Because it didn't exist. And, you know, I think the backdrop and the context around this was that new, Zealand's probably famous having lots of sheep. And it's a hugely important legacy industry in New Zealand that is, has gone through a really, really tough, a tough time. And, you know, I think they were, they were searching for new ideas and new categories, and it was kind of right time, right place with a, a random, maybe obvious idea that hadn't been done before. And, and we got lucky. And so probably around the world, couple of it before this grant, this research lab in Christchurch set about trying to make a fabric for us.

0 (24m 8s):
So wait, all of this is happening at the same time that your team is, is finally qualifying for the world cup.

2 (24m 14s):
Yes. So it was the second time New Zealand had ever qualified for the world cup for the first time in 9 82 and the second time in 2010. So that was a big deal. Did,

0 (24m 22s):
Did you guys get past the first round?

2 (24m 24s):
We were undefeated. We're the only undefeated team that they world cup

0 (24m 27s):
Because

2 (24m 28s):
We drew three games and didn't get out of our pool and Spain won the world cup. And, but it was, that was an enormous achievement. And this was a New Zealand team that, I mean was ranked. I think we were the smallest nation at the world cup. We were the lowest ranked and we went in there and I mean, even to qualify was enormous.

0 (24m 45s):
Wow. So, okay. I, I wanna bring Joe, I wanna bring you back into the conversation. Yeah. Because while Tim was playing in the world cup, what, what were you up to? Yeah.

3 (24m 55s):
You know, that was actually just about the time when we met. And how did

0 (24m 60s):
You meet?

3 (24m 60s):
Well, Tim, Tim had started dating a lady named Lindsay who he is subsequently married

0 (25m 7s):
American she's

2 (25m 7s):
From New York. She's

0 (25m 8s):
How did, how did you meet Lindsay? We'd

2 (25m 10s):
We'd met each other at, at a wedding. I'd come back to visit one of my old teammates from Cincinnati and gone to their wedding and stopped by to see some friends in New York and sat next to, to Lindsay at a, at a dinner

0 (25m 21s):
And Lindsay, Joey Lindsay knew.

3 (25m 25s):
I, I, I knew Lindsay because back in maybe 2000 early, early part of that decade, Lindsay and Liz, my wife were roommates and dormmates in college Dartmouth.

0 (25m 39s):
Oh,

3 (25m 39s):
Wow. Yeah. And so they they'd been super close friends for, well over decade. So I got to meet Lindsay. And when, when Lindsay came around and introduced us to Tim, I thought he was a pretty good book.

0 (25m 54s):
So you guys had met, but you were doing your own thing. He was playing soccer and you just thought I was a nice guy, Tim, you, you retire from football, from soccer. And I

2 (26m 6s):
Go to the world, I go to the world cup and I have this great experience. And I realized like, this that's the end of this, that's it? Yeah. This is, this is the, the moment where I depart seen left. And I, I tore up a two year contract. And I, at this time, the idea of going back to school and studying all the subjects that I'd avoided was interesting. And I I'd always wanted to go back to London where I was born and where my father was from. And so the idea of being able to go back there and, and study was, was both a way out of sport in some ways in the best of ways. And, and, and that the opportunity to kind of step back and, and start this next chapter.

0 (26m 40s):
So you decide to do a degree at the London school of economics with this idea for a shoe in your mind.

2 (26m 49s):
Yeah. And I had a little bit of shoe making knowledge. So, you know, I, I made sure a couple of,

0 (26m 53s):
Couple of shoes,

2 (26m 54s):
A couple of shoes, and I showed up and, and, and did the first couple of semesters at LSC, and then went off to Kellogg at Northwestern. And you were able to take the pick of classes at, at, you know, that you wanted through the, the quarter that you were there, the period that you were there. So I, so I show up at Evanston and I walk into an entrepreneurship class with a professor called Carter cast, who is a former CEO of walmart.com and this, you know, pretty special professor there. And he'd sent an email out and he said, everyone has to come in. And that you've got three minutes to pitch an idea to the class, and we will form teams around the best 10 ideas.

2 (27m 34s):
And for the whole, you know, quarter, you will, you will go after this business idea. And I came in and I pitched the idea of woo shoes. And I think people thought it was a little bit of a joke, but for whatever reason, it got selected. And I found myself immersed for three months

0 (27m 49s):
In on this

2 (27m 50s):
Idea on this idea. Wow. And truly, you know, actually building this into a business.

0 (27m 57s):
So this idea of wool's shoes, which, which you'd really been toying with since 2009 now around 20 12, 20 13, it's starting to get some traction. Yeah. But, but I wonder, I mean, were like, was anyone saying, like, how do you terms scratchy wool into, into shoes?

2 (28m 18s):
Everyone said that, but there was something about the idea that people sort of said, oh yeah. Why is that not been

0 (28m 25s):
Dumb? But how did you describe it to people? Because I'm saying to you, Tim, I don't get it. Like, here's my woo sweater. How do I translate that into shoes? How, how would you describe it?

2 (28m 35s):
Well, first of all, I realized that wool to Americans meant hot and scratchy. Yeah. So all of a sudden you actually had to talk about Marino.

0 (28m 41s):
Okay. It's a different

2 (28m 42s):
Sheep, it's a different sheet. Okay. And it's a finer material and it's softer. And, and, and then you also had to talk about not just the material, you actually had to talk about the benefits of the material. Okay. So why, if you're gonna do this, there must be a reason. And the reason is because wool has these miraculous properties and then people go, okay, that's interesting. And then for what, as much as people kind of laughed at the idea, and this has been a consistent thread, I think on some level, they sort of said, that's interesting. And, but I got the end of that course. And, you know, I flew back to, to London after my time at Kellogg and decided I was gonna launch wool shoes on Kickstarter.

0 (29m 19s):
Okay. But so to do something on Kickstarter, which you did in 2014, but to do some on Kickstarter, you need to have the prototype. You need to have a lot of things. Had you, what did, what was it, what was it called? Was it called

2 (29m 31s):
Allbirds? No, it was at this stage. I I'd renamed it again. It took another crack at naming and it was called three over seven. And it was gonna be very, very, you know, simple design. Okay. Original. And, and it was gonna be made outta wall with this, this new material. All

0 (29m 44s):
Right. So, but to get a Kickstarter, you still to promise people that you're gonna deliver them, the, a shoe.

2 (29m 49s):
I found a, another factory on Google. And where was it in Portugal this time? And I'd flown over and it was a tiny factory and I'd made, I think, I think it was eight pairs of samples. Hmm. And I went home to New Zealand for Christmas and I shot a, I, I needed to shoot a video. Okay. And I'd organized with my dad's friend who owned a sheep farm, not just outside of Wellington. Yeah. We have one day to do this. Okay. And my dad's friend, I remember showing up on the morning of he went and got a bunch of sheep, so they could be in the backdrop of this video. And I very nearly pulled out. I was writing this script and I just, it was one of those moments where you think this is dumb.

2 (30m 31s):
This is not gonna work. And my brother literally dragged me along to the farm and said, just do it. What's the worst that can happen. And so we, we went, we went ahead with it and shot a shot, a video, and ultimately launched the Kickstarter. It went live on March of 2014. So

0 (30m 48s):
You make the video and you say, Hey, I'm Tim. And, and I wanna tell you a little bit about Marino wool and the shoes that I'm gonna create.

2 (30m 54s):
And I chase some sheep around. And it's, it's a little, it's kind of a little flood of the Concords desk, maybe. Yeah. I don't know, little weird and funny. And, but tried to really hone in on, on sort of, you know, why this is different and why it matters and, and click live on it. And I was back in London and I remember my phone just started going, going,

0 (31m 14s):
When you put on Kickstarter, I put

2 (31m 15s):
On Kickstarter and picked up by some New Zealand media.

0 (31m 18s):
Okay.

2 (31m 19s):
And then it went on the Kickstarters homepage and, and on their mailing list where they send out sort of interesting projects and it went to a hundred and, you know, $20,000 in four days. And I had to stop it because I didn't have enough. That was, yeah. And I had to, I had to stop this thing and I was like, oh my gosh, I can't believe this

0 (31m 37s):
Is cause you didn't have enough wall.

2 (31m 38s):
And Lynn had, had sent this out to all her friends and, you know, Hey, you know, my, my boyfriend's doing this, this project and maybe you could support 'em and, and Joe was one of the, the early earliest

0 (31m 52s):
Customers. And what was your, what would you have to pay like a hundred hundred bucks or a

3 (31m 55s):
Hundred hundred dollars or $120?

0 (31m 57s):
So $120 is gonna get you a pair of these shoes. Yeah.

3 (32m 0s):
First woo runners ever created

0 (32m 1s):
First woo runners ever created. All right. So you do the Kickstarter, you you're one of the contributors, Joey, Tim, you raise more money than you need. And, and which sounds like a great thing, but actually it wasn't, it was, it was actually stressful.

2 (32m 17s):
Oh, I just, it, it was one of those moments that sometimes from the outside, when you you've had the moment of greater success, that's the moment where you're most unsure or you're most scared. And I remember being scared. Like we have to go deliver on this now and, and execute it. And, and, and this is gonna be really, really hard

0 (32m 37s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Tim reached out to Joey for help and how Joey went from being a customer to a partner, to helping build Allbirds into a billion dollar brand, stay with us. I'm Guyz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. I recently had the opportunity to spend quite a bit of time with the all electric BMW IX. And I've gotta say, it's an incredible cart. The interior design is something I've never seen before. It's so progressive with its minimalist layout. And yet the controls are still so intuitive. One of my favorite parts has to be the integrated speaker system.

0 (33m 21s):
The speakers are literally embedded in the headrest of the seats and they give you this cinematic experience. When you listen to your favorite music or even podcasts, it makes an already incredible drive that much better. The IX offers a truly bespoke audio experience with its integrated Bowers and Wilkins diamonds around sound system. These 30 strategically placed speakers make you feel like you're in the studio, especially the ones embedded in the seats that produce a 4d audio tactile experience. Now that is some base you can feel build your own BMW IX today@bmwusa.com slash IX.

0 (34m 4s):
When you are scrolling through social media, how can you tell what's real misinformation can be dangerous, especially when it's related to health. Anything can be posted online without being fact checked. Tanya Zucker brought founder of the trendy high fiber F factor diet has celebrity followers, including Megan Kelly and supermodel, Olivia Culpo, but allegations of troubling side effects with the diet began to surface. And people started to question, is she selling powder or power? Emily Galles, a popular fashion influencer saw these allegations and put the diet on blast to her own large social following. She launched a crusade to expose Tanya and the F factor diet.

0 (34m 46s):
What was once an online feud escalated into the real world resulting in threats, lawsuits, and a whole lot of drama from Wondery comes a new series about wealth, wellness and influence. Listen to fed up on apple podcasts, Amazon music, Spotify, or you can listen early and add free by joining Wondery plus in the Wondery app. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm Kira. So it's 2014 and Tim brown has launched his idea for a new kind of wool shoe on Kickstarter.

0 (35m 25s):
And people respond right away. They raise $120,000 in just a few days, which means that Tim now needs to get to work fast to start filling orders.

2 (35m 38s):
I had a couple young guys kind of working for me and we'd found a little office space in, in London. And, you know, I spent probably the worst year trying to make this thing happen. And why

0 (35m 48s):
Was it the worst year?

2 (35m 49s):
Oh, I mean, every mistake you could imagine. And I remember the, the, the factory had the young guy had gone over to the factory and he called me up one day and he goes, we've got a problem. The factory's made the men's and woman's shoes. Exactly the same size I go that's that's bad. There's like a, there's like a one and a half. There's quite a big difference. Sure. What are we gonna do? We've got no choice. We're gonna have to just, we're gonna have to, we're just gonna have to send these out.

0 (36m 14s):
Joey, you are a customer of that Kickstarter campaign. Yeah,

3 (36m 18s):
I was, I was one of the lucky customers who ordered a men's tent and got a women's tent and, and

0 (36m 23s):
It was fine.

3 (36m 25s):
No. Oh, okay. It was not fine. It was a pretty bad thing too. And, and when I, when I pinged customer service, which was Tim brown, he just recommended that I take out the insole and make a little room, more room for myself, so, wow. We we've. And since he didn't have any more, will there was no exchanges or anything like that. So, yeah.

0 (36m 44s):
Can you, can you explain something to me when you make $120,000 off Kickstarter, which sounds amazing. That's a lot of cash. It probably did not pay for all of the orders you had to fulfill. Right.

2 (36m 56s):
The whole thing was, was,

0 (36m 57s):
Was financially not even not close.

2 (36m 59s):
And so I was tapping into my, my savings that were rapidly dwindling at the time and living in London. And, and then right at the end of that, we'd sort of the factory in Portugal decided to go bankrupt right at the end of this shortly after we just delivered it. So the idea that we, we were gonna kind of try and make more and build this business and go forward to the next phase of things. Yeah. I, I had to do a mercy dash to Portugal to go rescue the 10 meters of Wallen from the factory.

0 (37m 27s):
Okay. When you finished fulfilling those orders, were you like, okay, now I've gotta create a business or were you like, yes.

2 (37m 34s):
Well, I, I mean, I

0 (37m 35s):
Was, are you like I'm done with this?

2 (37m 37s):
I was kind of somewhere in between. And I, the, that that year had was, was awful. And it was, I would find myself at dinners with, with Lynn and her friends who are kind of early thirties now at the stage of their career where things are starting to, to take off and, and we'd go out for dinner and it would go around the table. And I would, I just, I would dread when it would come to me and people would ask what I was doing and I would Lynns would make fun. Cause I, my body would curl up into a little ball and I would sort of say wool shoes. And when we'd leave the dinner, people would pat me on the head and say, that's, it's lovely that you're pursuing this little thing and good luck with that little fella. And it was just, it was, it was awful. And, and it became clear too, that doing this by yourself was really hard and that I was good at some aspects of it.

2 (38m 20s):
And there was a bunch of things that I was not good at.

0 (38m 23s):
Joey, you, you know, you're doing your, you know, your friend a favor and you wanna support him, but I have to imagine that at least initially you're not thinking, this is what I wanna do. I wanna leave my job and go do this, or right.

3 (38m 36s):
Yeah. I mean, if you'd asked me at the time, I would've laughed

0 (38m 38s):
At you, you would, you would just talk, I'm just gonna support this, this

3 (38m 41s):
Guy shoot got chance. I mean, yeah, not just supporting, I mean, I did think it was, it was really cool. And I mean, looking back at that video, as I, as I, once in a while do, when we're showing new employees now Allbirds, you know, a lot of the things that Tim intuitively saw and talked about in that video are exactly the same things that we talk about today. And I think, you know, Tim is, Tim is just one of those unbelievable, intuitive marketers that just connects with, with people and understands what is missing in the market. And, and that was clear from, I think, day one.

0 (39m 15s):
So Tim, I read that after the Kickstarter ended and you fulfilled those orders and you're kind of exhausted and you have this nightmare nightmare-ish year, and you're trying to think, what am I gonna do with this thing? You were contacted by an investor who said, Hey, there's something here. Would you let me buy into this thing?

2 (39m 34s):
Yeah. I found myself on a plane to New York speaking with someone from within the, the footwear world who had seen the traction and the, the,

0 (39m 42s):
The product and liked it,

2 (39m 43s):
Liked it. And I went to New York and spent a lot of time with them and we went through every aspect of it and they put a, they put a deal in front of me

0 (39m 49s):
And that must have been pretty gratifying. I mean, I have to assume you were getting a little bit nervous about your financial situation. So they're putting a dollar figure in front of you must have been quite nice. I

2 (39m 58s):
Was starting to think, what do I do next? And I've been through this really difficult year. And I was like, why, why am I, what am I doing? We're making wool's shoes. Why, what does this even, why am I doing this? And so there's a lot of those questions kind of going through through my mind. And, but we get this investment offer and I, I knew enough to understand the deal,

0 (40m 19s):
But she, but it was complicated. It

2 (40m 21s):
Was complicated.

0 (40m 21s):
And how much time did you have before you had to give him an answer?

2 (40m 24s):
You know, just couple weeks. Yeah. Just things on the table and, and Lynn, she, she goes, you need to speak with Joey about this. He comes from this world, he's, he's a customer of the project. And he, you know, he'd be an interesting person to sort of put this in front of. And so, and so I did, and everyone had given me their kind of 10 minutes on this

0 (40m 43s):
Were most people saying, take it.

2 (40m 46s):
Everyone was like, oh, it's good. And it's bad. And you don't really have anything else. So do you wanna shop this round? Or what do you really want? And

0 (40m 51s):
Can you, can you gimme a rough sense of what they're offering you?

2 (40m 54s):
It was, it was some upfront capital that would convert to equity depending on how the business performed and involve kind of moving to New York. And they would, you know, they were gonna take a, a big chunk of it, a large, large chunk

0 (41m 8s):
Of it, majority.

2 (41m 9s):
Yeah. A majority of it. And

0 (41m 11s):
So you'd be left with like 20, 15%,

2 (41m 14s):
Something like that. And so Joe, Joey took a look at this thing for me and, and he jumps on the phone and he hasn't just looked at this thing. Hmm. He, you know, I had really, really good friends, close friends that had looked at it. That kind of looked at it.

0 (41m 28s):
Yeah.

2 (41m 28s):
He'd gone through, he'd

0 (41m 30s):
Read it. Wow. What did you think when you saw it? Joey?

3 (41m 33s):
I thought, you know, I didn't think that there was any ill intent from the, from the guys who sent the deal, but it was, it was volt in the way I, I read it and I, I thought that it was taking advantage of a great idea and trying to sink their talents into, into this business. And it, what Tim would've been left with was not great. So I think I told him at that time, I was like, look, I wouldn't take the deal. And I wouldn't run the business this way,

0 (42m 2s):
But what was his alternative?

3 (42m 4s):
I said at that time, and look, there was, this is a moment in, in my life too, that I'd been at soul design for six years. Yeah. And I had a, a very consistent experience. And I, I mean, I kind of look back and laugh a little bit now, like algae oil kind of sounds like the, the like two thousands version of snake oil salesman. But I, I was going to big multinationals and chemical companies, big brands. And there was like a couple of these just seminal moments where I would, I would have an idea. I would go talk to the right. People you'd want to talk to, if you had an amazing new material that happened to be really sustainable for the planet. Yeah. I, I pitched it in, had multiple meetings and everyone at first is like, I'm super, this is amazing.

3 (42m 46s):
It's an exciting idea. We love the sustainability mission. And then you'd be like, okay, well let's do this. Yeah. And then it turns to like this really inane sourcing conversation where they're like, just do what we do now and do it cheaper. Like we don't really, we don't really care about the sustainability part is, is not the words they used, but that's the sentiment that's conveyed. And so I just realized through this super frustrating experience that the brands, big brands, they said they cared about sustainability, but in reality, they were just paying lip service to the idea. Hmm. So I'm sitting here and Tim comes with this, not just a concept, but like a pretty fleshed out idea with a Kickstarter success.

3 (43m 27s):
And it really resonated with me from a sustainability perspective, but it was also about an opportunity to sell shoes in a totally different way than the industry had, had ever done before.

0 (43m 38s):
Okay. So in the, you, you see this term sheet, the gears start turning in your head, Joey, where you're thinking, wait a minute, this actually, there's some legs to this thing. And actually, maybe I can talk to Tim about sort of using this shoe idea as a vehicle for a sustainability

3 (43m 58s):
Business. Yeah. And I I'd read this book cradle the cradle. And I remember the intro chapter talked about one of the scourges of the earth on pollution and the environment being the shoe industry. Wow. The number of shoes and, and I mean, there's 20 billion pairs of shoes that are made every year. And in the us alone, the average American kid woman, man, they, they buy eight pairs per year. Wow. Per person. So it's two and a half billion, just the us. And so, and all these things are sitting in landfills. And, and so what you put into the chemicals and the, and the materials that used to produce it are they're incredibly important and no one's thinking about it. And so, yeah, the gear started turning a little bit and, and I started thinking more and, and, you know, look, timing is everything.

3 (44m 44s):
And I asked Tim, my, my family, I, I had, I had two really young kids at the time and Liz and, and my kids were gone for the weekend. And I asked him if he wanted to fly out from London and, and just talk about the concept and see if, if he'd give it another go. And

0 (45m 2s):
If we would, maybe you guys could work

3 (45m 3s):
Together. We could work together. Yeah. So

0 (45m 5s):
What did you think about that? When he said that

2 (45m 8s):
I jumped on the plane and I flew out to San Francisco and, and Joey and I spent the week weekend together and he picked me up at the airport and

0 (45m 18s):
It's, this is in 2015.

2 (45m 20s):
This is in, in early 2015. And we, and we, we spent the weekend together getting, getting a little bit drunk and, and talking about our families and getting to know each other and walking in the Hills of Marin and, and really just sort of imagining what it might be like to work together and trying to understand if that would be a good idea or not.

0 (45m 37s):
So did you resolve that weekend to try this out, to make a go of it

3 (45m 42s):
By and large? Yeah. Yeah.

2 (45m 43s):
I, I landed back in London and I, and I said to Lynn, I go, I think I wanna do this. And I I've found the person to do it with,

0 (45m 49s):
Why did you think he was the person to do it?

2 (45m 53s):
I think I found a guy that on the surface was very, very different from me, but maybe underneath shared a, a lot of similarities in terms of attitude and approach, I'd found maybe a kindred spirit in terms of the competitiveness, which we both shared that I, I, that was, was attractive. And I think I found someone that could do all the parts of the business that I shouldn't be doing and, and that we potentially could be a great, a great partnership.

0 (46m 25s):
Can I ask you guys, and this is important, cuz a lot of people who listen to this show are they're co-founders or two people involved and a big part of the show is lessons learned, right? It's a roadmap. How can you walk me through the, I don't know if it was difficult. I don't know if it was uncomfortable or unpleasant, the conversation the two of you had to have when you decided how you were gonna structure this company, because you'd been working on this and you had this idea, but you also have this idea, which is to actually take Tim's idea, but to turn it into a totally sustainable carbon free carbon neutral product, which we'll get to. So you you're both coming in with big ideas.

0 (47m 8s):
How do you divide the company up?

2 (47m 10s):
And we did that. We did that very quickly and, and very simply of Remo.

3 (47m 15s):
Well, I think, I think the important part that we both understood was that doing this alone. I mean, Tim had experienced it for a while that doing it alone is really lonely. And I'd always been of the opinion that if I was gonna do a business, I wanted to do it with someone cuz I, I knew my shortcomings were substantial and then I would much rather have a piece of something big than a lot of something small. Yeah. And so it was, you know, and I think he respected what I was gonna bring to the table, particularly in the future of the business. So it wasn't, it ended up being a reasonably, reasonably quick conversation. And I think neither of us have, have really looked back or at least I certainly haven't looked back and ever regretted that.

0 (47m 58s):
So you're dividing up a hundred percent of something worth nothing at that point, which is always a challenge because you never know what's what's gonna happen in the future. And then you both decide you are going to both be the CEO.

3 (48m 12s):
Yeah. You know, we, we look, I was having a lot of the conversations with the financial community and you know, you go into like someone's office and they're like, okay, that's awesome. But can I talk to the CEO? Right. And Tim is, Tim is, you know, first he's in London. Yeah. He's in London. He's also, he's also doing other kinds of conversations that would be, and, and subsequently we knew that like press like talking to the media was gonna be really important. And if Tim was gonna go have a media conversation, he like, they would also wanna talk to the CEO. So we're like, yeah, let's just do co CEO. And we also, I think we both knew that what each other brought something really special to the table that the other one didn't didn't bring and that, and so the, the, it wasn't just a semantic title.

3 (48m 58s):
It was really actually the fundamental contribution warranted that kind of split responsibility.

0 (49m 6s):
So that summer of 2015, you're pounding the pavement, Joey trying to raise money. How much money did you think you needed to raise to get this thing off

3 (49m 16s):
The ground? We, you know, we did our little business plan, which was remarkably inaccurate, but we, but we had decided that we needed a million and a half dollars. Okay. And we felt like Dak could get us through a huge amount of marketing branding work in the beginning and then buy a whole bunch of inventory. And we wanted to buy a lot of inventory cuz we, we had this mentality of, if we were gonna do this, we were gonna fail super fast or succeed really big.

0 (49m 44s):
And so the idea from the beginning was direct to consumer. You were gonna have a big marketing campaign to attract people to the website and you were going to have the shoes in a warehouse and then you could just ship 'em out.

3 (49m 56s):
Yep. Basically it, and we were gonna launch simultaneously in the us and New Zealand on just website.

0 (50m 3s):
And did you have a date in mind?

3 (50m 4s):
We did March 1st, 2016.

0 (50m 7s):
Wow. And you were working out of your house?

3 (50m 9s):
Yeah, my mother-in-law's apartment.

0 (50m 11s):
Okay. In, in Marin. Yeah. Tim, you're wrapping up in London preparing to move to California,

2 (50m 16s):
Preparing to get married on June 6th, 2015,

0 (50m 19s):
And then to move to California

2 (50m 20s):
And then come to California and I'm going through it at green card, the immigration, that

3 (50m 24s):
Stuff. That's just like a little while.

0 (50m 25s):
Okay. So you spend basically a full year raising the money from investors and perfecting the design and, and doing everything you need to, to create this comfortable and sustainable wool shoe. What was your game plan at that point? Like, like what do you do at this point? We,

2 (50m 43s):
Well, we had to build the brand. We'd had a, quite an instrumental conversation with a guy who's previously been on the show called Eric Ryan from method method. Cause we we'd sat down with him and we said, Hey, we wanna build a different type of footwear brand. And we believe there's a problem we solved. And we can make shoes that are, that are more comfortable, that are better for the environment. And so our plan, what do you think? And he said to us, fantastic, don't pat yourself on the back, just get on with doing it. People don't buy sustainable products, they buy great products. And the only reason there's an opportunity for you to, to do this is because the, the rest of the world is far behind where they need to.

2 (51m 27s):
Hmm. And, but get on with doing it and, and don't make sustainability. A part of your brand make, make the attributes of the product of the sustainable materials, the story. So

0 (51m 37s):
You, you thought comfort was the way we were gonna sell this

2 (51m 39s):
Comfort was the way that there was the problem to be solved. And we were gonna solve comfort through sustainable materials that enabled that comfort experience. But we're also better for the environment. Yeah. You know, in hindsight it seems, it seems obvious. Yeah. Comfort is the number one reason why people buy shoes and, and comfort often is equated with ugliness. So if your dad tells you, he's got a comfortable pair of shoes, you assume they don't look very good. So the idea of bringing great design and pairing it with that and, and achieving the comfort through materials that were also better for the environment is, is really kind of the north staff of the business.

0 (52m 15s):
How, how, by the way, how did you get the name?

2 (52m 18s):
You know, we we'd been brainstorming a lot of different names and ultimately landed on, on the name, all birds as a sort of this whimsical encapsulation of, of the type of business that we wanted to build. And when people first came to New Zealand, there was, there was nothing there, but birds, it was all birds. So it was a little nod to the provenance of the story and, and the idea that we should tread more lightly in the, in the way that, that we make products. Yeah. And so, so we, we chose that and Joey procured the.com and, and we were, we were away.

0 (52m 53s):
So you launch on March, what

3 (52m 56s):
March 1st,

0 (52m 56s):
March 1st, 2016, you hit the, hit the, the, the big red button, or it's not a big red button. I, but you, you launch it, the website goes live. What happened to your inventory?

3 (53m 6s):
Yeah, we sold through it really fast.

0 (53m 8s):
And where were you holding that inventory?

3 (53m 10s):
We had a warehouse in Connecticut at the time and we sold through within, I think a week and a half. We started having sizes that were sold out.

0 (53m 19s):
Wow. And you did all this, like with Shopify as a back end? Yeah. Yeah.

3 (53m 22s):
Yeah. The technology enabled us to do this really

0 (53m 24s):
Lean. Are you still doing Shopify today? We are.

3 (53m 26s):
Wow. Yeah. I mean the, the, this is the thing, you know, we, we started direct to consumer as a concept has been around for a while. Sure. But the technology has developed. And so it, it allowed us to take advantage of things quite inexpensively from, from that infrastructure, that, that

0 (53m 42s):
Stuff. I mean, that's amazing. Cuz anyone can use that technology it's available to anyone it's affordable. Right. Salesforce, technology, Shopify, all this stuff is out

2 (53m 50s):
There in some ways the, the, the barriers for entry to, to launching a new business have never been lower and in, and others it's and other ways it's, it's never been more competitive, but certainly, you know, we were able to do that reasonably easily.

0 (54m 4s):
So you launch and you just start selling out fast. Was that incredibly exciting or did that create new kinds of stress?

3 (54m 15s):
It was weird. You know, it was like neither of us would've said that we were like really successful at that point. And I think in some ways it was great. Like obviously it's certainly better than not selling any shoes. Yeah. So, so don't get me wrong. I mean, and, and we had ordered like 15,000 pairs, so that was, it was a lot. And, and we started selling through really fast. And then we, I think we both found ourself acting strange, like this, this, like, it was like letting the air out of a balloon. It was like, you you'd had this unbelievably stressful seven, eight months of, of, of working for this singular creative piece of this product. And then you put it out there and just see what happens.

3 (54m 57s):
And it worked ostensibly, you know, people 15,000 are close to that, that bought it. And then we're sitting there like, okay, the stress is gone. Now. It was like, I don't know. Maybe we like had too much of a swagger. And like, I think it was funny, like the, the, the most successful times on the outside, maybe you look on the inside and it's actually where we were probably maybe at one of our worst moments as a partnership.

0 (55m 21s):
Why

3 (55m 22s):
I think we just started, you know, we started, maybe I was probably getting over my skis and talking about things in design and maybe Tim was doing some things in, in the area of the business that I was stronger at that, that, that maybe he shouldn't have. And, and we, we were, we were like, Hey, this worked like step off. Hmm. And I remember we had, we had, we had a beer, it must have been like at the end of March. So like our first 30, 31 days of sales and we, we done a million dollars in sales in the first month. I mean, it was, it was crazy. And no way we had, we, I think we, we blew through our first year business plan projection.

3 (56m 8s):
And like, I dunno weeks after that, like a really short amount of time. Wow. So we were beyond any doubt that it was, it was working and we're having this beer and we're like both eyes watering up and being like, why, why are you, you know, I don't like how this is going. Wow. And it was one of those moments where we then kind of fell back on the promise we'd made probably to our wives about not ruining their relationship and the fact that if we were gonna make something successful, it was gonna take two of us and we gotta work on this. And, and this is more important than whether we sell out the next color or whatever.

0 (56m 48s):
Yeah. Because from the outside, as you say, you would've thought, oh man, this is because you're crushing it. Great job. But this is really when the tension begins.

2 (56m 55s):
Yeah. It was a dark, it was a dark moment. And it's, it's funny. It has, you know, we've, we've, we've had a, a couple of them through the journey and they've usually, they've usually linked up from the outside when we've had, we've had most, most success when everyone would sort of be highfiving and popping. Yeah. You know, we had a moment and it was, I don't think we'd yet found a, kind of a, a mechanism to kind of get, to get stuff out. I think we'd just been working, you know, side by side, head down and, you know, it's, it's the joke about sort of the idea that this is a marriage. It sort there's an intimacy to it. That is, you know, that is pretty deep. And I don't think we we'd acknowledged that.

2 (57m 35s):
And we, we hadn't found, found ways to sort of like purge the system and reset the machine. And, you know, there was a bunch of stuff that'd been building up over time that kind of came out in a, in a little bit of an avalanche of, of kind of emotion and tiredness. And, and I, you know, I think it was, we realized that we needed to manage this more effectively, that our relationship would be as important as the strategy. Yeah. As, as important as many of the things we were doing that, and that needed to be worked on like any, like any healthy one.

3 (58m 7s):
And it's also, I mean, there's a directness in our relationship that if we didn't have that, like you, can't just, you can't just talk about superficial business tasks that are going wrong or right. Like, you know, we're like, dude, this is not good. I like this. Gotta be a different direction for us to work this out with. And, and it's, and just getting to the heart of issue, not letting it calcify it's it's, you know, give it no time, nip it in the bud and move on and have super low ego about it. And I think our, our personalities and our respect for one another is what kind of lends itself to allowing that strategy to work. And it might not be for everyone.

0 (58m 50s):
So was it a, just a self generating thing once you launched? My suspicion is it was just off to the races. Like you were getting more attention and you're getting celebrities wearing it. And Gayle king telling Oprah, you gotta try these on. And today Barack Obama wears them. I mean, is that what happened? Would it, did it just continue to kind of snowball on its own? And obviously you did media stuff, but, or, or was there ever a moment where, where it just sort of slowed down? You thought, okay. I don't know.

3 (59m 20s):
Yeah. I don't think there's like a single moment, but there was, there was moments, you know, in August the front page of the New York times, you get on the, the front page of the business section. Oh.

0 (59m 31s):
About how everyone's wearing

3 (59m 33s):
Big picture with it, with someone wearing a pair of shoes and that catalyzes a bunch of attention. And then yeah, you get a moment like, like, like you mentioned, Gail Kings a lot in the media. And I, I think we just gave it time too. You know, we didn't sell, we sold one style, the wool runner for 14 months. We didn't, we didn't do anything else except sell the woo runner. Yeah. And, and I think that it's hard to create any doubt about what you stand for when you have just one product. I think that helped too. And, and, and just being methodical and intentional about that and not taking advice from people who said churn it out faster, drop more colors, drop more styles, you know?

3 (1h 0m 14s):
Yeah.

0 (1h 0m 16s):
You guys have, you guys are a B Corp, which for people don't know that essentially means you're committed to certain sustainability practices and, and the way you sort of treat your employees and compensation, et cetera, is a big thing. You know, you talk about the materials that are used for the shoes. I know Joey, you were very influenced by, you know, sustainability. Let's talk about this for a moment. I mean, you're still, you gotta get the wool from New Zealand. It's gotta be spun into this material, then made into shoes at a factory that is probably, you know, using electricity and then put on ships and then sent all over the world.

0 (1h 0m 56s):
Is it possible to make a carbon neutral shoe? Is that possible with, with all those things I've just described?

3 (1h 1m 4s):
Yeah, it is. We're not there yet. And I think we, when we started this business, we had a really clear idea. We wanted to be, we wanted to be like a tree. We wanted to suck carbon out and spit out oxygen. We wanted be that good. And we knew we were, we were quite a ways from that, that ambition. But the problem with climate change is that businesses pollute and, and society pays for that. Yeah. The companies don't pay for it and that's the problem. And so we've, we've believed that we should pay for it. And so we have committed to be carbon neutral and the how, how do you do that? So, so we try to minimize the carbon impact across all those dimensions that you said from transportation to the electric grid, that the factories and we're in Korea, because it's a much cleaner grid than other places in the world.

3 (1h 1m 52s):
Sure. But we still, we still have emissions in, in the way that we make the shoe and transport it and ship it to customers for eCommerce. And so we pay for pay for offsets for the remainder of that.

0 (1h 2m 3s):
I wanna try to bridge the gap between the idealism and, and the practicalities. So where the sort of the rubber meets the proverbial road. Yeah. Despite your idealism, despite your commitment to creating this thing, that could be carbon neutral there, people are gonna wanna return on their money and they don't really care about that. Even if they say they do, even if they say they do at the end of the day, they're gonna wanna return on that. So what happens, how do you, how do you protect this thing that you built and keep doing it? I mean, cuz at some point a big shoe company, Nike or Adidas might say, Hey, we wanna buy you for 40 billion and, and that may happen.

3 (1h 2m 48s):
Well, you, you know, we don't believe that there needs to be the tension between financial success and success for other purpose driven aspects of our business and namely the environment for us. And I think that's true for a lot of businesses. You know, we have, we have a lot of debates inside the company because there's always a balance. Like if something costs 20 times as much, yet it's way more sustainable, you know, maybe you can't do that. Yeah. Take that, take that choice. But on the margin you can absolutely do it when it's a little more expensive it's much better for, and it follows our north star of, of making a lower carbon footprint shoe or product we'll do it. And so we just don't, we don't see that tension.

3 (1h 3m 29s):
And I think that the other aspect is we built this into the charter of the company. So our charter says we have a fiduciary responsibility to our shareholders and we have a, a equal responsibility to the environment. And so if Tim or I are no longer in the business and some other, some other person takes over, they still have a responsibility to do what our charter says, unless they get two thirds of our shareholders to, to vote and say that they don't care about the environment. And so we, we, we've kind of embedded this in the fabric of the company. And so people have to know when they sign on for a financing, this is part of the deal.

0 (1h 4m 5s):
I, I wanna shift, you mentioned Tim, that there was a time where you were dipping into your savings. It was stressing you out back in 2014 are, do both of you feel like you can breathe a sigh of relief now that you're financially you're on stable ground, cuz your company is valued at a billion 0.6 or do you still have stress about financial matters?

3 (1h 4m 25s):
You know, it's, it's never been about neither of us really need much money to be happy and live. So it's never really been about like the big valuation of the company or anything. I think we have enough anxiety between us just to push forward that regardless of it, while we're still in there, we're still, we're still cranking and pushing. Yeah. We, we, we pay ourselves more now than we used to pay ourselves when we started the company. So we're certainly, we're certainly in a better situation financially in our, in our, our little less financial stress. But, but yeah, this, the anxiety still is palpable.

2 (1h 5m 1s):
You're always a sitting there thinking of the 10 things that you could be doing better. And then anyone who started a business will know that that feeling, oftentimes people will ask, oh gosh, it must be work long hours. And you're like, well it's not, that's the wrong question. It's it's like when you start something, this thing in six inches in your brain and you, you don't shut it off. And it's a voice that's there 24 7 all the time. And you're constantly thinking about it. And I, you know, I retired from sport and I, that, that had its pressurized moments and getting out in front of, of lots of people at times and, and playing sport. And, but this is in, in some ways greater more sustained pressure. And it's, it's a very, very difficult thing to do.

2 (1h 5m 42s):
And you know, we're certainly, we've, we've had some, some good progress, but we've got a long, long way to go to achieve what we, we want to.

0 (1h 5m 48s):
How much do you think this, all that has happened to you because of luck or because of your skill and, and hard work,

2 (1h 5m 55s):
You know, along the way, whether it be meeting Joey, all the, the different characters along the way that that popped up seemingly at the right time, you can't call that anything other than, than luck. But there was, there was a lot of different offer ramps along this journey where if you were logical and rational, you would've stopped. And for whatever reason, we've, you know, we've kept going. And when it's just seemed like it was impossible, we've, we've managed to find a different solution and, and keep on going a little bit and you need that. And, and, you know, but if, if, if we've had any luck, if I've had any luck personally, I mean, I, I think we've been given an enormous leg up with our families and with our, our mum and dad and now with our, with our wives and, and, you know, that was a, that was a loving household, that valued education that encouraged us to go and take risks and do what we wanted to do.

2 (1h 6m 49s):
And not everyone has that. And it's been enormously important part of the journey because I think we've lent on them right now. I have at key moments, very, very heavily to keep on going.

3 (1h 6m 59s):
Yeah, I think they're, they're inextricably linked. I've always thought of luck as some random event happening to you, but that happens. And then what are you gonna do with it? And I think we've, we've had the good fortune together to, to have great timing across a whole host of things. Like we could start a business and put up a website in seven months and reach 10,000 people in, in, in a week. But we also, you know, we, we seized and capitalized on that opportunity and we worked super hard and made some good decisions along the way to turn that luck into something that was really positive. So I just, I just think you can't, can't really separate those, those ideas or that construct.

3 (1h 7m 42s):
And, and fortunately, we've, we've done a, we've had a good bit of both

0 (1h 7m 50s):
That's Joey's Wheeler and Tim brown founders of Allbirds. The company recently rolled out a new material for the souls of their shoes. It's called sweet farm. And it's made from the leftover parts of sugar cane, which would otherwise be thrown away. And it's part of their ongoing effort to make avers a carbon neutral shoe. And instead of keeping the recipe a secret, they've actually open sourced it so that anyone who wants to make souls out of sugar can do it.

4 (1h 8m 25s):
Business wars is a podcast from one tree that shares entertaining and eye-opening stories about the fights feuds and boardroom backstabbing behind the world's greatest business rivalries. The stakes for these companies, couldn't be higher. The winner goes on to transform their industry and help shape the world. As we know it, the loser gets a footnote in the history books in business. There's no prize for second place. The newest season of business wars explores the bitter fight between two entertainment giants over ownership of paramount pictures in the nineties. QVC wanted to combine forces with paramount pictures to create the first ever retail and media empire, but not if Viacom had anything to do with it. The clash between the two CEOs resulted in a grudge match where friends became enemies, billions were spent and the cable TV landscape was changed forever.

4 (1h 9m 12s):
Check out the battle for paramount pictures from business wars on apple podcasts, Amazon music, or wherever you listen. You can listen one week early and add free by joining Wondery plus and apple podcasts or the Wondery app.

0 (1h 9m 28s):
Hey, thanks for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that. And our story today comes to us from Kirby or daily from white salmon, Washington and Kirby, and his family spent a lot of time at the beach, which means they have all observed one of the great wonders of Marine life.

5 (1h 9m 45s):
You hear about it all the time. You hear about the beach umbrellas that fly through the air and you know, land on somebody's car. Those things blow down the beach like crazy.

0 (1h 9m 56s):
And those things blow around because they're not always well anchored, right? And a big gust of wind metal steak can just fly off the ground. And Kirby just wasn't satisfied with the stuff that was on the market.

5 (1h 10m 8s):
Lots of inexpensive tent steaks that you pound in with a hammer or a rock, but there was no really good toolless solution that would hold in all weather conditions. And that would work in sand. It would work in clay

0 (1h 10m 21s):
And because Kirby is a professional woodworker, he started to tinker around with ideas for a better ground anchor. And he was inspired by one thing in particular.

5 (1h 10m 31s):
You've probably seen it and it looks like a gigantic wine cork opener.

0 (1h 10m 36s):
And in case you haven't seen this giant wine cork opener think pets because people use this cork screw thing as kind of an anchor to help keep their dogs tethered outside.

5 (1h 10m 47s):
And because the screw threads have quite a bit more surface area that increases the surface area between the soil and the ground anchor

0 (1h 10m 54s):
And Kirby thought a big screw like that could be great for anchoring all kinds of things,

5 (1h 10m 59s):
Shade or rain structures, you know, a big, a big tarp over an outdoor kitchen. When you're camping artists at art festivals, their booths, with all of their

0 (1h 11m 9s):
Art. Anyway, Kirby started experimenting with prototypes and looking for a company to make the screw. And while he's doing all this, he has this huge earth shattering epiphany.

5 (1h 11m 19s):
The internet is amazing.

0 (1h 11m 21s):
Kirby was able to locate the perfect recycled plastic to make the screws. And then Kirby did a Kickstarter campaign. About three years ago, he raised $45,000 and boom, his product was launched.

5 (1h 11m 34s):
The crazy thing that kept happening over and over again is we would get a phone call or an email that says I'm going camping on Friday. I have to have these for the weekend. And so I, I don't know how we went from this product that never existed to something that people have to have for the weekend. And they're upset if they're not gonna be able to get

0 (1h 11m 53s):
It. Okay. Great story so far. Right. But then one morning, about a year ago, Kirby gets an

5 (1h 11m 60s):
Email, you know, an angry email and it said, I ordered your screws from this promotion you did on Facebook. And I haven't gotten anything yet. And I thought, I don't even know what this is. We, we're not running a promotion on

0 (1h 12m 13s):
Facebook. And you probably know where this is headed. Scammers were starting to get into Kirby's business. They were copying his photos and design and advertising cheap knockoffs and way undercut his prices.

5 (1h 12m 25s):
So as soon as we would report one of these for trademark violations as how we would take them down, one would disappear and then two more would pop up.

0 (1h 12m 35s):
So Kirby actually did something kind of unusual. He sent his own product for free to anyone who had made the mistake of buying a cheap knockoff. Meanwhile, some of his loyal customers kept reporting the knockoff sites and leading comments, warning new customers about the scam. We

5 (1h 12m 52s):
Created this kind of international police force, probably of 50 or 60 people that would email us every day and say, here's another one. And the whole thing just started dying down.

0 (1h 13m 4s):
The scammers eventually went away and Kirby has now spent about a year running his company full time with his wife. Oh, and the same year his company launched 2015. His daughter Isla was born

5 (1h 13m 16s):
For a long time. My wife and I referred to them as twins. And they both had their frustrations and were really proud how both of them were growing up.

0 (1h 13m 26s):
That's Kirby or daily. His product is called orange screw it's colored, bright orange. And last year he says it made just under $1 million to hear more about the company or to hear previous episodes, head to our podcast page, how I built this.npr.org. And of course, if you wanna tell us your story, go to build.npr.org. And thanks so much for listening to the show this week, you can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts and why you are there. Please do give us review. You can also write to us at I bt@npr.org. And if you wanna send a tweet, it's at how I built this. Our show was produced this week by Rachel Faulkner with music composed by Rameen ooey.

0 (1h 14m 6s):
Thanks also to Julia Carney, sons mesh Conor Niva grant and Jeff Rogers. David job is our intern I'm guy Raz, and you've been listening to how I built this.