0 (2s):
Any filmmaker that's in the screening of their films, not watching the film, they're watching the audience.

1 (8s):
Yeah. So

0 (10s):
You're watching the backs of heads have become really good at wa watching the backs of heads. Like I can tell what you're feeling by your neck at this

1 (16s):
Point. And for the first time being in the back of a theater, watching, you

0 (21s):
Know, just the side view of the light of the screen hit people's faces as they smile, as they nod, as they cry, whatever

1 (29s):
That feeling, just, you know, it was my first

0 (32s):
Hit and I was addicted and I've been addicted ever since

2 (42s):
From NPR. Yes. How I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements built I'm guy Roz and on the show today, how Ava DuVernay took her skills as a publicist writer, director, and entrepreneur, and built a movement that's changing how movies are made and who gets to make them when it comes to thinking about who is an entrepreneur, we often overlook people who get their start in the creative arts. I mean, think about Walt Disney before he built what would become one of the biggest media companies in history.

2 (1m 27s):
He created the most iconic cartoon character in history, but for his time he was pretty unusual. Artists usually make their money by selling their art, their acting skills, their paintings, their music, their novels, but over the past decade, more and more creative types have started to take more control over how their work is used and in some cases to own and distribute and market their own work. This is how Ava DuVernay has constructed her entire career. She's not only one of the most entrepreneurial creators in Hollywood, but increasingly one of the most influential.

2 (2m 8s):
Now you might think of Ava as a director, her documentary 13th about mass incarceration in the United States was nominated for an academy award and her drama. When they see us based on an assault in central park and the wrongful conviction of black and Latino teenagers made a huge impact when it was released in 2019, Ava's directed big budget films like a wrinkle in time and historical dramas like Selma. But her directing business is only one part of a much bigger enterprise, even a movement that Eva Dubin EI has built from the ground up. She began her career as a publicist and at age 27 started her own publicity agency.

2 (2m 52s):
She self-financed her first films. And because she had a background in marketing and knew how to network, she was able to build her own distribution company today. Ava oversees a campus just outside downtown LA. That encompasses much of her work. Array is a production company, a distributor of films, a nonprofit education center, a community event space, and a resource center to help people of color get into the film industry. Eva fell in love with the arts at an early age. For the first years of her life. She grew up in Compton, California, and then moved to the nearby neighborhood of Linwood.

2 (3m 32s):
And one of the most important people in her life was her aunt Denise.

1 (3m 38s):
She was a frustrated artist who loved music

0 (3m 45s):
And fine art and movies. And didn't grow up in a time or in an environment that encouraged or celebrated that those interests in her. So she became a nurse following in her mother's footsteps, but always fostered her love of art as a, just a lover of it, to stay a fan and really exposed me to all kinds of things that I would not have. I don't believe I would have come across if, if it hadn't been for her.

2 (4m 22s):
And it sounds like, well, we'll talk about this later, but sounds like you particularly had a strong bond with her.

0 (4m 32s):
Yeah. I mean, she was there, there were three of them who raised us. It was my mother, her mother, my grandmother and her sister, my aunt, you know, we're just a big, big part of our lives. And my two sisters came right after me. So this is a lot of ladies, a lot of that energy. And I would go to my aunt's after school. And I just spent a lot of time with her. So, you know, it was as close to her as I was to my mother, but they had very different interests. My mother's interests were, you know, my education and the clothes on my back and the food on my plate and just trying to keep it all going. And my aunt who was single, her interests were art and fun.

0 (5m 13s):
And, you know, kind of the things that my mother was so busy and focused on taking care of us, didn't really have, have the space, the mental space for. And so they made a good team.

2 (5m 29s):
I guess when you were a little girl, maybe, maybe eight or nine years old, a man named Marie MEI came into your life, your mom married him and he would become a hugely important influence on you as a, as a kid. And then as a grownup, right? Yeah, my dad, she, I

0 (5m 49s):
Remember the first day that he came to pick her up for a date and opened the door. I don't think I've ever told this story. I opened the door and he was just so handsome. And he had on a starched white shirt putting up and slacks and like a belt and shiny shoes. And I just really liked him from there. He was so such a gentleman and so kind to me and continued that to be that, to me all my life, all of his life, the rest for the rest of his life. So yeah, he had a big effect

2 (6m 23s):
On me. He was an entrepreneur. He had his own business. Right? Yeah.

0 (6m 26s):
I love you calling him an entrepreneur because I think that we don't use that word for people who are not, you know, creating companies that are fancy, so to speak, but he owned his own business at carpet, a small carpet and flooring company. And, and yeah, he had about, I don't know, six or seven men, men who worked with him, but he would, you know, get down on his hands and knees and put in carpet and flooring for residences and commercial spaces in Los

2 (6m 55s):
Angeles. When you were a teenager and people would meet you and they would say, oh, Ava, she's going to be this or that. What, what would people say about you? They would say, oh, she's going to be the president or what, what would he remember people saying,

0 (7m 11s):
I always got that. I was, you know, bright that I was smart. The things that every kid should hear, right. Just that, you know, I had potential and I could be anything that I wanted to be at the time for many, many years when I was young, when people would ask that horrible question that you asked children, which I don't think children should be asked, what do you want to be when you grow up? I'd say a lawyer. And I would always hear, you know, positive reinforcement. Oh, I can see that for you or that's perfect. Are you going to be that? I remember my godmother, Charlene gave me a briefcase for my eighth grade graduation. And I thought, right, this is these.

0 (7m 52s):
These are the tools that I need to go into the courtroom. And I am truly a few short steps from the courtroom. This will not take long. I am that smart. And I will use this briefcase and I will go to the Supreme court and do whatever I need to do. Was there anything

2 (8m 8s):
In your childhood or teenage years that would in any way you could look at and say, yeah, that I was going to be a filmmaker?

0 (8m 18s):
No. Other than loving movies,

2 (8m 21s):
What movies did you love as a

0 (8m 22s):
Kid? Anything that they played at the Lakewood mall? That's the only place that I went to see movies with my aunt, Denise, who would take me after school, to the Lakewood mall. I should go there and see a movie one day that would probably bring back such emotional, some, so much emotion, but yeah, anything. So this is, this is the late seventies, early eighties.

2 (8m 45s):
Yeah. So everything from, I dunno, like ITI to action movies, to just whatever was playing.

0 (8m 54s):
Yeah. All that kind of stuff. Very few black people I remember. Yeah. But just a bunch of studio stuff with different views of white life. And, and I, I really enjoyed it. And then as I got into, I mean, I enjoyed movies. And so as I got into high school, I remember, you know, loving the John Hughes stuff and wondering if there was any black people at the school. Yeah. I remember seeing the, a film that I really liked. I think it was 16 candles. I remember I saw the one Asian character. I really thought, oh, that's not nice. I remember thinking that everyone was laughing. And I remember thinking that that's not nice.

0 (9m 37s):
And, but just generally consuming the movies as, as a young person would. And at some point in their being aware that I wasn't seeing, you know, films with black folk in it. What was the first

2 (9m 52s):
Film you saw where you saw black characters and actors on screen that you were very conscious of? It? The

0 (10m 1s):
First one I saw that where I saw people of color on screen that was very formative for me was west side story coming to find out years later, half of them were not brown,

1 (10m 13s):
But you couldn't tell me that Bernardo

0 (10m 15s):
Was not straight from Puerto Rico at the time. I think it was that his, that film was such a big deal for me that it, it was, it was a while to shake off and realize that it was the magic of movies had made me see what I was seeing and feel what I was feeling. But that was the first film where I saw people like the folks in my neighborhood, because I went to school with a lot of Latino and Filipino people. And so I remember loving the colors and the culture, oddly, the first film with black people I can remember seeing. And really, and I th I know it's not the case. I know I've seen other ones, but for whatever reason, the, the one that I really remember feeling deeply was not until I got to college, which was a mope, inner blues spike Lee's bullpen posts.

0 (11m 6s):
I know I'd seen the other films before then, and I'd seen all kinds of other films, lady sing the blues, other things, but the one that really had an effect was smoke better. Blues.

2 (11m 18s):
You went to UCLA and you majored in African-American studies and English. And you were, you, you wrote for the, for the black student newspaper there. W what did you make of UCLA? You were there in the early nineties. Did you like it?

0 (11m 33s):
I loved it. I had a beautiful experience there learned a lot was involved with the black student union, you know, learned about the power of protest, learned about communities of color in Los Angeles that I hadn't been engaged with because I, you know, I think people who aren't from it, like think it's all together, but it's really a sprawl. So if you're from Compton long beach Lynwood, you really have no reason to be in LA proper, unless I had no reason to be in LA. So I really wasn't familiar with LA proper until I got to college. And it's like 40 minutes up the coast, but it felt like a different world.

0 (12m 14s):
And so, yeah, just, just had a dorm experience live in the dorms for the first couple of years, you know, worked my little job as a waitress, came home with my tips going through, you know, to the games. Like it was a very normal college experience, except for the fact that there was a huge, huge racial unrest happening in the city at that time. So feeling, you know, being a college student and becoming conscious of my history and the historical context of the times that we were in really had a big effect on me.

2 (12m 49s):
You were there, you were a student at UCLA when the footage of Rodney Rodney king beating came out and then also the acquittal of those police officers and the aftermath of that. Do you remember that, that time? Do you remember, what do you remember about that time when you were a student?

0 (13m 9s):
I remember being enraged. I remember that, you know, the Rodney king assault was one in a steady litany of assaults on the black community at that time. And so it was just a very oppressive LAPD presence in black communities and in spaces where black people convened all around the city that was deeply felt and, you know, became quite combustible when really the first video footage of a police assault that reached national prominence was still not enough to result in any kind of punishment for the officers who, who weren't.

2 (13m 55s):
Do you remember when you were a teenager? Would you just see police cars driving around your neighborhood? Do you remember seeing police presence all the time?

0 (14m 6s):
Yeah. All the time.

2 (14m 8s):
And it just, it was just part of the background. It was just, that was just there all the time. Yeah.

0 (14m 15s):
It's interesting even to get the question, cause I'm, it makes me think, you know, at, at my age, oh, right. That's not normal for people who don't live in those communities, but yeah. Police are everywhere and they're overhead as well. We call it the ghetto bird. It's a helicopter helicopter that flies low across black and brown communities, you know, in Los Angeles, especially, it was one of the tactics of the LAPD.

2 (14m 41s):
I guess when you were in college, you started to get into performing, like performing in a, in, in a hip-hop troop or duo. How did called figures of speech? How did that, how did that happen?

0 (14m 55s):
It was down in, in the Leimert park area, this glorious black arts district in Los Angeles, and, you know, became a part of the arts and culture space. There just, you know, a young person who was very attracted to hip hop and all the disciplines within hip hop, by the way, what were you listening to? Anything that was late eighties, early nineties. So I think from tribe called quest to public enemy, to Pharcyde, freestyle fellowship, all kinds, everything that was at that time. Yeah.

2 (15m 28s):
How did you start to perform yourself?

0 (15m 32s):
I was going to this open mic night, just enjoying it. This was the place to be as a place called the good life. It was a health food store that on Thursday nights would put a open, a mic and people would perform, and it was all hip hop, all rhyming, you'd come with your tape. You'd press play on your tape. And you would have like two minutes to rhyme and impress the crowd. And so on Thursday nights you would listen to, you know, a colorful cast of local emcees who, you know, were known in the neighborhood and eagerly anticipated what they were going to do and have fans and didn't have record deals, but we're like stars to us.

2 (16m 19s):
I wouldn't have probably known it at the time. But did it feel like, did it feel like you were parked? I don't know. You were part of something special. Yeah,

0 (16m 26s):
No. You definitely knew it at the time that you were in something that was very special, especially if you were able to be inside of it, know the artists and then eventually to become an artist there. The first time that I did anything as it related to actually being a maker of art, not a con, a consumer or a fan of art, which is a big part of the art practice is people to consume it. So I, I, I value that and that's what my aunt Denise was. You know, art that sits in a room by itself can only go so far. You need the appreciator. And so my aunt was that I was that for a long time, until I was encouraged to pick up the mic and really enjoyed it.

0 (17m 7s):
And so did that for a little while. Were you nervous

2 (17m 9s):
About performing in front of other people?

0 (17m 12s):
Yeah, I think, I think it's the rare artists too, you know, doesn't have nerves about the presentation of work. And so, yeah, definitely very nervous to get up there. I

2 (17m 22s):
Read that when you graduated, you wanted to become a journalist and at some point you actually went to, to CBS to pursue this career path. And I guess this was what, like the mid 1990s, what, what were you assigned to do?

0 (17m 35s):
Yes, my senior year in college, I got an internship with CBS evening news with Dan rather, and Connie Chung based in LA at the LA bureau. And this was right at the time of the OJ Simpson trial. And I was an intern at the very prestigious paid internship that I was very excited about.

2 (17m 60s):
I mean, CBS big deal. That was like the height as a big deal,

0 (18m 4s):
Huge deal. So that's the kind of thing you needed to move on and in space and did it, and was assigned a juror on the first day. I remember going over,

2 (18m 15s):
You were assigned to what, to follow a juror on the OJ Simpson trial,

0 (18m 19s):
All of them cause they were sequestered, but I had to sit outside of their house, obviously

2 (18m 24s):
That, that was I guess, a way to get breaking news. And what did that feel? Awkward. Weird. Yeah.

0 (18m 30s):
So I was basically outside of this, I think it was a lady I can't remember. And I basically just sat outside her house, you know, and saw what was coming and going and like made notes. And, and I remember hating it and feeling like this is stupid and wrong and I don't want to be doing this. And, and it really soured my appetite for news. So that was my last job and news.

2 (19m 0s):
So when you really kind of began your career, then at this point, I mean you're a young woman graduate, you went into, into film publicity. How did, how did you, how did you get into that? Cause I was

0 (19m 16s):
Really interested in media is still from the, the news days and had heard that publicists shaped the news they, they are involved with with media outlets. So I was really interested in the media at that time. And so I went and I worked at a small studio for a while. About a year, I was an assistant on a, on a publicist desk and then went to an agency and worked in agency life where I was juggling multiple projects. And this was all in the film and television.

2 (19m 54s):
And how did you like it? Was it everything that you had imagined and more? Was it exciting? Were you, did you feel like you were shaping stories? Yeah. Yes.

0 (20m 3s):
I love publicity to this day. If I was not a filmmaker filmmaker, I would be a publicist. I think about it as in terms of offering stories and presenting stories and, you know, understanding the power of publicity and that, you know, helped me understand that, you know, everyone has a story, you just have to present it correctly. And, and that's giving me a lot of confidence in my own storytelling as a filmmaker. Whereas I'll talk to filmmakers who will sometimes be driven by, oh, is this sellable? Can I market this? I never think that way, because I know you can sell and market anything if you know how to do it, which I do.

0 (20m 47s):
So, yeah, I, I loved it and I still do. And I'm so happy that I had that tool set. That was my time as a publicist was really my film school in so many ways. Yeah.

2 (20m 58s):
I guess you worked for a few different agencies for a couple of years. And then when you were like, like 27, you started your own agency. And the story I read was that your dad, Marie, was the one who encouraged you to do that. Like, he kind of led you to realize that, that you, you, you weren't getting paid enough. Is that, is that how you ended up starting your own business?

0 (21m 22s):
Yeah. Yeah. That was one of the steps in it. I talked with him about, you know, some of the, the projects that were coming into the agency that I was where I was at the time that were coming to the agency because there was a young black publicists working there and they were, you know, black films or films that were youth oriented that were coming into the agency or I was being used.

2 (21m 45s):
And you were bringing those in, yeah,

0 (21m 46s):
I was bringing some in or I was being, I was a centerpiece of the pitch of the agency. Like this will be your day to day and look at her and she can do this. And I get in the meeting and I do my thing and we'd get the business, you know? So yeah, it was a conversation with my father who just got me thinking about the numbers. Cause I was like, oh, I'm getting a nice salary. And he said, yeah, but, and he never said it. I mean, he was just such an elegant soft-spoken lovely man. Like I would have said cut to Avis version. I would have said, okay, dummy, what are you doing? Look at the money you're bringing in. But he just kind of walk me through it is so how much are the retainers? Like how much do they pay?

0 (22m 27s):
And I said, oh my gosh, it's like $10,000 a month. He was like, wow. So you S you've brought in, you've brought in six clients that are at $10,000 a month. And I said, yeah, he's like, so that's $60,000 a month. And I said, yeah. And he said, how much do you get paid here? I was like, oh, ouch. So $720,000, not even $60,000. How about that? So, so yeah, it was, that was an opener. And there was a woman who is still working today by the name of Jackie Roseanne black woman who had one of the few black owned entertainment PR firms at the time Jackie was handled films out of the east coast.

0 (23m 16s):
It was another woman named Marcy Devo who had out small practice with two people. She did television in Los Angeles. And so there were these two women who I think it's important to say their names. I saw doing it. And after my father had put that in my head, I, I looked for those examples and got to know them. And it was really Jackie <inaudible>, who was very kind. I remember she gave me copies of her letters of agreements early on with clients. She told me, you know, how to set rates and how to do some of that stuff really early on. And even early in my, my own agency days, we would share films.

0 (23m 57s):
She would do the east and I would do the west. She was very generous in that way. And so, yeah, I eventually started to do film and television and home entertainment, corporate crisis event, unit, publicity strata strategy got into marketing promotions. And eventually by the time I closed, my agency had run campaigns for every major studio in Hollywood.

2 (24m 23s):
I mean, as you kind of went on your own, one of the things that I'm always curious about is how people get customers and in the early days, did you have to go out and, and kind of pitch yourself or, or were things kind of coming in through word of mouth? Yeah.

0 (24m 40s):
You know, some of that idea of, you know, this is a young black woman and I worked on, you know, black stuff and lady stuff, anything to do with women. Yeah. Anything to do with youth animation. And so that's basically how I started and that business was coming in really nicely. And so, and yeah, we would pitch, we would pitch stuff, send out proposals, rarely cold. You know, I had those contexts, but, but yeah, it was a constantly, you know, that business is constantly trying to make sure you have enough business and that you're servicing those clients. So they'll come back again. And

2 (25m 18s):
Were you, I mean, were you like also managing, like press junkets for, for stars, you know, when they would call you, so you would be the person with them at times while they would, you know, do the five minute TV interview after interview, after interview. Yep.

0 (25m 32s):
That's my job. I do red carpets. That's why, whenever I walk on a red carpet, now I have so much respect for the people who hard work is very hard work. A red carpet, most people who are notable, who are asked to go on a red carpet, they walk out there thinking I'm a star like this is, or this is my moment. Or I have to do this red carpet. You know, my gosh, I don't want to do it or whatever. And people are yelling your name and you're doing the whole thing. But you got to think back to two weeks before when that red carpet was constructed, immediate alert was written.

0 (26m 12s):
It was sent out everyone that's on that carpet yelling, your name was booked. Confirmed. Directions had to be sent to them. They arrived. They had to be put in their places. Oftentimes they will fight over their place. I want to stand here. No, I'm here. The publicist, they're trying to wrangle that, you know, the, the red carpet company that has to come and put down the red carpet, put up the stanchions, put up the lights. There's a whole industry around this, the hair and makeup and the hotels that participate. And I mean, it's, it's a machine and it's a, you know, it's a machine that's around the business of making it selling books.

0 (26m 54s):
And that's what, what I did,

2 (26m 56s):
I, I've always felt like a publicist has to have the same level of patience as like I'm a realtor or even a talent agent in that they are sir servicing clients who can sometimes be really difficult, right? Like if you're a realtor, your client might blame you. If the house doesn't sell for what they want, or if you're a publicist, the client might blame you. If they don't get as much publicity as they think they, they should get. Did you, w w how would you handle that? That kind of, I don't know, are you just super patient?

0 (27m 32s):
No, I'm not patient at all. I, I didn't do that kind of publicity. So, in, in your, in your example, like a real estate agent, that's so true. The real estate agent has to be the patient one because they're interfacing with the client. I would be considered the broker. My, I was the publicist for the film, not the individual people. So I didn't have to deal with how you got your hair done and why you didn't like your sandwich. This person was mean to you. And you don't like that question. Right? So my clients were studios and networks, not individual people. And that was by design because I'm not patient. I'm not going to tell you everything's okay.

0 (28m 13s):
If it's not, I'm not going to sit there and listen to your sad story. When your sad story is you don't like your sandwich. You know what I'm saying? I would be the one that would be able to just have the straight talk with the client. You know, how would I liken it to guy? I was your grandmother. I'm not your mom. Okay. I don't have to go home with you and be with you forever. You come over grandma's house. You have a nice time. She sends you home after a certain period of time. That's what I was, I was with you for the period of this film. And when the film is over, you go somewhere else. So it allowed me to be transparent, to be able to say what I meant and what we needed and just to talk straight.

0 (28m 53s):
And I found that, that, that really helped me as a director.

2 (28m 59s):
When did you, I mean, as cause I know you, I mean, you worked with Clint Eastwood and bill Condon and a bunch of really well-known directors. And, and I read that you were brought on to work to publicity for the film collateral, the Michael Mann film, which was kind of a turning point for you and how you started thinking about what you wanted to do. Is that, is that right?

0 (29m 22s):
Yeah. That was a big deal for me to be on the set of collateral. First of all, it was just so cool. The concept of the film, but also to set very hot actors at the time, Tom cruise, Jada Pinkett, Jamie Foxx, a young Javier Bardem. And it was just an exhilarating project to work on. But yeah, something happened on this, that set. I, I see a couple things. First of all, he was using these digital cameras and it was the first time I'd ever seen a film shot on a digital camera. He was one of the first to use these digital cameras called Vipers, which could shoot through the night. You could see the depth of the night.

0 (30m 3s):
It would capture distance in the night, which is why that film looks so Milky and gorgeous. And then also he was shooting in a part of town that I knew very well. East LA shot a lot in east LA with brown people and black people. And the story had black people in it and brown people. And I thought, wow, he's shooting kind of like in the hoods that I know. And I just began watching him and thinking, oh, I, I want to do that. I'd been on many sets before and it never really hit me. Like I want to do that. I'd been on sets before where I thought I could do that. I could do what he's doing. You know? I mean, everyone's on a set watches.

0 (30m 44s):
Now. I know people think that now because they're watching me on a set and they'd be like, I can do, I can totally do that. But I wasn't until I was on that set where I thought, oh, I want to do that. I want to use those cameras. I want to tell a story like this with actors like this. And so that really catalyzed the idea of, of trying to make some films.

2 (31m 7s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Eva made her first 12 minute movie and how a chance meeting on an airplane would change the trajectory of her career. Stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR support for how I built this and the following message come from Culturelle, who wants you to know that an estimated 45 million Americans may have IBS according to the international foundation for gastrointestinal disorders, cultural IBS, complete support is a medical food for the dietary management of IBS.

2 (31m 54s):
It's designed to relieve symptoms like abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhea, and constipation in a safe well tolerated. Once daily dose save 20% with promo code radio@cultural.com. This message comes from NPR sponsor, GoDaddy, making a different future starts with you. That's why GoDaddy does more than help. You find a name you can create, sell, and get found online. So any small business can be a driving force to create change, or build an empire. So whatever it is you have in mind that will help make a different future, find everything you need to get started@godaddy.com because the future isn't decided yet it's up to us to make it happen.

2 (32m 42s):
Start different@godaddy.com.

3 (32m 46s):
Support for NPR comes from Intercom presenting this message customer support doesn't have to be chaotic intercoms tools, make it easy for businesses to offer a world-class customer support at any scale intercoms resolution bot, lower support ticket volume by 33%. This leaves reps free to resolve more tickets and handle issues. Only a human can self serve support lightens the load by answering frequent questions automatically for faster first response and resolution times learn more at intercom.com/support.

1 (33m 27s):
What happens after a police officer shoots someone who's unarmed for decades in California, internal affairs investigations, how the police police themselves or secret until now listen to on our, watch a podcast from NPR and KQV

2 (33m 54s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy, Raj. So by 2005, April two of her day is running her own successful business. As a publicist in Hollywood. She's also watching a lot of other people make movies, and she started to think, you know, I want to do this as well.

0 (34m 13s):
It was my proximity to it that made it feel maybe this is possible to tinker with because I'd been on sets. And so I knew that real people made movies that they did not, you know, appear right. Also, I think the big piece of the puzzle is, and this is a big piece of it. I don't think I've ever articulated, but I've, I've thought about for myself. I had no dreams

1 (34m 43s):
Of the outcome

0 (34m 46s):
Other than making a movie like that was it. Wasn't let me make a movie to get famous, to get an academy award, to be rich, to be famous, right. That was not in my head. And the reason why it wasn't in my head is because there was nobody doing that, right? Like there was, I won't say nobody, but there was nobody that looked like me. Like there were very few black women making films at the time. There were a couple I knew by name and I'd seen that they'd made a film, but no one had gone on to great fame and acclaim and all of the things. So I think one of the core pieces of the journey was it started from such a pure place of just wanting to make a movie and to tell a story.

0 (35m 32s):
It was all about that. And it wasn't about the outcome or the things that would come after. I think now these days, it takes a lot more because you can see why we're out there. There's, there's a good number, nice number of us. You see, I want to be like Shonda or ISA and what did they do and how can I get to that level and do those things? I didn't have that. So I'd have to think about it.

2 (35m 58s):
I remember when I was 21 and I, I was an intern at NPR. I'd never been done any radio in my life. I didn't know anything about it. I just like listening. And, and the way I learned how to do it was like by cutting reel to reel with a razor blade, you know, and, and doing it really badly. And, and over time I learned how to do that. Right. The technical side. How did you start to learn the technical side of making movies? Well, that's,

0 (36m 28s):
That's a good question. You know, for me, early on, I had to embrace what I did know how to do and not be intimidated by what I didn't know how to do. And I had been around enough filmmakers as a publicist to see that not all filmmakers were technically proficient, that the core of what made a great filmmaker was, did you know the story not, did you know, the lens? Did you know, you know, the technical aspects, but there are a lot of filmmakers out there who are story and performance focused and less technically focused.

0 (37m 17s):
I thought the most important thing is the story. And all these people around me are supposed to know that stuff. So if I can write the story, then I will be the leader of the story because it came out of my mind and no one will know more about it than I will. And from there, I made sure that I surrounded myself with people who did know their hubs. And one of the things that I learned from running my own business was to never be shy about saying, I don't know. And that, that, especially for women and for women of color black women, you know, to feel like you won't be taken seriously, if you don't know everything, you know, to feel like you cannot ask a question, were all things that I had to combat.

0 (38m 3s):
But the reason why I felt entitled to do it is because I saw why white men doing, let's say white guys all the time. Don't know what the hell they're doing, but you know what? They do have confidence. They're going to get out there and say, I want to figure it out. And I'm sure I'm sure I'll be okay. Sure. I can figure this out. And so, especially when you're an independent filmmaker, you really putting together small crew crews of people who will work for whatever money you can give them. And so there's a lot more grace there because everyone's kind of learning together. So that's what I did in the early years,

2 (38m 40s):
Made your first film. I think it was for short film, Saturday night life in 2005. And it's 12 minutes. I haven't seen it. I I've been looking for it. It's hard to find.

0 (38m 57s):
I have my ways to make things disappear.

2 (39m 1s):
Well, well, let's talk about it then just for a moment. Tell me what the, from what I understand the story was about when you were a little girl, your mom would dress you up and, and in listen to people, compliment you and, and your sisters. Is that, what, what was the film about

0 (39m 18s):
The film was about? Yeah. I told my mom, I wanted to make a short film and try to make something I had been taking kind of a, these extension classes at UCLA film extension classes, where you would, you know, weekend courses on two days to talk about how to make a short film, that kind of thing. And so decided I was going to make a short film and I was asking my mom, I need to figure out a little story to tell. And she reminded me about this, which is basically that she, when she, before she met my dad, when we were little, that she was really, really struggling as a single mom, struggling with money, struggling with her confidence, everything, the way that she would cheer herself up was she would dress us up, grease us down.

0 (40m 11s):
Now the greasing down is important. So our skin shine so Vaseline on their little brown faces and arms and chubby legs put us in our patent leather shoes, our matching dresses. Cause it was me and my two sisters. So there were three of us do our hair, take us in the car on hardly any gas to the alpha beta, which was the grocery store. And we would go there and she would dress us all up just to get a cup of noodles or a bag of chips or whatever she could afford. And she would do that. It makes me emotional just to say she would do that because she knew that her girls were so beautiful that someone would say, look at those girls.

0 (40m 55s):
They're so pretty. You're doing a good job and she'd buy her pack a gum or a bottle of soda or whatever it was. We'd get in the car, we'd split it and we'd drive home, get them, get ready for bed and just go to school the next day. But that was something that she did because she could get someone to say, you're okay, you're doing it. And to see her. So that's the short, it was a, a single mom who woke up and was having a hard time. She dressed up the girls who took him to the store and it was the things that were said to in the store.

0 (41m 35s):
And then she drove them home. And I had had no idea what I was doing. All I knew is I knew how to hustle up, getting a grocery store. We got a store to let us shoot in there. And I think I made the whole thing on like, I don't know, five grand or something,

2 (41m 55s):
But I made it. And you were not pitching this to the grocery store as a student film. Right. You were just saying, I'm making a film or do you remember how?

0 (42m 3s):
And I was a grown woman with a PR firm, right? Yeah. I went and I made it in, had no clue how to edit it together. Had I remember I showed a friend I've thought about this since it probably happened. I showed a friend of mine who made independent films. Hey, come see my, my cut at the smell. She was like, okay. So she watched it. I haven't thought about this. And she said, this is really good. This is real. I think this is interesting. I think you're on your way to something like all the things I say to people now, when clearly it's not good enough. You know what? You're on your way to something. She said, you know what you might want to do. And I was like, what? She's like, you might want to put some music in here.

0 (42m 45s):
I said music. She was like, yeah. You know how you go to the movies and there's you hear music? And I was like, oh yeah, music, music. Yes. Music. I had shown this woman, the cut with no music, not a lick of a queue, not a piano string, nothing was in it. That's how little I know about how to put a movie together.

2 (43m 10s):
And did you do anything with the film? Did you try to, I mean, you, you were publicist, so you had that experience. Did you try to screen it and get it out into the world in any way?

0 (43m 23s):
There was no market for shorts, you know, which is just further evidence of, I didn't really care about the outcome. I remember my big goal was, oh, it would be great. If I can get this into a festival and someone was telling, someone said, oh, people don't really care about shorts at the big film festivals, you got to go to a shorts festival. And the biggest shorts festival, there were like three big festivals at the time in the world. One of them was in the United States. So Palm Springs, short film festival really considered one of the top festivals at the time. So it's like old Palm Springs. That, that that's possible. So I submitted it to Palm Springs.

0 (44m 3s):
And I remember the day I got the letter, I was in my office and I got this letter that the film was accepted. And literally I did not feel that same joy, even when I got the academy award nomination, like nothing has since felt as you for work. And like breaking me wide open as the Palm Springs, short film festival acceptance. I thought, oh my God, isn't this America. And the first time seeing the film with an audience is in a shorts block.

0 (44m 45s):
So it's like six other films. And I think my film was fourth or something. I remember it was coming up. I was so nervous. And to, for the first time being in the back of a theater, I mean, any filmmaker that's in a screening of their films, not watching the film, they're watching the audience. Yeah. So you're watching the backs of heads have become really good at watching the backs of heads. Like I can tell what you're feeling by your neck at this point. And I'm watching, you know, just the side view of the light of the screen hit people's faces as they smile, as they nod, as they cry, whatever that feeling, just, you know, it was my first hit and I was addicted. And I've been addicted ever since

2 (45m 28s):
When you made that film. Right? So now you have a real film, like with real cameras that you used and real equipment and with a real cast was just 12 minutes, but it was a movie. It was a movie that you made. You were still also an entrepreneur. You had a business, you were running a publicity business. And did you think to yourself, I think this is where I'm headed. I think this is where I'm going into this direction. Or did you still think it was just something that you really enjoyed? And it was a passion

0 (46m 9s):
I've really enjoyed it. It was a passion. And the reason why is because there was no precedent for sustainable livelihood as a black woman filmmaker, as recently as 2012, I'm seriously telling you this is not humility or me saying, golly, gee. So I never saw it. Like literally I could look at no one to say she is making a full living and supporting her family alone on making movies. As recently as 2012, like there was a woman named Gina prince Brightwood who, you know, was formative in that I knew her personally newer was around her at work while I was a publicist on a couple of things.

0 (46m 58s):
And she was actually, she and her husband were pretty instrumental in encouraging me in my script writing early on. I was, they were my clients, but there were two of them and they were black filmmakers. And she had made a great film called love and basketball. And they were out pitching their things and making work, but yet, and still, you know, they were many years in between the films that they were making. And she was the only one I knew like one person. So for me, what I could see was a woman named Lynn Shelton, a white woman out of Seattle, who was a filmmaker who made very tiny films that were so good. And she was somehow made a film almost every year.

0 (47m 41s):
And I thought, oh, maybe I can be like Lynn Shelton and make like a little film every year that goes to festivals. Like she gets to travel with her film. There's like a review in the paper. Like, it's nice. I want it to be like her still thinking, I will have to have a job. I'll have to have a job. That was the

4 (47m 60s):
Extent of it. Hmm. You, you

2 (48m 2s):
Went on to make a documentary about the good life cafe w where you had performed back in college. And then I guess, right after that, you, you start to work on an entirely different kind of film, a narrative, which was based on your experience of taking care of your aunt Antony's, who was, had been sick with, with cancer a few years earlier, right? Yeah.

0 (48m 27s):
Yeah. She had had a recurrence of her breast cancer. It was like a stage two the first time she had a surgery and then it came back six years later, which was the cruel part, you know, the sale period, five years, you're out of the woods. And then like in a six year, came back at stage four. And I remember, cause we moved into a house together after she got diagnosed. I gave up my apartment. I moved her out of her apartment and we moved to an apartment near the beach in an area that she always wanted to live in, in long beach. Because at that point she was, you know, basically given a death sentence, a certain amount of time to live.

0 (49m 9s):
And so I went to make sure that she was in a place that she found beautiful and enjoyed.

2 (49m 15s):
And so the film basically tells that story of a, of a young woman dealing with the loss of her, her beloved aunt. And you named it after, I guess you named it for the U2 song I will follow. So what, what, tell me about that connection

0 (49m 32s):
Connection is that Denise, my aunt was a big U2 fan and really passed on that love of them to me. I remember, you know, she, one of the things about her is that she loved things that people in her family and in her community didn't necessarily have access to, to love. I won't say they didn't love it to sit in here. They didn't know it. I think they would have loved it if they would have had access to it and felt like it was something that they were exposed to, but she exposed herself to it. And somehow, you know, she loved rock and of course she loved all the quote unquote black music too, but she had a broader palette anyway, within that, she loved you too.

0 (50m 19s):
She took me to my first amnesty international concert, you know, crap seats. Cause she didn't have any money in a concert. I think it was the Colosseum and you two comes out and she said, listen to this song. It was like all white people. And like, this is very white environment. Okay. And I was not used to that, but she walked on up there, we're in there. And she said, listen to this song. It's about Martin Luther king

4 (50m 51s):
Pride. I was like, it's

0 (50m 53s):
About Martin Luther king. They're thinking about Martin Luther king. Like yeah, listen to it, listened to it. I get emotional. I could cry right now thinking about it. So Bano and the edge and Larry, they they're up there rocking out to pride. I'm trying to catch the lyrics. I'm trying it. And I start to hear the story and I started to put it together. And I was like, I think that's, I think, I think this is about, about Martin Luther king and that was it. Hook, line and sinker. Can't tell me nothing about you to love him. Love him, love him. So the title of the film, which is about my last year, living with my aunt Denise, before she passed is entitled.

0 (51m 39s):
I will follow, which is a famous U2

2 (51m 41s):
Song. And from what I understand, Ava, the, the film was self distributed. Right. And, and I'm, I'm curious about this idea because I think a lot of people who are not in the film industry don't quite understand how this works. So when you say you are self distributed, does that mean that you are literally sending it out, like sending out the films to theaters to screen? Like what does that entail? Yeah, I would

0 (52m 7s):
Liken it to someone who bakes a cake in their kitchen and then has to somehow get it on the shelf of the grocery store. Well, like you're a lady who makes cakes. Okay. But how do you get it in the Walmart? Yeah. So that's distribution. And so an independent film has a homemade cake and theaters are Walmart's big chains or Walmart's now it's gotta be much easier for that homemade baker to get their goods in a small local bakery,

2 (52m 37s):
A small independent theater.

0 (52m 39s):
Yeah. And so that's what we did. So we would go to them and we would talk about the film and try to get the film in these theaters. And there's a lot of segregation in those theaters. A lot of, it's another part of the puzzle of Hollywood. That's very close to people of color, particularly black people, because they're not owned by us. And you have to trust and hope that the person that you're pitching the story to sees the value in story. So if I'm pitching a story about a black woman who is dying of cancer and her niece, and they both love you too.

0 (53m 20s):
And they're just talking about life for death issues in the house, which is what I will follow us. If you don't think that you have an audience for that, if you're not sure how your audience will take to it, then you won't book it because you have seats to sell, right. It's a business. And so that distribution is we take this film and we somehow get it into the local bakery, into the bigger chains. And so that was what we did store by store cake by cake hand-to-hand. And so one of the things we tapped into was all the beautiful black film festivals around the country who had supported me as a filmmaker early on with the short films, early documentary.

0 (54m 3s):
I went to them and I said, look, you're the only person I know in Boston, Boston black film festival, urban world in New York. I don't know people out there, but I know you, would you help me get this film out? Would you help me present this film? And so start to put together a coalition of black film festivals that not only supported my work outside of their festival, because they had lists of film lovers, black film lovers. They had relationships with theaters where they showed their festivals. They had a marketing apparatus around their festivals. So I was able to convince those festivals to pull the trigger on their marketing apparatus when their festival was not in session and to split the profits of whatever I made at the box office with them.

0 (54m 51s):
And so that's how I created the African-American film festival releasing movement, which we called affirm.

2 (54m 57s):
All right. And basically affirm becomes like this sort of independent distribution company. I think it's like they're sending out indie films to theaters and festivals. And later of course, which we'll get to affirm becomes a array, which is what it's known for.

0 (55m 12s):
And that was covered on CNN and you know, New York times and this new way of distributing black film in a very kind of a grass rooted way. Eventually, you know, I'm not stopping knocking on doors. I'm eventually, you know, eventually got us into AMC theaters. Yeah. But yeah, you know, also it was really accepting and really thinking about where are the other spaces where we can show film, why can't I show film at the museum? They have a screen. Why can't I show film at the university? Why can't I show them film at the black women's sorority rotary club, whatever. So started to count those as screens,

2 (55m 49s):
That film, I will follow ended up getting some pretty great reviews. I mean, Roger eBird was basically telling everyone to go see it. I think he said it was one of the best films he'd seen about the death of a loved one. And then after that, you started working on your next film called middle of nowhere. And I want to ask you about, about funding for that. Because as, as I understand it, you were financing these films with your own money. Like, like for, I will follow you use the money you'd saved up for a down payment on a house. So when you started to work in the middle of nowhere, did you, did you also sell finance? Did you try to raise money?

0 (56m 25s):
Yeah. The second one I use profits from the first one, plus my landlord in my office building said, oh, I have some friends who might invest. And so he collected 20,000, 10,000, 50,000 from some, you know, people he knew that were doing pretty well. I mean, like not film people, just people who had an extra 20 grand to spare. And we put together like $250,000 and made middle of nowhere. That

2 (57m 1s):
Film, I think was also the first time you worked with David or yellow, how did you guys meet? How did you come together? Well, this

0 (57m 9s):
Is a very rare example of me getting a phone call from an actor saying, I've read the script. He called you. He called me out of the blue one day. I knew who he was as an actor, but he wasn't huge at that time. I mean, I knew he was, cause I know all the black actors, but he had been like, he had had a small part, one scene in Lincoln. Spielberg's Lincoln. You know, he played like the bad guy in planet of the apes. You know, he had had like small roles in good films. Yeah. He had been on a plane to do looping, which is additional dialogue recording ADR on planet of the apes. He was flying from LA to Toronto to do ADR is sitting next to a man.

0 (57m 56s):
So strange who says, oh my gosh, is this you? The man opens his laptop. And he's been watching on his laptop a show that David was in, in the UK called spooks spy show. And David's like, oh yeah, that's me. You know, thank you. Thank you. They get to talking. And the guy in about a half hour and says, can I ask you to ask for your advice onto something? That's come my way, this weird thing that's coming by. He's like, I have nothing to do with the entertainment industry. But I've been asked by my friend to invest in this independent film. Should I David's like, oh, bad idea, never invest.

0 (58m 37s):
Don't invest in a film. You know, who is it? And he said, yeah, it's by this woman, this black woman. I thought you might know her name. Ava DuVernay just a week before he had seen me on CNN talking about affirm, which was our distribution thing. He had said, I just saw her on CNN. He said, can I read the script? So the guy gives him the script. He reads the script on the rest of the flight. He gives it back to the guy afterwards. He says to the guy, we should go have dinner. The guy was like, this is an actor on a show that I was watching on my laptop. Yeah, let's go have dinner. They go have a steak dinner like

2 (59m 19s):
That night, like they get on the plane

0 (59m 21s):
Or the next night or something like that. Where in David convinced us this guy to invest in the film and then calls me when he lands at lax and says, hi, my name is David. And he said, you know, if there's any part for me in this, I would hope. And I asked you to consider me, wow. And I said, oh, this is really lovely. You've really boosted my confidence today. I just want to thank you because this is really lovely. I know by the time this gets to your agents, they're going to kill. They're going to say Nelson,

2 (59m 53s):
No way. Cause there's no money in it. Look

0 (59m 55s):
It, I'm going to give you a hug at the end. There's no check it's hugs. What are you talking about? But thank you. And he said, oh, I that's kind of you to say, but I just want you to realize one thing. If I say I'm going to do something, I'm going to do it. And you should know my agents work for me. I don't work for them. Wow. I was like, oh God. And sure enough cut to three months later, we're on the set. And his seatmate was an investor in the film. That's an amazing story. It is an amazing story, especially when you consider what happened next, which,

2 (1h 0m 24s):
Which we will get to in a moment after the break, we'll hear more from Ava about the path that led her to Sundance and eventually to making some of the most powerful films of the past decade, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Airbnb growing a business can be difficult, especially knowing where to start. You may be sitting inside an opportunity. Your home 4 million entrepreneurs have turned their homes into businesses on Airbnb.

2 (1h 1m 6s):
They're called hosts. You can host your extra space on Airbnb and then use earnings to travel, build Treehouse empires, or even start a podcast all made possible by hosting with resources and support from Airbnb to get started more about becoming a host at airbnb.com/host

3 (1h 1m 27s):
Support for NPR comes from Intercom presenting this message customer support doesn't have to be chaotic Intercom's tools, make it easy for businesses to offer a world-class customer support at any scale intercoms resolution bot lowers support ticket volume by 33%. This leaves reps free to resolve more tickets and handle issues. Only a human can self-serve support lightens the load by answering frequent questions automatically for faster first response and resolution times learn more at intercom.com/support. This message comes from NPR sponsor, each raid, a bald Eagle. Isn't bald, a shooting star.

3 (1h 2m 8s):
Isn't a star and each raid isn't just for trading. There's lots of ways to put your money to work with E-Trade from saving for retirement to starting to invest. And do they have a team of financial professionals to you support so you can be confident your money is working hard for you to get started today. Visit E-Trade dot com slash NPR for more information E-Trade securities, LLC members sit back.

2 (1h 2m 37s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Roz. So it's 2012 and Ava DuVernay has submitted her latest film, the one with David or yellow to the Sundance film festival. And by the way, it's not the first time she's submitted something to Sundance. She's done that several times before and been rejected every time. But this time with the film, middle of nowhere,

0 (1h 3m 2s):
I got in and got into the top category, dramatic competition and ended up winning you won best director. Wow.

2 (1h 3m 13s):
I think even up until that point, like you were running a publicity company and you were really good at it and you were really successful and, but winning best director at a film festival like that, that's working at the top of the, of, of your craft. Like, did you, what did you remember thinking when that happened?

0 (1h 3m 34s):
We're thinking that I should think about trying to really do this. I would think so. Yeah. So I remember thinking, wow, this is, I cannot believe I've won this and that. If I'm ever going to do this, the time is now to, to try to strike out and do this full time. So I can be Lynn Shelton and maybe make a film a year that I don't have to pay for. And that was truly, I thought, gosh, I could just support myself on movies. That's the first time that idea came to my head. And I remember giving myself six months to wean myself off of my business and give my clients to other PR firms and just kind of transitioned the business into being more of a film distribution entity.

0 (1h 4m 22s):
Because at that point I had distributed two of my own films and I thought, if nothing else, if this fails, I know I can distribute films for other filmmakers. If my films don't continue on, I can help other people's films continue on. So that's how my filmmaking and our business of a Ray started to become really intertwined. It's

2 (1h 4m 46s):
What's so interesting is that I'm sure at that time there were people who interviewed you and were surprised to learn that you weren't a full-time filmmaker or that you were, that you had a publicity company, but when you think about it, like what you were doing as a publicist was shaping stories and telling stories, and that's what you do as a filmmaker. So actually, as you explain your evolution from one to another, it makes total sense because they're actually slightly different versions of the same thing.

0 (1h 5m 22s):
Yeah, for sure. It's crafting story. Yeah. I agree. You know, the main thing about being a director is you have to convince people or inspire people to want to do the thing that you need done. Yeah. And through it all talking to actors, which is a big part of, if you ask any director young director, what is the piece that they're scared of? Almost all of them will say talking to the actor, but it is your job to talk to the actor and get out of that other human being with their own history, mind and thoughts and heart, what you think will service the whole project.

0 (1h 6m 3s):
So talking to the actor, I mean, it's not like talking to your grandma, like these are, the actor has their own. Like some of them are warm and fuzzy and some of them aren't, but for me, publicity, it prepared me to talk to the actor to deal with actors and to be comfortable around them.

2 (1h 6m 17s):
I think of a director as like a CEO and a COO at the same time, like you are running operations, but you are in charge and responsible for everything.

0 (1h 6m 29s):
Yeah. I think of a CA I think of the director as the mayor of a small town, because a film has every element of a small town. I mean a fire department hospital. It's the medic. You know what I mean? There's some people work in construction. There's some people working with the food. There's someone that's in charge of the bathrooms, someone that's in charge of the stuff that's going to come after the visual effects, the color, the actors. I mean, it is literally, you know, it's, it's dozens of departments of everyone doing their little piece, just like in a town. Like everyone has to know what we're doing, but also feel I like people to feel free, to contribute beyond their role.

0 (1h 7m 10s):
If you have an idea, say it. If something's not working, say it. And to be able to kind of manage all of that. I read

2 (1h 7m 18s):
An interview you gave, and you talked about after you won best director of Sundance, this was your quote. You said there was no golden ticket that unlocked the riches of Hollywood. For me, there were no studio meetings. There were no studio calls. There were no offers to do things. I mean, you had won this incredibly prestigious award and you didn't return to LA with like an inbox just jammed with offers. No,

0 (1h 7m 48s):
Nope. I didn't. There were some things that came through. I got an opportunity to make a short film for a fashion brand and while very different than the trajectory of my white male counterparts, who had won the award the years before me, who basically slid into movie deals. And I found myself making a short afterward for a brand. I was grateful for it. I got to make something on someone else's money. And I loved what I made a piece for product the door, but it was much different than, you know, one of my fellow filmmakers at Sundance who won the screenwriting award that year, who within six months had a deal to direct the sequel to Jurassic park.

0 (1h 8m 33s):
You know, there were differences, but you know, kept going, what can you do?

2 (1h 8m 40s):
We're not originally meant to be the director of the film that, that really became the first major film that you were, you direct in terms of budget, which was Selma. You were originally not meant to be the director of that film right now.

0 (1h 8m 58s):
No, I think it was the eighth, the eighth, seventh or eighth or something. And not like seventh or eighth director that they called six or seventh director who was actually had a contract to make the movie like that many people had dropped out.

2 (1h 9m 15s):
And part of it was because the budget was so small, right?

0 (1h 9m 18s):
Yeah. The budget was so small, $20 million or something. $20 million. I imagine. I mean, I just told you what I was making films with before. Right? So imagine someone says $20 million to make a film. I'm like, are you crazy? Yes, I can do it. I can do it. I have no idea, but I promise you I can do it. And of course that opportunity only came to me because of David

2 (1h 9m 46s):
Called you. Cause he read your screenplay on it, on an airplane and then was in your film middle of nowhere. He was cast in Selma. And how did what happened? I mean, how did he get you involved in,

0 (1h 10m 2s):
He was casting in Selma by the director who left the film before, because of budget. He had always knew. And his mother rest in peace had been very much a champion of him playing Dr. King. And he always knew that somehow he's going to play Dr. King. So he, this is something that's been with him for many, many years. So this king movie is moving around town. He think the story is that he had auditioned for it with another director and didn't get it. And when the director, before me auditioned him, he was cast as Dr. King. But when that director, I don't know why I'm pretending like it's later.

0 (1h 10m 45s):
Okay. I mean, what the heck, why are we going to Google? Right. There's a thing called Google. Now guy, we've got to say the names. So when Lee Daniels left the film, basically David being scrappy, the same scrappy guy, that's going to take a stranger on the plane to steak, dinner, to advocate, to invest in a film for a woman. He doesn't know in a film he's not in yeah. Said just because the directors left doesn't mean I can't still play Dr. King. So he to the producers, if I can find another director who will do it for $20 million, can you consider still making the film and I can still play Dr.

0 (1h 11m 26s):
King. So cut to this woman. He just worked with on this film, one Sundance, he says to me, you're going to need to rewrite this film and make it for $20 million. Would you consider doing it? I never saw myself making a civil rights drama. It's just a, it's a kind of movie that I would never watch. And he said, well, could you make one that you would watch? And I thought, ah, that's interesting. And having not a lot of options on the table at that time and having that challenge from him, I started to become very attracted to the idea of doing it.

0 (1h 12m 12s):
And so I said, I will take a swing at the script and I will try. And the whole deal was, if I could write a script that could be made for 20 million, that was good. They would make it.

2 (1h 12m 24s):
You had to rewrite the entire script. And from what I understand, I mean the king family owns the rights to his speeches. You couldn't, you had to recreate his speeches without using the same words.

0 (1h 12m 38s):
The king family doesn't have rights to his speeches for an estate. The estate has the right to speeches in the estate, had already given the rights to the speeches, to another filmmaker who was much more famous than I was because nobody knew who I was. You know, who was, was it Steven Spielberg? Look at this guy. Well-researched yes. Steven Spielberg got the rights to the speeches in film at that time. And so in order to tell the story, the way around it was to approximate or to rewrite Dr. King speeches, easy. Nope problem. Right. Did you do that?

0 (1h 13m 18s):
I don't know. I, I remember writing it. I remember doing the story first, which needed to be changed from something that was a lot of, kind of trying to have political entry. It was a lot of stuff with the president and to really imbue it with a sense of black people on the ground in Selma, the, the film was called Selma, not president Johnson. Right? So it was about taking what I'd learned as an African-American studies majors, UCLA. What I learned as, you know, a daughter of my father who was from Lounds county, Alabama, which, you know, sits right.

0 (1h 13m 59s):
Two minutes from Selma. What I knew about all of my summers growing up, visiting my father's family in Alabama, in the summers and to just pour all of that, the screenplay, and then afterward I tackled the speeches and I remember submitting it and getting a really fast answer back. We're going to run a budget on it, but this is fantastic. And if we can get this down to 20 million, you're going to be in production. And then we were

2 (1h 14m 31s):
You filmed, I think it took you like 30 days to film that movie, which is kind of nuts. Right. I mean, to make a whole feature.

0 (1h 14m 41s):
Yeah. Took you 30 days. Feels like, oh, it just took you 30 days for you had only 30 days.

4 (1h 14m 51s):
Yeah. That's what you had.

0 (1h 14m 53s):
That's what I had. It was, it was like 31 or 32 days or something like that. Yeah.

2 (1h 14m 57s):
So to make that work, you have to probably spend twice as much time, like organizing every minute of the day. Right? Like planning that out in super detailed. Yeah. Yeah.

0 (1h 15m 12s):
A lot of heavy prep and really important to have people around you who know what they're doing. The challenge with a period piece, as one can imagine listening is if I'm making a movie about now I can go out, find a location. And if there's a scene in a grocery store, I just walk into the grocery store and I shoot. Yeah. If I'm making a movie about, you know, the sixties, I've got to find a grocery store, that's still looks like the sixties or change it to look like the sixties. Every single thing that's on the shelf has to look like the sixties of every actor has to be dressed like they're in the sixties. So I can't just put clothes off the store.

0 (1h 15m 55s):
Everything has to be made and rented. And so that's how, why period pieces costs so much. And that's why the 20 million, you know, it goes quickly because every, every street light sign, shoe car, everything has to be period. So the way that this film came about, I always trace back to that random flight that David had on the film before. And I know that that's not random for me. That's a part of the design of why I'm supposed to be doing what I'm doing and how things fall into place. I believe that everything's for a reason.

0 (1h 16m 35s):
And so that, that set was really intense with a spirit of this is meant to be,

2 (1h 16m 44s):
Even when Selma came out, it was an, is widely praised, but you were not nominated for best director. And I know that this is probably kind of a sensitive question, but I don't know. I mean, did it matter? Did, were, were you hurt by that?

0 (1h 17m 2s):
I wasn't hurt by the not getting best director. And I'll tell you why I was hurt by David, not getting best actor nomination for him not to be nominated. That was, I remember the moment I just, that was the moment where I was really at the wind knocked out of me. The reason why I wasn't hurt by getting best director is because statistically speaking, there was no way for that to happen. And people are like, Ava, what are you talking about? I just, I had worked in the industry as a publicist. I've done Oscar campaigns and it's a campaign. It is a campaign and it is a very specific route to the nomination.

0 (1h 17m 43s):
And it just wasn't going to happen. I do not know at that time, did not know any of those people. And they did not know me.

2 (1h 17m 52s):
The academy electors, my branch,

0 (1h 17m 55s):
The directors branch. Right. I did not go to film school. I did not interface with them. I did not live in the same places. I did not speak the same film language. I, I didn't know them. And they didn't know me on top of that. No black woman director I'd ever been nominated in the history of the academy, which at that point is many decades. So that's against me. So when I say, no, I wasn't, I wasn't pushed out of shape about it. People have to remember what the times were. There was no precedent for it to ever happen. So I was not delusional enough to think, oh, I'm going to be the one

2 (1h 18m 36s):
I'm curious about what you think makes a great director. Do you think that great directors are great because they can get actors to give them their best work? Is that a definition of what makes a director strong?

0 (1h 18m 56s):
No, I don't think so. Because I think, I mean, I think that's a part of it, but I mean, you can have a great actor, give a fantastic performance in a film. That's, UK's not working. We've all seen that for me, it's a film that I can look at a film and say, oh, that person got their vision out. Like they, they told the story that they wanted to tell. Like I made a film called a wrinkle in time. I look at that film and for all of the beautiful experience that I had on it. And for the beauty that I think is in the film, it's not my film.

0 (1h 19m 37s):
Right. It was the first time I made a film for a massive studio and went through a process

1 (1h 19m 46s):
Of a

0 (1h 19m 48s):
Kind of like group filmmaking. You know what I mean? Like a lot of people with a lot of opinions who have a lot more power than you do, and ultimately you compromise and you get to the end and you say, okay, I think this will be okay. You know, and sit back and say, oh, okay. That wasn't quite what I meant, not quite what I started out wanting to do. And that, that was okay. That's what that experience was for me in my career. And so many, you know, directors go through that. There were some, there, there are many people around the world that I continue to hear from about the film, you know, in ways that are nourishing and necessary and beautiful.

0 (1h 20m 31s):
But I look at the film and I remember the process and it was a process that wasn't all my process. So I think that, you know, the successful film is the film that the filmmaker can say. That's more, that is more of what I had in mind that is then it's not, and the closer you can get to that being kind of 100% is, you know, now you're in freedom land. And that's what I experienced on. I will follow because no one cared middle of nowhere where, cause no one cared Selma because really no one cared. You know what I mean? They cared, but they really let me have that, that it was still yours.

0 (1h 21m 14s):
Right. It was still mine. Yeah. I thrive in smaller environments. And so after that went onto the 13th to do, when they see us in spaces where I could get a hundred percent of what I wanted out out. And so that's, my deficit is I kind of have to, I have to have room to move and can't really make movies by committee. I can make movies with collaborators. I can hear, you know, insight and criticism and ideas, but I can't really like give up parts. You know, I can't, it's hard for me. Could

2 (1h 21m 52s):
You imagine working on a big budget film, like a wrinkle in time again or, or not really? Not that you want to kind of focus on things that, that you shape

0 (1h 22m 6s):
I've had the most success with the work that I have done unhindered. Yeah. You know, whether it's the independent films and success that they had Selma, which was a really hands-off process 13th, which was, and when they see us, which is Netflix saying, hello? Ma'am would you like this money to make something that's important to you? Well, yes. Thank you. When will I see you again? Oh, when you're finished. That is the perfect time for me to see you again. Thank you. Whether it's my film, my TV projects now, you know, I have the most success with networks that are really saying, Hey man, we're paying you for your voice and we're going to let you do you that's the stuff that really works.

0 (1h 22m 47s):
So if there was something that was picked budget where that kind of space was allowed or given to me, afforded to me, and it exists that exists for some filmmakers, if I was ever presented with something like that. And it was something that meant something to me and I was attracted to shore, but you know, right now the things that I'm focused on are much, you get more leeway when you are spending less money. So I'd rather have leeway and less money. I mean,

2 (1h 23m 17s):
It's interesting that this idea of creating your art on your own terms, right, because that is what you are doing with your company, which, which you rebrand that you call, it's now known as array because you're not, it's not just a distribution and production company and a nonprofit, but it's, it's kind of like a movement, right? Like you do all kinds of outreach and you've got a database of people of color working in the industry. I mean the ambition of what you w what you built there is big. And so it seems to me that actually you can do many bigger things by doing it on your own, right?

0 (1h 23m 59s):
I mean, that's interesting this idea of doing it on your own, because I was just talking to, I just did a panel with some fellow artists with, for frees in New York, this kind of art week in New York. And I was talking about like, sometimes wishing that I was one of my white male counterparts, who does not have to labor on top of the film, like who can just make his film, who doesn't also have to go make the speech to the independent film, right. Cinema houses, who doesn't have to like try to create film literacy in our community and build a screening room that's free for the community to learn about films from around the world.

0 (1h 24m 43s):
Cause there's no movie theaters in our neighborhoods, like who doesn't have to create initiatives on my sets where, you know, I have to focus on, you know, equalizing opportunities for women directors who just doesn't have to do that. Like my white guy, friends don't sit on panels about this stuff. Like they don't get called for articles about this stuff. They don't have to do it. They just can make their stuff. Yeah. You know, I talk to filmmaker, friends at, you know, these days it's a zoom, but you know, you run into someone in the store or something and you know, what are you working on? And they're telling you about a film. Well, what am I working on, dude?

0 (1h 25m 24s):
You don't want to frigging know, like I'm talking to CEOs about inclusion, I'm fighting for, you know, to get more black folks in these unions so that they can be hired as crew. Like I'm doing a lot more than just being able to sit home and make my movie. Yeah. And so I'm in a place right now where I really have to interrogate my feelings about doing that. Where in some moments of the day, I'm like, I shouldn't have to do this. You know, if this is an equal playing field, then it should be equal for all of us, without me having to do this extra work on top of my art making.

0 (1h 26m 6s):
But within that, the joy, right? The freedom of expression, the building of new ideas, the disrupting of systems, the innovation that I've experienced by doing all that outweighs the days where I think I wish I didn't have to do all this. So I think right now array is 10 years old. It is a nonprofit that has community outreach and educational initiatives and learning guides for everything that I create. Physical

2 (1h 26m 37s):
Buildings, you have a campus. So

0 (1h 26m 38s):
For building campus in historic Filipino town, in Los Angeles, we have, you know, we're vaccinating people and community screenings and literacy and you know, three day film festival to educate the community about Philippine X films, or, you know, the French new wave or to teach kids how to read subtitles or to there's all kinds of stuff going on, right. That stuff is it's magic. It's beautiful to me and it's come out of a place of absence, but it has become a place of abundance.

2 (1h 27m 11s):
There's a quote that I read in an article, an interview you gave, and you said, when you're talking about the entertainment industry, and you said, we need to be thinking more broadly about how we not only reform the system, but rebuild the system, which is a huge, just a huge, enormous task ahead. Do you think that's either happening or will happen?

0 (1h 27m 35s):
It will happen. It may not happen and be fully realized in my time, but someone's going to see it right in the future or someone's going to be activated by it. And you know, this whole journey is just all of us taking our own little steps, like especially the journey of black people that early of women, the journey of black directors, like each person's lifetime was just one step in a long walk to get to a certain place. And so I'm hoping that my step can be a big one. I'm like trying to leap and get us a lot further in my time. And that's really my hope for array that this is something that even after I'm gone, you know, maybe I have my time on this.

0 (1h 28m 23s):
This planet is done. Could the principles and the work and the, you know, way of working that I'm trying to embed in this kind of array way. Can that continue on without me? That's the goal.

2 (1h 28m 40s):
When you trace your life story, just everything that you've experienced and all of the, just the, I mean, it's a life of somebody who follow their curiosity, really. How much of, of where you are today, do you attribute to just the grind and how hard you worked in and does any part of you attribute any of it to luck as well? Or what do you think?

0 (1h 29m 9s):
I guess I, I attribute it to luck, but I don't call it luck. You know, I think it's, it's my path and it was, these are blessings. These are, this is designed and it's up to me to work, to live up to these moments that are put in front of me, but certainly in the way that you're defining it, I would say luck. Yeah, work really hard, but you could work really hard and never get the breaks. You know, work really hard and never be seen, be heard. You can work really hard and you know, no one reads your scripts on a plane and calls you the next day and says, look, let me be in it. Who ends up being the same guy who gets you Selma, get that gets nominated for the Oscar that does today.

0 (1h 29m 51s):
You could be, you could make 13th. And you know, it sits on the back channels of Netflix and doesn't really get seen or move, but it moved. You can, you can make, when they see us, you know, and not change the lives of the five, five-minute, it doesn't completely revolutionized who they are as human beings. They live differently than they did when it first came out because no one saw it and it didn't make a difference, but that did. And so, you know, there's only so far that the work can get you. And that's far like, I believe I would have gotten far from just sheer hard labor, but there has been a furthering beyond that that has been blessings that have come into my life that are beyond my control.

0 (1h 30m 43s):
And some people call that luck. I'll take it.

2 (1h 30m 48s):
That's Ava, DuVernay, filmmaker, and founder of array. Ava's recently signed on to do a film adaptation of Isabelle Wilkerson's best-selling book cast. And she's working on a six part drama series for Netflix in collaboration with Colin Kaepernick, Colin in black and white. And one thing about that that really blows her mind is that the budget just for the music on just a single episode of that series will be bigger than the entire budgets for her first two films combined. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week.

2 (1h 31m 29s):
If you're not a subscriber, please do subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can also write to us@hibtnpr.org. And if you want to follow us on Twitter, we're at how I built this. Or at guy rise, you can find us on Instagram at how I built this NPR or me at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by Rachel Faulkner and Liz Medsker who also provided research help. It was edited by Neeva grant. Our music was composed by Ramtin era bluey. Our audio engineer was Alex Trey when SKUs our production staff includes Casey Herman, James DeLuise, Julia Carney, Farrah safari, Janet BU John Lee and Annalise sober. Our intern is Harrison VJ Choi.

2 (1h 32m 11s):
Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Ross, and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor GoDaddy making a different future starts with you. Go, daddy helps you create, sell, and get found online so you can create change or build an empire start different like godaddy.com.