0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, web flow on November 17th and 18th, join Webflow and thousands of designers, developers, and marketers for the free and online only no code confe registered now@nocodeconf.com.

2 (19s):
So you guys go public and the fall of 1999. And by the spring of 2000, the.com bubble burst, it could have crashes.

3 (31s):
Yeah, there were 1500 public internet companies at the beginning of 2,140 at the beginning of 2003, but it was that kind of, you know, of decimation and the stock price, which was one $29 or something. It went down to 4 cents at the end of 2004 cents.

2 (1m 6s):
Ramen PR how I built this show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built I'm guy Roz. And on the show today, how in the era of clunky cassette tapes, Don Katz created a whole new kind of audio experience online on demand with audible Back in the mid 1990s. Back before you could plug in a pair of earbuds and choose from hundreds of thousands of different books, millions of different podcasts or tens of millions of different songs back before any of that.

2 (1m 50s):
A former journalist turned writer named Don Katz had a problem during his daily jog in New York city. He would listen to books on tape, literally Han tape as in cassette tapes. And Don wondered, why do I have to lug around a cassette player? And then flip the cassette decide be in the middle of my run. Surely there must be an easier way he thought. And in fact, at the time there was MP3 technology existed, except almost no one used it in the mid 1990s, compact disc sales were on a tear. It would take another seven years before CDs began to decline, but Don was optimistic.

2 (2m 35s):
And at the age of 42, he decided to ditch his successful career as a writer and try to start something. He knew nothing about a tech company, a company that would create a digital audio catalog of books and storytelling and spoken word and deliver those stories to users through a device specially designed to play that audio. And as you will hear in the early days, not many people came to the party. The technology was way ahead of its time, probably too ahead of its time. In fact, audible, the company Don founded almost collapsed in the early two thousands when its stock price hovered at around 4 cents a share.

2 (3m 19s):
But today, of course, audible holds the biggest audio book catalog in the world. It dominates the space with a library of over 600,000 titles. And the company is now part of the Amazon family, which bought audible for $300 million in 2008. But getting to that point was painful and full of setbacks. And the story includes a cameo appearance from none other than Steve jobs. Don Katz was a staff writer for rolling stone magazine during its heyday in the late seventies and eighties. He grew up in Chicago in the fifties and sixties and strongly identified with his dad who owned a small business.

3 (4m 2s):
So my father was just incredibly kind of smart kind and you know, it's a cliche, but he was one of these guys. You would want it to be your best friend. I looked up to him, I probably wished he was home more because he was frankly like I became someone who worked a lot and he was also, he'd been a war hero. He ran away from home basically 17 and was, was behind enemy lines, highly decorated

2 (4m 37s):
Italy, or,

3 (4m 38s):
Or it was in the, he was in the black forest in Germany, you know, and he didn't really talk about it. He wasn't one of those guys, but I had different purple hearts. Every time I broke a leg in hockey or something, I would find I would wake up and find the purple heart in my pillow.

2 (4m 54s):
And, and, and your dad, from what I understand, he hit a music store in Chicago called I guess called K musical instruments. And it was,

3 (5m 1s):
It was actually a guitar man, your guitar company. Yeah. My dad made a make guitars. He made them for Sears silver tones, but I remember that there were some pretty great bands of the era, one called spirit that had a fantastic guitarist named Randy, California, who only would play play case. And the like, but, but my dad's kind of claim to fame at that time was that he put chord books in guitars and started this whole idea that you two can play the guitar. And it alienated a lot of the musicians, including Barney Kessel and Les Paul and people that he was friends with because they were infuriated to say that their instrument was any more easier to play than a, than a, than a violin.

3 (5m 47s):
And of course he said, yeah, but you know, it is. And so it ended up that my family was all in Newsweek magazine taking our guitar lessons together because my dad had decided to be part of this, YouTube can play the guitar, which was part of the whole mid sixties folk music kind of kind of movement. So, so I think back, and he was definitely somebody who also liked to challenge the status quo, which I think I have come by honestly.

2 (6m 13s):
So was he financially successful?

3 (6m 16s):
He was financially successful in the way of a rising entrepreneur of his time, but very tragically. He went out to play tennis at 47 years old on a Saturday. And I got a call when I was in college saying that he died playing tennis, very suddenly of a massive heart attack. And it really marked my life in so many ways. It was definitely, you know, a formative experience I I've heard. And you probably have heard this too, that there's a lot of patterns of fatherlessness in highly entrepreneurial people, whether it's through abandonment or, or early death, including taking ridiculous risks as a journalist in the early part of my career where I could have easily gotten, gotten killed several times.

3 (7m 10s):
I think I was working out his heroism and other kinds of things. So, you know, you come to these things a little later in life, but it is interesting to reflect on it.

2 (7m 18s):
So, so for college, I know that that you went to NYU and you majored in, in English. And from what I understand, Ralph Ellison, like the Ralph Ellison, the invisible man, Ralph Ellison was a professor there. And yeah, and you kind of had an opportunity to sort of work with them to be tutored by him.

3 (7m 38s):
He, he, he taught me how to read and Jorge that I, I fully didn't understand. And I knew that I loved more than anything, the, the sound of literature. And I was just in, in how it felt to me. But I, Ralph actually kind of flushed it out in a way that it became something that I was fully able to understand. He also, he also gave me the, I think the confidence to try to be a professional writer, which I proceeded to do for, for 20 years

2 (8m 9s):
Was, was Ralph Ellison, your like your thesis advisor.

3 (8m 14s):
Yeah, he basically was, and Ralph was a deep and exacting intellectual. So I had to work really hard and, and read really hard. Anyways. It was, it was an amazing experience. He, he would sit with a big Stokey and he had this amazing story telling voice with this. Oklahoma I've said that his voice was like a cold car coming out of my mind and I would just be mesmerized. And, and he was a big supporter. And, you know, later, even the audible transition, right at the time he died, he was incredibly supportive of what I did.

2 (8m 54s):
So you graduate from, from NYU and you're sort of thinking that you want to be a writer, but it's not that easy to do so. And you did what lots of people do, which is you decide to go to graduate school, to continue studying. I I'm assume you went to London to London school of economics. I might, am I assuming correctly that you didn't really know what you wanted to do? You wanted to kind of buy some time?

3 (9m 20s):
Absolutely. In fact, I thought at the time, almost everybody thought if he didn't know what you should do, you should go to law school. Yes. But I studied the European economics and politics and international history. And I was living with my old friend, Barbara, who was a rock writer. She had gone to be a rock and roll writer in, in London. And so we just paired up and shared a flat. And so I would come home and there would be, you know, rod Stewart and Keith Richards. And, and so that's who she hung out with.

2 (9m 56s):
Wow. And your roommate, Barbara, this is somebody you knew from college, from high school.

3 (10m 2s):
And just to make money. Barbara got me a little gigs reviewing albums for the British Exactly new musical express sounds. And I I'll never forget. I wrote one about Frankie Valli and the four seasons I got to interview Frankie Valli and the like, and I, I was just kind of trying to try to figure it out. I matriculated for a PhD, but I just didn't know, you know, what I wanted to do.

2 (10m 32s):
All right. So you're, you're doing a little writing and kind of getting into the music scene in London. And, and I guess one night you're out at dinner and you meet a guy who winds up kind of launching your career in internal ism. What, what's the story?

3 (10m 46s):
Absolutely. Sitting next to a guy named Robert Greenfield who introduces himself as a rolling stone writer. And we just get chatting. And I basically told him about some of the things that were going on, notably, what was going on in Spain at the end of Franco. And I talked to him about what was going on in Northern Ireland, because I had a very different perspective on the world because I was based in London and in reading the European press. And he said, you know, you should package one of these things. And right, this guy, John winter, who I work with a rolling stone, a letter with some ideas, because you could, you could just, you know, write about these are great stories you've got.

3 (11m 28s):
And I went ahead and I sat down and I wrote this letter, the two or three ideas.

2 (11m 33s):
It really is a handwritten letter or typed letter that you write. No,

3 (11m 37s):
I typed it up on my right. Right. I might type right.

2 (11m 41s):
The pitch, an idea for an article, which was what, what did you write in the letter? Where did, what was the pitch?

3 (11m 46s):
One of them was that at the point, Franco who was ancient begins to die, the great dictator of Spain, it would be very interesting to aluminate the liberation movement of the Atia Basque separatists, and the perspective of this last dictator going down. And that basically the last of the world war two era dictators. And it would be an interesting story. And I get a telegram saying, go to Spain and I'm not so sure anyone I work with at audible or my children know what a telegram even looks like, because that's, that was the fast way to get to me. It was to say, get it, get out of here, go, go, go write the story.

3 (12m 27s):
And it basically said, write, you know, write five to 7,000 words and we'll pay you $1,500 and reasonable expenses.

2 (12m 36s):
This sounds like a, this sounds like a dispatch from hunter Thompson, right? He would say, oh, and reasonable expenses are beyond winter, but I mean, you get this, you get this telegram from him. Just curious, did you have a mild panic attack as you were 23? And rolling stone was hugely influential by that point,

3 (12m 54s):
The attack that actually, I think attacks all people who go way out with crazy ideas, whatever they are at, which is that, oh my God, I'm a fraud. And they're about to find out exactly exactly what happened, but it's not the only time of my life that, you know, I've, I've got, you know, had that feeling. So I had no idea what to do. And I got myself to Madrid. I knew I'd have to get basically credentialed to cover what was supposed to be a funeral. And so what happened was all of the, of the world war two era journalists who were still around the wire service guys, they all to send it on Madrid for almost like a last hurrah.

3 (13m 35s):
And they took me under their collective wing and showed me a whole lot of stuff about how to be a more traditional journalists. And I sat down and I wrote this story and it came out as I'd written it. And on the cover, it said dispatch from the valley of the fallen, with my name on it and rolling stone magazine. Now I'm 23 years old. And I was like, I can't believe this. And of course, because I really hadn't been a student journalist. I just wrote, you know, I didn't know that as it was explained to me later that usually they like to edit these things a lot, but they sure they didn't.

3 (14m 22s):
They just,

2 (14m 23s):
And so I guess you want me to start writing more and more pieces for, for rolling stone and then eventually some, some other publications and any sort of travel more like to, to Northern Ireland. And I think you went to Ethiopia and a bunch of different war zones, but I mean, you were, you were in crowds, so incredibly young when you were getting those post by-lines, I read a story and I love the story that you were. So self-conscious about being like quote found out that, you know, that because you were so young that whenever one of, one of your American editors would come to London, you would actually not be there deliberately like you, so you wouldn't have to meet them face.

3 (15m 4s):
I thought if they saw how young I think I looked like I was 12 when I was 23 years old, I, I was incredibly self-conscious and I did try to be out on assignment when the editors I was working with, you know, telephonically or in town for a while. And eventually when I revealed myself and I met them, they did exactly what I expect. This is, oh, come on. You're you're not done like that. They were incredulous that I was putting out this precocious stuff.

2 (15m 36s):
I imagine. I, so I guess you stayed in Europe for, for several years. And I guess by like the late seventies, you moved to New York to work at rolling stone and, and you, I think, and I think you also got married around then, how did you meet your wife?

3 (15m 54s):
I met my wife, Leslie in 1982, on a river raft trip in Pennsylvania, out of Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania. And we were both with different people and we kinda hit it off. And I went off to China for national geographic and spent a little bit months traveling the silk road. It was incredible trip, but it was long. And when I got back, the relationship with my former girlfriend was over and she said to me know, I know who you're going to call one of the peoples that last night and that she was

2 (16m 36s):
Because you had connected with her on that, on that river trip.

3 (16m 39s):
Definitely. I thought she was great. So, so, and, and, and life went on from there. And it's been an amazing marriage. And just about nothing I can think of that that's has been good for me. She hasn't been an amazing part of including memorably referring to my sudden, you turn from writer to entrepreneur as a nontoxic midlife crisis,

2 (17m 6s):
Which will, which we'll get to in, in a, in a moment. But I mean, at that time you were still a journalist for rolling stone. You've got this great job. You're getting paid a salary. When did you, I know that you, you wrote your first book, which was the story of Sears that the department store, I guess, the history of Sears and then kind of like the rise and fall of it. And the book came out in like 87. Why did you want to write a book about Sears?

3 (17m 34s):
Well, I kind of thought how weird would it be to take this, this hippie counterculture storytelling and write about a big old American company? Hey, what happened to it? And I wrote another letter. I wrote a letter to the CEO and chairman of Sears. I got him ed telling who is famous for never having, given an interview, completely introverted guy. The beat reporters couldn't get anything out of ed telling. And basically I said that if he, if he can deal with the great American corporation of the 20th century changing itself. So as to continue to be the most beloved and trusted company of the century, it's a matter of historical record.

3 (18m 20s):
And he just decided that he'd let me in. And this was really rare because as you all know, corporations tend to be Pentagon like, and their control over, over the truth. And so I proceeded to show up as a bearded, still looking quite young guy and people who worked at Cirrus decided I was okay because I had sold at telling on something. They never thought anybody would sell them on. So I was a salesman in their eyes and I just try it. You know, I spent, he hears on this. Wow. And did I get an MBA in real time?

2 (19m 2s):
I'm wondering if ed telling, because he was widely reviled by the business press, right? He was considered to be a disastrous leader in the end. One could argue he, he redeemed himself. But do you think that he wanted you to write this book? So he would come out being redeemed?

3 (19m 22s):
I think he wanted to be part of history. I think he likes so many of these serious guys who they came and transferred their battlefield loyalties from world war two to this Heartland corporation. They live these lives where they would move 14, 16 times. I mean, that was part of a corporate life in those days. Yeah. But boy, it was, it was a pretty epic task to then turn it into this, you know, this tale of America, but it was a tale of hubris. It was a tale of the final founders sowing the seeds of the destruction of the company. I have a whole chapter remember in there about the building of the Sears tower. They made this genius conception of every customer thought Sears was the friendly guy down the street, the member of the Kiwanis club.

3 (20m 9s):
And that series was this localized reality. And once they built that tower and said that they're one of the most powerful companies in the world, all the bad stuff started happening because it was just thought to be such a, you know, an unfortunate statement of their, of their purpose. But that company's story is, is very much about the, the, the end of the, what ended up happening in the seventies. Eighties as Americans realized that other countries actually sometimes were even more productive than they were. And all those, all that wake up call was part of that story.

2 (20m 46s):
You are a runner, right? Or we're a runner, or maybe

3 (20m 50s):
I'm, I'm a hockey player who runs or did run a lot. So as to keep in shape, but I definitely liked to run in my, in my regimen when I was living in New York, as a writer was to take off in Riverside park and run several miles at the end of the day.

2 (21m 9s):
And while you ran, what would you listen to music?

3 (21m 13s):
Well, I ran with a partner and we would just chat the whole time, or I listened to the early audio books on cassette cassette and Walkman painful. It was a, at a Sony Walkman in a belly pack knocking around. And I just remember the utter irritation of trying to change the tapes when you're aerobically taxed and, and how, because you rented them in these big brown boxes that they would often not work at all, which was really irritating when you're a couple miles from home. But I remember listening to, you know, John reads 10 days that shook the world.

3 (21m 53s):
I would take on these long, you know, kind of books and, and jog along and listen. But at that point I was the only person I knew who

2 (22m 3s):
We did that. Okay. So I think this is the early 1990s. And during this time, I guess you're, you're also researching another book, which I think it was a book about like the burgeoning tech industry. Yeah. So at what point were you like, wait, I'm, I might have a business idea here. Like how did, how did that happen?

3 (22m 23s):
So, so I had this book contract, I, I began to connect with people who were teaching me what I didn't know about technology. And one of the people who was my key contacts was my college roommate from NYU ed Lau, one of my close friends to this day who was a computer frigging genius. And we were talking about signal compression, basically about analog to digital signal compression. And I was asking all these questions about how text fit through the internet, which was wait for it, the phone lines, there was no broadband at all.

3 (23m 6s):
And these discussions were happening in 93, 94. And he had this thought, he said, you know, you know, you could, you could get voice through the phone line. It could be compressed. And we went back and forth and I said, Hey, you know, if you could take audio books and send them through the phone line, the cost of the, of the packaging and all those tapes, wouldn't be there. You could lower the cost. I remember saying we liberate the signal, meaning how do we get the audio into my belly pack? You know, so I can watch a quick go around with it. And how are we going to get it into cars?

3 (23m 48s):
Is that's where people have, have a lot of time. I remember thinking if you took these audio books, you could actually liberate time for people. And we got kind of more excited about it. And I got more and more interested in what it would mean to do this because nobody else was doing it.

2 (24m 7s):
Okay. So you're thinking of making some new type of digital device or like a system for playing audio. So w w what did you start to do?

3 (24m 16s):
So through out 1994, I spent time trying to find anyone I could find to talk about a future that involved these little devices that were filled with the sound, the soundscape of culture, basically the soundtrack of culture. I remember talking in various ways or the sound of civilization. I remember all these things coming out saying, can't you see it? And like people thought I was out of my mind. I mean, I couldn't find anybody who knew what I was talking about except for ed. And we just decided to write it up into a business plan, to do

2 (24m 54s):
A business plan, to create,

3 (24m 56s):
To create a company that we decided should be called. Audible words

2 (25m 1s):
Would be a company that made what books on tape that were digital.

3 (25m 6s):
Believe it or not guy, it was actually a solid state cassette. It was a cassette that you hooked to the phone line. That was the first path. And that the idea was you'd have the signal come over. You capture it in the cassette flash memory. You'd push it into the tape bed in your car, which instantly everybody had at that point. And you'd be able to listen, and we just played with it. But I have to tell you, I wrote the business plan and it was like 110 page narrative. What

2 (25m 39s):
Was the story? It was a narrative saying what

3 (25m 42s):
The story was that we would occupy this time of people's life, which was, and we said, when your eyes are busy, but your mind is free. We would create a higher level of purpose that the AMF am radio was for everybody. It wasn't just for you. And you would be able to program your own listening time in the future, through digital technology. And that we would have a company that would sell a solid state digital device, as well as content. It would be about books and literature. It would allow you to listen to fresh air and marketplace, and all these shows that played at two o'clock in the afternoon.

3 (26m 28s):
And we got a patent together on a downloadable system of pro for media that would be captured by a solid state device. And I remember it was $14,000 that I put on my credit card. Wow. And cause, you know what we know now I know of course, you know, without a portfolio, patents are worthless, but you know, at that point I didn't, that was the first thing we did, but we actually started to get really excited about.

2 (26m 57s):
So, so instead of terrestrial radio, you could get it delivered through the internet instead of a, an audio book on tape or a book or a speech on tape or some kind of, you know, inspiring, I don't know, inspirational thing. You just basically say, this business is going to deliver this stuff to you through your phone line, to do the internet,

3 (27m 15s):
Play up the book part of it because the business itself was so infant Tessa mall and, and, and small, what I say, what I did was I realized through just basic journalistic research that 93 million Americans drove to work alone every morning, there were at that point only department transportation number, which you could extrapolate to hundreds of millions of hours of time. People sit in traffic. I then matched the sociological data that showed that the most frustrating time of people's days and least valuable time is sitting in traffic. And I basically just, we said, if we only penetrate 9% of them at $10 a month for a service that enriched their lives, here's how big the business would be.

3 (28m 3s):
Right. And that's how we were able to get, you know, what's now very small amounts of money, but was then to us a lot of money to, to, to make all of them.

2 (28m 13s):
Oh, before you went out to seek capital for this, right? Cause you were writing a book, how did this idea just take over your mind and your life? Because all of us get ideas, we've all had a business idea. And sometimes it, it captures us for a week or two weeks, but this was really,

3 (28m 37s):
I think I, there were multiple things inspiring me at the time. One was, I just thought it was interesting that I daydreamed about this more than I was daydreaming about the next paragraph or the next day I was writing. The other thing was I kept going to people who I otherwise respected, who thought I was crazy.

2 (28m 59s):
I thought you were crazy because you had a great gig and you're respected. And

3 (29m 3s):
They were so dismissive of it. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it was like, they just didn't get it. I mean, even people who took the time said, why don't you just package it and try to sell it to Sony for $25,000, it might be something they're interested in. It was such a dismissive reaction to it. And that made me more inspired really to go and try, try to do it. Yeah.

2 (29m 29s):
And we come back in just a moment. It turns out that building a new type of audio player and a new type of audio marketplace and they whole new type of audio experience is hard. And that's before the.com bust they with us, I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Edmonds finding deals on new and used vehicles has been difficult due to car shortages and increased demand. Edmunds is here to help. They've been taking the stress out of the car shopping process for more than 50 years, offering price, guidance, and shopping advice.

2 (30m 11s):
All in one Edmond's free appraisal tool gives you an accurate price for your vehicle in minutes. Visit edmunds.com to get your free online appraisal today and start searching for vehicles in your area for cars. There's Edmonds

0 (30m 27s):
Support for this NPR podcast and the following message come from Intuit. QuickBooks live with a major advancement in small business bookkeeping. Having someone else do your books for you, right from your laptop. Get started with a trusted alive expert who understands your business today by visiting quickbooks.com

4 (30m 51s):
In 1999, the music industry began cranking out. Latin music meant to crossover. How do we make it Latin without being too loud? Some of the inspiration came from strange places,

3 (31m 6s):
Channeling

4 (31m 7s):
More. We unpack Pop's Latin explosion and listen now to, it's been a minute from NPR.

2 (31m 21s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's around 1995 and Don Katz is trying to build an audio player and platform for audio books, interviews, comedy, and more what will become audible. But first he has to raise money. And one of the first people he calls is a former source from the world of tech, a guy named Tim Mott.

3 (31m 46s):
Tim ma was a great entrepreneur and is a great, great, great person. He was one of the founding people at electronic arts, the three people that developed electronic arts. And when Tim Mott read the primitive business plan, he called me up and said, I went fund this. This is amazing.

2 (32m 5s):
Don. When you went to your wife and you said, Hey, I want to do this. I want to start a business. What did, what was her reaction? Was she like, go for it?

3 (32m 14s):
I think at one point she said it was a, it's sounds a little sexist now, but she said it's better than a blonde. She'd already been such an amazing partner for someone who was willing to live without a net because, you know, I was freelance and book writer and everything, but I was scared. I mean, I have three kids at a market. You were

2 (32m 33s):
43.

3 (32m 34s):
I was 43 years old and I took an 85% year over year pay at the start audible. And

2 (32m 41s):
Meanwhile, from what I know of the story, you were looking for a business partner and you wanted it to be ed Lau. Who's your former, your former roommate, the guy who was that computer genius, but he wasn't able to join you. Right. So you, so you needed to find presumably someone else, right?

3 (32m 59s):
Yeah. I went out to find a new science partner and found my lifelong friend and wonderful person guy's story, who was a senior person at bell labs and guy decided to, you know, hear the siren song and he joined me early.

2 (33m 18s):
How did you convince him? How did you convince him? Or

3 (33m 21s):
Basically I basically said, I don't, I don't know if we're going to overcome what a venture capitalists would call the tech risk, you know, and the execution risk, but whatever we build, we're going to put in front of consumers and you'll get to say that. And I said, you don't have to take the 85% year over year pay cut. I took, but you have to take 60 and you're going to get all these options. And a guy jumped into the Merry band,

2 (33m 47s):
Your initial backer, Tim Mott put in, I think like $400,000 in seed capital. Yep. And what did you know at the time about how to, you know, like how to deal with equity and valuations? I mean, now of course every company, it doesn't matter what the company is. It seems like their perceived level of valuation is $20 million. Oh, my company is valued at $20 million and you're like, what, what are you making nothing? We're giving ourselves a $20 million evaluation. How did you know how to do that and how to, you know, because

3 (34m 21s):
Literally trusted Tim and, you know, I was a fast study is journalists are so I was picking the stuff up and, and taking it in pretty quickly. And Tim's first round was, you know, allowed us to evolve the team. And we took over a doctor's office in Montclair, a single room, not far from where I'm speaking in New Jersey. And we paint, we painted it on a Sunday and moved in on a, on a Monday. So now we've moved out of my attic and had a place to, you know, to gather. And then Tim and I hit the road for California to raise more money, to raise more money, and also begin the process of building the first download system, the first way of actually securing the intellectual property.

3 (35m 9s):
This was years before the terms about digital rights management were there because I'd had so many outside magazine articles ripped off on the Unix internet, and people put their own names on them like that. I kind of had this idea that this kind of professional grade creativity might need to be protected. So company very well known called IDEO, which does industrial design came in and they were totally excited about all this stuff, including everything from, you know, the idea of securing the IP and the download system and building a device with us. So that process started and yeah, we went out and spent a lot of time going up and down Sandhill road, getting to know people.

2 (35m 53s):
All right. So you're able to secure the capital. I think, I think if, I guess a few million dollars to get an audio player built, but also, I mean, you've got to, you've got to get content for that audio player. And you were going to be the CEO of the company. You were going to manage people and manage a team. Is that right? Yes.

3 (36m 12s):
So I was president and CEO and Tim was chairman and then we meet, we formed a board and I believe this idea of seeing the future and seeing these opportunities and doing something that had been done and persuading people to be part of it was the most important thing, but it is also true that managing people is a different art and science, which, but I did have all those years of watching both entrepreneurs and others lead

2 (36m 42s):
It just to me, it just sounds incredibly overwhelming, like an overwhelming amount of things to do. I understand that you had written books about leaders, but you'd never had like a leadership position at any of the publications where you worked. You weren't an editor at rolling stone where you nervous about becoming a manager of people in any way.

3 (37m 5s):
I was definitely nervous, but I was, I was on point, you know, look, I, I definitely felt more concerned about having put three and a half million dollars into play that was other people's money and feeling deeply responsible to them and to others, particularly people who left perfectly good jobs, because a lot of these people left really nice jobs to join this, this vision of the possible. So yeah, it was incredibly stressful, but, but, but you did say that, you know, part of the thing was about getting the content. And I would argue that probably our original funders discounted how hard it was going to be to convince the gatekeepers of, of the content that existed to see this particular, you know, future.

2 (37m 55s):
What was the content that you envisioned being on this player? Because you had two paths, right? You're you, you, you got two things you got to do at the same time. You've got one team building the actual device, that's going to play the stuff and then presumably another team getting the content. So what, what did you think the content was going to be?

3 (38m 14s):
I thought the content would be frankly, what it, what it became a mixture of literally the best possible public expression. In words, you know, if the Churchill club had profound speeches, I wanted to carry that. If we, we, we turned the San Jose mercury news into an audio program. You, you,

2 (38m 37s):
You know, people reading the newspaper as, as content. Yeah. Okay. So w what else, what else, what other kinds of content?

3 (38m 43s):
Well, we got some of your buddies at NPR, so we can have car talk or marketplace

2 (38m 50s):
Cartec, which was owned by those guys. So you didn't have to deal with NPR. Right?

3 (38m 54s):
Bye bye. 99, we'd say I'd signed up Robin Williams to do original programming for us. And yes, we wanted one of the audio books too, but it was many, many years. We had much more content that was just different kinds of public content, whatever you could

2 (39m 13s):
Get. Yeah. That

3 (39m 14s):
We either narrated or other things before we had a lot of books. But the first download when it finally happened was in October 31st of 97, it was, men are from Mars and women are from Venus, the a self-help book. And I remember too, it was to a, a, a customer in cave Creek, Arizona. And that was, and it was done at that then pretty famous technology conference called the agenda conference, which is where we unveiled the service and gave everybody from, you know, bill gates to Steve jobs and Michael gel, this digital audio player we made. And I'm sure the majority of them were sawed in half back in various labs when people got home to see what's inside of the,

2 (40m 2s):
Yeah. Was way ahead of its time. And often when that happens, businesses don't make it because they're too early, which

3 (40m 11s):
I think it's 95% of the time or something like that on the metrics. And we were, I think we were seven years before the vibrancy of the market. So it's a very unusual story to be alive that long.

2 (40m 25s):
So you have this device that comes out of 97 and how did the user experience this device? It was, you buy this thing, it's an, a docking station. And then what you go to the audible website and there's a menu of things. You can get car talk, you can get the speeches from whatever the Commonwealth club, whatever it was. And you would all a cart by those things. And then they would download to this device that was connected to your computer, through a serial port. Am I, am I describing this right,

3 (40m 56s):
Exactly. Right. That's how it worked. And now it did take a long time to come down. The internet was incredibly choppy over the phone lines before broadband. So we had really sophisticated resume features, which ended up being another things people celebrated for our tech chops later, because it would drop off. And that way, you know, it was always kind of waiting for you in the morning. And then you were supposed to drive to work and come home and put it back in the dock and get to work smarter than the guy in the next cube, as we used to say, and that was it. Now it should be said, it sounded like crap. I mean, the audio quality was not good.

3 (41m 38s):
It literally sounded like somebody talking to you with a COVID mask in the bottom of a bathtub or something, it was just not, it was not good audio, but we kept pushing the science forward. So guy and I would go around and visit these rocket scientists who develop codex and we would work.

2 (42m 0s):
The codex is, I should say, I say, sure, cause I'm an audio, right?

3 (42m 3s):
But it's a, it's an, it's basically a software algorithm that th that deals with the compression factor of the audio and gives you, you know, relative sound clarity versus not. And we did push the labs out there to make much better sounding audio, you know, even month over month, that allowed us to the clarity to go up. But in the end, you know, the user experience was really clunky and primitive to the point that when I meet people who are original customers, I always say, we should have been paying you

2 (42m 37s):
Done. When you pitch this idea to investors, you talked about 93 million commuters people in their cars not using that time valuably. Well, this device was not designed for the car. So who was when this came back in November of 1997, did you sell any of them? Was it successful?

3 (42m 58s):
We did the sell many, but the people who got them, they did use them in their car. They just, they plugged them into a little speaker that said on their seat. We gave them a cassette converter that we had that would,

2 (43m 15s):
Oh, yes. You could put that in your customer that yes. And then it would play out of your speakers and you could plug that into the output. Yeah.

3 (43m 22s):
But it costs us $208 to make that little device. And we tried to sell it for $215. Wow. And that was a lot of money for people to get something that, you know, was of that quality. And mostly that they didn't even understand what it was.

2 (43m 43s):
So, I mean, it comes out in 97 and this is your product that all these investment banker, you know, venture capitalists put money in. And it sounds like it was a bomb.

3 (43m 57s):
Yeah. It was kind of a, a bomb, but it didn't, we didn't ever stop to think that way. We just kinda went forward thinking like, what are we going to do now? And of course the tech deliverables were so difficult. I mean, I have to tell you being in the hardware business to this day, if it's not an easy business, is anyone who makes hardware will tell you. But I just remember missing a milestone. There was a big milestone for another funding. And I get to this company called flex tronics, which is a very sophisticated contract and effect manufacturing company. That was the player. And I just said, Hmm, what do you mean? It's another three months. He said, we're out of crystals.

3 (44m 40s):
I said, what do you mean we're out of crystals? He said, do you know about crystals? I said, I think I know about Chrysalis. He said, well, Dan, you can't shit, a crystal. So I had to grow them. They had to grow the frigging crystals.

2 (44m 56s):
These are crystals for the, for the liquid crystal display

3 (44m 60s):
Crystals that were in the, in the, you know, in the device. And it, you know, it couldn't believe how, you know, how complicated it was to get this thing built,

2 (45m 11s):
Done at a certain point, I guess in the first years you ended up bringing on a guy named Andrew Huffman to become the CEO. And he, he died. I mean, 1999, he was just there for a couple of years. And what,

3 (45m 26s):
Yeah. So Andy Huffman was a pure tech guy and, you know, really, really good guy, but he was absolutely pure product and tech guy. Yeah. And in that period, what I was doing, and now we're talking 99 was convincing by venture capitalists that they weren't the Cowboys anymore. Because what was going on was a bizarre situation in 98, 99, where companies like ours were going public and they were grabbing a whole lot of money. It

2 (45m 57s):
Was, this was the boom. And it

3 (46m 0s):
Was very much a bubble, but it was a bubble that I did not want to miss because if nothing else, my London school of economics training is like, when capital is costs, almost nothing, you probably should take it. So I just, we pushed,

2 (46m 16s):
You went to your, you went to your investors and you said, I want to go public.

3 (46m 19s):
Yeah. And then of course, you know, most of them said, what are you talking about? You know, you only have 3,800 customers. You know? So Robin Williams had come in and bought like 500,000 shares of common stock before it went public. He was part of the Roach. And he was cause he's real techie guy. And, and so it was a blast actually. And the whole thing of, of selling, of going to Europe and selling the slate, there was a real experience.

2 (46m 47s):
And how did you do by the way, when you went

3 (46m 49s):
Public great. We walked away with almost $40 million. We had 5,700 customers. The

2 (46m 55s):
Investors made a great return. Yeah.

3 (46m 57s):
But in that year, a few months later, Andy at 39 years old was a university of Maryland basketball star was playing basketball on a Saturday with people like Ralph Samson. It was a great NBA star from the past and others in a New Jersey game. And he died of a brain aneurysm. And, and this was, you know, one of those moments where I realized I was the only person of the 38 of us who'd ever experienced sudden loss and trauma. And I brought in actually a great friend who was a grief counselor and we kind of worked this through together, but it, it ended up, I think, stealing those of us who were left to a survivor mentality that probably served us well.

2 (47m 52s):
All right. So you guys go public and the fall of 1999, and by the spring of 2000, the.com bubble burst it crashes. So I think, I think when a company goes public, the officers have to have to hold their stock. Right. Like they can't sell the stock immediately. So yeah. I mean, did, did anybody make money off of audible going public? Yeah. A bunch

3 (48m 17s):
Of venture capitalists certainly did because, because

2 (48m 20s):
They could, yeah.

3 (48m 21s):
Yeah. A couple of them and the here's the term in the day was like, you know, a w yeah, I would never have sold. I mean, I thought, you know, I thought it was, you know, I was told it was immoral for a founder to sell it sheriffs stock. And I took that fairly seriously, but some of our VCs right after we went public began to, as the term was puke out their shares in very public filings. And they were right. I mean, they, they made a lot of money off a lot of all. And because what happened next was not pretty, but, you know, I should say for context, I've heard that there were 1500 public internet companies at the beginning of 2,140 at the beginning of 2003.

3 (49m 7s):
So there were combinations there, there were some takeovers or other things that went on, but it was that kind of, you know, of decimation and the stock price, which was one $29 or something. It went down to 4 cents at the end of 2004 cents.

2 (49m 32s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Don was able to chart a new path for audible, with help from one of the smartest and scariest people in Silicon valley, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

0 (49m 52s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Grifols senior director of corporate affairs. Vlasta Hakes explains the science behind the plasma derived medicines. The company produces

6 (50m 3s):
Plasma, contains proteins and antibodies. There are people who are missing those antibodies, or they're missing a protein that helps their body function. And what Grifols then does is we collect this plasma and then I select those proteins and antibodies to produce a medicine,

0 (50m 19s):
To learn more about donating plasma and to find a Griffel center near you visit Grifols plasma.com

2 (50m 27s):
Support for this podcast. And the following message come from living proof. Does your hair need a fall reset reveal? Your hair's full, healthy potential with living proof, their award-winning products are engineered to solve the toughest hair problems, never conceal

1 (50m 43s):
Them designed to leave you with cleaner, healthier, more brilliant hair for longer living proof products, never contain silicones, parabens and sulfates unlock your hair's natural brilliance@livingproof.com slash built.

2 (51m 4s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this guy Roz. So it's 2001. the.com bubble has burst Audible's stock price plummeted. And Don Katz is trying to stay calm.

3 (51m 18s):
I was incredibly anxious, but I just kind of had an attitude about it because we weren't out of capital yet. You know, and we had investors who had not given up hope and it felt like there was just always another reason to keep fighting.

2 (51m 39s):
It's still it's on. I mean, your stock was down. You guys weren't profitable yet. I mean, the market for what you were making, hadn't really taken off. So how are you strategizing? I mean, how are you going to guide the company through such a tough time? Well,

3 (51m 56s):
What happened during this period of time, as we did hunker down, and when you went public, you had to basically be trained to say one thing to all the fund investors, which was, we are technology agnostic. And what that was code for was that we will not build, or you say the word platform, because the word was in the nineties and life has changed a lot. Is that if the, if anyone said they were building a platform, Microsoft would make it their business to destroy your company. Right? And so, which, you know, if you look at some of the suits against myself, that there was some pretty good evidence, it was true.

3 (52m 36s):
So we decided to not be technology agnostic. And during this period, when nobody was looking, we decided to take our pretty good science and, and call this the audible ready platform, which would be the defacto way that spoken word was transmitted and played back in the new generation of MP3 players that were coming up. And we not only got all those deals done, we had Texas instruments, chips that were already audible ready. So when the dust started to clear a little bit in life, started to get a little bit better. We come out with all these MP3 players, which people were buying at the time with our bits inside the device and our marketing collateral inside the box.

3 (53m 24s):
So it kind got hard to compete with us at that particular time, because we were of all these different companies that wanted to be doing the same kind of thing in a pretty good position. So that was one of those, you know, I always think, you know, you get to where we got by having about 51% of the things you're doing, being smart Siena, named us the number one entertainment app on the web and, you know, things that made us feel pretty good. But as you also point out, the, the financial stuff got really dark and being a public company was not fun.

3 (54m 4s):
Yeah.

2 (54m 5s):
I mean, I mean, it would still take a couple of years before MP3 players would take off. And of course that happened with the iPod, which we'll get to in a moment, but how were you getting rights for audio books? Because audio books were still books on cassette and books on CD. So how are you getting the rights to get a digital versions of that? Was it hard or was it pretty easy?

3 (54m 29s):
No, it was definitely hard. And it was, it was difficult to bridge a world that is very much not technology focused,

2 (54m 39s):
Publishing

3 (54m 39s):
No book publishing as a is, is people who love books, meaning that they're willing to get paid less, or they have the wherewithal to not get paid a lot. And, you know, and they go into a world and usually they stand for the status quo and they usually resist, you know, technological change in particular and others. It's a, it's a longer story, but it's, it's been, it's been like this forever. So, so it was difficult, but eventually we did start to break through and be able to carry these audio books at a different cost. And then the other thing that we did figure it out was, was the subscription model.

2 (55m 20s):
Yeah. How did that, cause from what I understand, it was up until this point, it was, you buy a player, which you're asking a lot of people you're asking them to spend 200 bucks on an MP3 player and then 10, $5 on a book. That's a lot to ask people. Right. Yeah.

3 (55m 35s):
And that was the challenge. So what if you just got an audio book a month and a player and you get a year subscription and that really helped. That helped a lot. Particularly since at that point we had these audible ready devices that other people, you know, but, but we started giving away a little blue MP3 player called the Otis. We got rid of the audible mobile player and let that become the artifact it needed to be.

2 (56m 5s):
And the oldest was free if you got a subscription. Yep.

3 (56m 9s):
And we just gave

2 (56m 10s):
Him more. And what was the, what was the commitment you have to do a year subscription or

3 (56m 14s):
It was a year. It

2 (56m 15s):
Was a year commitment. And what was the price?

3 (56m 17s):
It was actually 9 95 for two audio books when we started a month. Yeah. A month. And it gained traction. Yeah. And frankly, the, you know, the phone call I got around this period from Cupertino, California from Steve jobs was a, was a Ray of hope. That was really meaningful.

2 (56m 38s):
Okay. So let's talk about this. Steve jobs calls you in 2001 and he said, Hey, I like this thing you're making,

3 (56m 45s):
He did. He said more than that. He said, tell me about this round, tripping, how you bookmark the content. I said, a reason I want to hear more about this. And then he asked all sorts of questions about the tech in very enthusiastically, which was kind of ironic because, you know, Steve was kinda known for, you know, not invented here view on tech stealing

2 (57m 5s):
Stuff. Yeah.

3 (57m 6s):
So, so, but he was very, very focused on this. And, and he, he went on actually to talk in ways that we began to have fairly rich conversations because we shared this historic view of the interplay of technology and invention and culture, this whole idea that, you know, from chisels and caves to parchment, you have this amazing creative unleashing. He understood. I was surprised for what I thought would be a pure tech guy, the golden age of radio and how, you know, what that meant and how the music business exploded with creativity when it's shifted from sheet music. I mean, so we talked about this kind of stuff.

3 (57m 47s):
And he told me that he would weep copiously when he listened to Edmund white read Charlotte's web and he's, you know, he, so he just basically decided to tell me that he had this plan around this iPod and that I went home. And I remember telling my wife that Steve said, he's going to spend $15 million marketing their audio player. And I said, can you imagine if we had $15 million to market, you know, at audible and this one thing led to another and the second generation iPod came out, it worked commercially with audible.

2 (58m 30s):
So basically you would plug in, cause you used to have a plug in your iPod to your computer through that, you know, interface and, and you would go to the audible website and that would download directly to the iPod.

3 (58m 42s):
Yeah. And that, that was it. And so you would, it would, it would load up and, and they were these, you know, sweet little devices. They were very cool. The only thing we didn't get to do was put our marketing collateral in the, you know, in the, in the

2 (58m 55s):
Boxes. So it didn't say audible anywhere.

3 (58m 57s):
It did say that it was audible ready. And that was the term that we'd kind of coined at the time. And that it started to mean something, at least in the world of people buying MP3 players. So we were able to garner our cost structure to be for the stakeholders who were going to get this. Yeah. You know, so we were able to target market to the people buying these newfangled, you know, players. And we were basically, you know, compatible with all of them. And once we started giving away minis, instead of, you know, our own player, it started to get better.

2 (59m 33s):
All right. So just to be clear, instead of giving away your own devices, as a way to get people to subscribe, you started to give away the apple iPod. And I think you did that for several years. I mean, I mean, Steve jobs kind of gave you a lifeline there. And so I'm assuming that pretty soon, you know, after that you just kind of stopped being a hardware company. Like, because eventually it would have been sort of pointless.

3 (59m 59s):
No, that's absolutely right. And you know, we were happy to get out of it and basically declare that, you know, the hardware was a means to an end. There wouldn't be other transmission methodologies. We know we had partnerships with everybody, including the companies that were making CD burners at the time. And the like, so I always wanted it to be a means to an end.

2 (1h 0m 18s):
You had a, I think by 2005, so you're now completely out of the hardware business. You're focused mainly on licensing audio and, and really you pivot towards audio books. When did that happen? What was the, what was the thinking around that?

3 (1h 0m 34s):
I think it was just because it took off 2007. We still had 20,000 audio books. Now we have many, many hundreds of thousands. Obviously we've been 20,000 audio books in 2007 and 45,000 other kinds of content, including Robin's programs, recruit your basis programs. The amazing Susie bright erotica series, which has had, which was

2 (1h 0m 57s):
Proper. These were pre podcasts. Oh, it was

3 (1h 0m 60s):
Before the term. Yes. Yeah. They were all short form programs. Yeah. They were just part of the repertoire. I mean,

2 (1h 1m 6s):
You became the global supplier of audio books to iTunes already in 2003. So by that point it was clear that audio books was where you were headed towards. What, what, what do you remember what the pivot point was? Where, where you were like, okay, we've broken through the publishing industry is, is, is cooperating. Yeah.

3 (1h 1m 27s):
I think that the, the utility of the service, the idea of positioning this as a way to use your time now, it was also true that only about 15% of the books coming out were an audio. So our crusade was always to get more audio books made or to try to get the rights ourselves from the agent and the author to get them made because we literally would run out of mysteries. And I would go at one point, I remember I put my wallet on the desks of the CEOs and the publishing entities. I said, I need more content. So at that point, it wasn't coming.

3 (1h 2m 8s):
And we broke in to getting the rights ourselves and making a whole lot of audio books. We also figured out how to make an audio book for about a 10th of the cost that the just using technology, you know, so we just started making a lot of audio books and, and it got better and better. And there was something called project Hollywood and in 2011 and 2012, where we just said, let's just go find out what the greatest actors will do. And when I heard Kate Winslet due to Risa Rica, one of the darkest Zola novels of all the Zola novels, you know, and people heard what she could do.

3 (1h 2m 50s):
I remember thinking we could take this whole thing to a new level and make this about acting as much as it's about writing

2 (1h 2m 59s):
Don, I think by 2005. So this is like 10 years since you launched the business here, you're 10 years in it's the first year you actually turn a profit. Yep. Just reflect on that show, reflect that for a moment. Because a lot of, well, I don't think enough people understand how long it can take, especially with a complex hardware slash content business. Like the one you created, how long it takes to actually make a profit. And, and even up until that point, I think 2005, you were still basically a small business. Right? I mean, you, you only had, you had fewer than a hundred employees, I think,

3 (1h 3m 35s):
Right? Yeah. Since, probably

2 (1h 3m 37s):
About right. You took an 80% pay cut to start this business in 1995 until 2005. Did you ever get back to what you were paid in 1995

3 (1h 3m 50s):
And salary? Yeah, I definitely, I definitely did. If you're, if you look at the, you know, the, the vesting and the equity pieces and all that, but

2 (1h 4m 0s):
Did you have to like cut family expenses and things like that for a

3 (1h 4m 3s):
While? Yeah. There must've been some hairy moments, but the truth of the matter is I said, I never really measured my ideas on money. I just, I always thought, you know, the number of customers, the retention rate, the kinds of, of amazing content we could make, including, you know, tons of original thinking. I dunno, that stuff turned me on more and, you know, I, I still probably approach things that way.

2 (1h 4m 33s):
So it's interesting. Cause we did a story about lynda.com, which eventually sold to LinkedIn and, and their rise and your rise really mirror each other. Cause you began around the same time. And I think, I think a lot of that has to do with broadband access.

3 (1h 4m 50s):
Yes. I mean, but obviously broadband access that, that download that system, they, they know the trust of, of, you know, of, of everything about from the e-commerce system to,

2 (1h 5m 0s):
To the system. And then we

3 (1h 5m 2s):
Just started to have, you know, which I guess now we have this massive kind of brand momentum brand equity in that like, I mean, things, people started discovering this, this thing called audible and we started to build up our teams. We started to expand internationally and kind of where, yeah, I admit it. I thought we'd be year three, which is why, you know, those survival years. But I got to tell you that the warrior spirit of those formative years, that is one of the reasons I still think we're so successful because the people that work at the company do try to see themselves as these kinds of people who want to invent and stay ahead as opposed to manage,

2 (1h 5m 48s):
You had this business plan, right. Which was audio delivered to people through the internet onto devices. But when you, when you think about that, right, do you almost wish that you would have, and, and there's no way to know, right. That businesses is most businesses just evolve. Like there really is no master plan like Jeff Bezos kind of at a plan, but it unfolded in ways that he probably couldn't really have anticipated all that maybe he did. But when you, when you, when you look back, do you often sort of kick yourself and say, God, I should have known from the beginning, this was going to be audio books and never have a wasted my time on the devices, on making the devices and just focused on the audio books.

3 (1h 6m 30s):
No, because then you're, you're not going to be the leader unless you take the big risk at the point that people don't believe. And you know, and then the question is how, how early is it? But I, you know, look, I am stunned by how quickly, you know, some of the companies formed after us did come together, but you know what most companies are based on productivity improvements. You it's like Uber gets you from here to here, like a taxi, but it just it's better. Most businesses, you know, have some level of productivity improvement, like all software businesses and the like that wasn't this idea.

3 (1h 7m 10s):
This was creating a media category. This was basically creating a spoken word category when it didn't exist in the country whose entire literary Canon was based on how we talked and told stories. I wanted to basically say there would be a spoken word category in the app called audible. If it had to be, it sat next to all permutations of video and movies and TV, it sat next to books and it sat next to music and we kind of pride this thing into the light. And that's just a little different than a better way to use your,

2 (1h 7m 51s):
You know, we we've told the story of Shopify, which was founded and continues to, to exist in Ottawa and lynda.com was an OHI, California. And then in Ventura, California, these were not in, not near sand hill road in Silicon valley or in Seattle. And you were based in, in, in Wayne, New Jersey and then moved to Newark, which was not a place of a company as we're going. I mean, it was still big parts of that city in 2007 were still boarded up. Parts of it are still boarded up today.

3 (1h 8m 24s):
I mean, you could just go all the way. Newark was thought to be a scary city. I mean, Newark was everything you heard about Newark was that this was a place that, you know, time had forgotten and that it was just crime ridden and had nothing good going for that was the word. And frankly, that's why I wanted to move us there when it came. But we were outgrowing this very ramshackle headquarters, which instantly was $12 a square foot with furniture and wiring talk about, you know, you know, cost-effective, we needed to go somewhere. And I said, let's move to downtown Newark.

3 (1h 9m 4s):
And besides we were becoming at that point, the largest employer of actors in the New York area, which been for awhile, and I said, the actors can jump on at Penn station. They can get off at broad street station, the board guys, and the consultants said, you're out of your mind, you're gonna, you're gonna lose. We think 30% of your workforce simply by moving that far and, and all the fear factor. And, you know, we moved in with 120 people and nobody left. And we started to just try to create either models that other companies or other cities could use to just be part of a city's comeback.

2 (1h 9m 49s):
So, so what kinds of things were you doing?

3 (1h 9m 52s):
So one of the first things we did was just said, you can't be a nepotistic intern anymore. Yeah. You gotta be a kid from Newark and you'll be a paid intern in our little world. So then you get like this carpet culture, which includes these incredible cutting edge technologists and all these English majors turned into business. People like me and then all the best, some of the best actors in the world hanging out and these kids and, and you start to realize that this is an unusually rich company culture. And, you know, we, we started paying our employees $500 after taxes, rent a frame. And if they moved downtown Newark and to be part of the urban pioneers, I started Newark venture partners, which has become a, a re an international level of success drawing companies from all over the world to Newark, to an accelerator.

3 (1h 10m 46s):
It's anyways, it's just applying the kind of entrepreneurial thinking that gets to create an audible to, to, you know, to, to social purpose.

2 (1h 10m 57s):
In 2007, your annual revenue at audible was like $110 million. And in January of 2008, Amazon announced that they would acquire audible for $300 million in cash, which in, in retrospect, they got a great deal for you. Look back on it, especially given that your revenue is 110 million the year before, obviously you didn't control the company, you were a shareholder, but at the time, did you think it was the right move for audible?

3 (1h 11m 31s):
At the time, I was the only one who thought it was a right move. So this was me. And it was a blast to be a NASDAQ CEO, even all the trials and tribulations. There were things about it that I, I love because it was just another adventure into a new world. But by the time 2007, 2008 came along, I was really in a moral crossroads because, you know, if you read everything from the law to Milton Friedman, the only purpose of, of a CEO and a chair and CEO as I was, is to enrich their shareholders.

2 (1h 12m 10s):
I mean, maximize shareholder profit,

3 (1h 12m 11s):
That's what it is. And so I was basically working for people that I stopped feeling like I was honestly waking up in the morning. I was in caring about them. And it was very hard to, because a lot of them were fricking computer programs that were whipping our stock around after hours in various complex high velocity models. And others were 100% speculators who could have cared less about being real investors. And I just wasn't into it. And on top of that, I knew that if I could hook back in with Jeff and with Amazon, we can have access to several hundred million people with credit cards who were likely to be our customers.

3 (1h 13m 2s):
We would go even faster and we'd have that many more millions of people, the freedom to even do the things doing in Newark that was meaningful to me. And it's, it's, you know, it's somewhat rare, a lot of founders don't, you know, they go away as soon as a transaction happens, but yeah, but in this case, it's an independent subsidiary that works,

2 (1h 13m 23s):
You know, it's interesting. A lot of Amazon has a lot of haters, right? Cause it's 800 pound gorilla on the block and it's just going to happen. It's going to be that way. But if you look at Amazon compared to other giants that acquire the companies, they, they really do. They have a great track record of allowing their, their acquisition companies to remain independent. I mean, look at Zappos. We had Tony, the, the late Tony Shay was a guest on our show, an amazing entrepreneur. I mean, that company was, and is totally independent. Audible is an Amazon company, but it, it it's, you stayed on, I think I was thinking about this.

2 (1h 14m 3s):
You stayed on as CEO of audible after Amazon acquired you for as long as you were the head of the company when it was independent, when, when it was. So that alone suggests that it was a pretty good marriage.

3 (1h 14m 21s):
Yeah. It's a pretty unusual story. And I frankly can't believe that it's now longer than my, than my writing career. And also, you know, come on, let's face it. Most people know that, you know, senior people at Amazon get paid in Amazon stock stocks. We did the transaction. The stock was like $50 a share. You might want to check out what it is now. So one way or another, whatever happens from here, it's been an amazing adventure and not many people I know at two careers where you get to turn ideas into reality. It's, it's, I've been pretty, pretty lucky.

2 (1h 15m 1s):
A lot of things happen to a lot of people that are lucky. I know you've mentioned meeting your wife for example, is because they lucky moment. And I would say the same about mine I'm to have, or, or the fact that Yon winners had go to go to Spain and cover this thing. And you met all these, like these guys who covered the, you know, the Spanish, civil war, like, Hey, yeah, we'll show you the ropes here. You know, somebody who, who, who gave you lucky break or this guy Mott who thought your idea was, was great when everyone else thought it was cookie. So there, there were a lot of lucky moments, but you also grinded and grind it and worked really hard. But when you think about this story that you've told me and you reflect on it, how much of it do you think has to do with luck and how much do you think has to do with the work you put in?

3 (1h 15m 49s):
I think it's something on the order of 54.5 to 51% purposeful, good calls and, and brave moments. And, and times when you just didn't give up the rest of it is definitely luck because otherwise, how could, I've made so many stupid boneheaded decisions along the way that didn't didn't kill us. So I think there's a fine line. You're making calls all the time. And particularly if you're a leader, you kind of got to do it. But I, I don't know. I think about it, you know, about it all the time, but I feel I was out there playing ice hockey last night.

3 (1h 16m 30s):
And you know, not many people my age get to play ice hockey is that luck. I think it's luck. And I think it's also that I just made it my business to try to elongate my hockey career. And I do a lot of stuff to make that real

2 (1h 16m 46s):
That's Don Katz, founder, and executive chairman of audible. By the way, a few years back, the company put together a list of some of its most popular audio books. Over the past 20 years, the best-selling memoir was bossy pants by Tina Fey, the bestselling business book, the seven habits of highly effective people, the most repeated listened was Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's stone, which makes a lot of sense. And here's one that all of you can probably guess in advance. The most searched Tor author on audible over the past 20 years was of course, Stephen King. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week.

2 (1h 17m 28s):
If you don't follow our show, please do follow wherever you listen to podcasts. If you want to write to us, our email address is H ivt@npr.org. If you want to follow the show on Twitter, it's at how I built this or my personal account at <inaudible>. Our Instagram is at how I built this NPR and mine at guy dot Ross. This episode was produced by Janesville Lucy with music composed by Raptiva Arab bluey. He was edited by NEPA grant with research help from Claremore Ashima. Our production staff also includes Casey Herman, Liz Metzker, Farah safari, JC Howard of Julia Carney and Elaine coats intern is Katherine cipher.

2 (1h 18m 8s):
Jeff Rogers is our executive producer guy Roz, and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.

7 (1h 18m 20s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, click up a productivity tool that saving people one day a week by bringing all your work into one place loved by 200,000 plus teams and companies like Uber it's free forever. So sign up today at <inaudible> dot com slash NPR.

2 (1h 18m 39s):
What does it take to start something from nothing? And what does it take to actually build it? I'm guy Ross every week on how I built this, I speak with founders behind some of the most inspiring companies in the world. NPR is how I built this. Listen now.