wondery Plus (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How I, Built This Early, and ad free Right. now join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts.

Babson College (10s):
The world needs more entrepreneurial leaders. And at Babson College you can become one, gain the skills to lead, motivate, and inspire through a specialized master's or MBA program with full-time, part-time, and online options. Just this year, Babson was ranked 10th best college in the country by the Wall Street Journal. And for 30 years it's been ranked the number one school in entrepreneurship by US News and World Report. At Babson, you'll experience what it takes to lead inside and outside the classroom with experiential learning opportunities and businesses that have become household brands. Find out what your future holds and put thought into action at Babson College. Apply today at babson.edu/grad programs.

Happy Egg (58s):
Listen, everybody murder, it's not happy, but your breakfast should be happy. Happy Egg makes intentional choices throughout their business so that you can make the easy choice. When shopping for eggs to choose Happy, happy Egg partners with small family farmers to raise their hens with the Happy Egg free range standard of care you wanna hear about it? It's pretty great. It's on eight plus acres of farmland with access to fresh water, nutritious feed, and space to roam and groove. I feel like, because I think the hens over at Happy Egg, I think they're grooving 'cause they're just happy. And you know what? This goes above the requirements for traditional free range farming. They believe and they know that this is better for their birds. And I agree, high fives to them. All of this results in eggs with the plumpish orange jokes that are full of flavor. I'm telling you, I've been eating them nonstop. I can't get enough. When you crack that egg open and see the color of that beautiful, huge yoke, you'll not believe your eyes. It's the most beautiful. It's like a sunset. I've never seen anything like it. Honestly. The proof is right there inside the shell. Look for the yellow cartons in a store near you. Visit happy egg.com/morbid to find a store near you that carries Happy Egg. Keep it weird, but keep it happy.

Rocket Money (2m 23s):
If I asked you how many subscriptions you have, would you be able to list all of them and how much you're paying? If you would've asked me this question before I started using Rocket Money, I would've said yes. But let me tell you, I would've been so wrong. I can't believe how many I had and all the money I was wasting. Rocket Money is a personal finance app that finds and cancels your unwanted subscriptions, monitors your spending, and helps lower your bills. Rocket Money has over 5 million users and it has helped save its members an average of $720 a year with over 500 million in canceled subscriptions. Stop wasting money on things you don't use. Cancel your unwanted subscriptions by going to Rocket money.com/ Wondery. That's rocket money.com/ Wondery. Rocket money.com/ Wondery.

0 (3m 15s):
Hey, it's guy here. You know, we talk a lot on this show about hustle and recently I spoke to actor Andy Garcia, who shared some amazing stories about starting out in Hollywood where he worked on a loading dock with another newcomer, Brian Cranston, and he was also a catering waiter at the Beverly Hilton serving dinner to stars like Jane Fonda. But just a few years later, he was literally making dinner and talking about the Corleone family with Francis Ford Coppola. Check out my conversation with Andy Garcia on my other podcast. The Great Creators Just search for the great creators with Guy Raz, wherever you listen to podcasts, and now onto today's show.

4 (4m 3s):
So I first set up a tripod in my apartment and I took photos of myself wearing all the clothes and I printed out a little pamphlet. And so my theory was to go into Fred Siegel and basically be wearing the clothes. And I just walked in and I was like, Hey, is the buyer here? And the girl at the counter I remember just kind of laughed at me. You know, I mean, the thing is, it was such a high profile store that I think she thought I was nuts. Nobody walks in off the street to Fred Siegel and gets a meeting.

0 (4m 42s):
Welcome to How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz. And on the show today how Paige Mycoskie couldn't find the clothes she liked, bought a sewing machine to make her own, and turned her colorful outfits into the brand Aviator Nation. For better or worse fashion trends start in very particular places in the us. Those places happen to be New York and Los Angeles. I live just north of San Francisco and it doesn't take long for LA Trends to make their way up the 1 0 1 to Northern California.

0 (5m 30s):
Anyway, about two years ago, I started to notice a lot of people initially yoga moms and their daughters wearing a very particular type of zip up hoodie. You couldn't miss it. It had five stripes, yellow, orange, red, blue, and navy, like a sunset over water. And I figured that hoodie must come from LA and I was right. It was a brand that seemed to explode to come out of nowhere overnight. I even started to notice it on TikTok at the gym in the grocery store. It was everywhere. So I figured, well, it must be one of those one hit wonder brands that'll fizzle out pretty soon. But there I was wrong.

0 (6m 11s):
The brand Aviator Nation was actually started in 2006. Its Rise was a slow burn to say the least. Its founder Paige Mycoskie started out by making clothing for herself. She'd rifled through the racks at thrift shops around Venice Beach, fined vintage sweatshirts and paste designs onto them, things like rainbows and lightning bolts. They had a late seventies California beach vibe. And as often happens on this show, people started asking Paige to make one for them. Initially she sold her sweatshirts to small boutiques in la, but eventually they did so well.

0 (6m 51s):
Paige was able to open up a small store of her own. She didn't have money for advertising, but she happened to be in Los Angeles, which as I mentioned earlier is where fashion trends tend to begin. Aviator Nation eventually branched out beyond sweatpants and shirts to jackets, hats, bags, and denim. And it grew slowly but steadily, not crazy out of proportion sales, but growth each year. But unlike many other successful founders, Paige never took on any investment. She is the main owner of Aviator Nation. During the Pandemic, when more casual close became a lot more popular and practical, Aviator Nation began to go viral on TikTok and sales exploded from 27 million to more than 130 million today.

0 (7m 42s):
Paige Makowski grew up in the 1980s in Texas. Her dad was a doctor for the Texas Rangers and her mom became a bestselling cookbook author later in life. As for Paige, she loved art and sports and studied photography in college. In the early two thousands, kind of on a lark, she and her brother Blake applied to compete on a new reality show called Survivor

4 (8m 8s):
Back then. I don't know how it is now, but you send in like a three minute video and that's how you apply. Yeah. So anyway, he sent in his video I sent in mine and like our big thing was like, okay, like let's make this a competition. Let's see who can get on. And like it was so funny, a couple weeks later he called me and he is like, did you get a call? And I'm like, yeah. I'm like, did you get a call? And so we both got a call from CBS to basically come to an interview and we obviously were like, this is so weird. I wonder if they know, you know, that we both tried out if they know they're asking us both to come in. They

0 (8m 38s):
Didn't know that you were brother and sister at that point.

4 (8m 40s):
No, they didn't. And so anyway, we went to our interviews and then we got a second call. We were both being called back. And then finally, I think part three was for all the final people to come to LA and apparently they were going to put us in front of Les Moonvest, the president of CBS, and then he was gonna choose the ultimate contestant. So wow. He sits us down and he's like, okay, Blake and Paige. It was not until literally this week that we knew we had two Micky's here. I love you both and I would love to have either of you on Survivor. He was like, but I can't put both of you on Survivor. So you can have the choice, you can either decide amongst yourself who's gonna do Survivor or he's like, I have this new show, amazing Race, and I can actually put you both on the show as a team.

4 (9m 28s):
Wow. And then you can compete together. And we were like, what's Amazing Race? 'cause the first season hadn't even start started yet. Yeah, apparently they had just filmed the first season and so this would be for the second season. And he explained that to us and he said, well it's a race around the world. Same prize, a million dollars to the, to the winner, but you don't have to go, you know, survive on a deserted island. Instead you're gonna race around the world as a team. And we were like, oh, this sounds amazing. Yes, we wanna do Amazing Grace. I mean, we knew right away that we didn't want one of us to not be able to do it. Yeah. So we were like, let's go, let's be a team. And so anyway, we agreed right there that we would be his first team casted for the second season of Amazing Grace.

0 (10m 8s):
Those are details that I did not get from my interview with your brother, who I'm now gonna reveal as the founder of Tom's Shoes. And we we're gonna talk about that in a few minutes, but Blake was on our show and we told the story of how he created Tom's and of course that was part of it. So you're the other half of the story. This is your perspective now of how you got onto the Amazing Race. So you got onto that show and it was around the world trip, or you had to go from, where did you have to go from and to

4 (10m 35s):
Yeah, so it was a race around the world. We started actually in Las Vegas and they dropped us off in helicopters in the middle of the desert. And basically we had to find our way to an airport. And then the first stop was Brazil and we went to Hong Kong, we went to Australia, New Zealand, multiple places in Africa. And Blake and I, you know, both had never traveled. I think he had been to Europe, but I had never traveled at all. So it was, it was pretty wild.

0 (11m 6s):
And the premise was like they gave you a small budget and then you have to survive off that budget and make your way around the world. Like, and that meant that sometimes you'd sleep like outside oftentimes, or like in the jungle or I mean it was sort of like survivor meets around the world in 80 days.

4 (11m 23s):
Yeah, absolutely. It was, it was interesting because the show was pretty much just starting and so they had a very low budget and it was kind of like a, a scavenger hunt, but at the same time we had no money and we're racing around the world. And so Blake and I always thought that our money should go into buying a guidebook because we had no cell phones, no computers, nothing like that. And then we just sacrificed, we were like, okay, like we would buy a, like a loaf of bread literally and eat it for three days. That would be our food. Yeah. And then we would sleep On the street. And that was our strategy

0 (11m 57s):
Because if you, if you run outta money, you can't get to the next stop basically. You're done. Yeah,

4 (12m 2s):
Totally. You're done.

0 (12m 4s):
What was the hardest thing you did during the Amazing Race?

4 (12m 7s):
I remember when we were in Australia, we went to this place called Cooper pd. I just remember like just getting sunburned like bad and it being in this extreme heat and having to like trek through the desert and it was just so brutal. I remember physically just feeling completely exhausted. I lost like 30 pounds on that show. I had like no body fat. Yeah. Because we weren't eating. Yeah.

0 (12m 32s):
How, how long was the journey total? In total?

4 (12m 34s):
Yeah. So it was six weeks.

0 (12m 36s):
Wow. And at the end of the Rainbow was literally a pot of gold and it was a million dollars to the winner and the the, and you had to get back to Las Vegas within six weeks.

4 (12m 44s):
So yeah, we ended up, the finish line was actually in San Francisco.

0 (12m 47s):
And what happened as you approached San Francisco?

4 (12m 50s):
Yeah, so when we got to San Francisco, we were down to the last three teams and when we got there we had to find something and we, and I was looking at the map and Blake took the map outta my hands and was like, no, we're going this way. I know it's this way. And like kind of made this like executive decision to go basically in the wrong direction. And, and it's, it's like a funny thing now we joke about because we ended up losing the race by four minutes in the end. And I always joke with him that he owes me a million dollars and he agrees. Oh,

0 (13m 23s):
Four minutes. Yep. I mean it must've been crushing, but obviously looking back on it, for starters, it was a great launching pad for Blake and eventually for you just, I mean this literally that trip helped inspire Blake to start Toms right? Like I guess it went back to Argentina after. And that really was the beginning of his exposure to this idea that maybe he could start business making shoes and giving a pair away.

4 (13m 51s):
Yeah, I mean I think for both of us, we just learned so much about breaking through the barriers because there really were like when you travel, I mean everyone knows it's stressful to travel, but on those conditions we really kind of hit a lot of struggles along the way. And I think that both of us were just so close to that million dollars and then losing it that like, I think we both just wanted to do big things. I think we were both just kind of like, let's just go out and and make it. Anyway.

0 (14m 20s):
Alright, so that experience ended and I think for a time you actually worked at CBS on Survivor as like a casting person, but really that was not gonna be sort of your long-term career.

4 (14m 33s):
No, not at all. After the race, we decided to just kind of move to la. I really wanted to be in LA anyway. I kind of fallen in love with surfing and the CBS people, you know, offered me the job at Survivor to do casting. But I realized pretty soon that it wasn't really for me, I didn't love the travel and so I started kind of working at a surf shop on the side and, but I was a little all over the place at that time.

0 (14m 59s):
You started working at a surf shop called zj Boarding House? I think it's still there. Yep. In Santa Monica. Like full-time.

4 (15m 6s):
Yeah, I started as data entry and I was basically putting in orders for the buyers. It was funny, I would be going through catalogs, putting in his order and then I would look at my buyer and be like, you know, are you sure you wanna order this one? Because I think, I think these shoes are actually like way cooler and I think this hoodie is like way cooler. And I always just kind of had a knack for what people would want and like, so he would say, okay, let's try that, let's try that. And then we would order it and then it would sell out. And so he saw that I was really good at choosing what should go in the store and so he ended up making me his buyer's assistant. And so then I started going to trade shows and it was so fun.

4 (15m 47s):
I got to pretty much choose what we were gonna carry and I shifted pretty much what he was ordering, kind of more of the safe items and I always wanted the more risky items.

0 (15m 57s):
Yeah. What were you into, what were the kinds of looks that you, you were attracted to?

4 (16m 0s):
I always wanted the really crazy stuff. You know, the funky colors, the stuff that a lot of people in retail would say that nobody really wants to buy. And I always believed that like if you had a little bit of the crazy and you still had the blacks and the whites and the neutrals, like that stuff actually looks cooler when it's paired with a little bit of the crazy stuff.

0 (16m 20s):
I guess at a certain point you decided to just for fun, start learning how to make clothes. Like you bought a sewing machine and I guess some instructional DVDs.

4 (16m 33s):
Yeah, so I just, you know, I had all these ideas in my head. I, I was really, really specific about what I personally wore. I really liked things that felt super broken in. I wanted really soft clothing all the time and, and I naturally ended up shopping in thrift stores and at Goodwill and flea markets and, and I was starting to get more and more specific about like, I would see something that I liked but it wouldn't fit the way I wanted it to fit. Or I would have something, I liked the way it fit, but it wasn't the color I wanted. And you know, growing up my grandmother made her own clothes and I spent a lot of time with her and it kind of just hit me, you know, I think I'm gonna buy a soy machine and just make what I'm looking for.

4 (17m 21s):
Right. And I, I got some money for my birthday. It was in 2006 and I remember I ordered a couple books on sewing and DVDs and I taught myself to sew. I taught myself to make patterns. I just could not wait to get home from work and play around on my sewing machine. And I remember honestly like no joke, staying up all night long, making clothes. I was completely obsessed. And then I started wearing, you know, the clothes to work and that's kind of where it started is everybody was just like, what is that? That is, that's so dope. That's a rad shirt. What is that?

0 (18m 1s):
Tell me what, what they look like. 'cause I guess you were using a technique called applique and I'm, forgive me, I'm, I've never made my own clothes. Actually maybe. I think I did make a tie-dye shirt in camp once when I was a kid. And so I did, I have made my own clothes. Yeah. Sorry, what is applicate? I don't know what that is. Can you explain that to me?

4 (18m 18s):
Yeah, so my technique was, I basically had an idea of what the graphic was that I wanted on the shirt and I didn't know how to screen print or anything like that. So for me, I just drew the graphic on a different color, cut it out of fabric, and then sewed that fabric on top of the other garment.

0 (18m 35s):
Oh, okay.

4 (18m 36s):
So like a heart, you know, if I wanted a heart on the shirt, I would cut out a heart and then I would sew it on. So that's technically applique. Hmm. So a lot of it was stripes and shapes, hearts, sunsets, you know, and I would make it all, I would draw it on other colors of T-shirts, cut it out and then sew it onto the sweatshirt. Wow. And yeah, it was very handmade looking, but it also had this like super unique look 'cause I mean, nobody was really doing that. I just did it because it was the only thing that made sense in my head.

0 (19m 7s):
Yeah. And this was before the Lisa Frank revival that happened a couple years ago. Like those things, lightning bolts and hearts, that's like, it was not yet hadn't been cool in 2005, 2006 when you were doing it. So probably people were like, wow, that's, that's different.

4 (19m 23s):
Oh yeah, it was, it's so weird. It's like I look at the stuff I was literally painting, you know, as an 8-year-old girl and it, I'm kind of doing the same thing now.

0 (19m 33s):
Yeah. I'm curious, this is 2006, and this is around the time your brother Blake starting Tom's, which would become a huge business of course. Did you ever talk about maybe just joining him and 'cause that was a fashion brand that he was starting?

4 (19m 51s):
Yeah, it's a really funny story. So when I bought my sewing machine, which was in February, 2006, he was in Argentina and he was supposed to kind of decide what he was gonna do next. And he came back from Argentina and we were very, very close. And he goes, Paige, I have an idea and I wanna tell you about it. He came in and he was like, told me the whole thing. He said he was in Argentina and he was inspired by all the people that didn't have shoes there. And so he wanted to make a traditional Argentina shoe and like an Esper

0 (20m 24s):
Drill.

4 (20m 25s):
Yeah. And so his idea was obviously to give back to the people of Argentina by giving away a pair of shoes when he sold a pair. and it was so random. I mean, he had done nothing in retail and he was like, what do you think? You know? And I said, oh my god, that's so crazy. I was like, I literally bought a sewing machine a couple weeks ago and I've been making clothes. We literally are both thinking about getting into like the fashion industry and we both had no previous discussion about being in fashion at all. and it was just so, it was kind of a funny moment that we shared, but I, but we definitely had our own thing going.

0 (20m 58s):
Alright, so he's starting his business. You're, you're making sweatshirts and t-shirts mainly, right?

4 (21m 3s):
Yeah. And sweatpants. And

0 (21m 5s):
Sweatpants. Okay. And at what point did you think, well maybe I should sell these? Like how did it go from you just kind of making stuff on your sewing machine to selling it to people?

4 (21m 17s):
One day I was in Venice and I was walking around and I literally got stopped by like three or four different people in span of a couple hours asking me where they could buy my sweatpants. Where did you get those?

0 (21m 31s):
Wow. And these were sweatpants with just like colorful stripes along the sides. Yep.

4 (21m 36s):
And I just told him, of course I made it myself. Sorry, like I just made it myself, you know, but that happened like in one day, like three times and I was just like, this is actually crazy. Like, these people want to buy this. And I thought, I wonder if I could actually make clothes and sell them and make more money than I'm making right now at my job. And then I think it was like a few days later, I went to a trade show with my boss for Zj Boardinghouse and I was at the action sports trade show in San Diego and I was wearing something that I made to the trade show and it was like a feeding frenzy because all these people are there to buy, you know, whatever's the cool thing for their store. and it was like, I couldn't walk 20 feet without someone being like, what are you wearing?

4 (22m 17s):
What is that shirt? And I couldn't go anywhere. I mean people like were just outta control. Thought it was nuts. And so I knew when I got home, I was like, I'm gonna try to do this. I'm gonna try to actually make a collection and sell it

0 (22m 31s):
When we come back in just a moment. Paige makes some more clothes and takes them unannounced to one of the most exclusive boutiques in la. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This.

Factor (22m 52s):
Get ready for the new year with factor factors ready to eat meal delivery, takes the stress outta meal planning and sets you up for success. Skip the grocery stores, prep work and cooking fatigue instead, get chef curated dietician approved meals delivered right to your door with over 35 meals to choose from per week, including options like keto, calorie, smart, vegan, and veggie and more. You'll have a ton of nutritious and flavorful options to kickstart your resolutions. Factor has everything our family needs for the week. In addition to ready to eat meals, they have cold pressed juices, smoothies, energy bites, extra protein, veggie sides, and more to keep us energized even on frantic days. And when things get hectic, factor is flexible, you can change your order up every week or pause or reschedule your deliveries anytime. Head to factor meals.com/ibt 50 and use code HIBT 50 to get 50% off. That's code HIBT fifty@factormeals.com slash h IBT 50 to get 50% off.

NetSuite (24m 1s):
Your business gets to a certain size and the cracks start to emerge. Things you used to do in a day are taking a week. You have too many manual processes, you don't have one source of truth. If this is you, you should know these three numbers. 37,000 25, 1 30 7,000. That's the number of businesses which have upgraded to NetSuite by Oracle 25 NetSuite turns 25 this year. That's 25 years of helping businesses do more with less close that are books in days, not weeks. And drive down costs. One, because your business is one of a kind. So you get a customized solution for all of your KPIs in one efficient system with one source of truth, manage risk, get reliable forecasts and improve margins. Everything you need all in one place right now. Download NetSuite's popular KPI checklist designed to give you consistently excellent performance absolutely free at NetSuite dot com slash built. That's NetSuite dot com slash built to get your own KPI checklist NetSuite dot com slash built.

6 (25m 16s):
Hi guy, I am Javier and I'm listening to you from Santiago, from Chile. I listen to the podcasts every day actually on my daily commute. My favorite episode is the one about run the runway from 2017 because of two reasons. First, I use it as a short business case in a class that I teach about business models and entrepreneurship in a university here in Santiago because it teaches the importance of running tests and MVPs and all that fun stuff. But the most important one is the fact that anyone with a good idea and with a relentless focus on execution can build a business that impacts society.

6 (25m 57s):
And I think that's the reason of why I love your show so much. Thank you very much.

0 (26m 1s):
If you wanna share your favorite episode of How I, Built This record a short voice memo on your phone telling us your name, where you're from, what your favorite episode is, and why a lot like the voice memo you just heard. And email it to us at HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com and we'll share your favorites right here in the ad breaks in future episodes. And thanks so much. We love you guys. You are the best. And now back to the show. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 2006 and it seems like whenever Paige goes out wearing her handmade clothes, people ask her, where can I buy that?

0 (26m 48s):
So she decides to start selling them.

4 (26m 52s):
And so I decided I'm gonna quit my job, I'm gonna move home to Arlington, I'm gonna tell my parents that I am going to spend some time sewing only focused on these clothes that I was making and I was gonna try to start selling the clothes. And I, and I just felt like I needed to get into the craft. Like I needed to just be sewing. I needed to see what I could really do, you know? So I went back to Texas for May and June of 2006 and I pretty much did not leave the bedroom. I set up a workshop and I just sewed all day, all night. And I had like a rack outside my door and I was just making clothes

0 (27m 31s):
With the idea that you would then do what, you would bring it to a, a retailer and see if they would buy them and put them on the racks or you would sell them at a flea market or a at a trade show. What was your idea?

4 (27m 43s):
I basically did not really know at that time. I knew that I was gonna try to sell it to somebody back in California. I knew that California was the place where people were starting brands. So my plan was basically to try to get a collection Sona, because I knew that from being the buyer's assistant that people sell a collection, they don't just sell two things. So I needed to make an actual collection and then I would decide where I would try to sell it. But there was one store in particular that was what I thought was the best store in la it was Fred Segal in Santa Monica. Sure, yep. And that was always where I thought all the new up and coming brands and were being displayed and, and so my goal was to make a collection in Texas and then go back to LA and try to get Fred Segal to carry the brand.

0 (28m 33s):
Tell me what the designs looked like. I mean, again, was it t-shirts with sewn hearts on them? Was it, or lightning bolts or, or was it Stripes? Tell me what you, what it looked like.

4 (28m 45s):
Yeah, it was a lot of stripes. I would make like a little half sun so it would be like, like a sunset on a bunch of stripes. And then the lightning bolt was another thing that was really consistent. I just loved lightning bolts and all the stuff that I liked was from the seventies. I mean a lot of the kind of vintage stuff that IW wore and would buy would have kind of those seventies rainbows and stuff on them. I also had posters in my rooms and stuff of like cars that were from the seventies. I think that I get inspiration from the colors of cars and a lot of record albums and old skateboards.

0 (29m 26s):
And tell me about the sweatpants or the t-shirts or the, the sweatshirts. I mean you were buying those already off the rack or you were making those from scratch. You were actually designing the cut.

4 (29m 40s):
I was making them from scratch. So I would buy garments at Goodwill and thrift stores and just cut it up into a big piece of fabric. And then I would make my own garment from patterns that I would make. And the way that I would make the patterns is for me, and again, this is like totally no like fashion school and a lot of people probably think I'm crazy, but I would take my favorite garment, like let's say my favorite T-shirt. I would carefully take all of the stitching out of it and then I could lay it flat and then I had a puzzle. Like I had a piece of each part of the cons, the garment, and then I would trace that onto paper and I would have a pattern

0 (30m 19s):
Over that two, two and a half month period living in Texas. At your parents' H home, how many items of clothing do you think you made?

4 (30m 29s):
I would say I probably made around a hundred garments.

0 (30m 32s):
And what did your parents think about, about this? I mean, you were, were they supportive or were they like, hey, so what's the plan? Like, are you gonna get a job? Like what did they think?

4 (30m 44s):
Yeah, it's funny. I mean my mom is always like, just loves everything. My dad on the other hand is very, very supportive and encouraging, but he's also very analytical. And I'll never forget, we're sitting in the kitchen and I was like, okay, here's the thing. Like I, I made some clothes, I was wearing them around, people liked them. I think I'm gonna try to start a clothing brand. Well what do you think? Do you believe in this? And he was like, I'll give you like, I think he said six months to be profitable. He was like, if you're profitable in six months, then I'll believe in you. Something like that. That was like pretty hardcore. But like at the same time it made sense, you know, it was like a reasonable amount of time. So I said, okay, I gotta do this fast, it's gotta be profitable and I'm, I'm gonna miss stay focused, you know.

0 (31m 27s):
So after a few months in Texas, presumably you go back to LA And by the way, did you have a name for, for your label, for your brand at that point?

4 (31m 38s):
I thought of the name when I was back in California, like right after I got back. So I was basically sitting there in my bedroom and I had all the clothes around me and I think I probably lit a couple candles. I always do that. I'm like big into like setting the vibe. Wow,

0 (31m 52s):
You are definitely living the California, you're like, I'm

4 (31m 55s):
A vibe setter.

0 (31m 56s):
Yeah, you're like proving the, the stereotypes of like hippie dippy people in Southern California. You like the candles? Okay, I'm in your room, you're lighting candles.

4 (32m 4s):
Oh yeah, I mean like I I, and even, even today, like I don't start my work until I have candles lit. Oh my god. Wow. And music playing and like the right lighting.

0 (32m 13s):
I bet your cortisol levels are low. Yeah. Okay, that's good.

4 (32m 16s):
Yeah, so I kind of set my vibe and of course as a photographer I'm thinking to myself like, I'm gonna have to like shoot photos of this stuff and what's it gonna look like as a brand and literally on a shelf in my bedroom I have probably 30 pairs of Aviator sunglasses all different. Like I get 'em at flea markets and stuff and I always collected them and I always wore Aviator, I think, I think my first like obsession with aviators came from Tom Cruise and Kelly McGillis and Top Gun. 'cause that was my favorite movie. And I had the poster on my wall growing up and, and then I remember thinking like, what do I wanna do with this brand? Like, you know, this could be cool if it was like also bringing cool people together.

4 (32m 57s):
And the word Nation kind of came from that because I'm like, I want it to be like a group of people that are all wearing these cool sunglasses, this lifestyle hanging out at the beach, like surfing together friends. So anyway, I'm like Aviator Nation. Hmm. The very same night I was messing around with what I should do with the logo and I put the A and the N together and I realized that that was really cool. And then the lines that are in the a were meant to represent the sunset. Alright,

0 (33m 26s):
So you have a name and a logo and about a hundred garments. And so your goal is to get into Fred Siegel. And so how did you, how did you go about approaching them? Did you start to call them? Was there like a, a number for a buyer that you found? What did you do?

4 (33m 44s):
So it's like the calling people thing just doesn't work. And I kind of knew that from working at the surf shop because when people would call, I mean, it was just like leave a message. Like the buyer never really got back to most of the people calling. But I've seen people walk in off the street from working in the surf shop and, and being like, Hey, can I get a meeting? And sometimes you can. So I first set up a tripod in my apartment and I took photos of myself wearing all the clothes and I printed out paper like a little pamphlet of myself wearing all the clothes. And so my theory was to go into Fred Siegel and basically be wearing the clothes. And I just walked in and I was like, Hey, is the buyer here?

4 (34m 25s):
And the girl at the counter I remember just kind of laughed at me, you know, I mean the thing is, it was such a high profile store that I think she thought I was nuts. You know, like nobody walks in off the street to Fred Siegel Yeah. And gets a meeting and she's like, no, you know, the buyer's not here. And, and I said, okay, well can I just leave this behind for her? and it was the photos that I took of the clothes. And so she's like, okay, sure, I'll give it to her. And so I left the stuff behind and I got in my car and before I even left the parking lot, my phone rang and it was like the girl from inside and she's like, Paige, the buyer actually was just walking in when you were walking out. She happened to see you and what you're wearing. And I showed her the pictures and she loves it. Huh. And how soon can you meet?

4 (35m 6s):
She wants to meet you.

0 (35m 7s):
Wow.

4 (35m 8s):
Yeah. I was just like, what? And I'm like, tomorrow. And she's like, okay. And so I went back the next day I had my rolling rack and I put all my clothes on there and I rolled them into Fred Siegel. And of course I'm wearing the clothes and the buyer looked at the rack and she wanted all of it. She wanted everything.

0 (35m 26s):
Wow. Wow.

4 (35m 27s):
And so she wrote an order, a big order, and I think it added up to about $8,000. And I had my first order and she was like, so when do you deliver it? and it was funny because of course I have no real hardcore experience. Like I didn't know, I mean, I knew I had to make all this stuff myself. So I'm like quickly in my head adding up how many garments it is. Like I said, I can deliver in three months.

0 (35m 49s):
I'm curious though, what do you think explains, I mean, what you were bringing in, it was still fairly straightforward. I mean it was sweatshirts and t-shirts and sweatpants with mainly with stripes or with the so on lightning bolts or heart. I mean, I guess at that time, this is like 2005, 2006, people are wearing like, like Juicy Couture and von Dutch hats and I'm trying to think what they were wearing in Southern California. What was different? Why do you think this appealed to the buyers so quickly at Fred Siegel?

4 (36m 24s):
Well, I think it was, you know, the same thing that appealed to the random people that were like stopping me On the street. I think that it really stood out. You know, it was very bright colors in a certain combination that for whatever reason people gravitated to. and it had a handmade look to it. It was just very, very bold. Yeah. The beginning garments were literally like just tons of stripes and tons of color. And I think it was just like, wow, what is that? Yeah. And so I think that maybe she thought, oh, it'll draw people into the store because it's so colorful or something like that.

0 (36m 60s):
How did you know what to charge for each garment?

4 (37m 4s):
Right. So that was, that was interesting. And I actually credit my brother to this. I called my brother when I was working on the collection and I said, I need to figure out prices on this stuff. And he said, well, what does it cost to make it? And I said, well, it's kind of hard to figure out because I'm like making it myself. And so he said, okay, well you need to figure out what you value your time at and how much time it takes to make the garment and your cost and materials. He's like, and then you have to add like a little bit of margin because you know, like, if this is gonna be your life page, you need to be able to like survive. So I actually timed myself making certain elements of the garment and, and then I, I remember telling my brother, I'm like, look, it adds up to a lot.

4 (37m 48s):
Like I've gotta sell, you know, this T-shirt for like $65 and I've gotta sell this hoodie for like a hundred dollars or whatever. And he's like, it's better to price yourself high than too low because there's always gonna be like unexpected cost and stuff like that. He was like, just go in there with the prices and see what happens. And she didn't even bat an eye at the prices.

0 (38m 12s):
Yeah. So if, so they ordered $8,000 or more give or take worth of clothing, you probably had to make at least 50 or a hundred more garments. Yeah.

4 (38m 24s):
And actually after I left Fred Siegel, I ended up on the way home stopping at the store, Planet Blue. This was another kind of really hot store in Venice. And I remember thinking, you know, I'm just gonna try for one more. And so I went in there and I was like, Hey guys. I said, is the buyer around? and it ended up being the buyer. This guy that I asked happened to be there and I said, look, I live literally across the street. I just made these clothes. I just sold to Fred Siegel like 10 minutes ago. Nobody else is gonna have this, but I think your store's really good. I would love for you to also have it. And so when I brought it in, he loved it. And he was actually a men's spire and she and the Fred Siegel girl was a woman's Spire.

4 (39m 6s):
And I told him it was unisex, it doesn't matter, it's sweats, it's t-shirts. And so he bought all of it for men's, like in bigger sizes. Wow. So then at that moment, I actually called my brother and I was like, I now have an order from Fred Siegel and Planet Blue, the two best stores in la. And he was like, okay, well don't sell anymore because you can't not deliver on time or you're gonna be shrewd. And I, and he was like, you have to make all this stuff. And I'm like, okay. So I kind of added up like what it was gonna cost and, and I went to Wells Fargo and they gave me a loan for $8,000 and boom, that was it. I, that was the money that I used to make the stuff

0 (39m 42s):
With that order. You presumably had three or four months to do. You didn't hire anybody. You decided to do this all by yourself?

4 (39m 49s):
Yes, I did it all by myself. I did actually have my mom helping me. Like she would cut stripes for me and she would also help me make like the labels and the tags and stuff.

0 (40m 2s):
So you went back to Texas to do this?

4 (40m 3s):
No, she came out to California and stayed with me. Wow.

0 (40m 7s):
You basically had a mini garment factory in your apartment in la

4 (40m 11s):
Oh yeah. It was the funniest thing ever. I mean, I would be boiling the dye on the stove, like while my mom's like making dinner on the stove. And then I had like a hose outta my bathroom window. 'cause I was like, I had the whole screen printing thing set up. Like, I mean it was like a little factory, my whole apartment.

0 (40m 29s):
I mean you were buying white fabric basically.

4 (40m 32s):
Yeah, at that point I was buying white fabric and dyeing it. And I, what's funny is, so I, I made all the garments for the order and I had COD on the order. So they

0 (40m 44s):
Paid you the moment you walked in? They

4 (40m 45s):
Paid me the moment I walked in. Yep. So I essentially dropped off the order at Fred Siegel, got my check, dropped off an order at Planet Blue, got my check, I went to Wells Fargo, I paid off my loan and I called my dad and told him I was profitable, which was pretty dope. And now let's wait and see if it sells. And so, so I dropped it off I think on like a Friday or something. And I got a call on Monday and the girl was like, Paige, we sold out. We need to reorder. Like everything is gone. And I like, it was the coolest feeling ever. But at the same time I had so much fear of like, how can I get a reorder going so fast that took me so long to make all that.

4 (41m 26s):
And so, but it was, it was amazing because it, it was basically the moment of truth for me that this wasn't just a small thing. Like they literally sold over a hundred garments in a weekend and that's a lot of money to make in a weekend. Yeah. And, and she was like, how soon can you get it to me? And I said, I'll do the best I can. I'll, I'll start sewing right now and I'll get you shipments as soon as I'm done with like a stack of clothes, I'll bring 'em over. And I was just bringing over clothes like every week of however many I could make. And there was a waiting list. People like literally Wow. Had a waiting list. Yeah.

0 (42m 1s):
And you were, this was literally, you were buying all the, the raw materials off the shelf.

4 (42m 7s):
Yes. And then, you know, a few months in I was like, I need to start trying to figure out how to do this in bulk. And that was when I kind of started to go downtown and find materials and bigger quantities and stuff like that.

0 (42m 22s):
Downtown LA to the Yeah, to the garment. Yeah,

4 (42m 24s):
Exactly. So I would go downtown LA and I started just going into factories. I went door to door and if I saw a factory I thought was clean and looked good, then I would go in and try to meet with someone and show them one of my garments and be like, Hey, can you make this? And literally nobody wanted to touch it. Why?

0 (42m 41s):
They

4 (42m 41s):
Thought it was too complicated. And they were all making like basic T-shirts.

0 (42m 45s):
Yeah. I mean this is the height of American apparel was making things in downtown LA

4 (42m 49s):
Yeah, exactly. And that was what people were making is just real simple basic t-shirts. Like they had no, I mean, even the single needle machines to sew the fabric on top of the fabric was not even something that they had. So it was a little bit scary because I was clearly making something that was way more complicated than all these other people were making. And I, and I really needed to figure out how to do it. And so finally I found a factory that was like an embroidery house that did applique work with embroidery. And, and basically it was a detail shop. It was a very small factory and they did a lot of detail work.

0 (43m 24s):
But my question is, you were handmaking everything yourself, so everything was slightly different and, and it was to your standards. Now you're putting it in the hands of a factory. How were you going to ensure that the quality and the standards were what you expected?

4 (43m 44s):
Yeah, so it was really interesting because I talked them into letting me train their people to do what I was doing, which was really kind of unique ways of doing things with some of these early garments. Like the way that I would sew the stripes together with the zigzag stitch. And, and so I literally sat down with their sewers and taught them to do it exactly how I was doing it. Hmm. To make it look imperfect. 'cause that that was part of the beauty of it, you know, it didn't need to be perfect, you know, and, and they were trained to do things perfect and, and I was like, no, no, no, no, no. Every stripe can be a little bit different. That's what we want.

0 (44m 21s):
Alright. So now that you had a factory that agreed to make the, the garments, I mean, you had to now focus on getting other customers or clients. So how did you do that? I mean, did you go to other shops? Did you go to trade shows or anything like that?

4 (44m 38s):
Yeah, so I, I actually did end up selling to Zj Boardinghouse also. I went back to them and then the Abbott Kinney Street Festival was coming up and I decided that I was gonna do that and it would be fun to sell basically right down the street in my neighborhood and have a little street fair and make some extra money.

0 (44m 58s):
And this is like Abbi Kinney's sort of like a, a HIBT kind of street in Venice with a lot of cool boutiques. Although now there's a lot of bigger chains, but traditionally a lot of smaller boutiques on that On the street.

4 (45m 9s):
Yes. At that time it was like a hippie hotspot. Yeah. Like it was flower shops and coffee shops and like little vintage stores and whatever. And they had the street festival. So I spent $500, I bought a booth at the Street festival and I sewed up as much as I could. And I ended up making I think 85, 80 $600 in one day selling clothes at that street festival.

0 (45m 35s):
I, I, I imagine, or I think pretty soon after that you really started to branch out. Like you started to go to trade shows and, and things like that, right? Yeah.

4 (45m 42s):
To get into one of these fancy trade shows, it cost $5,000 for a booth. So since I had just made the money On the street fair, I was like, I'm gonna put all this money into doing the trade show. And I asked my friend Reed Thompson, who is just a buddy of mine, not an employee, and I said, Hey, will you go out to this trade show in Las Vegas and, and help me set up a booth and and see if I get any orders. Yeah. And we'd go to this trade show and we set it all up and we literally, every other booth, it was just really simple, like basic stuff that people were selling. 'cause I remember walking around just being like, wow, like everything just seems so boring.

4 (46m 22s):
And then, and then my booth looks like a California explosion of color. It was just, it stood out so much no one could walk by the booth without stopping. So it became this like flood of people and we were writing orders faster than like, we like, knew what to do and like, and that night we got to the hotel room and we had this huge stack of orders. Yeah. We had sold $150,000 worth of clothes.

0 (46m 48s):
Wow.

4 (46m 49s):
And that was when it just really became a legit brand.

0 (46m 55s):
When we come back in just a moment, Paige starts to build a team and learn some tough lessons about hiring, firing, and getting scammed. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This On How. I Built This.

Mint Mobile (47m 14s):
We love to highlight businesses that are doing things a better way so that you can live a better life. That's why when I found Mint Mobile, I had to share Mint Mobile ditched retail stores and all those overhead costs, and instead sells their phone plans online and passes those savings onto you for a limited time. They're passing on even more savings with a new customer offer that cuts all Mint mobile plans to $15 a month when you purchase a three month plan. That's Unlimited talk text and data for $15 a month, mint Mobile's network is crystal clear. And ever since I switched to using it, I've saved so much money. And you can use your own phone with any Mint Mobile plan and bring over your own phone number along with all your existing contacts. To get this new customer offer and your new three month Unlimited wireless plan for just 15 bucks a month, go to mint mobile.com/built. That's mint mobile.com/built. Cut your wireless bill to 15 bucks a month@mintmobile.com slash built additional taxes, fees and restrictions, apply SE Mint mobile for details.

0 (48m 24s):
If you know anything about me, then you know I am generally the chef in my family.

MasterClass (48m 30s):
Not only has MasterClass helped me sharpen my cooking skills, but I've been learning a lot about the way food impacts our overall health and wellness. Recently I took a class with New York Times bestselling author Michael Pollen, who for years has been researching our food systems and the way humans eat. I learned a lot about how our human bodies interact with everyday Foods and the kinds of Foods that my family and I should eat to be as healthy as we can be. If you know someone who wants to learn something new or improve a skill, MasterClass would be a meaningful gift this season because with MasterClass you can learn from the best to become your best memberships. Start at $120 a year for Unlimited access to one-on-one classes with over 180 MasterClass instructors. Learn how to negotiate a raise with Chris Voss or manage your relationships with Esther Perel this holiday season. Give one annual membership and get one free at MasterClass dot com slash built. Right now you can get two memberships for the price of one at MasterClass dot com slash built MasterClass dot com slash build offer terms apply.

0 (49m 49s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 2008 and business is ramping up for Aviator. Nation. Paige has a bunch of new orders to fill and she's starting to think about opening a store. So she hires her friend Reed and goes out to get a bank loan.

4 (50m 7s):
And I think they gave me a credit line. I wanna say it was like $30,000 or something like that. So then I start thinking, okay, terms and stuff like that because it was a whole project of figuring out how to get the garments made on this like tiny little budget. Meanwhile pay for my living and Reed and you know, whatever else. So Reed and I were working in my apartment, but like, you know, but working outta your apartment, you start to think, okay, I, I couldn't really do it outta my bedroom after a while. So yeah, I was looking around for office space and I remember talking to my brother about it too and just being like, office space is so expensive.

4 (50m 48s):
And he was like, well you should try to sell the clothes and have an office in the same building. Like, it was definitely his idea for me to have a retail store. So I started looking around on Abbott Kinney because that was like my favorite street and the building that I found that we still have today. So that was the first store. I really did not have big dreams of having a bunch of retail stores. It was kind of like I needed to sell the clothes outta the front to pay for the office in the back.

0 (51m 18s):
And the store in your mind was gonna be a one-off. It was gonna be, that was gonna be your store where you would sell the clothes and maybe a few other retailers would also sell them.

4 (51m 28s):
Yes. But again, like, you know, as far as financing the store, it's actually crazy because, I mean, I pretty much built the store myself. I mean, I had my parents help me a little bit, like as far as my dad helped me hang things on the walls. My mom was helping me paint the walls. I had a couple other friends that would come in and help paint, but I built that first Abbott Kinney store for like nothing.

0 (51m 55s):
And how did you decorate it?

4 (51m 56s):
I put my own personal belongings up on the walls. I mean, I took my record collection and I hammered it up on the walls. I took my skateboard collection and I put it up on the wall and all the furniture was vintage furniture that I found at like thrift stores and stuff. That's kind of how our aesthetic of our stores was developed.

0 (52m 14s):
And a lot of the stores still kind of look like that. I mean I'm, I've been to the one in Marin County. I think there's like records like pasted to the walls and surfboards and guitars and I mean, it's still has that aesthetic.

4 (52m 29s):
Yeah, I mean, one of the big things with me is just realizing it was honestly this like awakening of like, okay, this isn't just about clothes, this is about building a place. Hmm. And like, I remember going to my grand opening and I, and I showed up and it was like a line down the block of people waiting to come in. And the way it made me feel was so much different than just getting a big order. It was like a high, I was just like, this is amazing. Huh.

0 (52m 59s):
And, and it seems like based on that experience, you, you actually decided to start building more stores. I mean, I, I think pretty quickly you expanded to like four of them. There was one in Malibu, one in Manhattan Beach. Yeah. And by the way, were you able to open them all purely through cashflow?

4 (53m 17s):
Yes. Pure. Wow. Yes. So cashflow, I negoti, I was a very, very hard negotiator with my landlords. I basically talk them into starting me at hardly any rent with a sharp escalation of rent. Like I've now negotiated with some of the largest property owners in the country. And they've told me actually, like this one guy that, that actually owns all the retail in the Win hotel told me I was the hardest negotiator he's ever met. And he owns I Well

0 (53m 47s):
What is your, what were you pushing for that made you so tough?

4 (53m 51s):
The thing is, for me in the beginning, you know, I knew that I didn't wanna take a lot of risk, so, but I was willing to reward my landlord if I did well. You know, so I would always negotiate where I would have several months of free rent so that I could have no expense on actually building out the store. And then I would make sure that I got the store built in half that time, so then I could have the store open making money before rent was actually due. So that was one thing. I also like to give myself an out, like in the first year, if it's not going well, like I can walk away and then basically sharp rent escalations that like made sense, you know, to get the landlord to where they wanted to be.

4 (54m 34s):
But only when I knew that I was making good enough money and land. And also I'm very, very good at like, taking care of stuff. And like, I don't bother the landlord. I try to repair things on my own. But, you know, after I build a couple stores and, and I've created this buzz, I mean, when I opened Abbott Kinney, my first store, I think like literally a few months after I opened Abbott Kinney like started to explode. You know, the New York Times did this big story about the Aviator Nation store and, and Abbott Kinney becoming a new hotspot. And then more stores started to open. And so ultimately the landlord of my store, of course, you know, in his mind he's just saying, wow, this now my, my building is becoming more valuable because Paige has like created this thing that's like a fashion place now.

4 (55m 20s):
And so obviously, you know, my rent went up and I was happy to pay it because our sales went up. And so then I was able to get landlords to take me on and charge me much less rent just because they thought my store would be good for their street and good for their, their building

0 (55m 35s):
Paige as the brick and mortar store. And eventually more than one were doing. Well how did you find it to be in a position where you were a boss, where you were managing people and the stores and the brand? I mean, and, and at one point you let everybody go, like all everybody who was working for Aviator Nation. Tell me what, what was going on? I mean, did you, was it a combination of you kind of learning how to run a business and how to lead and also how to find the right people? Was it all those things and more, I mean, I think 18 people, what happened with these TERs?

4 (56m 14s):
Yeah, so basically after my team got bigger and having the four stores in the LA area and, and quite a few retail employees, it actually started to get complicated. And there was some drama involved and it was quickly becoming something that was not fun. When it came to managing the people, I started to find out, oh, like this person doesn't wanna be scheduled to work in Malibu because they're not getting along with the person that works there. And then I found out, well, so-and-so actually was like sleeping with this other employee. I mean, every other minute there was another dramatic thing happening and it was all based on the employees.

4 (56m 57s):
So I ended up doing, like you said, this kind of mass firing all the retail employees. And I literally let everyone go. Hmm. But I just didn't know how else to deal with all the drama. Like I couldn't tell who was telling the truth and whatever. I decided at that point that I was going to be extremely strict with who I hired. I was going to make sure that I checked at least three or four references and I had certain ways of trying to figure out the most positive people. I was like, I only want people working for me that are literally the most positive people that you can imagine.

0 (57m 35s):
So how did you start to learn how to become a leader? I mean, I, I think about my own experience becoming a leader over two decades of, or more of doing this work. I learned over time how to get better at it. I mean, we all, we make mistakes along that journey. All of us do. And I have to imagine you did too.

4 (57m 60s):
Yeah, absolutely. I mean, I think that that period of time before I had to let everybody go, I think that I was really caught up in the business and, and other things. And I wasn't paying close enough attention to the type of person I was hiring. But like, I started getting super involved with actually doing every single interview myself. And even until, literally until about two years ago, I used to approve every single hire, even the retail level. So I personally, I think what makes me a little bit of a different boss is that I have literally done every single job in the company and, you know, so I have an understanding of their struggles and what they're going through, whether it's the sowers, you know, I mean the sowers, the print shop, all of the D house, you know, like, so if I can speak the language of the employee, then I think that makes me a better leader because I'm able to get down on their level because I've been there.

0 (59m 0s):
I think during this period when you let a, a bunch of people go, there was a, a couple who came to you to propose helping you professionalize the business. And that actually turned out to be a really bad decision. What, what happened?

4 (59m 14s):
Yeah. So I basically was at a trade show and this couple, this man and wife came to me and they were like, we wanna help you manage your production. They kind of said, look, we're gonna man manage all of your vendors, all your relationships with the people that are helping put the garments together and you're just gonna pay us, you know, a flat fee per garment and we're gonna pay all of them. And I mean, it sounded like a great deal, you know? And so I hired these people and I gave them a big deposit on the production that was about to be made, and they disappeared with all of my money.

4 (59m 54s):
And they filed bankruptcy and pretty much disappeared. And they had all my designs and they had all my samples and they had all this, I mean, it was like, whoa, you know, I think that maybe coming outta small town, Texas, whatever, maybe I was naive or something, I don't know. Like I was not expecting it at all and it was a huge chunk of money and it made me just immediately harden. Like I went from really kind of trusting everybody to then being like, I don't trust anybody because I didn't wanna tell anybody. And that's another thing, you know, you're hu

0 (1h 0m 29s):
It's humiliating. It feels like you, it's

4 (1h 0m 31s):
Humiliating. And like I have this team of people around me that I've been preaching to like, hey, positive, positive, yet I am like in shambles internally, but I have to put on my happy face as a boss and like pretend like everything's okay. 'cause the last thing I want is the whole company to think, oh my God, she just gave all this money to these people that disappeared and what's gonna happen with all these orders we have on these products that these people were supposed to be making? Yeah. But that was the moment that I decided I was gonna have my own factory because I needed to control everything.

0 (1h 1m 3s):
You were gonna build your own factory or you're gonna work with your own?

4 (1h 1m 6s):
No, I was, I was gonna basically build my own factory

0 (1h 1m 9s):
With what money.

4 (1h 1m 11s):
So at that point I think I still, I had the credit line with the bank. I probably leaned on that credit line at that point. And so that's how I was able to then basically what I did is I bought out a factory that was doing work for me. I bought all the machines, I took over the employees and I hired the guy that was running the factory to work for me. Right. And I realized that like it was my responsibility that the garments were made fairly and the people were getting paid properly. Because if you hire a factory to make clothes in LA and those employees for that factory are not getting paid properly and are not getting workman's comp and all the things, it is my liability even though it's not my factory because I'm the one that is selling the garments.

4 (1h 1m 57s):
And so I just said, you know what? I'm gonna like hire my own people and I'm gonna make sure that it's all done perfectly.

0 (1h 2m 3s):
And I mean, you were still a relatively small business. I mean I, I think that, you know, by 2012, from what I understand, you're doing about $5 million in revenue, which is still a small business. You are still, as I say, your margins were probably, probably still fairly narrow, fairly slim. Yes. And you could charge more for your, you know, your sweatshirts and t-shirts and sweatpants because there was demand, but also the cost was higher. You were making this primarily in Los Angeles. Did you ever at that point or since then think, you know, we really should start making these in Asian factories where it'll cost us a fraction to make these products and we can have way higher margins, which is what virtually every fashion brand does.

0 (1h 2m 48s):
Even even the premium fashion brands. You go into Neiman Marcus today and, and look at the high-end designer brands and much of the material, much of the clothing is made in China and the prices are astronomical. Did you ever consider doing that?

4 (1h 3m 5s):
No, I never did. And the reason is, I mean, there's a few reasons, but I truly love that this is an American made product. I, I've always been excited about the factory experience. I mean, when I was working closely with the small factory and I was becoming friends with those people making the clothes, I think I just felt so connected to the, all those people that I just never imagined, like taking the work away from them.

0 (1h 3m 33s):
Everything is still made in in the US

4 (1h 3m 36s):
Yeah. Everything's made in California.

0 (1h 3m 39s):
And I mean you can, just to play devil's advocate, there is high quality clothing made in China. The quality of, of raw materials can be very high. I mean the, the only differe is the cost of labor is a lot lower. So is there a world where you could justify in your mind making things in China or Vietnam or another country that would be equally as good but with just lower labor costs?

4 (1h 4m 5s):
I mean the thing is like, I'm like, look, I've already established this brand at this price. People are buying the product for this price. So they're already giving me the money that I need to make it here. 'cause I'm not gonna lower my prices if I take it overseas. I mean, I've already established the price and so it's just gonna be more money in my pocket and I don't need that money because like I have the money I need to run the business. I'm not trying to open a hundred stores. You know, I love doing this slow and I'm like, so why would I change it? And really, like I have done research and I have friends that make stuff in overseas and even my brother made his shoes overseas. Yeah. And he told me and others have told me like it gets really complicated.

4 (1h 4m 48s):
I mean if something is made overseas and it arrives, you can't turn it back, you know? Yeah. Like you can't say, oh that color is not exactly the color I want. I mean, and I'll tell you every single week I make changes in what's going on in my factory because there's things that have to be adjusted all the time. I mean every lot of fabric shrinks a little bit differently and you know, sometimes I'm like, oh, this collection is not selling as fast as I want it to. So don't make any more of those. Like literally stop the machines. I mean we just stopped a whole collection we were doing for this music festival happening in Egypt because of what's happening in Israel. Like we literally were able to stop it. So it's that, it's like you, I'm have the ability to pivot so quickly, which ultimately I think makes me a better brand and a better company.

0 (1h 5m 37s):
One of the things that I'm curious about how you've dealt with over the years is you've been dogged by Adidas. Adidas saw the stripes and I think already in 2012 they filed a cease desist or maybe a lawsuit, but they saw stripes, even though they look I think very different. But Adidas doesn't think so. They think that the stripes violate their, you know, their trademark. How, I mean, first of all, that must've been scary, you know, the biggest or second biggest apparel brand probably in the world after Nike is coming after you, it must be nerve wracking.

4 (1h 6m 10s):
Yes. That was very scary.

0 (1h 6m 12s):
And that's your whole, that's your brand, that's your look.

4 (1h 6m 15s):
Totally. So, you know, I did what I do and I like did some research on it and I found out that of course, like they have the three stripes is their trademark. But

0 (1h 6m 25s):
How did you, how did you fend that off? I mean that's, it was a battle.

4 (1h 6m 29s):
I mean at first, you know, I basically said, no, I don't think that it's similar. And then it went on for years.

0 (1h 6m 36s):
Did it cost you a lot of money to fight that?

4 (1h 6m 38s):
Yeah. And that's one of the things that's really crazy about business is even when you're not doing something wrong, you still have to pay to defend it. Especially when you're a young entrepreneur because obviously Adidas has a ton of money for legal fees. And when I, in 2012, you know, I did not, and you know like I'm gonna take out a loan to defend this. But like if I were to lose, then I lose the money and I lose the company.

0 (1h 7m 5s):
How did you resolve it?

4 (1h 7m 6s):
Basically what happened was, in 2012 there were a couple garments that did have three stripes on 'em. I basically said, okay, I, I said I'll stop doing the three stripe garments, but I'm going to continue doing the four stripe. Hmm. And so they like basically disappeared for several years and I stopped doing three stripes. Right. And so anyway, they came like years down the road, I don't remember, I wanna say maybe 2016 or something. They came back and they said, okay, now we think your four stripes are confusingly similar. And I was like, no guys, we made this agreement. And so anyway, in 2016, you know, I had a little bit more money. I think at that point I actually had insurance for trademark protection.

4 (1h 7m 50s):
And so this went on for a long time and, and we did go through mediation and all this stuff and then in the end they pretty much let go of it. We just settled on the fact that I wouldn't do three stripes and I would really not do anything with four stripes. That was confusing with their three stripes because one of the stripes blended into the background of the garment or something.

0 (1h 8m 11s):
And for all as far as you know, that's over.

4 (1h 8m 13s):
Yes.

0 (1h 8m 14s):
You hope,

4 (1h 8m 15s):
As far as I know, that's over.

0 (1h 8m 17s):
Do you remember in 2016 what roughly what your revenue was?

4 (1h 8m 21s):
Yeah, I was doing about six and a half million. That had like five or six stores then,

0 (1h 8m 27s):
So 2016 you're about six and a half million. So each store is doing about a million dollars in revenue. 'cause it's all pretty much at that point being sold in stores. You were not, your online sales were probably relatively small compared to your brick and mortar sales in 2016.

4 (1h 8m 43s):
Oh for sure.

0 (1h 8m 45s):
And so going from a six and a half million dollars business to a $20 million or $30 million business, sometimes it requires advertising and marketing. Tell me a little bit about your strategy around that.

4 (1h 8m 60s):
Yeah, so it was really about opening these brick and mortar stores. I thought having the stores was kind of like a billboard. You know, I'm like if I have stores in these Prime spots, then that is going to naturally get the customer and then later on I can grow the online business. But first, for somebody to pay the price point that I was demanding, they would have to feel the product and try it on because it, it really is, it's a product that a lot of the value of it is the comfort level. But if the product's good, then the marketing in my opinion was just gonna kind of take care of itself by like the word of mouth. Hmm.

4 (1h 9m 40s):
And in 2018, like I, at that point I had I think eight stores in 2019, I decided that was going to be my year of like just focused on opening stores. Like I literally spent my entire year on the road and I opened a new store every two months. Like I opened five stores in 2019.

0 (1h 10m 1s):
So, alright. So you are growing steadily and you hit, what was your revenue in 2019?

4 (1h 10m 8s):
Yeah, so in 2019 I was up to 27 million in sales.

0 (1h 10m 14s):
So you'd gone from six and a half in 2016 to 27 million Three years later, which is a really nice healthy growth. Tell me about Covid Covid hits, and this is, I mean, especially given that you are heavily in brick and mortar, invested in brick and mortar, what did you do? I mean, you just shut down all those stores obviously, and you were gonna lose a lot of money.

4 (1h 10m 37s):
What happened was like, I remember having like two or three days to like basically close everything and I'm gonna have this huge overhead. And I was like, from now through the weekend, or it might've been 24 hours or something, I think it was 24 hours or something like that. I was like, I want to put on an email that says everything that we sell is gonna go toward paying the employees during shutdown because I need a lot of money to carry us through however long this is gonna be. I was like, I don't know what else to do. So we sent out an email, I stayed up all night. Like I looked at like orders I had for Bloomingdale's that I knew were gonna get canceled. And I put that stuff on the website like, and at that time we were doing I think around $30,000 online a day or something and I put out that email and in 24 hours we did like over a million dollars Wow.

4 (1h 11m 28s):
On our website. And that basically bought me like four months of overhead.

0 (1h 11m 33s):
Wow. I mean your sales exploded during Covid and so other apparel brands did too. Ri and other, you know, athleisure wear, so-called Athleisure Brands. Did, did you anticipate that? Did you expect that to happen or were you just totally surprised at what happened with your sales?

4 (1h 11m 51s):
Well, you know, I think that a big part of it honestly is this email that I sent out because if you think about it, a million and a half is a lot, you know, that's a lot of product to basically go into the hands of all these people that then are just talking to people on Zoom calls and stuff. And then they all see the clothes.

0 (1h 12m 9s):
I mean, did you have an influencer strategy?

4 (1h 12m 12s):
No, not at all.

0 (1h 12m 13s):
Nothing did not to do any

4 (1h 12m 15s):
Of that. Nothing because

0 (1h 12m 16s):
There, there was a point where all of a sudden, I mean every teenage girl between the age of, I don't know, 12 and 18, I'm seeing wearing Aviator Nation and I start to ask around and somebody said, oh, this is Oliver TikTok.

4 (1h 12m 31s):
Yeah. So, you know, I mean I'm all about like letting the stores kind of just post and whatever, but I mean, we don't really have a huge social following either. I think we have less than 300,000 followers. Oh wow.

0 (1h 12m 43s):
Well it took a lot of people a long time to discover it. 'cause you started in 2006 and for

4 (1h 12m 48s):
Sure definitely

0 (1h 12m 49s):
2020 is when a lot of people first heard about this brand as 14 years in. So I mean 14 overnight success, but for in 14 years, right?

4 (1h 12m 57s):
Yeah, exactly.

0 (1h 12m 59s):
This is what I wonder about your brand is, you know, on fire, right? Because expected, from what I understand, about $130 million in revenue this year. So obviously growing very fast. But I wonder, you look at a brand like let's say Tom's, your brother's, the company he started and he's not involved anymore. It was sold, it's not as buzzy as it was five years ago, 10 years ago. Right. And I wonder how you think about staying ahead of the curve. There is a real risk in fashion, especially with TikTok trends moving as you know, in outta consciousness, like in a blink of an eye that people might not be as interested in this in a year.

0 (1h 13m 40s):
So how do you, how do you future proof what you're putting out into the world?

4 (1h 13m 44s):
I kind of attribute this, you know, my strategy to my personality, which is basically that I literally want something different every month. I'm all over the place. I, I really just constantly have ideas for new design ideas and stuff like that. And even though a lot of the product that we still sell obviously is the core product, we basically drop a new collection almost every week. Because for me, I mean, I'm bored. Like I don't necessarily wear the stripes that often. I wear 'em every once in a while, but like right now I'm wearing a full tiger sweatsuit. Yeah. Like, I like the kind of crazy stuff personally.

4 (1h 14m 26s):
And I think that that's the only way

0 (1h 14m 28s):
I have to assume that you're not no longer the sole designer. You've got other designers now?

4 (1h 14m 33s):
No, I'm the sole designer.

0 (1h 14m 35s):
Yeah. So this is interesting to me. When a researcher contacted you, you responded, this is what you, I'm gonna read what you responded to their, you said, I personally approve all operational practices, store decor, holiday decorations of the stores, window displays, new product displays, all staff goals, bonuses, you'll read nightly closing reports from each location. You approve everything down to the tote bag and giveaway IES that we hand out with purchases. And obviously you still design the close, so you are, it seems like you're really involved in a lot of things and a lot of things that might, maybe over time you're better off letting go.

4 (1h 15m 14s):
Sure. The thing is, what I have done over the years is I have built a small team of people that has worked very, very closely with me for like 10 plus years and they know me so well that it's like a super efficient way of making decisions. So like they're able to almost read my mind and bring me like the top three choices. But out of the 20 decisions that I make a day, let's say, you know, on approvals, there's still one or two like pivotal things that I catch that's being done wrong. And sure there are certain things that I let go of, but I also have this belief that like you really need to keep your eye on things when you're in a period of major growth, which we are still in.

0 (1h 16m 3s):
When I interviewed your brother, he was still very much involved in Toms and then of course it was sold and, and he's not involved anymore. I mean, what, tell me what, how you see the, this sort of the future playing out. I mean, you own this company, I'm sure there's been interest in either investing or in potentially even buying out the brand.

4 (1h 16m 24s):
I mean, the thing is, I've had a lot of offers for hundreds of millions of dollars. But I do believe that if somebody comes in and tries to like make my company 10 times the size that it is now, that it won't be a good thing for the brand. I think that that at the price point and the customer and what I'm doing, it can't be a brand for everyone. I just feel like why rock the boat? You know, like I don't need more money, thankfully, like I didn't take on any, any debt. I was really good to pay back everything. And so I don't wanna bring on somebody that I just have to answer to just for a lot of money.

4 (1h 17m 5s):
It's not worth it to me to have an extra 500, 600 million in the bank. So then I have to report to like a group of people.

0 (1h 17m 13s):
When you think about your journey, I mean it's been a slow growth for sure and now you're really emerging as a a known fashion brand. How much of, of where you are today do you attribute to your hard work and how much do you think has to do with the luck of people just discovering it?

4 (1h 17m 31s):
I think that it's, it's really the hard work. I mean, me and my team of people have really done the manual labor. You know, like I didn't do all the things that people do when they have a huge investment allowance. And we did it ourselves. We figured it out ourselves. We made mistakes, we fixed 'em fast. Like, and I, and I'm a big believer in not spending a lot of money to hire these big people to come in and like blow up your brand with marketing and influencers and all this stuff because there's not hard work in that. There's just not. And then you don't feel like you really did it. So it just, the feeling of satisfaction I have inside is deeper than just seeing the money that we're bringing in.

0 (1h 18m 18s):
That's Paige Mycoskie founder of Aviator Nation by the way, according to Paige's mom, Paige and her brother Blake started their respective companies on the very same day in 2006. February 26th to be exact, which also happens to be Paige's birthday. And here's another connection. Paige actually designed the logo for Blake's company, Tom's, it's a riff on the Argentinian flag with blue and white stripes. And if you haven't heard my interview with Blake about Toms, go back and check it out. It's another really great story. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show.

0 (1h 19m 1s):
and it as always, it's free. And if you wanna contact us for any reason, our email address is HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com. This episode was produced by Alex Chung with music composed by Tine Arablouei. It was Edited by Neva Grant with research help from Rommel Wood. Our audio engineer was Josephine Nyounai. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, Sam Paulson, Katherine Cipher, Kerry Thompson, John Isabella, Chris Masini, Carla Estevez, and Malia Aguello. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This.

Wondery (1h 19m 42s):
If you like How I Built This, you can listen early and ad free Right now by joining Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts. Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon music

0 (1h 19m 54s):
before you go. Tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Wondery (1h 20m 2s):
Even if you read all the books, there's very little that can prepare you for parenthood, but sometimes you can find something that gives you a little insight from Wondery, I, Love My Kid, but shares hilarious stories and anecdotes about parenting that are actually relatable. Like when a friend asks you to do something at 6:00 PM on a weeknight, here's A clip from an episode. Is dinner three hours at your house? I notice that when I have company over and we have a dinner party that is about the time Oh, okay. And, and I'll and and I really want everyone to leave no later than six 30 or seven. And I'm so, and only the people without kids are like kind of clueless. And I'm like, no, you don't understand. Like it's bedtime now and it is, you don't wanna see this. You don't want see and I don't want you to see this. It's, yes, Some horrors are about to happen. Yeah, they're the boss. She's the boss of us. And I don't want you to see that. Listen to I Love My Kid. But on the Wondery app or wherever you get your Podcasts, you can listen to I Love, My Kid, but early in ad free on Wondery Plus.