1 (1s):
Reveal the economic patterns all around us while you swipe right and left, understand money better with the indicator. One of NPR, daily podcasts, more voices, all ears, NPR podcasts,

2 (15s):
Ready to turn your small e-commerce business into the next big thing. Klaviyo can help. It's the easy to use email and SMS platform that gives you everything you need to build genuine relationships with your customers. And even if you're new to marketing Klaviyo can help you become an email expert with drag and drop design templates, simple insights, and made for e-commerce reports and recommendations. Give it a try with a free account at klaviyo.com/built. That's K L a V I Y o.com/built

0 (50s):
Solar from Kurt co media, a fully immersive Sonic adventure with revolutionary sound from Dolby, Atmos, starring Stephanie Beatrice,

3 (59s):
Jamal has given up. I'm going to find a way to see

0 (1m 3s):
Tony award winner. Alan Cumming leaders have to make sacrifices academy award winner, Helen Hunt, And Jonathan Banks get a

1 (1m 12s):
New home is the only thing

5 (1m 13s):
I can do to give my life any anywhere.

0 (1m 16s):
Solar available, wherever you listen to podcasts.

7 (1m 22s):
So the plan was launched before Christmas, get a lot of press sell a lot of suitcases, but we found out when we placed our order, that there was no way that our bag would be ready before Christmas, which I don't know why it was so surprising to us. We were like, what do you mean? Like we have this timeline in the spreadsheet. And it said that if we ordered the bags by August, we would have them for the holidays. Yeah. And it was as if like someone had said, like we had to stop doing the company

2 (1m 54s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Ross. And on today's show, I have a broken suitcase, inspired Jen Rubio to design a better one. And in the process disrupt the multi-billion dollar luggage industry, Instagramable suitcase away From Wondery American history. Tellers is a podcast that explores extraordinary events from our nation's past and brings them to life. And all new season looks into the legendary expedition of Merryweather Lewis and William Clark in 1804 Lewis and Clark set out into the unknown on a mission to explore the unchartered west and find an all water route to the Pacific ocean in their time.

2 (2m 44s):
It was a daring journey with harsh weather, dangerous terrain and deadly disease. We all know their names, but how much do you remember about their story Lewis and Clark mapped out uncharted territories came across indigenous populations and discovered previously unknown and animals, but to get to the Pacific and back, they faced a non-stop barrage of challenges. Every day, there were mountain ranges to cross harrowing encounters with Grizzlies difficult rapids to navigate and hostile encounters to evade. Their expedition was about more than exploration and science. It was about who owns the American Northwest American history tellers looks into how bravery leadership and luck help these adventures overcome impossible odds, listen to American history, tellers, apple podcasts, Amazon music, or you can listen ad-free by joining one repless in the Wondery app.

2 (3m 37s):
So, you know, when you're standing at the baggage carousel at the airport, waiting for your bag to come around and there's like a never-ending parade of black suitcases going by and every now and then the person next to you rushes to grab one of those bags only to realize it's not actually hers. This is a pretty common scenario because for a lot of people, a suitcase is just a thing. You shove all your stuff into. When you go on a trip, you might've bought it for 50 bucks at TJ max or on Amazon. And most of the time you shove it into a closet or under your bed between trips. And it probably only lasts a few years before the zipper breaks or the handle falls off.

2 (4m 17s):
And most of us have always accepted that. That's just the way it is. Right? Well, Jen Rubio didn't think so. And back in 2015, she had a hunch that other people might agree. She hated how mid-range suitcases were designed. They seemed boring and uninspired. She wanted something that would last a long time and she wanted to create a bag that would be eye catching, something you'd want to show off at the airport. And so Jen approached a friend named Steph Corey who worked with her at Warby Parker. And the result of that partnership is away. It's a line of sleek suitcases that come in tons of colors like rose gold or violet or sky blue.

2 (4m 59s):
And with perks like a built-in phone charger, the kind of bag you'd want to Instagram while you travel the world. And Jen's own story of traveling the world. It started when she was a kid in the Philippines, her mom was a dentist and her dad was a business professor there until one day when Jen found out that their lives were about to change.

7 (5m 21s):
I remember when I was seven years old, my parents told me that me and my brother and my mom were moving to, to the U S and we'd never been in we're so excited. And they told us stories about how in the U S it snows. And we went to, to this giant mall in Manila and bought snow suits. I had a pink one and my little brother had a blue one and, and we wore them on the planes. This was my first big, big flight with, with my mom. My dad stayed behind because he didn't have a visa yet. And, and we were snow suits. I remember just being very sweaty on the plane. And this was like, I don't know, late September, you

2 (6m 1s):
Were wearing your snowsuit on the plane to, to the U

7 (6m 4s):
S we insisted and told my mom where like, it's snows there. We read about it. And we land at Newark airport and like September sweltering, it was super hot. And I think that was the first time I'd ever really experienced. True disappointment.

2 (6m 19s):
Why did you guys move? Would you, do you know what the reason was? It was just like new opportunities or, or what?

7 (6m 27s):
Yeah, that's a good question. I mean, we had a great life in the Philippines as far as I remember, but it was presented to us as a very exciting opportunity that not a lot of people got, we had a couple of aunts and uncles who already lived on the east coast and we were going to join them. And we'd never even met these aunts and uncles. So we were super excited about it. Obviously looking back now, it was just for my parents to, to continue to grow and have more opportunities to develop their careers and, and give a better life to, to us.

2 (7m 1s):
Eventually Jen's dad was able to join the family in New Jersey. Her mom opened up a dentist's office and her dad ran the business side and Jen started to settle into her new life in America. Did you, as a kid, did you like, were you immersed in Filipino culture or

7 (7m 18s):
No, totally the opposite. I think, I think there was like two different experiences of immigrant kids and they're the ones who embrace it. And they're the ones like me who are just immensely embarrassed of, of the experience. And I think it had a lot to do with, you know, the other kids at school or like wanting to fit in, or, but, you know, I, I only spoke English. I would like get mad at my parents when they would cook Filipino food, because it would make like my school jacket, like smell like food. And I was just, I don't know, I was like, I was a kid and I was just so embarrassed of the whole thing.

7 (7m 58s):
And you kind of don't come to terms with that until you're like older, early twenties. Yeah.

2 (8m 2s):
When you start to kind of realize that it's this hugely rich part of who you are.

7 (8m 8s):
Yeah. And it, and it's so valuable and it's so important. And I just, I spent, you know, probably the first 10 years being in the U S and just like being embarrassed of being Filipino,

2 (8m 22s):
Jen was a pretty good student through high school, despite, as she says, being more interested in being cool than doing well in our classes. And when it was time to go to college, she chose Penn state

7 (8m 33s):
And it was like TV college. I was a college in the movies and there were football games and there were tons of people. And, you know, everyone's wearing like school colors and there's like a quad. I know that's normal on every campus, but it was just like all of the college things you saw in movies. And I was like, this is amazing. And I picked a major called supply chain. It was like, like in the orientation they had said, you know, they were one of a handful of schools in the U S offering supply chain as a major. And I was like, cool, how exclusive? And I, I chose that to study.

2 (9m 12s):
So you're doing like you're in college. And I guess you decided that you just, at a certain point, you had an opportunity and it, and it meant that you didn't go back to college. Like what, what happened?

7 (9m 27s):
Yeah. So I was, I was taking a bunch of classes in the business school and they had at Penn state, what's called a co-op program, which is you take a semester off and you work for six months at a company. And I was hating school and I was hating going to classes and taking the tests and actually having to apply myself. So I read about this program and I was like, cool, you, you get credits and you don't have to go to school. And I decided to do it. And I was placed at Johnson and Johnson in Skillman, New Jersey. And I remember getting there on the first day and it's, you know, it's Johnson, Johnson is a huge company and this was their headquarters.

7 (10m 8s):
And they told us something mind blowing on the first day, like 140,000 people work here. And I just couldn't wrap my head around that number. I remember I kept trying to relate it back to, to like the Penn state football stadium and how many people could fit in there. And I was, I was just enamored with the whole thing. I like, I got a cubicle and I got an ID badge, and I had my own desk and my own phone number and my own email and an email signature, and just the idea of work and being like a business lady was so exciting to me. And I just never wanted to go back to school, but I had to, so it ended I had to go back first semester and I was just so miserable.

7 (10m 54s):
I had felt like I knew what was out there. I knew what it was like to work this whole, like corporate world existed. And it was like, it was thrilling to me and I want it to be a part of it. So after a semester, back at school, I got another co-op. And this time I got placed at Neutrogena, which is also owned by Johnson and Johnson in LA. And I asked them to extend it for a summer internship. And then I asked them to extend it into another thing. I just begged to stay. I like couldn't fathom the thought of going back to school and I don't know how I did it, but they, they let me stay. And they made me, like, I promise that I would take the rest of my credits online and that I would finish and get my degree.

7 (11m 42s):
And I never did.

2 (11m 43s):
And they offered you a job.

7 (11m 44s):
Yeah. And I, I basically was just like the intern who never left and I was invited to walk at graduation, but I think I'm still three credits short

2 (11m 53s):
You're. So you're technically a college dropout.

7 (11m 56s):
Yeah. Technically a college dropout. Yeah. I think, I think people are like, oh, cool. You're a college dropout. I'm like, no, I like dropped out of college. So I could like, so I could work in a cubicle.

2 (12m 6s):
So this is like a 2006, 2007. You're in your early twenties, living in LA, you're working for Neutrogena. And, and that, that was your plan at that point.

7 (12m 18s):
Yeah. So I was working at Neutrogena and one woman that I really admired and that I, I had never spoken to her personally, but I just remember recalling, like every time she sent an email, like everyone would open it and everyone would, would read her analysts reports all the time. And every time she spoke, like people would, people would listen and she ran marketing and I was talking to kind of my mentor about her. And I was like, okay, how do I get a job in marketing? So this woman's like, oh, well, to work in marketing here, you need to get an MBA. And me being me, I didn't think to myself, oh, I should finish and get my, my undergrad degree so I can go get an MBA.

7 (13m 1s):
I was like, there must be some way around that. And there wasn't, but now like this, this had opened up this whole new world to me of, of being able to work in marketing, which to me at the time meant that you could control how, how people found out about your products and how you could take everything that people were seeing about it and maybe change the products. And I just thought it was so cool. And I knew I really wanted to do it. And that if I couldn't do it there, I would find somewhere else that would let me do it. So I quit.

2 (13m 37s):
And did you have a job or did you, did you think, okay, I'm going to figure this out. I'm going to try and do marketing for people and just figure it out. Yeah.

7 (13m 47s):
It was like, I was like, I'm going to do marketing. I quit and I didn't have a job and I don't have a degree and I didn't have that much money, but I had, do you know that that platform tumbler?

2 (13m 60s):
Yeah. Sure.

7 (14m 1s):
So Tumblr had, I guess maybe just started and I was like one of the early people on it and it's what, you know, I would do in my spare time. I would like write on my Tumblr blog. And I had met a few people in LA on Tumblr. One of the guys I met, you know, did social media. And I was like, what do you mean you do social media as a job? Like I had my space, I had tumbler, I had Twitter. And I, I didn't know that you could do that. And also that it was part of marketing, but he would do, he would do social media for some of like the OG food trucks in LA.

2 (14m 36s):
He would like to like control their Twitter or whatever Facebook, whatever was around at that.

7 (14m 41s):
Yeah. And it's so, it's so wild. It was, it was literally Twitter. And I'm doing social media for food truck meant like you would just tweet where the truck was going to be. Which sounds so crazy. Now that that was someone's job. But I remember like following the Twitter account, finding out that the truck was going to be on the corner of these streets in LA driving over there. And there would be hundreds of people there. And I don't know why, but it just blew my mind. I was like, you can just tweet where you are and like, people will come and that's that those are business. Otherwise like the truck would have just sat somewhere and you had to maybe drive by it. And I, it was like, this is marketing.

7 (15m 21s):
Like, this is how you get paid to do marketing and do social media. And these are all things I was interested in. And I was like, I got this, I'm figuring this out. So I started being like a freelance consultant for social media.

2 (15m 34s):
You just put your, like, you just like hung a shingle out. Like, how did you get people to hire you? How did you know where to go?

7 (15m 41s):
Honestly, so much of it is luck. It was really a lot of the right place. Right time I was living in LA. It was when, when food trucks were a big thing and I kind of just spread the word, I would go to small businesses and two food trucks. And my first client was the cafe on my street. It's not around anymore, but it was this little cafe on Beverly Boulevard. And I would literally sit in the cafe all day and tweet things like there's a password of the day. And if you say the password at the register, you get like a free espresso shot. Oh,

2 (16m 15s):
Wow. It

7 (16m 16s):
Was such amateur hour, but there was also nobody doing it. So I found myself in this situation where I am getting paid to do something. I don't know that much about it, but also at the same time, everyone saw me as an expert. And it was one of the wildest years of my life because my first client was, was buzz coffee. And I don't even know if they paid me. Like, I think they paid me in coffee. And then all of a sudden I was doing it for a food truck and a restaurant. And then all of a sudden, like they introduced me to someone and I was doing it for a new hotel that was opening. And then all of a sudden I realized I had just spent a year being immersed in digital and social media and realizing how, how people could, could use that in a really powerful way.

7 (17m 5s):
Like I also, like wasn't making a ton of money, but I was, so I was also doing like personal assistant stuff. So I was a personal assistant to the wife of one of the heads of like one of the very big studios in LA. And then she had asked me to help her with her blog and her social media and her website. And I started helping her with that. And then she told her husband, I was doing a great job. And all of a sudden I find myself like driving up to the lot every day, like checking in with my ID and meeting with these film executives, talking about how they could market their films, like through social media.

2 (17m 42s):
And this was like, all this is at a time when it's just starting to explode. Right. And so primarily this was like Facebook and Twitter at that, at that point, right?

7 (17m 51s):
Yeah. It was just Facebook and Twitter, like MySpace was tapering off.

2 (17m 54s):
Yeah. And, and I mean, you were just sort of doing this as you, as you went along, right? Like you weren't, you didn't set up a business or a company or you didn't sort of show the companies how the, their social media impacted the world. Right. You weren't like producing reports for them. You were just out there doing the social media stuff and we're hoping that they were happy with it.

7 (18m 18s):
Yeah, exactly. And there are no metrics, there are no analytics of any sort at this time. And I would just pick, look what I tweeted. Look at all these people that responded, look at these people who showed up. And for me, it was, that was actually great because it wasn't reports. It was like real, tangible stuff. It was like people showing up and saying something or doing something or spending money at the business. And that was really exciting for me. Hmm.

2 (18m 45s):
I try to skip ahead for, for, for a sec, because I guess eventually you were, you were able to get a job at, at like a legit ad agency in New York. And then, and then you started to do this, this type of stuff, like marketing for real. And then in 2011, you got recruited by Warby Parker. How did that happen?

7 (19m 3s):
So I have tumbler to thank for this one again. So my friend rich, who worked at Tumblr was like, you should meet with these guys. They're starting this, this glasses company online. And they just want to talk to someone about social media. And I remember meeting this guy who worked at Warby Parker and we met at, at union square park. And I remember realizing kind of halfway through our conversation that it was a job interview. I thought that I was just like coming in there to like chat with them about the startup. And they would like pick my brain. And that was something I was like really open to. And I left being like, I think I just interviewed to be the social media manager at Warby Parker.

7 (19m 46s):
And that's how I got started in the startup world.

2 (19m 48s):
They, to the co-founders have, have been on this show before. And, and, you know, the, the social media stuff never really came up. Did they have a social media strategy when, when you got there? I mean, it's still, this is still like the stone ages to social media compared to compared to today. But today did they have like accounts for all the different social media stuff? And,

7 (20m 13s):
Yeah, I mean, it was still the wild west, like, so there was a Twitter account and those basically for, you know, customer service and, and the guy who interviewed me, Brian, you know, his whole job is like replying to everyone on Twitter, which then became my job, which is, you know, spent like 10 hours a day replying to people, even if the even people would be like, I love Warby Parker. I would reply like, thanks. Like hundreds of times a day, they're on Facebook, on Twitter, they're on Tumblr and Instagram launched right when I started. So I was like, guys, there's this cool platform. I think we should go on it. And they're like, okay, cool. Whatever.

2 (20m 53s):
And what did you, what did you do for them? I mean, like what, how did you start to use like things like Instagram to expand their brand?

7 (21m 3s):
Yeah. So I think I started thinking about like what a content strategy would look like, how do we, how do we take this, this amazing thing that we're building, that's kind of weird, which is selling glasses online. All of my friends thought I was crazy for doing this. And like, how do we, how do we like translate that experience into like a social media community? And we would do things like, like Warby Parker had that like home try on program, or you try on five pairs of glasses and we would do it so that like people would post their five and like we'd repost it to our Tumblr,

2 (21m 34s):
Like bullet pitch of themselves.

7 (21m 37s):
And then like our community would like help them pick. And that was like a big thing on, on tumbler and Facebook. Like, we basically crowdsource what frames people should buy. And we've just built this really loyal, really engaged community. And it just kept growing and growing. And I think like it's always embarrassing to kind of like, look back at your work, especially in those early days. But I really was just like, I really could feel how social media was having an impact on, on how much people love the brand. And that was really special to me.

2 (22m 7s):
When you, why you are at Warby Parker, did it ever cross your mind that like, I want to start my own business one day or was that not even on your radar at all?

7 (22m 18s):
No. I, I never wanted to start my own business. I never wanted to be an entrepreneur. I, I think I was just so grateful to have found work into something that I really enjoyed. And for me that was like social media and marketing and eventually brand development that because of those opportunities seem so limitless and that I never felt like I could learn everything there was to know about what I was doing, that it never occurred to me to start my own thing.

2 (22m 47s):
So I guess you, you sort of lasted at Warby Parker for about two plus years and you were recruited or you, you you've got a job with all saints, which is the, the fashion brand based in the UK to be their global head of innovation. You were like 26, 27 years old. How did, how did that happen?

7 (23m 11s):
So, yeah, so when I joined Warby Parker, there were maybe 15 people there. By the time I left, there were a couple hundred. So it was still growing really quickly. I still left like pretty early days, but my, my father passed away while I was working at Warby Parker. And it kind of, it, like, I kind of slowed down a little bit after that. And I started thinking a lot about what I wanted to be doing. And coincidentally, like this head hunter called me at the same time. I was kind of going through that and moving to London seemed like one of the most exciting things I could do. And I was so drawn to the opportunity.

7 (23m 52s):
The job was interesting. So it had really nothing to do with anything I'd ever done before. So I became the global director of innovation at all saints. And this is when they were, they're trying to turn the company around. They had new owners, a new CEO. I was 26 or 27. And I had a seat at the table with all these like very seasoned executives from, you know, from like from Selfridges and Harrods. And

2 (24m 22s):
They knew your work from Warby Parker and they wanted some of that magic for their brand. Presumably

7 (24m 27s):
Basically the new CEO at all saints, I think had just wanted someone from Warby Parker. But yeah, I mean, it was like, great job, great title. Like I got to live in London. I didn't realize until after the fact that what was missing is that my entire career had revolved around the idea that there is a brand and that someone in the middle does something. And then there's a customer at the other end who falls in love with it. And, and I'd built my entire career around like that middle part, like being the gap between the customer and the brand, like building the relationship, making people fall in love with the company and because all of my projects at all, saints turned out to be internal facing and more of like internal innovation.

7 (25m 14s):
I realized that was the part that I really missed. I wasn't wise enough to realize that at the time, but I think that's basically why it was so bored.

2 (25m 24s):
So, so what, what happened? What did you, I mean, we just kind of waiting to, to figure it out.

7 (25m 31s):
Yeah. I was reading to figure it out. I always promised myself that I would only work on things that made me happy. Especially after my dad passed away. It was like really important for me to, to spend my time doing things that I was really passionate about. And I knew that had kind of dried up for me in this opportunity. And so I left, I left all saints and I was still living in London kind of for finite amount of time because my visa was going to expire. So I started interviewing for jobs. I interviewed for like VP of marketing, like CMO jobs at companies of all different sizes.

7 (26m 13s):
And during this, I, I was completely just on a tear around the world, splitting my time between interviewing and like going on vacation. So I'm in Zurich airport and my back breaks. And it was this old bag that I'd had like since college, I guess it's like no name like black ballistic nylon bag. And it was super embarrassing. Like I didn't, it broke that. I didn't realize the zipper broke. So I'm leaving a trail of like my underwear behind me as I, as I'm running through the airport and I get home and I go on Facebook and I tell everyone about this embarrassing story about my backbreaking.

7 (27m 3s):
And I ask people if they have any recommendations

2 (27m 6s):
For bring you back you back.

7 (27m 7s):
Yeah. This was just me really like, just trying to shop.

2 (27m 11s):
This is like, by the way, this is like 2015, this isn't that long ago.

7 (27m 15s):
Yeah. This was 2015. At that point I've traveled hundreds of thousands of miles in my life with this one bag and I was super annoyed and I was just like, okay, I'm just going to buy a really nice bag that I love. And this won't happen again for a long time. So I asked a bunch of people and every single person is like, I don't know, or I have this, but don't get it. It's awful. Or, or I would specifically ask a friend that I knew traveled a lot and he, or she would be like, oh, I don't actually know what brand I travel with. And I think it was so crazy to me that all of these people, including myself who love to travel, who did it all the time, who packed a suitcase every time they traveled really had no connection to this thing that they brought with that on every single flight on every single trip.

2 (28m 11s):
But like most people would go to like target or TJ Maxx or something, or, or, or, or Marshall's, and just like go to the suitcase area and get a suitcase.

7 (28m 20s):
Yeah. And I didn't want to do that, which is why I asked everyone. And then I found out that like, no one really had luggage that they loved. There was one girl who really loved hers and it was like $4,000. Wow.

2 (28m 34s):
Even though they make $4,000 luggage.

7 (28m 36s):
Yeah. I know me neither. So what I thought to myself was I have to find this brand, like there has to be a great luggage brand out there. Like I didn't, I didn't think like I'm going to start wide. I was just like,

2 (28m 46s):
We're not looking for like, just to be clear, you weren't looking for like a category to start a business in. No,

7 (28m 53s):
Not at all.

2 (28m 53s):
Not at all.

7 (28m 54s):
No. I was like, I like wanted to go shopping. I, I wanted to buy the right thing so that this wouldn't happen again. And I was, I was crowdsourcing for answers and I, I didn't get an answer. And these are people who I have like a mask, a networker friends over time who, whose tastes, I really trust whose advice I take and no one had any advice for me. Everyone was like, good luck. So I started to think, why doesn't this luggage brand exist? Like how come buying luggage is so awful? Like how come you have to go into like the basement of a department store or, or in New York, there's all these like crazy luggage stores in Midtown that are massive.

7 (29m 38s):
And, and you go in, and there's a $500 bag next to a $50 bag. And they look exactly the same. And, and like the luggage sales man is like, whispering in your ear. Like, I can give you 30% off if you buy it right now. I was like, why is this so horrible? So that's when I maybe thought that I could start something like, at this point as interviewing for jobs and in my head, I was like, I can start a little luggage business on the side and like, make it like some cool brand and maybe sell it at like at Liberty or on NetApp forte or like these cool places that I like to shop.

7 (30m 20s):
And that's when I caught up with staff, when I was at Warby Parker, I met Steph Korey and we we'd started on the same day. And we became fast friends. And we were friends all throughout my time at Warby Parker,

2 (30m 34s):
Chief, what did she do at Warby Parker?

7 (30m 36s):
She ran supply chain there. So she was in charge of how the glasses were made, like the factories that we got them from, like how they got to the states to be shipped to customers, just like stuff that I actually technically went to school for, but really didn't know much about. But we kind of went through this, like the crazy growth of Warby Parker together. And we stayed friends and we'd like loosely kept in touch if we check in every few months. So just as this, like this little BB idea of, of making luggage that my friends would love was brewing in my head. I, I reached out to staff and like, I sent her a Facebook message and I said, Hey, there's something I've been thinking about.

7 (31m 21s):
Would love to catch up with you. And she was, she was in business school at the time. So she

2 (31m 27s):
Had,

7 (31m 28s):
Yeah, she left Warby Parker to go to business school at Columbia. And she'd just always been my sounding board. And so I called her to catch up and I was mostly complaining. I was like, this luggage brand doesn't exist. Like I have a bunch of ideas. Like I think, I think I could make like a Cole one, but also how annoying I have to go interview for this other job. They were just catching up. And this was supposed to be a 10 minute call. And like three hours later, we were still on the phone. And basically she was in business school and she had been looking to start something. And she was the one who is like what we did at Warby Parker.

7 (32m 9s):
We can do with luggage. And we basically got off the phone and she realized like all the same things that we saw with eyewear, we were seeing with luggage like crazy markups in the industry, like no brands that people are really loved, like a really awful shopping experience. So she was coming at it from this whole like, like supply chain, disruption, angle, and she's, I guess she was sitting there in business school, like looking for her category. And I basically called her with my little baby to start a luggage brand. And she was like, this is it. This is what we have to do.

2 (32m 47s):
And we come back in just a minute, how Jen and Steph turned this baby idea into a reality and how a coffee table book save their business, stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. Okay. So it's 2015 and Jen Rubio and Steph Korey have this idea for a better luggage brand, but to start working on, it would take a leap of faith because at the time both of them were interviewing for other jobs.

7 (33m 33s):
So I still live in London and I was in pretty late stages to be VP of marketing at this fashion company. Stuff was in business school and talking to a few startups about being like their VP of supply chain. And, and I was, I was actually being flown into New York for, for like one of my final interviews. And I realize I was doing the interview that I was like, I don't want to do this. I want to, I want to do the luggage thing. It's like, I do the interview. And I don't even remember how it went, but I got the job offer and I really didn't want to take it because I had been so excited about, about this idea for a luggage brand that I actually wrote.

7 (34m 20s):
I wrote stuff in email about how I never wanted to be an entrepreneur before, but like, was really passionate about this idea. And I thought that we were the two perfect people to do it. And I made a whole list of everything I wanted to co-founder and then explain how she embodied all of those things. Like I wanted someone who had like a complimentary skillset and like had other lucrative opportunities that they were turning down to do this, which was like a, like a weird qualifier, but it was really important to me. And it wasn't until I wrote that email, like asking her to be my co founder and asking her to do this with me, that that was the point I kind of realized I wanted to be an entrepreneur.

2 (35m 3s):
Did you, did you come up with the name already at that point?

7 (35m 7s):
I feel like everyone's always looking for like some wild story about how I came up with it. But as I was doing my research, I was like trying to stay organized and I made like a folder on my computer and it was like TBD luggage brand. And one day I like opened my computer and I just typed in away as a placeholder. Like it just came to me and I always had it in my head. Like, there's no way we can use like a way as a brand name. It's like just such a simple, like four letter. It's like extremely common. And then Steph and I actually spent a lot of time, like brainstorming new names, but we just never came up with anything as good.

7 (35m 48s):
And she found like some trademark lawyers and asked them if we could trademark it. And they basically laughed in our face. And she was like, she like insisted that they looked into it. And then a week later they called us and they said, you have been given a gift from the marketing gods because this trademark is available in your category in a lot of different countries.

2 (36m 10s):
All right. So you have a name and what's the first step. Like, how do you, how do you get the luggage may? Like where do you, where do you even start?

7 (36m 19s):
Yeah. So kind of like our first steps made sense to us because we are who we are. I had this branding background, she had the supply chain background and I was like, okay, we need to get a branding agency. Like, we need someone to do this. And it was still like, we don't even have a product. We don't even know how to make it. But I was like, I'm going to start working on the branding

2 (36m 36s):
And you have to design, like design what the suitcases are gonna look like.

7 (36m 39s):
Oh yeah. I didn't even think about that. I was like, I was like, I can sell anything. I was like, we have the brand. And she's like, what are you branding? I'm like, the company don't worry about it, but she kind of went with it. So I that's where my head was at. And, and stuff was like, okay, well we have to like come up with a product to sell.

2 (36m 56s):
How did you find, like, I mean, how did you even begin D cause I have to assume that suitcase is probably mainly made in China, but you like in terms of finding a place to make them and, and, and designers and like, what was the, what did you do? How did you know what to do?

7 (37m 15s):
Yeah. So we at Warby Parker, you know, Steph basically learned how to make things. And obviously like the industries are different, but she had a bunch of contacts in China who she asked for intros to like in the luggage space, you know, we cast this wide net. We realized that there are lots of different factories, like a varying degrees of being good at what they do. And like varying degrees of working conditions and like, and the end product and all of that, that we couldn't really make a decision until we had decided what to make. And I think the first few weeks were just like really intense, like our intense version of like market research, which basically meant we went shopping.

7 (37m 58s):
Like every single day we went to like every department store, we went to every luggage store and like compared all of the experiences and all their prices and like kept very meticulous notes on what was out there, mainly because we couldn't afford to like pay for the industry reports. So we're like, we'll just figure this out ourselves. So we start shopping for luggage and we're like getting a better sense of like, what was being offered. It's still wasn't super clear to us. So we decided that to really create the perfect luggage, we need to actually figure out what people wanted. So over the course of a few months, we talked to like me and 800 people and we would just talk to them about travel. And we would ask them things like, not even about luggage, but about their biggest pain points when they travel.

7 (38m 43s):
And we discovered things like people get hotel rooms and they would like steal laundry bags from the hotels because like they didn't have their own or that, you know, everybody like wanted a bag that they could fit a ton of stuff in, but also have it be flexible, but also really durable and like really lightweight. And then something we heard a ton was my biggest pain point. Like one of my biggest pain points when I travel is like, my phone always dies when I'm at the airport. So we were basically armed with, with not a list of features, but, but stories that kept coming up and that's how we figured out all of the things we needed to make, like our one perfect suitcase.

2 (39m 27s):
So as the design process began, what looked like, how did that work? Like, what did you, what did you want the bag to look like?

7 (39m 34s):
Yeah. So basically, you know, and I had this list and then I knew what I wanted it to look like. And, you know, we were basically up like 20 hours a day because our industrial designers were in San Francisco. We had factories that we were talking to in China, basically the second one of them wrote us an email, like we would make sure to write back or pass it on. So there would be no delays because also in all of this and I, to this day, I don't know where it came from, but you know, this was like January. This was like February of 2015. And we had it in our heads that we wanted to launch by Christmas.

7 (40m 16s):
So in less than a year, we wanted to have like product out into the world. And luckily like, we really didn't have anything else to do. So we just like immerse ourselves fully in this. And we're just obsessed with every single detail.

2 (40m 30s):
So I guess, I mean, what's amazing is, I mean, this idea really begins in 2015, like January, February of 2015, by November of that year, you guys managed to raise, I think like two and a half million dollars from, from, from VC companies. Yeah. Was it, was that hard to get, I mean, was it hard to make the case? Cause it sounds like it was pretty easy. I mean, pretty quickly after the, you had the idea.

7 (40m 58s):
Yeah. So in March of 2015, like when this was barely an idea, like we still didn't have a ton of direction on what we were doing. A friend of mine in San Francisco introduced me to Yuri Kim who's a partner@foreignerand4runneristhevcfirmthatinvestedinwarbyparkerandeverlaneanddollarshaveclubandjet.com. And they just had like these amazing portfolio and these amazing wins. And we had heard about them obviously when we worked at Werribee, but didn't really interact with them. And my friend was like, I'll introduce you to one of the partners and me, like, I just had like the audacity to schedule a meeting with her, even though we, we literally had nothing at this point, we still thought away was a placeholder name.

7 (41m 46s):
It was just like an idea to create this thing. And we were basically just like in the throes of doing research, but I was in San Francisco and I met with URI and I kind of like, it was basically just like a meeting of me being excited about what we're doing in my head. It wasn't like me pitching her. But because of that, like, because of that early meeting and because of like her wanting to stay in touch and being excited about the idea and seeing how excited we were about the idea, like we stayed in touch, which meant that when we actually went out to raise our seed round in the summer, we already had like a, like a foot in the door with one of the firms that we wanted to partner with.

7 (42m 27s):
And we, we pitched a lot of, we pitched a lot of VCs. It was like a crazy process. We were like super diligent. And we had this crazy spreadsheet of every single venture capital firm who'd ever invested in a direct to consumer brand who the partner was at each firm that did it. If we had any like mutual connections on LinkedIn, like how we would get to them, we had this like crazy master plan for, for fundraising.

2 (42m 51s):
You really thought this through him, you were really methodical about it. You and Steph were really, I mean, you, you really did your homework.

7 (42m 58s):
Yeah. I mean, I think, I think part of it was that like that deadline to launch in 2015 came from nobody but us, but we just, we really wanted to do it. I don't even know where that timeline came from.

2 (43m 11s):
And you want us to do it in time for Christmas?

7 (43m 13s):
Yeah. We want to do in time for Christmas. Yeah. We're like, this would be like a great way to launch, like get a ton of press. So we had this like self-imposed deadline looming above our heads, but like once we wrote the timeline down, we stuck to it. And that meant being super methodical in everything we were doing, whether it was designing the product or fundraising, or just like literally anything that we were doing. We, yeah. So we raised the seed round in the summer and we talked to a lot of investors and, and URI Kim at 4runner ended up co-leading our seed round. And she actually brought in the other co-leader, which was Brian O'Malley from Excel at the time.

2 (43m 51s):
So you guys, I mean, by that summer, you get your, you get

7 (43m 55s):
Your two and a half million dollars

2 (43m 56s):
To half a million. So what, what was the plan in the summer of 2015?

7 (44m 1s):
So, so the plan was to launch before Christmas. And we had known from previous experience that this was like a very, very lucrative time to, to launch something. All the media does gift guides. There's also like a lot of demand for like human interest stories and things like that. So it all these angles that we wanted to hit, but basically the plan was to launch the suitcases and get a lot of press because we knew from Warby Parker that the press was a big part of, of driving,

2 (44m 34s):
Right. They have this like article in GQ or Vogue or something that just like, It's like blew up for them. But this is, this is already July, August of 2015. Like the big magazines are already 30 making decisions about their Christmas issues at this point, their gift gift, giving guides at this point.

7 (44m 53s):
Yeah. So we didn't know that at the time we like got months, but our whole thing was launched before Christmas got a lot of press sell a lot of suitcases. But we found out when we placed our order in August, that because of the way we designed the bags and we use like all of these, like top of the line components. And we had looked at like every single supplier and wanted all of the best things from all the suppliers that there was no way that our bag would be ready before Christmas. Wow. Which I don't know why it was so surprising to us. We were like, what do you mean? Like we have this timeline in the spreadsheet. And it says like the spreadsheet that we made up, and it said that if we ordered the bags by August, we would have them

2 (45m 36s):
By

7 (45m 37s):
Christmas. And it's so weird that this whole world did not adhere to our timeline. And it was as if like someone had said, like, we had to stop doing the company, even though it was a self-imposed deadline at this point, we'd actually started, like, we didn't even have a suitcase set and we'd already started talking to editors and to like potential PR agencies about what we were doing. And we had gotten some really good feedback. So,

2 (46m 1s):
But didn't, they want to see the suitcase or did you, were you sending them like photos of it?

7 (46m 5s):
We were sending them like, like 3d renderings and we were mostly just like selling them on, on this idea that, that like before us amazing affordable luggage did not exist. And beyond that, that there was like this whole brand that was obsessed with travel the way that they were and that we were creating it. So people were just excited about that. And when we found out the bags, weren't going to be ready. We were like, okay, what are we going to launch? Like we can't launch suitcases. So, so basically our options were like, don't launch or push it back, which wasn't on the table for us, for whatever reason. Or we could launch with a pre-order, which I think is just like the most boring thing you can do when you're launching a brand.

7 (46m 48s):
Like no one wants to put their credit card down for something that they like may or may not get. So we came up with this idea and the idea was that we would come up with something before Christmas that people would want to buy that would show them that we were like this amazing new travel brand that they'd never heard of.

2 (47m 6s):
Right.

7 (47m 7s):
So the idea was to write a book, neither of us are writers. Yeah.

2 (47m 11s):
And this was before a single suitcase has come off the factory, the factory last night,

7 (47m 15s):
Actually, I'm just like, I was, I was just like this, this freak with all these crazy ideas and stuff, it'd be like, okay, okay. We can make this work. Like we were just total enablers.

2 (47m 23s):
Was it going to be a book of your photos of your luggage?

7 (47m 27s):
No. So basically I was like, we're sitting in this big wreck. We're like, Hey, we have to show people that, that we're an exciting new travel brand and that, that they're going to love us. So the book was, we were going to find 40 tastemakers, like not celebrities, but people who had really strong communities, like people who we wanted to vouch for us essentially. And my friend who was like a freelancer for T magazine and Vogue and into the gloss, she was going to interview these people about like their favorite place to travel to. And she would write the little blurbs. And then we realized that like, we would need photos in the book or it'd be really boring.

7 (48m 7s):
So she would also ask them for their vacation photos. And we came up with this list of, of people that she would interview. And the whole plan was to write this book and to, you know, we had to, it was just us and two designers at the time. And we got them to agree to design the book. So we're like, we're going to make a coffee table book. And then inside the coffee table book, we're going to put a gift card that people can redeem for the luggage.

2 (48m 33s):
Wait, let me just pause and say you had raised two and a half million dollars from VCs who wanted you to make luggage and you and I using that money to come up with a coffee table book of people's vacations.

7 (48m 46s):
I didn't even think about that.

2 (48m 50s):
I just, I'm just wondering, like, did anybody say, Hey, what are you guys doing? Or, or did they not really know?

7 (48m 56s):
Well, it's actually funny because when we were trying to choose our investors, a lot of the feedback that we got were like, oh, you're creating the Warby Parker for luggage. Great. We'll invests. And those are super easy conversations. The other feedback was like, you know, we would show them a picture of the login, like a rendering of the luggage and they'd be like, I don't get it. It's just luggage. Like, what's different about it. We're like, well, here's all the great things about the product, but also, and then I would go on and on about this brand that we were building and I would like ramble about the brand. And I was like, like, we make luggage, but we're a travel brand. It's really going to connect with people. And that's the whole idea for a way is that people didn't emotionally connect with Samsonite or to me or any of these other brands.

7 (49m 40s):
And basically the, the, the VCs that we ended up going with were the ones who got that brand was this tangible thing that we could make uniquely ours. And that's what would set us apart. So every time, and even now, like every time we come up with like some crazy idea, like this, they're like, okay, it must be for the brand. So no one questioned what we did.

2 (50m 1s):
Yeah. Where were you going to sell the book?

7 (50m 3s):
So we were going to, that was like, the book was the thing that we were going to sell. So we had set up this whole website to sell luggage that wasn't going to be ready. So then we changed the website to sell the book.

2 (50m 14s):
So if you went on the away website in November of 2015, you could only buy the awake coffee table book. You could not buy a suitcase.

7 (50m 23s):
Yeah. I mean, I guess, I guess like a different way of looking at it would be like, you would, it was basically a pre-order for the suitcase, but you would get the book. And the reason we did that was because we wanted people to be able to like give people things for the holidays, like something tangible. So, yeah. So if you went on the web on the way website in November of 2015, you would buy the coffee table book and the book would come with a gift card for the suitcase, but you would have to go back on the website in February through redeem the gift card. And it was like the craziest, like least efficient idea on paper. And even now, as I'm telling you, but stuff was like, you know what? I think this could really work. And we made 2000 of these books and I remember like the books got delivered and they came these huge boxes.

7 (51m 10s):
And I think Steph and I looked at each other and we were like, this is either a great idea. Or we're going to have these books in this office, like for eternity. Yeah. I think it's just like these thousands of books showed up. So November rolls around. We had, we had lined up a bunch of press. We invested a ton of time in meeting with editors, like getting them to fall in love with, with us and the idea and the product that would eventually launch. And on November 9th, 2015, we woke up and there was a big feature on vote.com all about this new travel brand. And that was our launch. And we had the book on the website and we basically spent the whole day like refreshing Google analytics, refreshing our, like our little dashboard for the platform that we were selling on.

7 (51m 58s):
And people just started buying the book.

2 (52m 0s):
Wow. And how much did it cost?

7 (52m 3s):
Well, you had, so basically you had to buy the book for $225, which was the price of the first suitcase. And we sold hundreds on the first day,

2 (52m 12s):
On the first day,

7 (52m 13s):
On the first day. So Vogue wrote about it. A bunch of other outlets picked it up. All of the people in the book were like really excited about it. We had like a big dinner, every was posting about it. And then the next day, like the hundreds more sold. And then, and then more the next day. And by the end of a couple of weeks, we had sold out of all of the books and each book represented one suitcase that we ordered. So we had sold out of our first order.

2 (52m 42s):
And at this point you still did not have a single suitcase, like in stock, in the U S

7 (52m 47s):
No. So basically, so basically every suitcase that would come in February was accounted for.

2 (52m 53s):
So February of 2016, the suitcases were going to arrive from China. And how and where, like, what do they do? They come in like a giant shipping container to like a warehouse in New York.

7 (53m 5s):
Yeah. So, so it's actually a great, because, so this, like the holidays happened, we sold the books. Like our minds were blown. We were like, look at the appetite for, for this brand. Like all the stuff we told VC is, is real. And we actually weren't sure if it would be, so that felt great. But then we were like, okay, actually have to, to get the luggage over here. So right after Christmas, we flew to our factory and we actually spent days, like in the factory on the production line doing like quality control, checking every suitcase like Steph and I were like, we're standing there with all the factory workers. Like we inspected every bag off of the line.

7 (53m 48s):
They got packaged in their boxes.

2 (53m 50s):
Were you happy with them? Do they look, do they look the way you wanted them to look?

7 (53m 55s):
Yeah, it was, it was a dream come true because we'd basically spent an entire year just, just imagining it and designing it and like, and putting in the work. And I had never been a part of that process before of, of like coming up with and designing something from scratch and then seeing the end result. So there were a lot of tears. It was, it was a very emotional time, but we were, they were like, I was like on the factory floor, like crying, like hugging the suitcase. But yeah, so that was January. We like, you know, they put them on a boat and they made their way over and we sold our first physical suitcase in February of 2016. Wow.

2 (54m 33s):
That year, I think in your first, the first year where you actually had the suitcases, you ended up selling 55,000 suitcases, which is amazing. How did, how did people find out about them?

7 (54m 46s):
I mean, I think what we saw pretty quickly is that our timing was perfect. Like we were in this time in social media where travel is a status symbol. Everyone wanted to post about not just their trips and like, not just about the beach that they're on or like the mountain that they're skiing on. But, but how they got there and people are taking photos at airports, or even when they were packing and Steph and I realized that like we had to be a part of this and we had to be the bag in all of those photos that people were posting as they were packing or as they were at the airport. So we basically found, I mean, in the beginning, in the beginning it was a lot of press.

7 (55m 28s):
And then it was a lot of basically anyone we knew on social media that had a lot of followers like asking them to post about the bag during that kind of like pre-trip process. And we made it so that anytime you would open Instagram and someone was like getting ready for a trip, they would be posting a photo with their away suitcase.

2 (55m 49s):
How did you, I mean, pretty, I guess pretty soon you were, I mean, celebrities were starting to use the bags, like Rashida Jones and Karlie Kloss. And I mean, did you, did you deliberately seek them out and say, Hey, check out our bags or how did that happen?

7 (56m 6s):
I think what happened was we'd give to, to a couple celebrities and I can't remember who, but, you know, celebrities get their photo taken by paparazzi when they leave the airport. So the bag would start showing up, like in all of these magazines as, as celebrities were leaving. So I think that did a lot for growing our customer base and also other celebrities seeing it. But I think what's been amazing is that like celebrities were so drawn to the brand that every celebrity collaboration we've ever done has been because that's, the lab has been a customer and it was crazy. Like, I don't, I don't know how it happened. Like when we first launched the book and we were like, looking at the orders, come in, you know, we would see the names of every single person who ordered.

7 (56m 52s):
Yeah. And I remember I'd be like, oh, I know that person from college, like they must have seen on Facebook or, or like I used to work with that person and it'd be like names of people we knew. And then maybe like names of people we didn't know. But then once in a while, like, you know, we were watching orders come in one day and Laura, Jean Weatherspoon ordered a bag and stuff sets stuff, said it out loud. And I was like, that's Reese Witherspoon. That's her real name. She's like, that's so weird that you know that. But yeah, like she had heard about it from like one of these articles or one of these influencers and she ordered a book. So she actually has one of our like original books. And the bag

2 (57m 30s):
You started this company, just the two of you in 2015. How many, how many employees do you have now?

7 (57m 35s):
We have close to 250 employees.

2 (57m 37s):
Wow. I mean, it it's, it is pretty unbelievable. Like, you know, the one hand it is unbelievable, right? You start this company in 2015 today, you know, three and a half plus years later, you know, you're doing, I don't know. The last I've seen is 50 million in revenue, probably higher today.

7 (57m 58s):
So we've sold over 1 million suitcases.

2 (58m 2s):
I mean, it, it, it's pretty amazing how quickly that's happening, but at the same time, like you really, both humans and staff came to this with a lot of experience and an experience that really kind of set you up to succeed in, in this venture. Like this was like, you, you sort of took the time to kind of burn the ropes. And I mean, it's, in some ways it's not surprising that it succeeded so quickly. I don't know. I mean, does it, does it surprise you?

7 (58m 34s):
I think that just things have been moving so quickly that like, I don't think we stop enough to like, to think about what happened and what we've done. I think a lot of it has to do with the fact that we're so different and basically like any strength that staff has is like my weakness and vice versa. So that meant like from the beginning we had all bases covered. So I feel like even if this wasn't a runaway success, we would have done things like twice as quickly or, or twice as good as anyone else, because we really like from the beginning operated as like one brain. But I mean, I don't know. I think it's like I never set out to do this.

7 (59m 16s):
I never set out to, to run a company with hundreds of people. And I think what's asked of you when, when you have a couple dozen employees and maybe like a couple of million in revenue is so different than, than what is being asked for us now. So for us, like while externally it, it definitely has been successful and really exciting and something we're really proud of. We're, we're just like, we're constantly like behind the scenes, like trying to fix things or trying to try to keep up with things, you know, like those first, those first investor meetings, they'll sit there and look at you to see if you have what it takes. Or if you have the idea that can turn into a $1 billion company.

7 (1h 0m 1s):
And to us, that was, that was so daunting. Like how do you create a billion dollar company? And now the kinds of investors that we meet with are that we're getting to know for this next phase of the business will say things like, yeah, we really, you know, we're really just evaluating to see if, if this can be like a five or $10 billion company, which, which is mind blowing. Yeah.

2 (1h 0m 21s):
I mean, you're, you are like at the time of this recording, you're only 32. You've got, oh my God, like your entire career ahead of you, where do you see this company going? I mean, do you, what do you, what do you imagine a way becoming beyond a company that sells suitcases?

7 (1h 0m 39s):
I'm only 31.

2 (1h 0m 41s):
Sorry, I'm sorry.

7 (1h 0m 43s):
I'm just kidding. I was like, am I 32? I mean, I, so I think for us, it's funny because the future away really goes back to what we were saying in those first investor meetings that we're building this travel brand. And I think we talked about it a lot, but we didn't really know what it meant. We knew we were going to be a travel brand and we were going to start by selling luggage, but we became so obsessed with just every part of the travel experience. So I think, you know, in the short term, like our goal right now is the way you would go to like, to Nike, if you're, if you're playing sports and you kind of get, you can get everything from like one sportswear brand and they make all the different things.

7 (1h 1m 26s):
Like we want to do that with travel. Like when someone's going on a trip, we want to make everything they need to go on that trip seamlessly. But I think in the longterm, like what we've done or what we're trying to do is really set this foundation for how do we create a brand that people love and trust enough so that we can solve every single part of the travel experience.

2 (1h 1m 48s):
How much do you think of how much you think luck played a part in, in your success and how much do you think it was? Hard work and skill and talent?

7 (1h 1m 58s):
I think it's, it's probably 50 50. I mean, I think for me personally, luck in timing had so much to do with, with everything I've done at every single step, just in terms of like the way we time things or the people that we met, or even just the fact that like, it was really lucky that I called staff when I did and that we didn't take the jobs that we were supposed to. But I think we, we worked our tails off, especially in that first year. Just obsessing over everything. Yeah. I mean, I don't know. I think it's like every time I saw something that excited me, I would find a way to do it. Like I never thought, oh, I need to get a degree to do that.

7 (1h 2m 41s):
Or I need to have certain work experience to do that. I would just find a way to do it. And I think I'm just a very curious person. That's something I learned from my dad actually. And I just followed all of my curiosities.

2 (1h 2m 57s):
That's Jen Rubio of a way the company has expanded its product line a bit. Since those first few bags came off the factory floor, in addition to their signature hard shell suitcases, and now sell duffle bags, backpacks, even packing cubes, and the brand continues to gain more and more celebrity fans, including most recently Duchess Megan Markle, who reportedly gifted away suitcases as party favors at her baby shower. And please do stick around because in just a moment, we're going to hear from you about the things, your building, but first, a quick message from one of our sponsors, Smartwater inspired by fresh thinkers, who stories your listening to Smartwater has more ways to hydrate Smartwater alkaline nine plus pH and Smartwater antioxidant with added selenium Smartwater.

2 (1h 3m 56s):
That's pretty smart. Hey, thanks so much for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that. And today's story comes to us from John Maroney who lives just outside grand rapids in Michigan. Anyway, back in November of 2015, the snows came early to the east side of lake Michigan. And what afternoon John decided to take the kids? Sledding.

8 (1h 4m 21s):
Flooding is something fun. You can grab a few sleds and go find a hill and spend hours.

2 (1h 4m 27s):
And as John watched his kids slide down the hill, he thought, Hey, I want to get in on the action because sledding is awesome. But John is also a fully grown middle-aged man. And as he sat on that sled waiting to glide down the hill, he realized that sleds don't always agree with grownups

8 (1h 4m 47s):
Many pounds and years later on our bodies sledding. Isn't quite as exciting as it used to be. You know, when you're 8, 10, 12 years old,

2 (1h 4m 56s):
Which to John didn't seem fair or right. Sledding should be fun for everyone. And besides this seemed like a problem waiting to be solved, which worked out great because John happens to be a professor of product design. So that afternoon he decided to take out his notepad to take some notes.

8 (1h 5m 15s):
We noticed that a lot of kids like to run and jump onto their sleds, trying to get a little bit more speed. And a lot of them would do it running and then kneeling on their sled as they go down and hitting jumps and things like that. Well, that was terribly uncomfortable for us as adults that kind of got the wheels turning a little bit.

2 (1h 5m 34s):
The wheels started turning and John got in touch with a group of friends who also love to solve design problems. He shared his notes with the team and he asked, Hey, could we figure out a way to make sledding more comfortable and more fun? Not just for kids, but for grownups too.

8 (1h 5m 51s):
One of the team members said to us, Hey, I think we could really make this a little bit more exciting. If we created two independent sleds and strapped into our legs to

2 (1h 6m 0s):
Sleds strapped to your legs, kind of like the pads a hockey goalie might wear, but instead of pads they'd be sleds. So John and his buddies decided to pursue this idea. They pulled together about $20,000 each and got to work.

8 (1h 6m 16s):
The first prototype was actually kind of like a foam filled sled that was cut in half and duct tape to somebody's legs. Just to see if it were possible to have two independent legs with something underneath them, track and stay straight down a hill. Yeah,

2 (1h 6m 32s):
It was possible, but not that simple. So for the next model, John made a hard plastic shell to fit over the lower legs,

8 (1h 6m 41s):
Skirt, some straps to it, and then cut up some yoga mats and stuck to us on the inside. Just to get a little bit of cushion. Yeah, you laugh. But when you're my age that matters,

2 (1h 6m 51s):
This version did move better on the snow, but now John needed to make the sleds more comfortable without losing that agility.

8 (1h 6m 59s):
The foam was kind of the key ingredient to all of this. There's an impact energy absorbing foam that goes into it. That sort of raises your, your feet up in the back and really makes it possible to go down the hill and pick up some speed without totally dragging your feet. The hallway.

2 (1h 7m 14s):
At this point, John needed feedback on his design. So he got his friends, his kids and his neighbor's kids to try them out.

8 (1h 7m 22s):
You know, we heard really straightforward things. Like I really like how I can run and slide on them. It helps me go faster. I like how I can walk up the hill and not have to carry my slut up.

2 (1h 7m 35s):
But the next winter 2016, the team was ready to sell their product. They used some of their money for advertising and they ended up selling 800 units. It was time to celebrate, but

8 (1h 7m 47s):
About two days after that big shipment, we hit this local ski hill. All the founders put on a pair, jumped, went down the hill and half of them broke on the very first run. Thank God for the beer, because that probably made it a little bit more tolerable when we discovered what the problem was. But man, it sure didn't feel good at all.

2 (1h 8m 9s):
The problem was the straps. They weren't properly attached. So the team grabbed the beer and left the hill and spent an entire night troubleshooting. And after a few days they sent customers a follow-up shipment. It had better fasteners and instructions on how to attach them. And they also started gearing up for the next winter. They tweak the sled design and the added a smaller size for little kids. So when the 2017 season rolled around,

8 (1h 8m 37s):
We sold 8,000 units. We actually sold out

2 (1h 8m 44s):
John Moroney and his team are the founders of sled legs. Next year, they're planning to sell sled legs in stores. If you want to find out more about John or hear previous episodes, head to our podcast page, how I built this.npr.org. And of course, if you want to tell us your story, go to build.npr.org. And thanks so much for listening to the show this week, you can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts, and while you're there, please do give us a review. You can also write to us@hibtatnpr.org. And if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this. Our show is produced this week by Rachel Faulkner with music composed by REM teen era bluey. Thanks also to Julia Carnie, JC Howard, Nora Cuzzi, Neeva grant, Melissa Gray, Sandoz Meshkinpour and Jeff Rogers.

2 (1h 9m 31s):
Our intern is Candace lip. I'm guy Roz, and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.