0 (1s):
We got the contact info that day to Randy , who was in produce coordinator for whole foods. And we ended up getting a call scheduled where them,

1 (12s):
It was like a two minute phone call. He's like, boys, what is this? You guys are farming. And we said, Randy, we're growing mushrooms on copies. He's like, what were you farming before? Well, Randy were in college. All right, you guys figured this out and he's kind of laughing how to grow mushrooms on coffee waste. He's like, this is the coolest shit I've ever seen him. Produce boys, figure this out, call, text me if you need anything else. And then he hangs up. That was it.

2 (39s):
That was it From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built. I'm guy Ross. And on the show today, how two college grads headed for jobs, banking and consulting decided instead to grow mushrooms built back to the roots. One of the fastest growing organic gardening brands in the country. One of my favorite things about getting to do this show is we don't just hear about the successful businesses that people built, but also about the businesses they tried to build and ultimately abandoned before James Dyson came up with a groundbreaking idea for a new vacuum cleaner.

2 (1m 37s):
He was desperately trying to market a wheelbarrow that used a giant round ball instead of a wheel in the front before Dinah trout launched health aid kombucha. She was working on an idea to make party kits for adults. Everything you'd need for a roaring twenties party or a Flintstones party before rich full-up, co-founded the bedsheet company, Brooklyn. And he was thinking about a business selling a hot dogs inside hollowed out French begets and Apoorva Mehta. The guy who started Instacart was initially convinced he had the perfect business idea, an online social network for lawyers, just for lawyers.

2 (2m 22s):
I know, I know. Imagine how exciting it would be to connect with other lawyers. Anyway, you get the picture. Sometimes you need to come up with and then try one idea to get to the real idea, which is how the home and garden brand back to the roots began. Nick hill, Aurora and Alejandro Velez originally planned to sell mushrooms, which they grew unused coffee grounds. The idea came from a class. They took together at UC Berkeley and believe it or not, even though neither of them knew much about agriculture or farming, they managed to build a pretty successful small business around it.

2 (3m 3s):
For several years, they would haul leaky bags of spent coffee grounds from cafes around Berkeley and Oakland to a warehouse. They rented near the airport. They grow mushrooms and sell them to the local whole foods and a few other specialty food stores, their guide to farming, mainly YouTube videos and trial and error. But what's truly remarkable about their business model is that even though it wasn't making a ton of money, it was profitable from the very beginning, Nicole and Alejandro, who also goes by Alex would get paid to Holloway, the used coffee grounds. Then they'd get paid for the mushrooms. They grew on those grounds.

2 (3m 45s):
And after that, they'd sell the nutrient rich coffee soil that the mushrooms had grown on. But as the co-founders eventually realized, there's only so far, you can go with mushrooms and coffee grounds. So eventually they propped the mushroom growing business entirely and moved into the home gardening business, things like seeds and potting soil. And this year the company says it will reach $100 million in sales, all from an idea to grow mushrooms on coffee grounds. Mikila rara grew up in Southern California. His parents were immigrants from India. Alejandro spent his early childhood in Midian, Columbia, where he experienced firsthand the political violence and terrifying guerrilla attacks that were happening at the time as a young boy, he and his grandparents were briefly held hostage by the violent Colombian guerrilla group farm.

2 (4m 43s):
But when he was about 11, his mother married an American servicemen in the family, moved to Michigan

1 (4m 50s):
Moved to so I'll start off by saying basically when I was on the plane, it was like, you're now called Alex. They will know how to pronounce on a Hondo. So I basically, as soon as I got to Michigan, I changed my name. Didn't speak a word of English and landed in a town called Papa, Michigan, a town of about 5,500 people. And I was the only Hispanic kid.

2 (5m 17s):
So you were an 11 year old now named Alex and, and put right into a public school right away and just like sink or swim. Like you gotta start learning English basically

1 (5m 29s):
So much. So that the day in which I was put in front of the class the first day, and apparently they asked me, where is Columbia? And my teacher, Mrs. Schumann. She brought out, you know, she put me to the front of the class. I was so scared. And then she makes me point to the country where I'm from. And for some odd reason, my like intro is me making gun noises like gorillas gorillas at 11 year old from Papa, Michigan. He thought I was talking about gorillas with guns in Columbia. And he's like, whoa, this kid comes from a place where gorillas have guns.

1 (6m 12s):
That was my intro to my fifth grade class. But the culture in Papa and Midwest culture is so warm. I never felt like I was an outsider.

2 (6m 24s):
I guess when you were 15, you went to, to see a doctor cause you had a soccer injury and the doctor discovered a lump in your armpit, which, which turned out to be stage two Hodgkin's lymphoma. I mean, just, I can't even imagine what that must've been like for your mom. What do you remember about, about that moment and hearing that

1 (6m 48s):
When you mentioned it, the memory that comes to mind is when the doctor called and my mom had already gotten the news and she just turns away hands me the phone. And I said, Hey, doctor, what's going on? And he immediately says, Alex, you have cancer. And as I'm hearing those words, I'm processing my mom, take her head and start pounding it against the kitchen wall. And my immediate first question was like, well, am I going to die? And thankfully the doctor said, no, you're not

2 (7m 24s):
Gnosis is pretty good for, for that particular kind of cancer, especially when you're 15, but it still meant that you had to go through months of, of chemotherapy, right? Yeah.

1 (7m 36s):
Yeah. I went through four cycles of chemo. And did you lose your

2 (7m 39s):
Hair? I did.

1 (7m 41s):
Yeah. I mean, I was the luckiest immigrant to have come to a town like Papa, the entire town rallied around me. So the entire basketball team shaved his head and then wow. The entire school started shaving their head at another friend of mine. McKenzie, who did prayer chains. So the entire school did prayer chains and she glued one by one and created a whole chain. And she took to the day chemotherapy sessions though. Just a lot of love around me. Hm.

2 (8m 13s):
All right. Let's pause. And I want to move to you in a keel. You grew up in, in orange county, right? That's

0 (8m 21s):
Right. Grew up born in Irvine.

2 (8m 23s):
And were your parents, did they like, did they have a lot of friends in the Indian community also like people who had immigrated to the U S

0 (8m 31s):
Yeah, it was a huge part of my experience growing up was just, and I've realized this more as I've been older, just how incredible it is. And the amount of even think about entrepreneurship, like to me, immigrating is the ultimate form of that have taken risk and sacrifice in search of something better, but, you know, like leaving all of their family, all of their friends back in India to kind of pursue this new journey. And I think what they found in Southern California was the community of a lot of other Indian immigrants who had all done the same thing. And really that all became family.

2 (9m 4s):
Did your parents have kind of, do they kind of push you in any particular direction? Your dad was an engineer and was there any, did they have any expectations for you or, or pushing a particular direction?

0 (9m 16s):
You know, guy, they, I know this goes counterintuitive to a lot of the narratives, but, but they, they didn't, it wasn't like you have to be a doctor and engineer. I think you just wanted to see me and my brother working hard, which I, and you know, I think that in so many ways to that, you know, downstream gave me, I think in the back of my mind, the space, the confidence to keep on exploring new things, which I think that that was kinda the energy I grew up with. And I'm grateful for them for that.

2 (9m 47s):
So both you and Alejandro ended up going to UC Berkeley for college. I think you've started in 2005. Both of you are our business administration majors and senior year. I think that both of you sort of take a class in business ethics, which was like, Nicole, just briefly tell me what, what was the class? What was it about

0 (10m 8s):
That was business ethics class professor, Alan Ross. You know, this is a lecture 100, a hundred plus people in this class, which is crazy. We were both in the same classes, both undergrad business majors. And like, we both remember each other in different classes, but somehow never connected, never shook hands, never said hello to each other. And one of the classes, our professor is talking about different ideas around sustainability, and this idea gets brought up in one sentence about how you can grow mushrooms on coffee grounds. And he went on to some other topic right after that. And I don't remember, it was a whole series of different ideas about sustainable business practices, sustainable ideas, and Alex and I both after class independently, email our professor for more information.

2 (10m 54s):
All right. So the professor says, Hey, you can grow mushrooms on coffee grounds. Why was that interesting to you? Why did you think that was interesting? You know,

0 (11m 3s):
I asked myself that question a lot over these years. And I think for me it was, you know, just kind of focus on sustainability and recycling. It was all the summers when my grandparents who had this beautiful garden and a small town would grow all their own food and hearing something about growing food. My, you know, my parents teaching me about kind of just my dad, always in my ear about recycling. And I think all of those experiences in the course of, you know, at that 0.2 decades made that relevant to me at that moment and said, that's really cool going food off of waste. And I think I've gone through my mind. I was like, is there something here? This is a really cool idea.

2 (11m 38s):
And Alan Hunter, why were, why were you interested? I mean, when the professor said, yeah, you can grow mushrooms on coffee grounds. Why did that, why did you even pause and reach out to professor? W what did you ask him? I said, Hey, that sounds pretty cool. Do have any more

1 (11m 53s):
Information? What was interesting is it's kind of crazy, right? Coffee wastes and coffee waste has been part of my culture. My grandparents in Columbia had traded coffee. The fact that that sounded like weird magic. Like how do you take coffee wastes and grow mushrooms on it? That's where it, cause I loved coffee and I've always like, I've always loved coffee. So, all right. So

2 (12m 18s):
Each of you went up emailing this professor, you do not know each other. You kind of, kind of know who the other one is, but you're, you're not friends. He then sends you an email back and says, Hey, there's another student who emailed me about this. And he connected you guys over email. Is that, is that your, your memory of what happened? Yeah,

0 (12m 37s):
I, I remember that same thing. He emails the both of us and the next vivid memory I have, this was, I want to say February, Alex was a committee a month before spring break at that 200 nine, 2009. And we met up at Alex's fraternity and we just hit it off, like right away and just started kicking around ideas. And honestly, at that point, I think it could have been, it could have been anything. I think we just, honestly, and this is to this day is the core of it. We had, we right away realized we just had this connection. And I think we just, we were like bouncing off each other, the energy from, and to this day we still are.

0 (13m 19s):
But like, I remember just sitting up there and started YouTube videos. Like the first time I remember that Alex we met and we were just like started YouTube, how to grow mushrooms and just laughing about all the crazy videos that came up on YouTube and just like trying to figure out, you know, what to do about this whole thing.

1 (13m 34s):
And we start realizing, we're like, I think we gotta grow this stuff to actually see if it works. And it was like, this realization is like, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. We, we got to go and get our hands on.

0 (13m 45s):
Then it was definitely like, I don't know if it was a business per se at that point guy, where was like, is there a project or is there something here? Like, man, there's so much coffee waste out there. And I think turning that into something useful, it was just, you know, inspiring in that moment.

2 (13m 59s):
And by the way, why are coffee grounds good for growing mushrooms?

0 (14m 5s):
Super rich in cellulose. And the cellulose structure of coffee grounds mimics that of, you know, a tree on which oyster mushrooms would traditionally grow. And what's crazy. So the whole reason we started this thing off is that traditionally mushrooms are grown on Virgin trees being cut down for their logs, mainly overseas as a substrate to grow mushrooms. And when we first heard this factor, like, wait, you're importing mushrooms that are grown on Virgin trees being cut down just for this substrate, when you have this whole massive waste stream, millions, millions of pounds in their local communities. And we could grow this food locally. That's what inspired the whole thing. That was crazy that people were cutting down trees.

0 (14m 47s):
They're growing mushrooms when there was so much agricultural waste and kind of this food waste around to do it. So one of the ideas there was like, should we just collect all these coffee grounds and try to sell it to a mushroom farm? And finally, we were like, we should probably just try going this herself. See if,

2 (15m 1s):
Yeah. I mean, it's interesting. Cause cause like growing mushrooms is not as lucrative as like mining Bitcoin. Right? And I can imagine there are many mushroom billionaires on planet earth, but, but you guys were thinking, Hey, this could be an interesting business.

1 (15m 16s):
I thought we could have three. We could have three streams of revenue off of one byproduct. And that was really intriguing, which was what we could pick up the waste. So we were waste collectors,

2 (15m 28s):
Which is coffee

1 (15m 29s):
Grounds, which is coffee grounds. We could sell the fresh mushrooms. And then third we could sell the spent mushroom substrate, which is once the mushrooms are done growing, they leave even more nutrients behind. So we're like, oh my gosh, this is a gold mine. Wow. This is so cool. Three revenue streams, zero waste on any of this. And then I was an Excel monkey and I pulled out Excel and I modeled it out as Nicole stocking. And I said, this could be a big business. And like, that was our,

2 (15m 60s):
Our first meeting. I mean, don't get me wrong by the way. I love mushrooms, but it doesn't sound like you guys loved mushrooms. It doesn't sound like you were like mushroom fanatics. Nope.

0 (16m 10s):
Can't remember eating. I mean, I'm sure we had him on pizza, but that was probably

2 (16m 14s):
Not until like sauteed wild mushrooms or anything like that. You're just, it just happened to be the thing that was mentioned, that then as you looked into it, you thought, Hey, you know, you can extract a lot from a mushroom.

0 (16m 27s):
We went to the library and found all the mycology books. And over the coming weeks, we were YouTube-ing every, every possible video on mushrooms and downloading every PDF we could find. And you know, Paul Stamets like the mushroom grew, wrote the handbook on growing mushrooms. We got all his books

2 (16m 43s):
And his whole documentary on this guy, Paul Stamets amazing,

0 (16m 46s):
Brilliant

1 (16m 47s):
Cold emailed him. And he, he got back to us within two hours of us cold emailing him.

2 (16m 52s):
You cold email, Paul Stamets. But for people that aren't, he's got his whole mushroom tea company and he's got a Ted talks and mushrooms and documentary on him. He's like the mushroom kind of expert. What did you email him? Like, would you ask?

0 (17m 6s):
We were trying to grow mushrooms on coffee grounds. And we were asking about spawn. And I forget if we asked them directly, Alex

2 (17m 14s):
Is like the seed basically like

0 (17m 17s):
Seed. Exactly. Yeah. It's analogist to seed. So you need that to get started. So he donated our first spawn or seed that we needed to grow, which eventually we used for our first test bucket.

2 (17m 27s):
And by the way, you're in Berkeley and you needed to, you want to do this on coffee grounds. Did you just like brew a bunch of coffee and use that one look,

1 (17m 36s):
Local coffee shop and just said, Hey, can we pick up your coffee with

0 (17m 40s):
Yep. The first time we thought we were actually, we were like, afraid. We didn't know how it was gonna work. You remember walking into the first cafe and asking for their coffee, gone away, then, you know, thinking of you, big deal. And man, they were so happy to get it off their hands. Like you want to go to the back and you pick up that trash bag, that's messy and heavy and leaking like, sure, go ahead. And I think we were like, oh, okay. There's definitely a lot of this back here. And they don't want anything to do with it.

2 (18m 3s):
So you get some coffee grounds, Paul Stamets mails, you some mushroom spawn mushroom seeds through my fraternity, give fraternity house. And w what did you get a bunch of like buckets

0 (18m 14s):
And just white, like imagined white paint buckets. We had about 10 of them. This is right before spring break. And finally, both of us were like, oh, we just got to do this thing and got to try growing these things enough, reading enough, watching videos and decided to plant them. So, you know, he went collected a bunch of coffee grounds, brought him back to his fraternity, put this tarp down in this fraternity kitchen closet. And we mixed in the spawn into them, put a little top on it and poke some holes, trying to use all of our best research, you know, that we had done. And we leave for spring break and we're both gone for roughly 10 days. And I will never forget this phone call because Alex, you know, it gets back to his fraternity and I get this call and he's just so excited and kind of screaming.

0 (18m 59s):
He's like, Nick hill, you gotta run up here. You gotta take this out. And you know, in this room with him, when we look at these 10 buckets and let it, nine of them are just contaminated and nothing growing, just looking really nasty after sitting for 10 days, you know, what's more coffee grounds. The one of them had this beautiful crop of pro oyster mushrooms growing out of them. And I remember we were both standing around this bucket and just looking at it. And Alex was like, you want to try those? I'm like, I'm not trying to, he's like, you want to dry them. It's like, I'm not trying these either. We're both kind of, you know, just looking at this bucket of mushroom sitting in this dark closet,

2 (19m 36s):
Wind up, actually sampling the mushrooms.

0 (19m 39s):
It was actually funny that that's speaking of, you know, never really being chefs or foodies or gourmet cooks or anything. Neither one of us was trying those mushrooms. But we were like, what's the best restaurant in town. And we both had heard about this best. John called shaped nice by chef Alice Waters, who is just an absolute legend. And one of the founders, the entire natural organic food movement with a restaurant right there in Berkeley. We didn't know any of that. We just knew it was this famous restaurant in Berkeley. And we ended up literally walking over this paint buckets, one paint bucket, the mushrooms walked it over and she happened to be in the front of her restaurant. She was talking to somebody and we just walked right up to her and said, Hey, Alice, I'm Nick hill.

0 (20m 21s):
This is Alex. We're trying to go these mushrooms on coffee grounds. We just grew some would you want to try some? And you know, she got super into it and she's like, that's really cool. And come to the back with me. And she actually walked us through the back of the, her restaurant to the kitchen where her head chef, this guy named Cal was, and she's like, how do you want to, do you want to try some of these mushrooms? These boys are grown and he ends up plucking half, half of mushrooms out his bucket. And he chopped them up. Sautes them up in the back of her restaurant. And she tries and he tries and we try, and I remember chef Alice Waters was like, man, these are delicious. Wow.

2 (20m 60s):
She was on the show a few years ago. And, and so when you, you brought the bucket of mushrooms and she said, she kind of gave it her blessing, did they say, yeah, we want to buy them? Or what, what was the, how did you leave it?

1 (21m 13s):
No, I mean, we thought that they were going to taste like coffee waste. So we're like, they're not going to like them. So it was almost like this. Okay. This is further along than we thought we'd be. Where do you go from here? So after that, we were like, oh man, now we got, we got a product here. Let's just take it to whole foods. And we took the same day, that same bucket to the Berkeley whole food store. This was at the early days where whole foods, you could do this all the time. You know, a lot of local growers would go to a whole foods store and on the spot, whole foods would buy it from you.

2 (21m 46s):
So you guys went to the whole foods in, in Berkeley. I know that whole foods on Telegraph avenue. And you w w you'd like walked in and who'd you ask for first

1 (21m 56s):
Produce guy, we saw his name was Sessa

0 (21m 58s):
And we just went right up to him and said, we're trying to grow mushrooms on coffee grounds. And we just grew these, check them out and just kind of told them what we were trying to do. And Alice Waters

2 (22m 7s):
Now you've got the Alice Waters endorsement, even though I may not have been official, but, you know,

0 (22m 13s):
Yeah. And he got fired up about it and he ended up bringing up. He bought his produce manager. I think we had a store marketing lead by three or four. People are like huddled around this little bucket of mushrooms. And, you know, we were telling him about what we were trying to do and got a bunch of interest and support. And we got the contact info that day to Randy , who was a new workout produce coordinator for whole foods. And we ended up getting a call scheduled with him. Alex must've been what a week or two later.

2 (22m 45s):
And he said, Hey, tell me about what you guys are doing.

1 (22m 49s):
Randy's a character. He's like boys. It was like a two minute phone call boys seeing all these emails. And what, what is this? You guys are farming. We said, Brandy, we're growing mushrooms on copies. He's like, you hear this pause. And he's like, okay, what were you farming before? Like, well, Randy were in college. Okay. All right. You guys figured this out and he's kind of laughing how to grow mushrooms on coffee waste. He's like, I'm going to blow you up at whole foods. It's like, this is the coolest shit I've ever seen him produce, take coffee, weeds, grow mushrooms, boys. Figure this out. Here's my personal cell phone number. So just call, text me if you need anything else. And then he hangs up.

1 (23m 28s):
That was it.

2 (23m 29s):
That was it. And no discussion about like a purchase order or pricing or anything. It's just like, this sounds cool. But, but when you figure it out, give me a call back. Yeah,

0 (23m 39s):
It was that. And I think at that point, I mean, we knew nothing about retail. After that phone call, we were now a couple of weeks away from graduation and we were still meeting up all the time, talking all the time. Like, what are we doing with this? And we heard about a business plan competition called bears, breaking boundaries, big ideas. It was called at Berkeley. And somehow someone told us about this, Alex. I think it was a night before the deadline. I remember it was an all night. We were up to like the end of the night submitting this thing right before the deadline. And we learned that we won. No,

1 (24m 18s):
No, no. I think we got second place,

0 (24m 20s):
Brother. Yeah. It felt like we won this thing. Yeah. We got $5,000 and we were on top of the world. And that is when we, I think Matt up. And we, I remember very vividly both of us and just kind of asking each other, like, if you're in, I'm in, if I'm in your end, just kind of both shaking on it and deciding to go all in. And you know, you fast forward actually to a graduation ceremony, thousands of thousands of kids, right. At Berkeley. And because we had won this, this award, our chancellor brought it up and actually his commencement address. And he was like, and we have two kids who are going to be growing mushrooms after they graduate. And we, I remember the whole, like auditory of his Greek theater just starts cracking up laughing.

0 (25m 4s):
And Alex and I looked at each other like, whoa, what are we getting ourselves into? I, now everyone thinks we're crazy. But that was, that was the start of this whole thing.

2 (25m 12s):
Huh. And just to be clear, I mean, before you got going with, with this mushroom project, I read the, both of, you had really promising jobs lined up after school ended like a hundred. I think you were, you were going to go into banking and kill. You had, I think a consulting job lined up and you basically put those jobs on hold. Right. That's right. So how did your parents take the news when you told them that like a hundred, when you told your mom who like, you know, made all these sacrifices to like leave Columbia and to get you to the, to the U S you get to Berkeley and you've got this great offer on wall street when you were like, I'm not going to do it.

2 (25m 53s):
Do you remember what she said?

1 (25m 55s):
She was all in. Wow. Trusted me. She was all in

2 (25m 58s):
Amazing. She wasn't like, well, what are you doing? Are you nuts? She was totally supportive. She was,

1 (26m 3s):
Was she saw. And I think probably the best word is how refreshing those three months versus my summer experience in investment banking in New York, I had a really tough time yet. I was going back and signing full-time and going back to doing it again. So I think in her eyes, she saw how happy I was and she just trusted me. Wow,

0 (26m 30s):
Same and guys, as much as we talk about our family being really supportive and we definitely had friends who thought we were, we were crazy. I have this one memory of ever being on the corner of a Telegraph and Duran by the Pete's coffee, they're waiting at like nine 30 or 10:00 PM after closing and then waiting for Alex to pick me up. Cause he was collecting coffee grounds from some other cafe. And you know, Friday night, all of our friends are going out to a party. Like what are you doing? They cause anybody's trash can with two trash bags. I feel like Alex almost had an intervention that his fraternity, you know, everyone's just like, what are you doing, Alex? You have this job offers six figure job offer. And you've worked your butt off for, for four years. And you're going to give it up to, to do what,

1 (27m 12s):
Like, what are you doing, man? You just got this job offer. You've been wanting to, I've been hearing about you wanting to do this forever. And now you're going to start growing mushrooms. Like what are you doing?

2 (27m 23s):
But that was a good advice that you gave you at the time. I mean, cause this was chances that this was going to succeed are very, very tiny. Oh yeah. So you have 5,000 bucks now, some money to start. What does that do? What does that get you? What can you do with 5,000 bucks at that point in summer of 2009, you stay in Berkeley. Everyone goes after their jobs, you guys are staying there. What do you do with 5,000 bucks?

1 (27m 47s):
We got an $800

0 (27m 48s):
Van keep us, then we could find that's the one, that's the one run.

2 (27m 51s):
And this is going to be presumably the hall to hall the coffee grounds. Right? Because you needed all the coffee.

1 (27m 56s):
Yeah. It, those to pick up the coffee ways, we signed a lease on a 250 square foot office that was supposed to be our warehouse in which we were we'd cultivate the mushrooms.

0 (28m 10s):
I wake up early in the morning, meet up at like 5:00 AM. And at that point, you know, we ended up meeting with pizza, coffee and Kim by spot and we pitched him what we were trying to do and they'd help. They, they were excited about it.

2 (28m 25s):
They said, yeah, you can, you can have our coffee waste. And presumably they were paying somebody to remove their waste. Right.

0 (28m 32s):
They were at that. When we started off, we, we weren't getting paid. That was a whole separate discussion actually a little bit later as we proved ourselves. But to the beginning, which was like, can we be allowed to go into your back of your cafes and go, you know, pick up your coffee, ground waste every morning and be at Pete's coffee goes our first major kind of supply partner.

1 (28m 51s):
They had a couple, couple of hundred coffee shops. And then eventually we went and said, Hey, how about

2 (28m 58s):
Paying us? And they said, well,

0 (29m 0s):
At that point, though, we had, we had been collecting coffee guys for some time for probably what 6, 8, 9 months I think consistently and had proven ourselves. There were like, we were literally replacing waste management and their stores, which was a cost driver for them. And so like we ended up negotiating a rate that was a little bit cheaper than I think, where they were paying waste management. And so we really became valet waste collectors.

2 (29m 21s):
Or are you taking the coffee grinds to this 250 foot square foot office space and like filling a buckets in that little office space baby

1 (29m 31s):
Filled up in bags. Okay. And

2 (29m 33s):
That's right. And you just would put, put it on the ground and that off in that warehouse or that

1 (29m 38s):
We put them on, on the racks that we, that we bought with 5,000, I got you.

2 (29m 43s):
So you would just have racks of bags, growing mushrooms, what kind of mushrooms? Pearl oyster mushrooms. Pro-life mushrooms. Right. And, and, and ha how are you growing these mushrooms? So the,

1 (29m 57s):
You pick up the coffee waste drive, put them in the bags at the mushroom spawn, and then you leave it in a dark room for roughly two and a half, three weeks. And then, well, mushrooms are pretty fascinating. They only grow when they think they're going to die. So you, you, you have to immediately go from a dark room to a light room. You have to go from a dry room to a really humid room. So with those shops, mushrooms get scared and they begin to fruit. And that takes about 10 days.

2 (30m 28s):
How did you do all of that in the, in a non climate controlled warehouse or 250 square foot office in Oakland,

1 (30m 36s):
We bought some tarp and some humidifiers, lots of

2 (30m 39s):
Duct tape modifiers. Okay. Oh, duct tape. So he would just like sealed a part of the room off.

0 (30m 45s):
We tarped up or humidity chamber and stuck a bunch of humidifier. This is all we got started off fans and remove some of the ceiling tiles to create some more, you know, Eric's changing. It was yeah. Looking back. It was crazy. How

2 (31m 0s):
Did you figure out how to do this? Was it all through watching YouTube

1 (31m 3s):
Videos and reaching out to experts? All right.

2 (31m 7s):
Now you've got a bunch of bags of mushrooms. At what point? I guess I read it was like October of 2009 is when you finally had enough mushrooms to bring to whole foods. How many, how much did they buy?

1 (31m 19s):
First invoice was 3.1, four pounds.

2 (31m 23s):
They bought three pounds of your oyster mushrooms. And what do they pay you? $10

1 (31m 27s):
Per pound, which was, which was pretty good price. Very good price. Sure.

2 (31m 31s):
30 bucks and some change and not bad for six months of work.

1 (31m 36s):
Not bad at all. We were. So we were so happy. We, we drank, we drank a beer at the Berkeley whole foods. 5:00 AM when you, cause you have to deliver early in the morning. And so, but we had the invoice and cheers to a beer that we chugged at 5:00 AM after, after we sold those.

2 (31m 57s):
And how did they market it at the whole foods? Did they have like a set to, they say like locally grown mushrooms in coffee grounds or, or did they not do that? Yeah, they

1 (32m 7s):
Put a little picture. Well, they put your picture up.

0 (32m 9s):
Yeah. They'd really told the story. These are grown off of local coffee grounds and this has grown a mile away almost literally, you know, it was awesome. The first store they really got behind it.

2 (32m 18s):
I always buy that every time I go to whole foods, I see that I always buy that one. That I'm totally, I'm a sucker for those stories. I love it. So presumably when you sold them that those three pounds of, of mushrooms, it was with the understanding that you would sell them more, that they would, that you would now had an operation and you could provide them with more. Did they say, and now we want 10 pounds a week or, or not quite yet.

1 (32m 43s):
Yeah. The two things we didn't really consider one is, well, once you sell it to a store, you've got to make sure it sells through. So the buyer sees that the products on through and ballrooms shrooms, the shelf life short. So it's got to sell pretty quickly. And then the other part was that as soon as you sell out, they're going to say, we want more for that store. And we want to expand you to another store. And after that first 3.1, four pounds, there was about a month or two that we didn't have and much more. We actually, we still hadn't consistently produce crops

2 (33m 21s):
Because you would basically plant some spawn and they just wouldn't grow.

1 (33m 26s):
Can you get track or dare me out? Like, which is that green fungus. That was a tough time.

0 (33m 31s):
It was the most, I mean, disheartening from may through October, you know, you graduate, leave your jobs, you're riding high. And then you plant, we planted our first batches, you know, right late may, three weeks of anticipation, excitement. We, you know, we figured it out. And then now you're talking about probably mid June when the first crop we had planted should have been ready, nothing. And then we were planting every single day. So then you come back every night, you'd come back and just check and check and nothing, nothing. And just, you know, you look back you're like, that was crazy. Everyday waking at five, collecting coffee guys, planting, drying them just to kind of see nothing

2 (34m 11s):
When we come back. And just a moment, it's an kill and Alejandro learn a critical business lesson. It's not always a good idea to take people on a tour of your fungus farm, stay with this guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

Shopify (34m 35s):
This message is brought to you by NPR sponsor Shopify, the all-in-one commerce platform to start, run and grow your business. Shopify gives entrepreneurs that resources once reserved for big business so they can sell everywhere. Whether it's shopping in person online or across social networks with integrations and apps, Shopify powers over 1.7 million businesses from first sale to full scale, go to shopify.com/built all lower case for a free 14 day trial

The Indicator from Planet Money (35m 12s):
From NFTs to the great resignation. The economy never takes a break. And from the Delta Marion to climate change, neither does science. That's why NPR has a daily economics podcast called the indicator from planet money and a daily science podcast called short wave. There are less than 15 minutes, so super easy to fit into your day. Listen, wherever you get your podcasts.

2 (35m 38s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy rise. So it's 2009 and Nicole and Alejandro are full-time mushroom farmers selling whatever they can grow to whole foods and making extra cash by hauling away used coffee grounds, all good developments, but still they're barely making any money.

1 (35m 60s):
I mean, we were living off of very little. We took, I think a hundred dollars a week each and you know, it took us until January really to get some consistent crops to whole foods. But the beauty about starting a sustainable business in which you're taking waste to produce something, is that yeah, the raw materials are actually not even free. You're making up, you're making money. You were paid,

2 (36m 31s):
Right? That's that's, that's the brilliance of it because you basically, you were hauling the coffee grounds, which is what you needed to grow your mushrooms. You were paid for that. So you have cash coming in and, and then selling the mushrooms. So you had some casual somebody coming in.

0 (36m 45s):
Yep. The spawn was really our biggest expense. So we were buying spa and we could, we were not sophisticated enough to be able to kind of grow our own spot and seed. But in the scheme of what we were doing was a very small percentage. But as we were scaling up growing mushrooms and we were starting to collect thousands and thousands of pounds of coffee grounds per week, and we were growing mushrooms on them and what's left over, was the spent mushroom substrate, which at the time we kind of knew was something interesting, but didn't know much about it ended up kind of stockpiling it. The substrate

2 (37m 16s):
Is, is what's left over in the S in the

0 (37m 18s):
Ground. Yeah. It's just the mycelium or the roots of the mushroom. So to speak the exact, yeah, the white roots grown throughout all the coffee grounds, the mushrooms have fruited or grown off of it. And we just started stockpiling this behind our warehouse. And we, I don't think it fully thought through what we were doing with this. And then I remember actually we got an email from our landlord thing. He was like, this stuff is starting to stink. I've seen rats running through there. You got two weeks to get rid of it all. If not, I'm terminating your, and you as he kicked out and we ended up putting it on Craigslist and I didn't know what else to do. And honestly, within probably 48 hours, all of it was accounted for people, wanted

2 (37m 57s):
It for what,

0 (37m 58s):
Urban farms, local gardeners, who, and we kind of learned through them. And this is one of the most premium, nutritious soil amendments. There is period and mushroom <em></em> it's called, or actually one of those beneficial things after your garden, because it helps your roots uptake nutrients. So imagine adding plant food, which is like the actual nutrients, but what mushroom roots or micro they do is actually help your plants better extract, whatever is in your natural, your native soil. So really good stuff for your garden

2 (38m 29s):
Basically had coffee grounds mixed with this, my Sealyham and that is food. Basically. He would sprinkle that over your, your garden.

0 (38m 39s):
Exactly. So we started selling that guy and we sold it actually in bulk. We add now the waste of waste of waste, all avenues imagine, well, coffee grounds getting paid for that growing mushrooms off of it. And then our own waste. Whoa, we were selling as well. So that whole cycles would allow us to bootstrap this company.

2 (39m 0s):
So in the first half year, at least it was just the two of you,

1 (39m 5s):
Just the two of us. I mean, it was probably 15 hour days between collecting and planting and then harvesting and then demoing at night.

2 (39m 15s):
At this point, you're selling the mushrooms at whole foods. I think you're, you're doing some farmer's markets too at that time. And what kind of reaction were you getting from people? What, what are, what are people saying to you?

1 (39m 28s):
Two different things were happening at the same time. One we'd always do farmers markets and anytime families came by with their kids, they would stay there for half an hour with us. They buy a lot more mushrooms. They love the story. They'd come and do tours of our, of our farm. And they'd say, Hey, can I take one of these bags home? I'll try to grow them out of my kitchen. So basically

2 (39m 57s):
When you re, when you refer to, when you refer to your quote unquote farm, you're literally talking about a warehouse full of bags and mushrooms. It's not like a, like a farm, like a bucolic farm with a growling green Hills. No,

1 (40m 9s):
It was scary. It just looked grindy. We were next to a, a recording studio and an insurance agency. And it was to our consumers from farmer's market. Awesome. It is awesome. But to a whole foods produce buyer, it was not awesome. And we made the mistake of just because we were starting to get more confidence with these tours. We're like, Hey, produce team, come and do a tour.

2 (40m 39s):
Oh, you invited the whole foods team to come and check out your operation.

1 (40m 43s):
Yes. And we were so proud and right after that, Randy calls us a whole foods buyer. And he says, guys, never do that again. Why, why? Because he's like the health aspect of it could turn into something. We don't want to go there. Like just,

0 (41m 3s):
It took us what, six months after that we had to get certifications because whole foods is that you got all these health and safety checks. That was our first big kind of regulatory lessons. And I'm showing up and selling to a major retailer.

2 (41m 16s):
So when you, when you had to like, kind of quote unquote, professionalize it and get, get it up to code and stuff, I mean all power to the bay area. But I mean, the regulatory regime in the bay area can be quite something for anybody. Who's started a business. How did, what did you have to do to get it like kosher to make it a call your kosher operation? So to speak,

0 (41m 39s):
We would spend hours cleaning Gabby that Alex and I'd have, like, we just be jamming out to music and wiping the walls every cause you want to keep it pristine. Cause if not, you know, you can, might have a competing fungus growing. So we would do so much of our days. Those days were just us mopping and scrubbing and cleaning and trying to keep this little space as pristine as we could. And you know, whole foods guided us a lot. They would help

1 (42m 4s):
Guide you from start to finish.

2 (42m 6s):
All right. So now, so you've got the mushrooms, but, but then around this time, I think late 2009, you decided to kind of make kits, mushroom kits where people who grow them themselves. First of all, I would just think that would cut into your business because now you're giving people the means of production. You know, you're not giving them your mushrooms anymore, and now they can make their own mushrooms. So to hell with you guys, why do I need to buy your mushrooms? But that was not the thinking presumably.

1 (42m 32s):
Well, the thinking was that when we had so many families come to do these tours and they could take a souvenir home, that would be at 20 bucks. So that same bag would produce roughly $10 worth of product. This now became a $20 product. And that was, that was one part of it. The other part of it was people were sending us pictures by text and email of their fully grown kit. And that was impactful because you now had our consumers come back to us and they became the farmer with a,

0 (43m 10s):
And we didn't know this early on, but we kind of learned this through those kinds of experiences, the kits weren't about the mushrooms. They were about the experience of growing and just seeing something grow and growing something yourself.

2 (43m 21s):
Okay. But to make the kids right. And for people who are familiar with him today, they're like, they're like cardboard boxes and you has got, it's a branding on it. And it's a printed package and there's a bag of soil that has mushroom spawn in it and a booklet on how to grow them, you know, everything's in there. Right. But that costs money. It costs money to finance that. So how did you, like, how were you able to launch the mushroom kits, even though I know you had some cashflow, but I can't imagine you had that much cash to work with.

0 (43m 50s):
I think Alex and I are really on tapped into every support avenue there was. And that, you know, we applied to a ton of business plan competitions. We probably what got Alex is a hundred something thousand dollars from different winnings. The city of Oakland was incredible. And we ended up, we moved from Emeryville to Oakland and got about a $25,000 redevelopment grant from them to build out our, what became our largest warehouse, 10,000 square feet in west Oakland. So, yeah, and I

2 (44m 20s):
Think he even got a loan from whole foods, right?

1 (44m 23s):
The local producer loan from the Northern California region

2 (44m 28s):
And that loan was to do what, what could you do what'd you do with that loan? It's like 25,000 bucks at red.

0 (44m 34s):
One of the best uses of that grant funding. You remember, we finally, this was two years or so Alex and two, maybe more, there was a local machinist near west Oakland facility and he would just see us every morning for hours grinding away on this wine, press drying these coffee grounds. And he was like, I think I can make you guys an automated one and you know, cost significant money. It was, you know, 11 grand, 11 grand. Yeah. And he ended up building this beautiful, automated thing, custom built for us at his machine shop. And I remember vividly the first time that we got this machine, put coffee guns in there with literally you take 90 minutes, we hit one button and 60 seconds later, you had perfectly dried coffee grounds at the right moisture consistency.

0 (45m 18s):
And it was just this game-changing moment. Never forget that. Clicking that button.

2 (45m 24s):
I wonder. I mean, you're now a year in, right. You get to the mid 2010, you've got, you've got people now working for how many people were you able to hire initially in that first year? Do you remember Nicole?

1 (45m 38s):
I wanna say we roughly had five people all in that's about right. Yeah. And we did 250,000 in year one in revenue year one.

2 (45m 49s):
I wonder in that first, you know what I mean? It would take awhile. We'll get to this later, but it would take a while for you guys to actually go out and raise money. But why didn't you, why didn't you do that early on? Why didn't you go out and look for investors?

1 (46m 4s):
We still knew we were figuring all this thing out. Like there was a lot of moving parts. I mean, we were doing everything ourselves and we were still making a lot of mistakes and I mean, we would throw away stuff like nobody would invest in a business like that.

2 (46m 20s):
And so it wasn't even on your radar,

1 (46m 21s):
Not even on our radar, we were all focused on grants, actually. That was all our energy because we knew that we had something that we could see and feel from customers that they're like, this is so cool. You're taking waste, you're selling the waste. You're selling fresh mushrooms that come from waste. So we felt that always. And that's why we stayed in it. All right.

2 (46m 42s):
So you guys, you're selling mushrooms and I think by year one, you're an, all the whole foods in Northern California.

1 (46m 51s):
I mean, 500 pounds a week at 10 bucks and 50 weeks is roughly a quarter million dollars. So that was where most of that revenue was coming from. So your

2 (47m 1s):
Core business was brown mushrooms that people would buy and cook

1 (47m 6s):
10, our bread and butter was fresh mushrooms.

2 (47m 10s):
Okay. And also in 2011 was your bread and butter mushrooms.

1 (47m 15s):
2011 got a little bit more from waste collection because we were by then picking up from roughly 40 Pete's and Starbucks and local shops a week. Yeah. A week

2 (47m 28s):
2011. Your basically your, your, your customers are Wholefoods and Pete's right. Essentially. That's right.

0 (47m 35s):
Well, we were all sitting a lot of farmer's markets guy at that time, too. So that was it. That was a lot of Alex and I, every weekend, Saturday and Sunday, 10 hours for years, we were asked all we did and that's the mushroom kits. We sold them. We start creating mushroom kits. We're first selling them at farmer's markets and getting great feedback. So,

2 (47m 54s):
And so this is 2011, you've got these sort of three, let's say legs of the stool soil, fresh mushrooms, mushroom kits. Was it just, will you just so busy that two of you and your small staff that you couldn't really figure out where this was going to go, or at this point, did you did the two of you start to have conversations saying, Hey, you know, maybe we should kind of assess what we want to do here and what, where we should focus or was it just like, let's just keep doing, doing it this way.

0 (48m 24s):
We had gotten our mushroom kits, farmer's markets. Then we got them into whole foods. And Randy was, you know, a mentor of ours. And actually the amount of the first time we took this big, like basketball size bag that we were growing, these mushrooms, and we had slapped a sticker on it from FedEx. We thought it looked beautiful. We were in the meeting with Randy talking about fresh mushrooms. And at the end of the meeting, we pull out this mushroom kit with all the confidence in the world as if it was the next iPhone. Right. And we put it on the table where like one more thing, Randy, what about this mushroom kid? And he looks at this bag and I know he literally falls out of his chair. He's like, that's the most disgusting thing I've ever seen? No, one's going to buy that in my store.

0 (49m 4s):
And he just laughed at this thing. And he was also, you know, by that point, a friend, a mentor, and it wasn't a no, he was like, go back and figure this thing out. Cause it's cool. But this thing looks hideous. No one's going to put this on their window cell. And it was actually the push that we needed at that time and really kind of make us focus in on the design and the user experience we came back with, what is, you know, a version of what is, what it is today and start selling that in whole foods. And we were for a while selling both of them mushrooms and mushroom kits. All right.

2 (49m 34s):
So you guys have this business calling, you still bootstrapped, and this is a total like I'm going to go, I'm going to take the off ramp here and go in a totally different direction for everybody. And there's a warning for everybody listening in may to June of 2012, Alejandro you become a contestant on the eighth season of the bachelorette. This is not part of the narrative. This is the true, I am not making you leave the mushroom business to, for some time to be a contestant on the bachelorette. I need the backstory and the front story and the middle of the story, please.

0 (50m 11s):
The floor is yours. It was a, a friend of, one of the casting directors of the bachelor that I think had gotten a mushroom kit from Alex and heard about the brand through a demo at an LA whole foods. A lot of random things came together where they were like, oh, you should talk to Alex. And somehow Alex got connected to the bachelorette casting director and they loved Alex and thought he'd be a great fit for it. And

2 (50m 33s):
I thought he'd be a great fit because aside from the fact that he's handsome and charming, that there's a great backstory,

0 (50m 41s):
He's a handsome, he's a smart, charming entrepreneur doing cool stuff. And they thought he'd be a great, you know, a great contestant, just two years, an urban

1 (50m 52s):
Mushroom farmer.

2 (50m 53s):
I got ya. And I'll a hundred. Did you think, Hey, you know, this might be my ticket to meeting my true love.

1 (51m 1s):
I was 23, 23, like so many things. One of their producers was this guy named Elan and the guy just sold you on the whole experience. And it was, they had announced to who the bachelor at was, and that was Emily Maynard. She had a daughter named Ricky. So I was 23. She was 27, 28 with a six year old daughter. So it was this thing where just one thing would lead to another and this, we kind of laughed and just said, what the heck? Let's just do it.

0 (51m 41s):
There was a big decision. I remember you were basically Mia. Like we had two phone calls allowed for the 45 days. And it was like, Alex chose me. Like he, he could have one person you could talk to when you're on this because they don't want anything leaking. So you, you know, you can choose somebody. So Alex chose me is, you know, prison, phone calls, so to speak. And we got two phone calls over like a month and a half. And checking in on the, you know, it was a big decision, but we were like, this is a kind of a once in a lifetime thing, like who knows where it goes.

2 (52m 4s):
You did not make it clearly. You were not married to Emily today. So you did not, you did not make it all the way to the end. I

1 (52m 9s):
Didn't know,

0 (52m 10s):
Final eight or nine Alex. I remember we had a viewing party at our house.

1 (52m 15s):
I was the random, the random Hispanic that didn't say a word the entire time. I was so nervous. So

2 (52m 22s):
Did you get, did you get recognized, ever appropriate? Like, Hey, Alejandro, I saw you on the bachelorette.

1 (52m 28s):
I was. So I think I had like a, what, one second of, of local,

0 (52m 33s):
There was a good, there was a good year. And there was a, there was a lot of that, which was fun.

2 (52m 37s):
All right. So you, to, through it ends, you're back to work and you guys are still bootstrapping, but clearly it seems like by, by 2012 it becomes clear. I think that the growth part of your business is, are the kits. Am I, am I right about that? The mushroom kits was that growing faster than, than the mushrooms themselves?

0 (53m 4s):
Yeah. You know, at that moment, I think we were kind of realize, and they're both pretty different things. We were selling. One was more of this branded experience that required education and teaching people like, what is the mushroom kit? What's a grow kit. What is this? I can grow my own food at home. You know, there's a lot, there's a lot of education focused versus selling fresh mushrooms. It was kind of a different thing and scaling up that production. And so I think we started realizing there's, you know, we may have to choose one of these things and

1 (53m 34s):
It became so clear that with fresh mushrooms, we could have a local farm sell locally, get our mushrooms into people's homes locally. Or we had this other avenue in which these mushroom kits could be shipped nationwide. And it just was like, let's do the lab. Let's do that. And let's put all our energy on that.

2 (54m 0s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Alejandro, and Nickeel go all in on mushroom kits and how the decision to expand even further, almost wipes them out, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

DocuSign (54m 25s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor DocuSign. When you're running a small business, you want to maximize every minute and every dollar that's where DocuSign can help DocuSign can give you the freedom to complete your business agreements anywhere in real time and get signed versions back in minutes, it's that simple visit docusign.com today to learn more about how DocuSign can help add valuable time back into your day.

ClickUp (54m 52s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, click up a productivity platform. That's saving people one day every week. How it's simple, click up, brings all of your work into one place. You get tasks, docs, goals, chat, and more in one tool. So you can focus on getting work done without switching apps. It's how teams and companies like Uber, Google and web flow save time. Click up is for free for ever. So try click up today@clickup.com slash NPR.

1 (55m 30s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz.

2 (55m 33s):
So it's 2012 and Nickeel and Alejandro have decided to focus full time on making mushroom growing kids for the home gardener. And they're still providing all the elements required to grow the mushrooms, but then someone suggests that they partner with a specialty farm called gourmet mushrooms, incorporated run by a guy named David law,

0 (55m 55s):
Brilliant him and Chris Bailey, the two guys who run that just brilliant people and best in class at going fresh mushrooms. You know, we, it would take us decades to get to the experience these guys had, and we just hit it off also just in a relationship standpoint. And you know, you fast forward a few weeks and they grew some and we tested them out and it was night and day quality. Like, I mean, yields, consistency, everything that goes around, making a healthy mushroom, substrate and spa. It was just night and day. And I, there was, that was probably the biggest defining moment, I think in our journey earlier for Alex and I both, when you realize one, you don't have to do everything.

0 (56m 36s):
It's okay. Not to be the best at everything. And it's okay to let some things go. And that was the hardest thing to like, oh, because that was our identity.

2 (56m 43s):
You don't need to understand when you say, let it go, you meet this guy, David law, clearly they know how to grow mushrooms better. So what did you do? I mean, what, what were you selling to him?

0 (56m 54s):
Well, we were doing in our warehouse in Oakland of collecting the substrate, the coffee grounds, mixing of the spawn, growing the kits, packaging them, we fast forward, ended up now buy those from him as a supplier to us. So they're the ones incubating all of that. So here's this huge warehouse, 10,000 square feet. You know, we had at that point, what, 35 people, Alex, you know what we knew, what that meant was that the people, the space, everything we're doing, all of that.

2 (57m 23s):
So you essentially get out of the mud, out of the farming business in, in, at the sort of at the end of 20 12, 20 13, you start to transition out of the farming business because really this company can grow the mushrooms, sell you the ground, whatever's left the finished product, the finished product. And you can then end this guy, David, at this company, gourmet mushrooms, they can turn them into kits for you.

1 (57m 48s):
Yeah. It's kind of crazy because yeah, he was a competitor to us and he could have easily said, Nope, I'll wait until you guys, you know, go out of business because you're not going to be able to scale it the way I can. And instead, instead, David basically looked at us and said, you guys have so much energy and you're getting people growing mushrooms. That's a good thing for me. So let me take it off your plates and you guys focus on what clearly you guys are really good at, which is getting the word about out into the world about mushrooms and that that's like the partners

2 (58m 24s):
Right there. And so by the middle of 2013, I have to assume you get out of the coffee hauling business. You, you no longer are, are hauling away coffee grounds for pizza. Correct. Okay. So you are out of the coffee. It's amazing. I mean, cause you started this business in 2009, by 2013, you're no longer, I mean your two big revenue streams, fresh mushrooms and hauling coffee grounds. You're out of that business entirely. You're focused on selling mushroom kits. And what's interesting to me about that is I cannot imagine seeing a viable business there. Like I could not imagine in 2013 saying, we're going to sell, grow your own mushroom kits and turn this into a sustainable business.

2 (59m 6s):
So what, what was giving you the indication that you could do that and then not try so hard and I love it, right? I'm not trying to be harsh. I'm just, I cannot imagine saying to people,

1 (59m 21s):
You know, what I, the beauty about the United States is if you execute on one thing extremely well, there is a pretty large market for it. I mean just whole foods alone was 500 stores that we could take this product into and running the numbers on it. You could do a couple million dollars.

2 (59m 44s):
Yeah. If you were in every whole foods in America, selling mushroom kits and you're doing really well, the math suggests that you could probably do like five, maybe 7 million in revenue maximum a year. So you could do us a significant small business for sure. But, but that's only if you did it in whole foods and that would you'd have to kill it.

1 (1h 0m 5s):
That's true. We'd have to sell a lot and then we'd have to expand beyond whole foods.

0 (1h 0m 9s):
You're dead on there. I think with the kids, we were starting to also realize this was 2012. I think Alex, when we did our first non mushroom product, I want to say, think it was with our Kickstarter, for our water gardens. I think we were at that point also, we had made the decision we had started seeing, Hey, there's, there's something here, you know,

2 (1h 0m 28s):
At this point, I mean, you guys are seeing that people like to grow things at home and rather some you wind up getting some inspiration for your, your next idea. After a visit, you, you take to Wisconsin and a tour of an aquaponics farm there. What, what's the story?

0 (1h 0m 43s):
Yep. It was called growing powers is huge city block size aquaponic system. What kind of will Allen? He won the MacArthur award for this. He was raising tilapia. So aquaponics is raising fish and plants. All the fish waste is fertilizing. The vegetables and plants in turn are cleaning the water and taking out the, you know, the nitrogen from it. So it was a really cool closed loop system where the fish feed, the plants, plants clean the water. And you know, this is where our own curiosity about just growing food and growing things different ways. Whereas I had been peaked now and you know, we were obviously doing with a mushroom farm, but we were like, what else? How else people growing? And we started like asking ourselves, like, is there a way to do what we did for mushroom farming for aquaponics and shrink down a big mushroom farm down to this table, top classroom experience,

2 (1h 1m 30s):
Just to be clear, how did you come up with this? Cause eventually you, this is what you would create, basically a fish tank with fish inside. But growing on top is like greens and microgreens that you could eat and that were fed through the waste of the fish, which we'll get to in a sec. But how did you come up with that idea? Have that, that come to you.

0 (1h 1m 52s):
On the side of our mushroom kit facility, we had bunch of piping and buckets and started kind of building our own and tinkering and had actually built that a really rough again, like buckets kind of prototype of like we had beta fish and at them, the waste from that was enough to grow herbs and microgreens and you could harvest the top. And we were talking to all the aquaponics experts. We actually funny story guy. We ended up reading the Steve jobs biography and we're super inspired by their design principles and eat cold email, Johnny ive from apple and on a Sunday afternoon. And he actually got back to us in like five minutes and we were able to spend a handful of sessions with him, kind of mentoring us, showing him prototypes and design things.

0 (1h 2m 34s):
So it was an amazing experience as I need this.

2 (1h 2m 37s):
Wow. You cold email, Johnny I've designed basically everything we use today. And he was like, yeah, I'll help you with your fish tank.

1 (1h 2m 44s):
That was insane.

0 (1h 2m 47s):
I will say we, this one though, we learned a lesson here with our mushroom kit. We were anxious doing this all we were anxious because our brand who we were identity, you would walk into whole foods. And it was like, oh, it's the mushroom guys. That's what we wore. And now all of a sudden we're experimenting with fish poop and you know, like micro greens. And so we actually ended up on this product. We put it on Kickstarter and it was partly to raise funds for it. But really I think it was for the two of us to try to convince ourselves like, is there something here? And do people actually want this thing? And we put a hundred thousand dollars goal up for 30 days and we ended up hitting $250,000 orders on Kickstarter. And another two 50 can our website and the fallout, 30 days after close, we had almost half a million dollars.

0 (1h 3m 29s):
Pre-orders off of like a 3d video and a concept. And that's when I think we realized like this back to the roots, bigger than mushrooms. It's something else that people want you to reconnect with food. And I think that was that month was our proof point

2 (1h 3m 43s):
With, with that $500,000 that you raised. That's cool. It's amazing. You're still bootstrapped at this point. You, what you presumably could take now take that money and start production on these fishbowls or fish tanks that grow, that grows salad on top.

1 (1h 4m 3s):
I think that was the beauty of Kickstarter where it was both to raise funds, but to see if anybody would buy this thing. And then for if you really made a splash, retailers would eventually it would get sent to a retailer. So Petco and whole foods became the launch partners. Wow.

2 (1h 4m 21s):
In Nordstrom

1 (1h 4m 22s):
From an Nordstrom. Thank you. Yeah.

2 (1h 4m 24s):
So here here's a business question. You get Nordstrom, Petco and whole foods putting in an order. I have to imagine the costs are going to be higher than half a million dollars. You'd probably make them in China, get them shipped over. I mean, there's a lot of math and a lot of like projections that you have to get right to make this work. Even if you have purchase orders, like it can all go south. So how were you able to successfully manage that

0 (1h 4m 50s):
Two things guy one just somewhere the manufacturer actually manufactured them all in the U S branch who we really try to focus on us manufacturing and a bulk of that. Probably half of that winter, the tooling, which is really expensive and the design cost and engineering costs. So yeah, most of that was there. And then for initial inventory costs, but I think the risk was almost less about the initial forecast because, you know, we had, pre-orders thousands of them from our consumers through Kickstarter. We had POS from retailers. So we knew what that demand was. But our, one of our biggest mistakes we've made an almost put us out of business was we started feeling a lot of pressure to deliver this on a timeline that we are, that we was too aggressive.

0 (1h 5m 36s):
And we didn't know that it was too aggressive when we put it out there and kickstart,

1 (1h 5m 39s):
We went from, I mean the definition of zero to a hundred, we went from one prototype that we did a video on to a 40,000 unit order and highly discouraged, or do not recommend this to any entrepreneur to just go from a prototype to 40,000.

0 (1h 5m 58s):
And we ended up, I think looking back, I wish we had just been transparent and confidence that, Hey, we're not gonna hit that timeline. Like please, you know, support us through this and be patient, but we rushed it. And we put out a product, our first one that like, you know, it was just, we didn't test it enough. And our first pump was overheating in the unit because of the design constraints. And, and, you know, almost was like 80% of the pumps. Alex died within the first 30 days of the units going out on Kickstarter. And it was, it literally put us out of business almost. So how much money did you,

1 (1h 6m 31s):
Oh, I mean with 80% of those pumps broken,

0 (1h 6m 35s):
We caught most of them on the Kickstarter. That was the B, that was the blessing of the Kickstarter. I think we caught that with those early users of the first five, 6,000 people that got it. And we realized that. And so we had to send them all replacements and do the whole, but luckily we were able to before the whole foods and the retail orders went out, make some changes to it last minute. But if that pump had, for instance taken two months to die and not four weeks. And so we had already produced that for the retailers who,

1 (1h 7m 3s):
But, but I would say the economics of it change, we, we had to, the pump was significantly more expensive than we thought. And the price point then became off. And we then didn't have a proposition that the company could actually make money sustainably. So we almost went out of business for the entire order. Both Kickstarter led to us still on the nationwide launch was, was a disaster. We had high return rates. So that was a really, that was a tough time. And during that time, we in isolation really improve the product and launched the 2.0 version.

1 (1h 7m 43s):
So,

2 (1h 7m 44s):
All right, eventually you get this Aqua farm back or like you get it, you get it in working order. How long did that take you before you were able to say, okay, we got this under control. Was it like weeks, months,

1 (1h 8m 0s):
By the way, I'll say, I love that you called to the aquifer. And we actually got sued for calling the Aqua farm and we had to go and beg for forgiveness. And they said, okay, fine. We won't make you discard all your packaging inventory. Just sell it out, but you need to change your, to the water garden. So during that crazy messiness, we also got the cease and desist letter at the time.

2 (1h 8m 21s):
I mean, this is a thing at every stage and we're now in 2014, you're so vulnerable, like one lawsuit, you know, cause even if the lawsuit was frivolous, you could, you could have spent all your money fighting it. You know, one lawsuit, one, one, mistake, one, somebody getting sick from a mushroom kit. It could have been anything could have gone wrong or a competitor coming in and just crushing you, it just up to this point, I mean, obviously you guys are smart and you worked, but you guys are kind of lucky at the, up until this point. We were

1 (1h 8m 52s):
Or one bad event from just completely going out of business pretty much for the first six years.

2 (1h 9m 2s):
Yeah.

0 (1h 9m 3s):
And I look back and maybe the rational thing would be like, Hey, not worth the risk. And I, I keep on going back to just this partnership. And the two of us digging together kind of got us through all this, these, these moments, you know, and man, like, you know, we were, when we finally had our own apartments and we're getting some salary, you know, we still carpool in and out every day you picked me up at 6:00 AM and dropped me off at 8:00 PM. And those, you know, every day kind of reset in the morning and night and just refreshing, you thought each other's energies and kind of worked our way through it.

2 (1h 9m 35s):
So once she got the aquariums up and running and you know, how did they sell? Did they do pretty well? Were they generating revenue? Yeah.

1 (1h 9m 43s):
The water garden. That was a really big boost for the company. And I think at first took us from just being the mushroom guys to, Hey, there's something really interesting in this company called back to the roots

2 (1h 9m 55s):
In Petco too, which is great. You're beyond whole foods. You're in Petco, Nordstrom,

1 (1h 9m 60s):
Whole foods. We're selling, you know, in the home department we're selling and grocery. And now we're shown in the pet department. Also at this time, Amazon was really starting to explode. So we put this item on Amazon and it became the number one selling aquarium and stayed that way for quite some time.

2 (1h 10m 20s):
You guys, I think by 2014, he'd done. I mean, this started in 20 2009, by 2014, you had generated $4.6 million in revenue. And I think you were profitable that same year. This is again, I'm going to go off the freeway here. This is totally like at a left field. You launch a cereal brand. You've gone from mushrooms to, to salad on top of a fish tank to cereal. Now

0 (1h 10m 51s):
I think what we started realizing guy with this vision of ultimately what we were doing is trying to reconnect families and kids to food and where it comes from. It was all a continuum, right? Whether you're from seed and the farmer and growing it yourself, or if you're going to go and buy a pre-packaged item that someone grew in cooked and packaged for you, you should still know where it's coming from. And I think being in selling a whole foods as well, I'm starting to kinda envision that coming to life through both are ready to grow line with our kids. And they're ready to eat line with cereal and we'd launched snacks as well to on our cereal actually with a first identity preserved like a hundred percent stone ground biodynamics cereal actually put the ingredients first brand, put the ingredients on the front of the box.

0 (1h 11m 38s):
And so we're like, whether you're growing yourself or if you're going to buy food from us, you're going to know exactly kind of where it's coming from. And yeah,

1 (1h 11m 46s):
Yeah. I'll say we, we grew that and even just the not so crazy part of it was we were selling to whole foods already nationwide.

2 (1h 11m 55s):
Yeah. You were already, you already had a connection there. Yeah.

1 (1h 11m 58s):
And on top of that, we were working with schools non-stop with all our kits. So many teachers were our consumers. So it was natural for us to basically sell well, let's go out to the biggest, most impactful school district in the entire country. So we went out to New York public school district and said, Hey, as we launch in and expand immediately nationwide with whole foods market, let's put this in the communities that needed the most through purchase orders that they would place. And we did that. We launched in New York public schools, which was, it was 2000 schools that started serving an organic and biodynamic cereal.

1 (1h 12m 40s):
I had one fifth of the sugar with three ingredients

2 (1h 12m 43s):
Clear, you did not build a factory to make the cereal. Right. You worked with like a co-packer or a different manufacturer. Yup.

1 (1h 12m 51s):
We worked with a co-manufacturer and co-packer in making the product. Yup.

2 (1h 12m 56s):
In January of 2016, you raised your first round of funding. This is now what? Six years? Six plus years. Since you founded the company, you go for funding, was it was it? I have to imagine it wasn't that hard to raise money. You raised $5 million cause you had a track record. Am I right about that? That it wasn't that hard.

1 (1h 13m 17s):
Every financing round I would say is hard. We did it like a $2 million round from angels, from angel investors. And then, and then after that we did the a $10 million round and that one came from acre ventures. So

2 (1h 13m 36s):
You start to raise money, I think. But I think today you've raised almost twenty-five million dollars in outside investment. I think that's right. More or less. Right. So I'm like that. Yeah. But

1 (1h 13m 46s):
By the time this airs it'll be 40 million.

2 (1h 13m 50s):
So my question is when did you decide that you were a gardening company? Cause you started out as a mushroom guys and then the, the fish tank guys and the cereal guys, when did it become clear that actually you are a gardening company? Cause that's how you describe yourself now. So when, when did that kind of all gel,

1 (1h 14m 10s):
We had great revenue growth, really great revenue growth, but we were just not able to be profitable on the cereal and snacks side at the moment. And there was no clear path unless we went and purchased our own equipment and fully vertically integrated, which would have been significant risk to the business. And on the other side, the lawn and garden business was already profitable. And what's it you're seen as I think first being able to focus just on the lawn and garden piece of our business was like so energizing. And I think we ourselves were so focused on growing within whole foods that we almost crippled our ability to take a step back and say, where are our consumers actually shopping?

1 (1h 15m 2s):
And we

2 (1h 15m 3s):
Realized, wow, our consumer gardeners, they're going to the home Depot. They're going to Lowe's, they're going to Walmart. They're going to target. They're not necessarily going to a produce department at a whole foods market. And I think that ability to focus, and this is something actually, sir, Johnny I've said to us, he said, the number one lesson I learned from Steve jobs was focus. And his definition of Steve's definition was focused as the appeal, the ability to say no to the things you really want to do. And I feel like that just singular focus on like our consumer is a gardener. They're going into home centers on the weekend to pick up their gardening stuff.

2 (1h 15m 43s):
That's where we need to be. And there's probably two years guy in our business that we just completely exploded from doing a lot less things. What did you cut out? And you said you do fewer things, but you

1 (1h 15m 56s):
Grew, oh, we were going from Petco. Yeah. We were selling into Petco. We were selling to whole foods. We were selling into Nordstrom, you know, online. We were selling to local grocery stores through distributors, you and a five K. He like, we just had an in and it's a small team. And I think once we just realized like gardeners are shopping at home Depot at home Depot, the gardeners are, yeah. That's where they're going. Why are we spending all this energy and time trying to find them elsewhere? Let's go fishing where the fish are. So the difference is the home Depot has 2000 stores on like whole foods has maybe 400 stores. So I mean, this is an order of magnitude also of scale.

2 (1h 16m 38s):
Hmm. So I mean, that was a game changer, right? When do you get, when you get into home, when you get into home Depot and today, I mean you are, you sell seeds and you sell grow kits and you know, you still have the water gardens and raised beds and planters and windows. So planters, I have to imagine this is a growing market, right? From what I, from what I gather, it's just like, how big is it? Is the home, the edible gardening market.

1 (1h 17m 11s):
It's about $20 billion. And by the way, Scott's miracle grow, being the category captain there about a $12 billion market cap company. So you've got a lot, a lot, a lot. It's a big market, a lot of it's America's number one, hobby is gardening. It's, it's traditionally bent to the older generation. So the, the average gardener today is 59 years old. Our average gardener is 29 years old. So you do have this pretty massive gap from what the average gardener is in America to back to the reaches average gardener,

0 (1h 17m 46s):
You know, whether it's an eight year old or a 68 year old, can both enjoy the brand and maybe have a smile on their faces for different reasons. But like how do we be a spark of curiosity for a new generation not going to have, we're not telling people like grow all your own food and we want, we don't want to solve coming and say, we're going to solve all the world's food shortages. We just want to be that spark of curiosity. And I think in so many ways, like that was just how we started this company. It was just, we were curious, but you kind of distill that all down and we do this sometimes just as a team. And I know that the, the words that come out of it are just joy and connection. When

2 (1h 18m 17s):
You think about this journey and the fact that it really began with a professor saying, Hey, you know, grow mushrooms on coffee grounds. And then here you are 12 years plus later, you know, with the business, I think that's, that's doing, you know, when the tens of millions of dollars in revenue a year, how much of, of, of that do you guys attribute to luck and how much do you tribute to how hard you worked?

0 (1h 18m 44s):
My grandpa was very close to. He told me all the time, it's just the harder you work, the luckier you get. So, you know, every one of those moments you can look at, you know, I guess it was lucky that one at a 10 group, but I'm glad we said, let's not just play in one bucket. Let's take the time and collect enough for 10 buckets. And I do believe it's both, but I think half of it is so much of it is staying in the game, staying in the arena for opportunities to present themselves and then being prepared to, to walk through them.

1 (1h 19m 17s):
We presented to Costco's lawn and garden department seven years in a row and got turned down every single year. They've just announced they're launching us this coming spring, spring 20, 22, 7 years later, same exact merchant as well. And then Walmart presented for four or so years. And then within two years, we are the fastest growing garden brand in their entire department that took four years, Steven get in the door. So Nicole you're you're spot on too, man. We just, we've just, just not given up. And then staying long enough to where luck catches up to you.

2 (1h 19m 59s):
That's Nikila Aurora and Alejandro Velez co-founders and co-CEOs of back to the roots, that the way the company has something called a grow one, give one campaign where if you post a photo of what you grew with, one of their kids they'll donate another, the school of your choice. By the end of this year, they hope to reach 130,000 kids in underfunded schools across the country. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you don't yet follow the show, please do follow wherever you get your podcasts. If you are right to us, our email address is HIB t@npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter at how I built this or mine is at guy Ross, you can find us on Instagram at how I built this NPR or me at guide dot Roz.

2 (1h 20m 45s):
This episode was produced by Liz Medsker and Ferris safari music composed by REM, Tina or bluey was edited by NEPA grant with research help from Claremore Ashima. Our production staff includes Casey Herman, JC Howard, Julia Carney, Harrison, BJ Choi, and Elaine coats. Our internist Catherine cipher, and Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Ross. And you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR I'm guy, Raj host of how I built this here to tell you about another podcast I host on this one.

2 (1h 21m 29s):
I talked to some of the world's top leaders about what it took to get, where they are triumphs failures and all it's called wisdom from the top from NPR and luminary.