0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built This Early and Ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

1 (9s):
When you leave home, can you ever really go back? Soccer legend. Leo and I both left Argentina. As kids,

2 (17s):
You know, you're that piece of a puzzle that doesn't fit anywhere

1 (20s):
To so many immigrants is a way to reconnect. Listen to the last cup in the embedded podcast feed to hear the latest collaboration from NPR and Fudo Studios.

Slack (30s):
This episode is brought to you by sax.com. Like many of you, I'm starting to plan for the holiday season and sometimes it can be really hard to find the perfect presence for the people in my life, like the team that makes how I built this. A quick scroll of the sax.com holiday gift guide is the easy way to shop for everyone on your list. sax.com editors have curated the best presence like LA Me skincare sets, handpicked by the beauty team and Cozy Moon Clair beanies that everyone wants to be wearing for the office commute and for the hardest to please the editors s.com have picked out Bacara, barware, and Versace Home decor Sacks. Digital stylists are even available to give you free gifting help and personalized recommendations whether you're shopping for others or for yourself. Plus free shipping, free returns everyDay@sachs.com. How I built this is pleased to have Slack as our presenting sponsor. Slack, where the future works. Let Slack be your digital hq. It's one digital space that brings together all of your people and all of the tools you need. Having Slack makes collaboration easier and more flexible so you can be a lot more productive. Don't wait to see what you can accomplish with your own digital hq. Head over to slack.com/dhq to get started. Slack where the future works.

4 (1m 59s):
I cold called them and, and I said, my name is Rianne and I'm a makeup artist and I have an idea. And they were like, I could just, I could hear the sigh on the other end of the phone, you know, and she was trying to basically get off the phone with me. And I, you know, I said to her, I said, well, who designs your makeup sponges? You never had a makeup artist help you design a tool to apply makeup for your companies? And she said, well, no, actually, we never have. And I said, okay. So then maybe you wanna listen to me, maybe you wanna hear my idea.

0 (2m 40s):
Welcome to How I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz, and on the show today how a Hollywood makeup artist figured out a better way to apply makeup with a teardrop shaped sponge. And grew that idea into Beauty Blender, a multimillion dollar cosmetics brand. If you happen to walk into a big box electronic store in the early two thousands, you might remember being slightly blown away by the new televisions on display because at the time, HDTV was just getting popular.

0 (3m 27s):
And when you looked at those sets, even from across the store, the super crisp pictures would like pop off the screen. But there was one problem, at least for the people on screen, the actors and news anchors and talk show hosts, because high def resolution made every pimple, every poor, every straight bit of stubble that much more visible on screen. And the makeup that was used to cover all those imperfections, well, you could usually see that too. So at the time, the makeup artists who worked in TV were struggling to figure out how to deal with all of this. And today's guest, Rianne Silva, she was one of those makeup artists in the early two thousands, Rianne was working in Hollywood as head of makeup on the sitcom girlfriends.

0 (4m 14s):
And she was trying to come up with a way to apply makeup so that it wouldn't show up in high definition. And the way she figured this out was by inventing a special tool, a tool that was so small and so simple, it's almost hard to believe that it became a multimillion dollar business because the tool, it was a sponge. A sponge, a sponge that is used to apply makeup except rianne designed one shaped like a teardrop in that shape, believe it or not, kind of changed the world of makeup. Pretty soon, other makeup artists wanted it. Rianne called the brand beauty blender. And eventually her sponges got picked up by the big beauty stores, including Alta and Sephora.

0 (4m 58s):
But how she built a multi-million dollar business is also an incredibly amazing story. That includes NFL Hall of Famer, Eric Dickerson, a Saudi prince, a cameo from Rick James, and years of struggle as a single mother. Rianne Silva. Grew up in a working class family in Southern California in the 1960s and seventies. And as a teenager, she didn't really have any serious ambitions.

4 (5m 24s):
I really didn't have a direction. My dad was a mechanic, an auto mechanic. He was like the fons, you know, in like happy days. Like he slicked his hair back, he raced motorcycles, he raced boats, he raced cars. He ended up being a mechanic. He came from very humble, you know, very humble background. And the same with my mom. My mom was a waitress and you know, I think they were kind of, of the mindset that having a trade yeah. Was the way to go. They, they didn't, yes. There was nobody in, in their history and their family that had gone to college.

0 (6m 1s):
Hmm. And, and, and after high school, I guess it was your mom who, who kind of encouraged you to go to go into a trade, right? To go to a, a fashion school in la right?

4 (6m 13s):
Yeah. I think she started thinking about what is, what is she gonna do? She can't just get married and have kids, like, you know, yeah. What is she gonna do? Cause my mom was very kind of, and I think she wished she had more opportunity. So she was the one that found F I D M, the Fashion Institute of Design Merchandising. And my mom was a very fashionable person. And I think that's part of the reason why she worked. Her and her sisters liked to shop, so they liked fashion. She saw that I, I enjoyed fashion too, and I was also a sketcher. Like I like to draw a little bit. And I think she put those things together and then, you know, found out about the school and yeah, she marched me down there one day, we signed up and she took a loan out, you know, to, to afford for me to go to that school.

4 (7m 2s):
And that, that's where I went for a couple years. Hmm.

0 (7m 6s):
Tell me about how you got into makeup. From what I understand, it started, you got a job selling perfume Hmm. At a department store. What, what, what department store was it?

4 (7m 18s):
Yeah, so I think it was an old one called Bullocks.

0 (7m 24s):
Bullocks. Bullocks. I remember Bullocks, they grew up in Southern

4 (7m 27s):
California. Yeah, yeah. Downtown. Anyway, I got a job and as a, as a perfume model, they, they dress you up and they give you a bottle of perfume and you spray people. Hmm. But spraying people with perfume is a great way to live a solitary life because nobody wants you to spray them with perfume. Right. Most people just like put their hand up and say, Nope, thank you. No, no, no. So, you know, I quickly realize like, this is really a horrible job because I'm not making any friends. I'm walking around in high heels all day, making minimum wage. I'm sick to my stomach at the end of the day smelling this perfume. But I noticed that the girls in the cosmetic counters, you know, they were laughing and they, people loved them because there was this positive experience going on with the consumer.

4 (8m 17s):
They were selling product, which meant they were making commissions and more money, and they loved their job. I was like, that is what I need to be doing. I don't need to be spraying people with perfume. I need to somehow find my way onto the cosmetic floor. And long story short, you know, fake it till you make it. I convinced someone to hire me in the department store. So I got a little bit of experience there.

0 (8m 43s):
Hmm. So, alright, so you switch over to, to selling cosmetics at Bullocks. And, and I think around this time you also moved to a new apartment, and I guess by chance in that apartment you meet someone who works in the movie business. Is that, is that right?

4 (8m 59s):
Yeah. I met this woman who was a makeup artist. She lived in the building. She lived in West Hollywood. And so I, it was very interesting because I got to see two slices of life when it comes to makeup artistry. You can work retail or you can be lucky enough to live in Los Angeles where you can be in production. Yeah. So I was able to see, okay, this girl that I met, she goes on set and she works and she does makeup. And as my friendship went on with my friend who was the makeup artist, and I met other makeup artists, I started to focus my attention to moving in that direction because their life seemed really exciting. They were working with, you know, all kinds of different producers, different jobs, celebrities, and I thought, and they were making great money.

4 (9m 48s):
I was like, wow, that's, you know, that's, that's how I actually got the bug or the interest in makeup.

0 (9m 55s):
Hmm. And, and I think we're talking like somewhere, this is like somewhere in the early 1980s at this point. And, and I guess you decide to leave school to, to leave the fashion institute so you could concentrate on, on makeup. But I guess around this time you also ended up going to London and, and spending time there for a while. How, how did that happen?

4 (10m 17s):
Yeah, I was doing makeup jobs, retail makeup jobs, and I met a Saudi prince.

0 (10m 27s):
Wait, where?

4 (10m 29s):
In Newport Beach?

0 (10m 30s):
Just in like hanging out in, in Newport Beach,

4 (10m 33s):
Just hanging out. It was the craziest thing. Wow. So, I don't know, but if you recall in the early eighties, late seventies, the US had started to do a lot of business with Saudi Arabia and a lot of the royal family and, you know, politicians and, and the important people were sending their kids, mainly their sons to the United States to go to college. Right. And socially, I had met this one guy and it wasn't, he wasn't like anybody I dated or anything, but he would invite a group of friends to come to Europe and he, he paid for everything.

4 (11m 14s):
Wow. Yeah. And, you know, living in Newport Beach at that time too, you have to remember I'm not a blonde-haired, blue-eyed yuppy girl. So I can only imagine when they saw me and I heard this over and over again, you know, they'd be like, where are you from? Are you, you know, they

0 (11m 28s):
Try

4 (11m 29s):
To speak Arabic to me or Persian. I'm like, no, I'm Mexican. And they'd be like, wait, you're Mexican. You look like one of us. So I think that was their initial attraction to me was like, there's somebody that looks like us, you know? And then I actually ended up meeting somebody that I fell in love with and I thought I was going to get married and move to Saudi Arabia and live happily ever after with this person. So I kind of didn't think about fashion design anymore. But then that didn't work out. So, so now fast forward to coming back to America where I had been gone for a couple years. I, I'd lived in London. I had a flat in London, and I came

0 (12m 8s):
Back. What were you doing there, by the way?

4 (12m 10s):
I was, I was living my life. I wasn't working. I had a boyfriend who supported me and we were gonna get married and I was gonna move to Saudi Arabia.

0 (12m 20s):
Wow. And was was your boyfriend a member of the royal family or was just a We sort of a wealthy Saudi?

4 (12m 26s):
Yeah, no, he was just a, a wealthy Saudi. His dad was like the attorney to the king. Wow.

0 (12m 31s):
I mean, and that was that, so that was in the, in the early eighties, you were kinda living in London hanging out with this guy.

4 (12m 37s):
And my parents were freaking out. They knew bet nothing about Saudi Arabia.

0 (12m 41s):
And they were like, what are you doing in London? Who is this guy? What's going on? They're

4 (12m 45s):
Like, oh my God, you go to Saudi Arabia, we're never gonna see you again. What are you doing?

0 (12m 50s):
And so what you were what, 2021 and it, and it kind of fell apart and you came back to LA

4 (12m 58s):
I love this guy so much and we're still friends to this day. It just wasn't for me going to work because I, I did wanna have a career. I didn't know what that was gonna be. But in my heart and soul and my intuition told me, look, you have more to do than go to Saudi Arabia and, you know, have a bunch of kids and be the one he's leaving in Saudi Arabia when he goes to Europe and parties. You know, it's like,

0 (13m 21s):
Yeah. That would've been, that would've been a difficult life also.

4 (13m 24s):
Yeah. Yeah.

0 (13m 26s):
All right. All right. So you, you find yourself back in LA and, and let me, let me ask you about, about that time in your life, cuz I, I think shortly after you, you broke up with a guy in London. You began dating someone new, a, a football player, NFL football player, Eric Dickerson, I think, I think he was already pretty famous at that point. H how did you, how did you meet, how did that relationship begin?

4 (13m 54s):
So I go out one night with my cousin to this place called El Bravado, which was the second floor of Carlos and Charlie's on Sunset Boulevard on a Monday night. So I'm hanging out and I'm meeting a lot of different people in la. One of the people that I met, this is gonna sound crazy, but was Rick James. I met Rick James and

0 (14m 15s):
Rick James. The Rick James super

4 (14m 18s):
Freak. Yeah. And the thing about Rick is everybody knows like, he is wild, right? We weren't wild. So the way we got introduced to Eric was, well I got introduced to Eric was Mr. Just say no to drugs. I wanna introduce you to Mrs. No say no to drugs. This is Rianne and I think you guys are gonna get along just great. And we just sat and talked

0 (14m 39s):
And Eric Dickerson was known becau for being Mr. Santa to drugs cuz he was an athlete. Well

4 (14m 45s):
He was the, he was the like spokesperson for the Nancy Reagan just say no to drugs campaign. Oh

0 (14m 50s):
Really? Wow. Yeah. Okay. Wow. I didn't know, I mean, I grew up in LA I used to worship Eric Dickerson cause I was a Rams fan as a kid. Was he, when you met him, was he, did you know who he was?

4 (15m 2s):
No, I knew nothing about football. And I think really that's why it kind of worked

0 (15m 8s):
And all right, so you meet this guy who was already pretty well known in LA and, and would of course for people to know Eric Dickerson's, a Hall of Fame. Hall of Famer running back. What and, and what you guys started dating. He, you kind of became a, a couple.

4 (15m 25s):
Yeah. Well we, we started dating, you know, look, he's an athlete, right? I mean, there is no shortage of women around, let's say that. But we started dating and you know, one year went by, two years went by, three years went by and we were still dating, you know, we actually got engaged and I ended up getting pregnant and he asked me to marry him, you know, brought me on the Oprah Winfrey show and I thought, okay, I'm gonna be an N F l wife and a mom.

0 (16m 3s):
Hmm. Wow. Wow. You won an Oprah. Yeah. It's amazing. So obviously the relationship didn't, didn't last. You guys did not get married, right?

4 (16m 16s):
No, it didn't work out. And when it went bad it went real bad.

0 (16m 20s):
Yeah. So, alright. So you find yourself, what, mid twenties as a, as a single mom?

4 (16m 29s):
Yeah. I had Erica when I was, I gave birth to her when I were both October babies and she was born in October, so I had just turned 25. So what ended up happening was, yeah, I had to figure out what I was gonna do because I didn't think he was gonna support me at all. And so at this point I had continued to work doing makeup at a retail level. And this is when I kind of like put it into like Turbo and like, okay, I need to figure out how to get into production.

0 (16m 59s):
So how did you do that? I mean, LA obviously the world capital or one of the world capitals, cuz I think you could make the argument that Bollywood is another one, but a world capital of the entertainment industry. And so presumably there was work for makeup artists, but I can't imagine it's easy to get into, there's probably unions and there's probably right, there's lots of people who want that work. How did you break into that to that industry?

4 (17m 27s):
So, you're right. And if you think about the time we were in, you know, early to mid eighties, it was the MTV revolution. And you're absolutely right, there are unions for makeup artists and literally for anybody who works behind the scenes. However, there are non-union projects at Kiwan as well. And it was the MTV revolution like I was saying. And I started to understand through my research, you know, where these music videos were getting made, where the production houses were, what their names were. And I, I'm kind of bold, I would just walk in and say, Hey, I'm a makeup artist. Can I talk to, you know, the head of production or somebody there, I'm looking for work, I just wanna leave my resume if you guys ever need anybody.

4 (18m 10s):
Yeah. You know, the, these were the days when you walked in somewhere, you, you didn't do it online, which, right. You know, I find it so hard for young people now because nobody ever gets that eye to eye. No. You know, kind of connection with people anymore. You don't really get to know anything about a person other than whatever is, you know, in front of you on your computer. But I would walk in.

0 (18m 32s):
So what were some of the video shoots that you got jobs on? Like, what was a, do you remember the first one where they were like, okay, yeah, we could bring you on?

4 (18m 40s):
Well, the first artist I ever worked with was Tina Marie.

0 (18m 43s):
Oh yeah,

4 (18m 44s):
Yeah. And Woody Johnston, dear friend of mine was her road manager at the time. And he was like, well, Arian, I'm gonna give you a chance because she's looking for someone and we, we don't have a lot of money and would you do it? I said, I'll do it for free Woody, you know, just to get in. Then I started working, doing some artists at Motown. I did The Good Girls and I did a, a ton, a ton of musical artists at Motown. People that you wouldn't know because they come and go. Hmm. But, you know, they were churning out artists and developing artists like, like mad people that would need photo shoots, album cover shoots, press shoots, like, I mean, eventually, over a very fast time, over a couple years, my skillset increased greatly.

4 (19m 31s):
Hmm. I mean, listen, I did the California Love video with Tupac and Dr. Dre where it was all, you know, all Mad Max. And Yeah. But that was easy compared to like, when I had to do meatloaf and make him look 20 years younger.

0 (19m 49s):
And, and you would come with your own kit of makeup, presumably, and did you, I mean, were you bringing in like really expensive high end makeup or, or what?

4 (20m 0s):
So I did have a kit and I did purchase makeup according to the job. So I eventually accumulated what I call a dead body worth of makeup. I mean, I would drag around, you know, 80 pounds, 90 pounds makeup with me everywhere before it was very almost like, like the businesses were very separate. The makeups were very different according to the medium you were working in.

0 (20m 24s):
Yeah. We, we, we interviewed Bobby Brown on the show maybe five years ago. And I remember her talking about how, you know, when she started out as a, as a makeup artist, it was about showing makeup and then eventually she was kind of interested in, in sh in using makeup that didn't look like makeup. And that was a big change I think in the nineties, right? That, that it was, you almost didn't want to look like you were wearing makeup. It was, it was so good that it looked natural.

4 (20m 54s):
For sure. So if you think about the history of makeup, makeup artists were basically men for the most part. And hairdressers were women. And it's reflected in the pay rates, the makeups that were designed by men back in the day. And the heavier makeups when you go back and you look at black and white silver screen makeup all the way to, to like, say the seventies or eighties Right? When you're talking about Bobby Brown, those makeups had all a red or pink cast to them. Hmm. And that's why there wasn't a lot of great darker makeups. Right. However, what Bobby did was, which, what was so genius with her, is that she started this trend of having makeup look natural by using yellow toned makeup.

4 (21m 39s):
So all of her formulations were based in yellow tone. And that's what, that's when women and consumers and people that used makeup themselves were able to kind of understand a little more about color matching and being able to have colors that actually look like their skin.

0 (22m 1s):
Your, I mean, as you were sort of getting more and more and higher profile drops, like, like doing the, the, the Tupac video for California Love, which anyone listening, just pause and go watch it cuz it's so, it it, I it's like Mad Max and Burning Man.

4 (22m 19s):
It is. It's exactly

0 (22m 21s):
Right. Such a wild video.

4 (22m 23s):
Wait. And they flew Tupac from jail to the desert right there. Wow. We had a big circle of trailers. He landed, it was crazy.

0 (22m 31s):
And then like you did Brandy and you did

4 (22m 36s):
I did Eve, I did Brandy, I worked with Whitney Houston, Tony Braxton, I worked with Sean Diddy Combs for about 12 years. And all of his artists, I did Faith Evans. I, I I mean,

0 (22m 48s):
And and were you making a pretty good living?

4 (22m 50s):
Oh my God, I was making six figures at this point. Wow. Yeah, yeah. But I was working all the time. I had spent a lot of time away from Erica. You know, production is not like being a c e o, you know? Yeah. They tell you when to eat, you show up when you show up and you rap when they say rap. So, you know, sometimes it was a 12 hour, 14, 16, 18, sometimes I had jobs that were almost 24 hours. It was exhausting.

0 (23m 16s):
And you had very high profile people, so it was probably a lot of

4 (23m 20s):
Pressure. Yeah. I mean it was, it was crazy when I think about it now, but you know, at the time I was in it, man, I loved it so much and it was like almost like a game to me to be able to see how much I could do. Hmm. Yeah. I mean, the sheer amount of work and my agents were all about it. They were like, okay, you think you can do it? Okay, bet. Let's make that commission. Come on, let's do, do it. How many assistance you need. Okay, let's do it.

0 (23m 49s):
Alright, so here, here's, here's what I'm wondering because I think there was a kind of a turning point in 2000 I think H D T V started to be used like, and hd. T v I remember this, I remember the first time I saw like a newscaster on an hdtv and you could see their makeup. Now you don't, that doesn't happen anymore. But I remember seeing that and that probably really changed how makeup was applied. Right?

4 (24m 17s):
That recognition that you have was the singular reason why I was hired to do the show girlfriends where I create a beauty blender. So makeups how we talked about it a few minutes ago early on for film were consistency wise, different, more opaque, more pink based, more creamy. And you would use a lot of powder to powder them down, right? Because literally you were creating like a mask on someone's face cuz you wanted to recreate the canvas. Right. When you use that technique in high definition, it does exactly what you said.

4 (25m 2s):
You just see that, you see nothing but like crazy lick makeup, right?

0 (25m 6s):
Yeah. It it's like sitting next to somebody who's just been on a TV set and didn't get their makeup off.

4 (25m 11s):
Yeah. You have these people that either look like they were wearing a, a shit ton of makeup or people that just looked terrible, like they just didn't do anything. So how did you find that balance? Right. So one of the skill sets that I taught myself during this career of mine was to airbrush makeup. And airbrushing makeup is the art of spraying makeup onto a face. And you

0 (25m 38s):
Do it like literally an airbrush,

4 (25m 40s):
Literally spraying it on, on with an airbrush. It was used for many, many years prior to beauty makeup in special effects. And it, it creates a seamless look of makeup. Like there's no line of demarcation like what you were talking about a few minutes ago. So although airbrushing was a wonderful technique to make makeup look natural and high definition, it's not a practical set tool. So in the morning in my trailer on the backlog of Paramount, I can be spraying people in my trailer. My music is on, we're chit chatting and laughing, getting ready for the day.

4 (26m 20s):
But the minute I walk on set and they're rolling sound, I can't turn my compressor on. No. So how do you do touchups? How do you maintain that airbrush finish when you can't turn your airbrush on, but you have to do touchups in between takes. Yeah. What ended up happening was you were still hand applying the makeup because you were touching up the makeup, makeup with your brushes and the old way that we had always been applying makeup.

0 (26m 49s):
I wanna, I, I wanna get to the sort of how you kind of came up with this idea in a, in a moment, but just to, just so I understand, I mean, I, I, and for people who don't wear makeup, I'm gonna try and explain my experience, which was in 2003, I went into television for a few years as a TV reporter and I was taught how to apply makeup and I was brought to a department store and, and, and we, I bought a bunch of, they bought me a bunch of Mac makeup and I remember it, there was a, it was concealer and there was powder and, and I can't remember what else, there was a brush in there, but there was also a triangle sponge. And that was what I used to like, put the concealer under my eyes and like anywhere I had like, you know, alongside my nose and I was taught how to do this Now, you know, listen, I gotta be honest, I got pretty good.

0 (27m 39s):
But it was this triangular sponge, right?

4 (27m 41s):
The wedge.

0 (27m 42s):
Right. The wedge. Okay. So, and, and so what I'm trying to understand is that was what presumably you used and lots of other makeup artists used. So what was wrong with that shape? Why couldn't that shape do what you needed to do?

4 (27m 57s):
Well, the thing about that shape, right? First of all, we never used the wedge, just like you get it outta the package. Makeup artist always cut and bevel the sharp edge, ah, off of the wedge. Okay. That's something the kids at Mac don't teach you.

0 (28m 12s):
They no one taught you that

4 (28m 13s):
Get taught. They don't get taught that. See, this is where there's that separation between fashion, makeup, tv, film, you know, there's the, and the, these are the kind of like proprietary trade secrets that makeup artists keep, that make themselves feel different from that person over there. Yeah. And that person over there or whatever. Right. So basically what we're talking, if you, it it taught and if you were ever to go to a makeup school, a school of makeup for film and television, you would've been classically taught to take that wedge and take some scissors and bevel the edges so that there's no straight lines of demarcation because it can look good to your eye. But when you go in on a closeup and you know, you're in a theater and a face is like, you know, 300 feet by I don't know how many feet, you see those lines of demarcation, like, you try to work as perfectly as you can.

4 (29m 5s):
So you, you cut those edges off the wedge to kind of ensure the fact that there's gonna be a softer line of demarcation. Hmm. So, you know, beauty blender is a wedge that I trimmed into a teardrop. The sponge itself has no edges. We round the sponge and listen, I didn't create cutting sponges into round shapes. I, you know, I did like every makeup artist before me historically has had to cut sponges, but it's just something that happened for me.

0 (29m 35s):
Hmm. Alright. So you've, you've got like this kind of rounded sponge that you've just cut. Right? And I guess it at, at it would kinda look like a teardrop or, or like an egg shape. And from, from what I understand, like around this time, you, you went to like a, some kinda workshop where you, you like, you get another idea about how to use this sponge that involves water and like what, can you explain that? What, what was the idea that you got?

4 (30m 4s):
Yeah, yeah. I mean, I went to this one seminar with this really prolific makeup artist who's still working today. Her name is Kelsey Fry. And the thing that she said that stuck in my head was that she would wet her sponge. Like, I know it sounds crazy, everybody, and everybody always says to me, why are you wetting your sponge when you're using this makeup because it's gonna dilute, it's gonna, and she said, but trust me when I tell you this works. And by the way, it's not like a drippy sponge. Like you wet the sponge, you ring it out and you towel dry it. But what ends up happening is then the sponge starts to repel the makeup.

4 (30m 46s):
So it's then pushing the makeup onto the face as opposed to grabbing the makeup and trying to suck it in. So, I don't know, is that like physics or something? I, I don't, I don't know. Yeah. I'm a bit of a sponge scientist now guy, I have to say you are so,

0 (31m 1s):
No, but it is very, it is really scientific. It's really complex. Yeah. And these things that people don't think about. They're just watching a TV show. You wa when you wa I bet when you watch tv you're like, oh, that makeup suck.

4 (31m 13s):
I'm the worst one. Right? I can see continuity. I can say, that's a different makeup artist this day. That, that was a different day, that was a different hand. This is not good. Wow. Did they not the continuity. Like, it's bad. So with the sponge, when you wet it, like I said, it's now pushing the makeup onto your skin so you have control of the makeup, you can thin it out or you can just keep adding more to it to, to get more coverage. So that was the lesson that I learned in that class. And I went back that next week to my show and I started experimenting with it and it worked.

4 (31m 53s):
And I was like, oh my God, this is amazing.

0 (31m 57s):
Why'd we come back in just a moment? Rianne pitches her new technique to a potential new partner who nearly hangs up on her before deciding to hang on the line. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

Shopify (32m 24s):
Sometimes all the constant notification noises we hear every day can get a bit annoying, but wanna hear one notification sound you will never get sick of. That's the sound of another sale on Shopify. The all-in-one commerce platform platform to start, run and grow your business with Shopify. You'll create an online store in your vibe, discover new customers and grow a following that keeps them coming back. Shopify grows with your business anywhere thanks to their endless list of integrations and third party apps. Literally everything you can think of. From on-demand printing to accounting to chat bots, everything you need to customize your business to your needs is already in your hands. Shopify's got you every step of the way. Sign up for a free trial at shopify.com/built. All lowercase. Go to shopify.com/built to start selling online today. shopify.com/built

American Giant (33m 28s):
this holiday season when you are shopping for gifts, support local craftspeople and buy high quality clothes that last by giving the gift of American Giant. I have been a huge fan of American Giant for many, many years. I've got tons of their products. I've got their hoodies, I've got their jeans, I've got their socks, their t-shirts. I wear the classic full zip hoodie all the time, like including right now in the studio because it is so comfortable, it's super versatile, it's amazingly long-lasting and it wears even softer than when I first got it. American Giant makes high quality American made clothing built to last. Join them in their mission to rebuild the manufacturing communities that provide durable jobs for the hardworking communities that need them. Shop gifts that last@americangiant.com slash built and get 20% off when you use code built at checkout. That's american giant.com/built promo code built.

0 (34m 39s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this. I'm Guy Raz, so it's around 2001. And Rihanna's working on the TV show girlfriends and perfecting a tool to improve the look of makeup in high def. She's using this teardrop shaped sponge that she designed herself and to help the makeup last longer. She's wetting the sponge first.

4 (34m 60s):
It allowed me to not have to apply more makeup on the actors, but rather kind of just redistribute the makeup that already was there, which if you can imagine, take after take scene after scene, you don't have time to recreate a whole look. So you're adding makeup throughout the day and trying to keep these makeup levels looking natural in high def especially is very difficult. So it was, it just made, you know, it made the whole job so much easier for everybody.

0 (35m 33s):
So basically you were taking just like rectangular sponges and cutting them into like an oval rounded shape, but it wasn't just the shape that mattered, it was also the absorption, the ability to absorb liquid.

4 (35m 51s):
Well that's where the, the creation of Beauty blender came in. So yes, I was sitting on set with my two or three other makeup artists working for me and we were cutting sponges as we were sitting on, you know, the sidelines of the set during takes. And we would just cut them for the next day because you couldn't use 'em over and over again. And so one of the things that I thought about was the material, and I realized that the material that was hydrophilic, meaning it absorbed water and got softer and fluffier with the absorption of water, I started realizing that those materials actually gave a better makeup result.

0 (36m 33s):
Hmm. Well what I'm wondering is, even before you, you were gonna talk about this a minute, how you figured out how to make them, but before that happened, when did you, I mean, you're cutting out sponges in, in certain shapes and what, at what point did you say, you know, I should turn this into a business? I mean, you had a makeup business, you were an artist. When did you say to yourself, I should see if I can like turn this into a product?

4 (36m 60s):
So I had already started be before Beauty Blender even was an idea. I had already started to think about how long am I gonna do this? How long am I gonna be able to do this? How am I gonna keep this schedule and how am I gonna keep making money? So I st I had started to think about alternative kind of like ways to create passive income. Yeah. At the same time I was cutting these wedge sponges and trying to figure out how, how can I make this a business? Because I think that there are going to be so many other makeup artists behind me and this experiment that I'm on, on this TV show that are going to need these tools because, you know, the future was like the, you know, the the, the buzz on all the sets is like everything's going high def and you need a red camera.

4 (37m 53s):
Yeah. And you need this and you need that and everything's gonna be different. And you know, how, how can I create a business for myself and take advantage of this, you know, technology that's gonna take over.

0 (38m 5s):
So you were, I mean, you were already thinking, what could I do and this, this thing kind of, all these things came together, it was like wet sponge shape. But, but initially your idea was, I'm gonna make this for the industry. This is gonna be an industry tool.

4 (38m 22s):
I dared to dream on occasion. Like, wow, what if this could be a consumer product, but way too complicated for them to understand. Like, it's so far in makeup artistry. I don't think anybody would, would, you know, why would they trade this out with whatever they're doing now? Like it, I just, I knew that my niche and my, you know, little slice of, like I said, passive income would come from the professional community that understood what I was doing.

0 (38m 51s):
All right. But here's the thing, this is like early two thousands and you know, this is pre, not pre-internet, but it's like, it's not, it's like internet. The internet's like it's 1.0. Right. And so a little harder.

4 (39m 2s):
It was, it was pretty pre it was definitely pre-social media.

0 (39m 7s):
Yeah. If you wanted to make something, how did you start? Like what did you, I mean you, you knew this, you knew these products as a makeup artist and you knew who made them. So how did you start to like research what you, what, what to do next? Like where to get them made and what material do you use and like what, how to design it and all that stuff?

4 (39m 31s):
So, you know, I used to travel all over the world with my clients and I used to collect sponges from every country, every city because I was actually looking for a manufacturer to help me with this idea. But in doing that collection, I also started paying attention to the back of the packages. Like where it's made, where who distributes it? Yeah. So there was this one company called Victoria Vogue. Victoria Vog

0 (40m 4s):
Was, Victoria

4 (40m 5s):
Vogue was based in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.

0 (40m 8s):
And what was Victoria

4 (40m 10s):
Vogue? Victoria Vogue was a company that manufactured and distributed beauty implements. So that meant they created sponges for cosmetic companies, but the sponges that they created would fit into the compacts. Like think of a powder compact and you have a little thin sponge in there, you know, any, any tool that supported your beauty routine. So I called four 11 and asked for the phone number to Victoria Vogue. Then I cold called them and asked to speak to somebody in their product development department. Hmm. And they said, well, okay, but who are you?

4 (40m 51s):
And I said, my name is Rianne and I'm a makeup artist and I have an idea. And they were like, I could just, I could hear the sigh on the other end of the phone. And they said, hold please. And then this lady came on and said, can I help you? And I was like, yes. You know, I'm a makeup artist, I'm a professional. I work in film and television and I have an idea and I need someone to help me get this made. And she, you know, she said, well that's great honey. We hold over 400 patents. I'm sure whatever you have designed already is covered in our patents, so I don't, don't know that we could help you much.

4 (41m 36s):
You know. And she was trying to basically get off the phone with me. And I, you know, I said to her, I said, well, okay, but wait a minute, who designs your makeup sponges? And she stopped for a second and she said, well we have product engineers. And I said, so you never had a makeup artist help you design a tool to apply makeup for your companies? And she said, well now actually we never have. And I said, okay, so then maybe you wanna listen to me, maybe you wanna hear my idea. And she just kind of was like, I guess I was being pushy. And she was like, okay, what's your idea? And I said, oh, I, okay, so I have an nda cuz I did like, my friend was like, ran, you have to, you have to definitely have them sign this nda.

0 (42m 23s):
It's because otherwise it could steal the idea from me.

4 (42m 25s):
Yeah, right. Yeah. And I was like, okay. So I, I got, I got a little like, I don't know, like do it yourself NDA or something like that. And I had an NDA and she was like, oh, well this is gonna have to go back to our legal department. I don't know if they're gonna sign it, but I'll get back to you. Right. So we hung up and, and then she got back to me, you know, I don't know, it was probably a couple days later and she goes, you know, I was thinking about what you said and I've shared your NDA and they, they signed it, so why don't you share your idea with me now? Right. And when I did, she said, oh my God, that's like the palm slap to my forehead. Why didn't we think of this? And I said, because you're not makeup artists.

0 (43m 6s):
What were you seeking from them? You were hoping that maybe they would

4 (43m 11s):
The collaboration.

0 (43m 12s):
Okay. So so they would maybe like license this idea from you and, and what did you present to her? Did you like fax over

4 (43m 19s):
A picture? No, I sent, I cut a sponge and I sent it to her. I mean, we'd been cutting these,

0 (43m 24s):
So, and, and, and, but it, but it was cut by hand so it wasn't like machined and smooth and, but it was basically this idea, it was sort of that egg shaped or that teardrop shape of a sponge. And maybe this is a stupid question, but why do you think that right away she recognized that this was different and unique? I mean, I'm trying to understand like when, when she said face palm, you know, plant on my forehead, like why, what did she see in it immediately?

4 (43m 55s):
Right. So I, you know, I went into detail about why the shape and what I was doing and the show I was working on and high definition, unbeknownst to me, the company had charged her for finding to find innovation. So she was looking for innovation within this space already. But she didn't imagine like, cuz I never told her it's a 3D round ergonomic, egg-shaped sponge. So when she saw a beauty blender, she recognized like, this is something really different.

0 (44m 29s):
Alright, so you send one over there and this is Catherine Bailey who gets it Yes. At Vogue, Victoria Vogue. Yes. But still, there was no, like Catherine didn't say, what do you want from us? Like, at what point did she say, okay, this looks cool now what? Like what then?

4 (44m 47s):
Yeah, so timing is so important. Right? So un again, unbeknownst to me, Victoria Vogue was suffering at the time and she had gone back to her bosses, apparently, this is what she told me. She had gone back to her bosses and they wanted nothing to do with my project. Hmm. But if you wanna work on it, you can work on it, but you need to work on it on your time. You can't work in on it on our time. Okay. And it'll be your project. We want nothing to do with it. Which was such a blessing to me because I was not tied to Victoria Vogue. However, I was able to work with Catherine who had all of this knowledge about sponges and, and tools.

4 (45m 34s):
So we then continued to discuss the development of Beauty Blender on her free time.

0 (45m 40s):
Well, what I'm trying to understand Rianne is how did, so Catherine was working for Victoria Vogue and how did she, this is sort of like a side project she was working on, but like, what was in it for her? I mean, what, what would incentivize her to work with you on this when her own company was like, eh,

4 (46m 1s):
She was probably looking to exit the business anyway. And then I come along and there's something here that interests her and it can be hers. And there's a p there's a part and a heart to Kathy where she's a mentor. And I think that she saw me as a young makeup artist with an idea. Single mother just wanting to help. I don't think that she had any kind of preconceived collateralization of it because she literally worked for me guy for years without a dime. Hmm. It was kind of a la it was very much a labor of love for both of us.

0 (46m 42s):
And how long did it take before you sort of landed on, on the right blend of material and shape and like six months a year?

4 (46m 52s):
Oh God no, it was a couple years. Yeah. It, it almost felt like it was gonna take forever at one point. Because you know, when, when you, when you're making something that has never been made before and you don't have a huge investor behind you throwing money at labs and manufacturing companies, you're relying on the goodness and the kindness of people that believe in your idea to make the time to, to help you make that idea happen. And it's not happening in that nine to five space. You know what I mean? They have to do it in their off time. So I remember go, I remember going to set because I was still working, I was still very, very active in my makeup career.

4 (47m 39s):
And, and they would, my friends, the other makeup artists would be like, what are you doing here? Aren't you starting a company? I'm like, girl, I I still gotta work. Yeah. So in the beginning when I first decided that this should, you know, I wanted to try to make this a business. I had invited another makeup artist to work with me. I eventually bought her out. But we had both, I think we both invested like $75,000. Hmm. And when you're working all the time, you don't have time to spend money. So, you know, and there was no internet. I couldn't be on my phone buying things.

4 (48m 19s):
So, you know, I amassed and saved some money to buy a house and I'm, I mortgaged my house and that's how I did it. I'm still working with the same fabricator and manufacturer from the very beginning. Like, they've grown with me in this business and, you know, they took a chance on me. It was really them on off hours, you know, from three different entities when you talk about the foaming and the, and and the fabricator and then Kathy, like all three of them were very much just, I dunno, being philanthropic, I don't know. I, I look at a guy, I look and I think like I'm the luckiest person in the world.

0 (48m 59s):
Alright. 2000, I think sort of four or five. You, you start to, you have them and a and you're using them cuz you're working as a makeup artist. But how are you like marketing it? And cuz you, you needed to sell them and you needed people to buy them. Were you just kind of selling them to other makeup artists?

4 (49m 20s):
Yeah, so we had these pro stores that we create pos from the studios for, and the studios then pay for all of our supplies. Right, right. I had created very strong relationships with three or four of the main pro stores in the United States because by this time I was a very active makeup artist working all over the place. So, Hmm. They were my first clients, my first customers. And people were asking if, if they carried the product because I, I would give them out to makeup artists. So in a way that was, it was the pro community with my marketing. Like I would, I would be like feeding them sponges and yeah.

4 (50m 0s):
They would be using them and they would want more. And then it, that's just really how it happened. I had to have a place to sell them. I, I didn't have a website. I mean, even, even to this day, my digital, yeah. My e-commerce business is the smaller part of my business.

0 (50m 15s):
Alright. Here's what I'm, I'm wondering, this is a product that is, it's unique, right? And we've done this in the show. We've had, you know, Randy Hetrick of TX talk about the TX straps. This is a unique product that you invent and it's going to be really revolutionary for the makeup industry and you don't patent it. And it strikes me that it immediately, once people cut wind of it, this would be copied. First of all, why didn't you patent it? Well,

4 (50m 48s):
It, it, it's, it's not that I didn't patent it, it's that I wasn't awarded a patent. I tried to patent it for years

0 (50m 55s):
And it got kept getting rejected.

4 (50m 56s):
Yeah. There was a conflict, there was a conflict. There was a patent owned by a, a company that, and this is the craziest thing, and this is why I've fought so long and hard about it, but there was a medical ear cleaner that was like, if you can envision like, almost like a Q-tip only bigger, it was like, it had a little handle and then on top of the stick where the Q-tip would be was a foam teardrop sponge.

0 (51m 31s):
Right.

4 (51m 31s):
And that was my conflict. And so the ear cleaner people wouldn't sell me their patent. And so I just, I was never able to get one. And I'll tell you, like I was saying, I was able to create real brand recognition during this time where we were patent pending.

0 (51m 49s):
How, how are you able, how are you able to do

4 (51m 51s):
That? Because I kept selling beauty blenders to pros. Yeah. You know, some, some people would say don't sell anything, you know, weight. Right. But I just kept selling. So cosmetic companies, they had, they had started to notice Beauty Blender, you know, backstage at Fashion Week. They'd started to notice Beauty Blender, but none of the big companies had like, swooped in and really thought that there was any real revenue generating business there. So I didn't have any competition from, from them. So I just kept selling Beauty Blender and it kept growing within the pro community. And then when consumers were walking into places like Sephora and asking for them, that's, you know, that kind of was like the game changer

0 (52m 37s):
Because they were not, they were not available at Sephora at that point, but, right. And, and one of the things you did was it was pink. The color of it was pink. And what, that was very intentional, right?

4 (52m 49s):
Oh my God. That was, that story is so funny to me. So during this time when I was trying to get the special material that was hydrophilic and expanded a certain amount and got soft enough for all of the things I wanted it to do, the company that I was working with, the foamer would send me different variations of substrates to try. And every time that a new formulation was sent to me, they would dye a certain color so that I wouldn't confuse them. So when we we talked, they could say, Hey, remember the blue one? Remember the green one? Remember the yellow one?

4 (53m 30s):
Remember the purple one? And I remember getting this, the last box was a note when I opened it up and said, Hey, I think, you know, they wrote, I think we've made it. I think this, you're gonna love this material. Don't look at the color. Just use it and tell us what you think. And I opened up the box and it was the beauty blender pink that we all see today. It was this beautiful neon bright pink color. Hmm. And I mean, I, I just remember opening up the box and being so hopeful and optimistic and thinking like, this might be it. And when I, you know, went back to, to the company and I was so excited, I said, I, we did, we found the material.

4 (54m 12s):
This is perfect. I want you to be able to see it in a sea of black across the room, you know, when you walk into the store. I think the fact that it's an egg shape is so different. People are gonna look at it and wonder what the hell is this thing? And I want it to be pink. I want them to pick it up and actually ask, what is this?

0 (54m 35s):
When we come back in just a moment, how beauty blender moves from pro stores into Sephora and beyond. And why Rianne isn't worried when the knockoffs start to come out. In fact, she kind of welcomes it. Stay with us. I'm Guy Ross and you're listening to How I Built This

Audible (55m 3s):
Books can allow you to discover new worlds, explore old worlds, and inspire you to build a better world. Audible lets your imagination run wild as the home of storytelling when it comes to audio entertainment. It makes sense to choose Audible. As an audible member. You can choose one title a month to keep from their entire catalog, including the latest bestsellers and new releases. Members also get full access to a growing selection of included audiobooks, audible originals, and podcasts. Recently I've been listening to Barbarians at the gate on Audible. It's great that I can fit books into my busy schedule by being able to listen really anytime, anywhere. By the way, you can also hear the How I built this book on Audible. Let Audible help you discover new ways to laugh, be inspired, or be entertained. New members can try it for free for 30 days. Visit audible.com/built or text built to 500 500. That's audible.com/built or text built to 500 500 to try audible free for 30 days audible.com/built

Wondery: American History Tellers (56m 12s):
in a democracy change comes from the ballot box, but sometimes the will of the people is overrode by an assassin's bullet from Wondery. American History Tellers is a podcast that explores the events and people who shaped our history. The newest season explores the assassins who changed our country. Long before the Secret Service was created. Presidents walked freely amongst the people that was by design. Armed guards were synonymous with European monarchs and dictators. But America's idealistic innocence would soon change, starting with President Lincoln's assassination. Ech episode this season details a different Madman's pursuit and the root of their animosity for the leader they struck down. You'll learn about every critical moment leading to the assassination and how as a result the country changed forever. Follow American History Tellers. Wherever you get your podcasts, you can listen ad free on the Amazon Music or Wondery app.

4 (57m 12s):
Hey, welcome back to how I Built this. I'm Guy Raz, so it's 2008 and Rianne is ready to take Beauty Blender to the next level out of the pro shops and into the mainstream.

0 (57m 24s):
So she decides to leave LA and move to Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, where her partner Catherine Bailey is based

4 (57m 32s):
Yeah, we worked out of her bedroom.

0 (57m 34s):
Oh yeah. And, and I know you, you, you sort of moved the business to her house in to, to Bethlehem. But at at what, at what point right, did you say or were you able to take this into a retail store? Did you, did you say, did you go to, cuz obviously Sephora Alta, these are big mass distribu, you know, these are big retailers. Did you go to them and say, Hey, you know, you should take a look at this. Or did they come to you after seeing the

4 (58m 3s):
Alta came to me, Alta Beauty came to me. Ulta Beauty came after Sephora, but I started in small private boutiques. Right. Boutique beauty stores. So the pro stores like friends names and Nigels that I was selling at, I asked them like, who is your favorite sales rep? I think I need a sales rep. And so they gave me the name of this woman, Laura Carlitos, who still works with me today too. And her and I met and we decided that the strategy we need to take is to not go to big stores because you have supply issues. Right? Right. Go to the smaller boutiques where you can control the messaging. And you can do education too, because when you have a product like Beauty Blender that no one's ever seen before, you're talking about sustainability, cleaning it, it's a high def tool.

4 (58m 51s):
Like those are all like things that are like way over the heads of consumers. Like they, you know, if, if things become too complicated, then they walk away and get what they know. They don't try something new. So marketing and selling initially in a, in a controlled environment where you have the opportunity to sit and talk with each customer and explain why and what, and you know, the, the ins and outs of the product wa was the, the way we grew the business, so, Hmm. Sephora, honestly, I went after Sephora because it was gonna be the only way to really justify the costs for me. And because Beauty Blender was an expensive product based on cost of goods.

4 (59m 36s):
And you know, me probably not negotiating, you know, the best deals because I didn't know any better. It made it a very expensive product. I needed to have more people buying it.

0 (59m 48s):
Yeah. Because it's 20, it was $20. Right.

4 (59m 51s):
$20.

0 (59m 51s):
Yeah. And people are used to getting sponges free

4 (59m 54s):
For free. Yeah. Because if you think about sponges, they come in the compact already in the price, you know, that, that you pay for the product. And that was funny because you know that, you know, I, I tried to get financing early on and everybody looked at me like I was crazy. And

0 (1h 0m 9s):
Who did she try to get financing from?

4 (1h 0m 11s):
Just different investors, you

0 (1h 0m 13s):
Know, she went out to see if they would invest. Well, I would

4 (1h 0m 16s):
Not, you know, there were people that would be interested and they're like, well, I don't, I just don't know. I don't know if people are gonna spend $20 for a sponge. And I, and I try to explain to them, they spend $20 for a brush. They spend a hundred dollars for a brush. Yeah. What, what? It's, it's that disposable mentality that we've been taught about makeup sponges that makes you feel like it's not a worthy tool, but it's the most recognized tool, but the least developed one because it's been marketed as a disposable product. Yeah. So I thought, why can't I make a cleaner and clean your sponge? Keep it longer. It would justify the price point because you're not throwing it away.

4 (1h 0m 59s):
So I created the world's first sponge cleaner. You know, when retailers like Sephora ca, you know, came calling, it would also justify the price point because they're prestige retailers. So, I mean, that, that's kind of how that happened.

0 (1h 1m 17s):
So, alright. So you managed to, to get this into Sephora and Alta, I think around 2012, obviously the, the groundwork had been laid. I mean, makeup artists had been using it, it was in magazines like Allure, so people, regular consumers kind of were, were looking at this product. What's, what's amazing to me though is that I know there were knockoffs, right? There were, and there are, but how did, how did you maintain, I mean, why were you not ever, why did you never feel threatened by Knock? Or maybe did you ever feel threatened by knockoffs

4 (1h 1m 52s):
Every time one came out?

0 (1h 1m 55s):
Yeah. Yeah. And what could you do about it? Because you couldn't, you didn't have the patent protection. So how are you able to stay ahead of that?

4 (1h 2m 2s):
There's a couple things. So the fact that Beauty Blender is rooted in the pro community is a very important foundation for my business because the consumers, the editors, and everybody listens to the, the pros, right? So when pros only use Beauty Blender, then that's, you know, that's, that's an important message about the knockoffs. Secondly, the way that I soothe myself about knockoffs is that I remember this fact that, you know, Coke needed Pepsi, Xerox needed ibm.

4 (1h 2m 44s):
Yeah. Beauty Blender needs knockoffs in order to prove why we are the category creator and the best. I mean, there's still, even in my biggest retailers now, there's, there's brands within those retailers that have beauty blender type sponges. But all that does for us is give us a target to market our superiority. Hmm. Two, do you know what I mean? Like, if they, if they didn't exist, we couldn't talk about why we're the best.

0 (1h 3m 15s):
Speaking of, I mean, of product development. I mean, as this product really began to take off and really began to become a, a significant business, I think, I think to date like what 60 million beauty blenders have been sold, something like that,

4 (1h 3m 32s):
Probably more than a hundred million.

0 (1h 3m 34s):
I mean, it's amazing you got into the, into the cosmetics business in 2018, you guys launch a, a a, a line of a foundation called Bounce. Did you have any, any, I don't know, was there any, I don't know, pushback or, or anyone from the makeup industry sort of saying sort of like, well, wait, you're getting into that business. Like we've been like supporting your thing and now you're kind of coming into our territory. Did you hear any of that at

4 (1h 4m 4s):
All? You know, you're never gonna hear it. Yeah. Like in any, in any industry, we all try to hold hands as, as partners, but, you know, there was definite fear from companies because Beauty Blender had been so widely successful. They recognized that I had created a foundation or a net to really make an impact in complexion, like quickly. Right. Because if I, you know, my, my whole thing was if I could get every person that uses a beauty blender to just try my foundation one time, I would, you know, be killing the game. Yeah. So there was definite like, fear. There were, you know, there were makeup friends of mine, founder friends saying, oh, just stay in your sponge space.

4 (1h 4m 47s):
You don't wanna be out here in this makeup world. It's hell. And, and to their point, like, I don't know if maybe you don't know about Shade Gate Guy, but when I

0 (1h 4m 56s):
Launched Yeah. When I asked you about that,

4 (1h 4m 58s):
Yes,

0 (1h 4m 59s):
I will. Well, I know that when you launched different shades and, and very consciously wanted to do this to represent all skin tones, you got criticized by some, some people who said, actually, it's not broad enough and, and it doesn't cover the entire spectrum of skin tones. Tell me about how you, you know, I'm sure that that was not a, a a, that was a tough pill to swallow for you. Tell me about what happened.

4 (1h 5m 28s):
Yeah, I created a line of foundations by this time my company had grown. I had an internal pr I had gone to work with this really super amazing creative agency that created a lot of beautiful assets and, you know, ready to go. It's like gonna be, this is so exciting. And so I go to New York and I do press with all of these editors, and now, you know it, it's not just editors of magazines anymore. Now you're ed, you're, you're talking to editors of blogs and they're all wanting to get everything first, right.

4 (1h 6m 8s):
The editors and the bloggers. So there's this, this competition for them to, to be the first one to have something. And so one of the bloggers that we agreed to do this with, they re photographed my Shade Range with a flash photography. And the bottles that I used in my original packaging were frosted. So when they took this picture, it looked like all of the colors were the same color. Hmm. I mean, you know, there was a beginning and an end. There was a very light front end of the Shade Range.

4 (1h 6m 48s):
And then there was a very dark end of the dark shade range. But in the middle there was this, what they would call like a sea of beige. Right. And they thought that I didn't really support diversity. So I will tell you that we got like a whole hell storm of really, really angry and terrible responses to that one photo that that blog that Wow. Blog or put out. So we had to do a lot of control, you know, a lot of spin on, on our whole launch. But at the end of the day, we sold out of 22 Shades. You know, it's like, it's a crazy thing.

4 (1h 7m 30s):
It's in the entertainment industry. They say good press, bad press, it accomplishes the same thing. It's kind of true because even though that was like the worst thing that could have happened at the time, I, I mean I invested, you know, over 2 million into this launch. Hmm. And, you know, it was probably the worst thing that could have happened, but the best thing at the same time, because everybody knew we launched.

0 (1h 7m 54s):
So even with that, even with that negative, you know, attention, it was not all bad for you. Is that what you're saying?

4 (1h 8m 3s):
It was not all bad. It's not to say there weren't, there weren't aspects that were really super challenging. There absolutely was. And, but it also set us up for more conversation, more explaining, more trying to kind of undo that narrative, if you will. And so also set me up to be able to create other products. So that's why now, I mean, I have a full line of complexion products that we sell at Sephora. You know, we're doing really well. We've, I I mean, I, it was challenging it, I'm not gonna say it was horrible. It was challenging. My whole team was stressed out. It was so not what we were prepared for.

4 (1h 8m 45s):
Yeah. But, you know, luckily I can say, I mean, we survived it. It's all good.

0 (1h 8m 53s):
Let, let me ask you about, you know, obviously you've got several other products now. You've got Beauty Foundation and you do, you know, other, you know, makeup and cleansers and you make accessories and, and, and other things. But I have to, I imagine that the, the Blender is still the core of your business.

4 (1h 9m 13s):
She's the

0 (1h 9m 13s):
Queen, right? The the main seller. Tell me about where, you know, sort of what, what your ambitions for, for PD Blender is. I mean, do you, do you see this, this as like an Estee Lauder? Do you, I mean, do you see this as a, cuz you own, you still own all or most of this company, right? I don't think you, you took on outside investment or maybe have some

4 (1h 9m 35s):
No, I still own it a hundred percent. I have no investors. And, you know, that's an interesting question. I, I listen this year, this next year, 2023 is gonna be 20 year anniversary for Beauty Blender. And I, nobody is, you know, more surprised at that number than I am. Because when I went into this business, if you recall, it was like passive income. So I could pay for private school, send my kids to college, you know, just take a vacation because I was working so hard. Like I just needed some extra money. Yeah. I'm just now really starting to think about it, guy, I don't know, like, would I love for this company to end up being an Estee Lauder?

4 (1h 10m 16s):
I mean, from a legacy perspective, of course. But then I also now understand how brutal the business is and, you know, I would really need to have one or both of my kids really in it. Right. To keep it a family business like that. So, you know, I don't know if that's gonna happen. Like, I don't consider my company a big company right now. I'm like, maybe we're midsize. I, I don't think we're a big company, but you know, much

0 (1h 10m 45s):
Like 200 million in revenue, something like that a year.

4 (1h 10m 49s):
No. Something like that. But, you know, it, we're coming outta Covid, what can I say? Yeah. Where people stopped wearing makeup. Right. But boy, are they wearing it again now? I don't know. You know, I, I will say this, I I think probably in the next three to five years, just because of my age and also my own personal desires, things that I want for my life, maybe I'll take on an, in like a minority investor. Yeah. And then by that time I'll be able to have a better idea of, you know, what the future looks like. If I would, you know, do a, a full transaction or, you know, do I, do one of my kids want a part of it?

4 (1h 11m 35s):
I, I really don't know yet.

0 (1h 11m 37s):
I mean, it's kind of amazing to think about thinking about the, the arc of your life, right? Like you, you had serious relationships with two very successful wealthy men. You know, this Saudi son of a Saudi, you know,

4 (1h 11m 53s):
You only know of a couple. There's more there.

0 (1h 11m 55s):
I know a couple, right. And, and, and Eric Dickerson, who I still think was, you know, I still remember fondly as a great running back. Yeah. But I mean, and no knock on on those guys, but like, you kind of, you kind of kind of like left him the dust. Like you, you really built a massive career on your own. And how much of this do you attribute to just the grind and how hard you worked and, and what if, if any percentage would you a attribute to luck? Just, just the luck of the circumstances of meeting Catherine and, and you know, some other breaks you got. What do you think it's really about the grind and the work or, or do you think there was luck too?

4 (1h 12m 37s):
I think there's both. And by the way, I'm not, I've been with, I have a wonderful man in my life. His name is Rory Nicks and he's been, we've been together for almost 28 years now, but we're not married and we have our son together. But luck is what, what did they say about luck? It's preparation, meeting timing or some, there's some basically saying there's no such thing as luck. It's all yeah. Movement and preparation. But I do believe in luck and I believe in God. You know, I believe that, not to sound too woozy, woozy, but you know, I went through a lot of things in my life that were kind of unfair and I just hustled and worked hard.

4 (1h 13m 26s):
I didn't dwell on it too much. I just, yeah, just worked hard. And I feel like it's, it kind of comes full circle, you know? So I attribute a lot to the grind.

0 (1h 13m 39s):
I mean, it is, you know, we're often, we're often pitched on this show and I, I understand founders who are like 25 of businesses or, you know, and that's fine. I mean, and it's a great, great, often great stories, but we generally prefer to talk to founders, you know, in their forties, fifties, and beyond because, not cuz they're better or smarter, just cuz there's, they've lived life longer. And so there's more for them to kind of reflect on and offer up to the people who listen to this show. And one of the reasons why I, I thought your story was so compelling was cuz you really, you started this business when you were like in your forties, you, you, you

4 (1h 14m 15s):
39. Yeah.

0 (1h 14m 16s):
Yeah. I mean, you were, you had a career behind you. But, but you, but in order to have made this successful, you had to have had that career. You, you could not have done this No. If you didn't have 10 plus years as a makeup artist.

4 (1h 14m 31s):
20. Yeah, yeah. No, I'm 60 and you know, I have, my father has passed away. My mother is 86. I'm, you know, I'm watching her and how vibrant she is. But you know, the reality of of our mortality definitely is in my mind, you know? Yeah. And I think like, what, what do I want for my future? How much do I wanna do that I'm not doing? Now? The the problem for me, guys that I love this business. Yeah. You know, I'm still enjoying this, this, there's never a day for me that I'm like, Ugh, I gotta go to work.

4 (1h 15m 13s):
No, I like, I get up every morning like, you know, ready to play this game. Like I wanna win.

0 (1h 15m 22s):
That's Rianne Silva, founder of Beauty Blender. By the way, the company says you should never have to throw away any of its sponges. After you've used them for a few months, they'll recycle them for you. And they also have tips on what else you can do with a used one. You can clean your shoes with it. You can use it as a stress ball or a pin cushion, or you can also tie it to a piece of thread and voila, instant Cat toy. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you enjoyed it, please help us spread the word. Tell someone about how I built this or post about it on social media. And thank you. If you wanna contact the team, our email addresses, h ibt, id.wondery.com If you wanna follow us on Twitter or account is at How I built this and mine is at Guy Raz and on Instagram.

0 (1h 16m 12s):
I'm at Guy dot Ross. This episode was produced by Liz Metzger with music composed by t Arab Bluey. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Sam Paulson. Our audio engineer was Maggie Lahar. Our production staff includes Casey Hermann, JC Howard, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, and Carla Estevez. Our intern is Susanna Brown. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This.

0 (1h 16m 52s):
Hey Prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon Music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear@wonderyshop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.