2 (0s):
Hey everyone, its guy here. So I hope you're doing well. Given the circumstances like many of you. Our team is working remotely at the moment and we're all working really hard to produce some fresh episodes for you. It's a little challenging but they are going to be coming your way really soon. Anyway this week we wanted to go deep into the how I built this archives to find a story that would bring all of us a little levity and comfort and joy, and I think you will agree. We found the story. Oh and just a quick warning. In this episode does contain some salty language.

1 (37s):
Pillsbury had bought Haagen-Dazs so they own them and they went to Independent ice cream distributors and told them that if those Distributors continue to deliver Ben & Jerry's that they wouldn't sell them Haagen-Dazs anymore. You know, we recognize that Pillsbury was using their power to keep competitors out. So would you do we took our case? To the people we decided to go after the Pillsbury Doughboy the most beloved food mascot in the country the pudgy little Doughboy, but this particular case it was a matter of survival.

2 (1m 27s):
From NPR it's how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They go. I'm Gyros and on today's show had two hippies named Ben and Jerry turn their small ice cream shop in Burlington Vermont and to one of the most iconic ice cream brands in the

3 (1m 49s):
world.

2 (1m 57s):
I don't know about you, but I have a feeling that most people at some point have spent a quiet evening in front of the television with a spoon and a pint of you know, chunky monkey or Cherry Garcia or New York super fudge chunk of chocolate chip cookie dough because there's something really comforting about a pint of Ben & Jerry's even though it's full of sugar and saturated fat it somehow feels okay, you know what I mean? Maybe it's the fairtrade symbol on the front or the we buy from local Vermont Dairy Farmers on the side of the pipe or most likely seeing Ben & Jerry's photo on it because you kind of know they're good guys that their hearts in the right place.

2 (2m 40s):
And the thing is all that peace and Justice and love and equality stuff that Ben and Jerry's kind of tied together with their brand. It's real. It wasn't a gimmick. It wasn't a strategy designed to attract customers because it's Who they are there weren't social Enterprises back when these guys started and they certainly never plan to get rich, but they did do well and they did do good and their amazing story of building. One of the most beloved ice cream brands actually begins almost 60 years ago when Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield were at the same middle school on Long Island in New York.

1 (3m 19s):
We were both fat as kids. We were both, you know nerdy. Not not in the mainstream

3 (3m 26s):
socially, you know, we were the two slowest fattest kids in gym class, you know, if you're running around the track and you're half a lap behind everybody else and there's another guy there beside you, you know, you get pretty friendly with that guy. And

2 (3m 42s):
did you end up going to the same high school?

1 (3m 44s):
We did? Yeah. We went to Calhoun High School. We graduated

3 (3m 48s):
Barry was a mathlete. I was in Debate Club. Wow, I lettered in Debate Club. You looking better in math?

2 (4m 2s):
All right. So you guys grew up in Long Island you finish high school there. And did you where did you go Jerry? Where did you go to college been? Where'd you go?

3 (4m 10s):
I went to a lot of colleges. I went to Colgate with the Skidmore. I went to NYU. I went to the new school that you did the circuit. I dropped out of all those all right, and then I finally joined the university Without Walls, which was the most Unstructured college program at the time. The idea was that the whole world was your campus and you go out there and learn whatever you want to learn and then you come back to this administrative body and prove that you learned it and they give you a degree and I dropped out of there too. So that was my college career

1 (4m 50s):
still too much structure for been. Yes. I like to tell people.

2 (4m 54s):
Hey Jerry, how about you

1 (4m 55s):
I went to Oberlin College in Ohio. I did four years straight. I was pre-med and applied to and got rejected from lots of medical schools on two different occasions.

2 (5m 8s):
So so you guys were I mean look, I failures failures that let's be honest. It's just not true just untrue. But but what happened after you graduate. How did you guys reconnect? Well, I was

3 (5m 22s):
working at a school for Disturbed kids in the Adirondacks. I was teaching Pottery there and then I I decided I wanted to try to learn try to be a real Potter. You know, those who can't teach those who can do. Well I tried doing and nobody would buy my pots. So I left the Adirondacks. I moved to New York City in order to get you know, some more other influences on my pottery. And of course it was so expensive to live in New York the I needed to spend all my time making rent driving cab. And so I had this apartment. Grungy apartment and Jerry showed up in New York.

3 (6m 5s):
Yep,

2 (6m 5s):
and you but you moved into Ben's apartment or you just you just ended up

1 (6m 9s):
both I did so this after I graduated college and after my first bout of medical school rejections, I moved in with Ben and New York City and then I left and went to North Carolina and after my second bout of medical school or injections I connected with pain again, and it was at that point. Point that we decided to put our fortunes together and open up a little business shop, which yeah, which turned out to be an ice cream business, you know, we didn't exactly think of it as a business. We thought of it as a venture

2 (6m 45s):
like let's do something because we're not right right. That's exactly right.

1 (6m 50s):
Let's do something for a couple of years. And then after we do that, let's do something else. We talked about becoming cross-country truck drivers after we did this ice cream shop.

2 (7m 0s):
So it was ice cream. The the main idea was that what you were going to do from the beginning because because I've read that that you weren't really sure what kind of shop you were going to

1 (7m 8s):
do. Yeah, we thought we would do something with food because we'd always like to eat and we want it to live in a college town. So we thought about picking a food that was becoming popular in big cities, but had not yet been brought to a college town and at that time the foods we we thought about were bagels and homemade ice cream. So we went to a used restaurant supply store to price out Bagel making equipment. This was G&G Restaurant Supply in Albany, New York Lewis there Louis this old guy with a gold chain around his neck and a big cigar in his mouth and he he told us we didn't have enough money to buy Bagel equipment.

3 (7m 59s):
He also told us. Hey, I wouldn't screw you Life's too

1 (8m 3s):
short.

2 (8m 8s):
So I'm curious. I mean, I'm curious where you could because you guys were in your mid-20s. And and did you sit down like and you know, hang out late nights putting out a strategy thinking, you know, sort of starting to think about different ideas you could do together. And were you meeting and in cafes during the day or was it like, how did it even how did you even start to develop this idea, or was it just Much less it was just much more sort of we Alice. Is it in the old days

3 (8m 40s):
before Cafe culture?

2 (8m 44s):
Right?

3 (8m 45s):
No, we did not meet in cafes to discuss this but we did discuss it quite a bit and we researched it quite a bit. We sent away for 30 SBA pamphlets that cost between 15 cents and $3. Hours per on all the different aspects of running a business. This is

2 (9m 10s):
just like pamphlets from the from the small business administration that you I guess were available. Yeah, the government would

1 (9m 15s):
put a Hatter how to calculate your break-even point pretty pretty basic

3 (9m 21s):
stuff

1 (9m 24s):
our goal when we opened was to make $20,000 a year of Peace,

2 (9m 29s):
which was pretty good money. I guess in the late 70s,

3 (9m 32s):
right? No, it was shitty

2 (9m 33s):
money. And

3 (9m 38s):
and it took us a long time to achieve that goal.

2 (9m 47s):
So when you were in New York kind of think about what you could do, how did you settle on an ice cream shop? And how did you settle on Burlington

3 (9m 55s):
Vermont? Well, we settled on ice cream because bigger equipment was too expensive and we settled on Burlington Vermont because originally we settled on Saratoga Springs and we actually move to Saratoga Springs to get rid of open up the place and We're spending most of our time working on this business plan for an ice cream shop and doing a lot of research and we took this correspondence course and how to make ice cream. We were doing the correspondence course. We got the big college textbook called ice cream by William Sr. Buckled Wendell has our buck.

3 (10m 36s):
Thank you the father of modern American ice cream and huh. Jerry could understand that very complex text book because he had this biochemistry. Background from his failed medical school. All right, so they were some other ice cream shop that opened up in Saratoga Springs before us it was called Afternoon Delight.

2 (11m 0s):
Did they make good ice

3 (11m 1s):
cream. You don't know we left town before they open up. You just

2 (11m 5s):
figured we're not gonna We're Not Gonna open up here because his earlier

3 (11m 7s):
we should we didn't want to compete we figured we had a better chance of success if we opened up in a place where there wasn't much competition and Originally, we were looking for warm rural college towns in the old the warm ones already had ice cream. So, you know as we went further and further north, but then the only Town left that we knew anything about was Burlington which you know is an hour and a half south of the Canadian border. It's kind of cold and there wasn't much ice cream here.

2 (11m 36s):
I just want to pause for a sec because I think a lot of people here Ben and Jerry's and think these guys were hippies which is true and they're you know, they're sort of activist. Sand and but that it was just kind of slapped - but you guys really did actually, I mean there was some method to this. I mean you researched you actually scoped out possible locations. I mean this wasn't I mean you were really actually trying to do this in a methodical way.

3 (12m 3s):
We're very hard workers.

2 (12m 5s):
Yeah. No, I mean you re I

1 (12m 7s):
mean nobody but when you describe it youryour and yes, all those things happen, but the way you're describing it is putting a lot more.

3 (12m 16s):
I

1 (12m 16s):
thought and planning into it then then we actually did. I mean we just took one step at a time and we did whatever. The next thing was in front of us.

3 (12m 27s):
I think it was near that time that we kind of realized that you know, the word business is, you know, essentially kind of busy - mmm that is mostly common sense and a lot of

2 (12m 42s):
work. Yeah, and I mean this is pre internet so you couldn't just Go online and type in how to make ice cream which you could do today or where do I buy restaurant equipment like you who I mean things took a lot longer presumably

1 (12m 55s):
the Yellow Pages. Yeah spent a lot more time. Yeah with the phone book in the Yellow Pages. Yeah. I mean, you know, when when Ben and I talk to people today about taking a correspondence course correspondence courses don't exist. I mean, the closest thing would be an online course, but the idea that that somebody would mail you a textbook and then you read These textbooks and you fill out answers to a test and you mail it back to your professor and then they grade it and then they mail it back to you and you find out how you did on your test. It's a quaint idea.

2 (13m 32s):
Yeah, how much how much did I course cost by the

3 (13m 34s):
way $5. Wow, we split one between the two of them

2 (13m 39s):
did when you decided when you when you told I don't know friends or parents or family. Like we're going to go to Burlington Vermont and we're going to open up a nice. Ice cream shop did anybody to say do you guys realize that you know, maybe seven months out of the year. It's really cold there and and and it just might not make a whole lot of sense or did would that conversation

3 (13m 58s):
never come up? My parents were really happy. Finally. There's son was giving up the idea of being a Potter for the rest of his life and finally becoming a businessman, huh. This this really turned them on and They were so supportive of it that I started thinking. Oh, I must be doing the wrong thing. Yes, of course. We thought about you know the cold weather Jerry even came up with this idea of a promotion that ended up in the business plan called pops it Biz we heard she was the penny off / Celsius degree below zero winter Extravaganza way.

3 (14m 44s):
Can you

2 (14m 45s):
say that again slowly? Lolly pops it

3 (14m 47s):
is we the penny off / Celsius degree below zero winter Extravaganza. You can say it slowly a few more credible.

1 (14m 55s):
And you had how did

2 (14m 56s):
it work? It had were colder it got the more

3 (14m 58s):
you saved for every degree below zero Celsius, which is 32 degrees Fahrenheit. You got a penny off the price of your cone, which was significant at the time because a cone cause 52

2 (15m 11s):
cents ha. All right, so you get to Burlington Vermont and and you start looking around for The perfect place to open up your ice cream shop.

3 (15m 20s):
Well, we got one of those clickers we did customer counts at various corners and we didn't know exactly what number we were looking for. But we did customer care.

2 (15m 30s):
Did you really use study the corner with a clicker for and you just would click? Yeah, and you would just click as people pass. So you would know how many people pass that location every hour.

3 (15m 38s):
Yeah ice cream is an Impulse item. Yeah, you need to make money off the passing traffic. I mean, I'm gonna just

2 (15m 46s):
just just directly for side because that again like that is a pretty sophisticated technique. I needed to all in the SBA in those manuals. It would say go to a corner with a clicker and that will determine where you should open your shop. You

1 (16m 4s):
know, I interrupt here because I haven't been giving been enough credit. All these years been actually does think a lot of these things through. Yeah, and I think I think it was me who wasn't thinking I'm through. But yeah, I think Ben's a very thoughtful person.

2 (16m 22s):
So so after after all that research, where was the location that you you thought would work was it was it actually on the main drag?

3 (16m 29s):
It wasn't on the main drag. It was a block of the main drag, but it happened to be you know, right across from City Hall Park, which was a great thing for us and Ice Cream Parlor, you know get a cone sit in the park and it also was an old gas station. It was totally dilapidated. It was falling apart. Part, nobody wants it to rent it. And it had some parking spaces in front where the gas pumps used to be which was also an incredible Boon for an ice cream shop in a city to have some places where people could pull up in a car and jump out get a get a

2 (17m 5s):
scoop. So how much money did you have to have to sign the lease and then also buy the equipment and you know, get the store ready. for customers

1 (17m 15s):
so Ben and I each had four thousand dollars and that you saved up or don't ya just yeah Ben Ben actually borrowed two out of the four thousand from his father, but that was fine because that was our commitment to each other that we were we were each going to come up with $4,000 and and then we wrote this business plan in order to try to borrow money from the local bank, you know, we wrote A business plan only because we felt like it was The only way the bank was going to lend us

2 (17m 45s):
money and do this business plans are have projections like five-year projections showing revenue and profit and loss and all

1 (17m 51s):
that stuff. It had projections. I can't remember if it was 5 years. I mean it probably wasn't five years the beautiful thing about the business plan. So Ben and I didn't know how to write a business plan, but we have a friend Jeff Furman who is mentioned often and and Jeff used to work for the small business administration in New York. T and Jeff got us a copy of a business plan that was from a pizza parlor in New York. So Ben and I pretty much copied that business plan except every place where it said slice of pizza we crossed it out and we wrote an ice cream cone and the other great thing about the business plan was when we first rode out and figured out our projections for how much ice cream we would sell and how much it would cost.

1 (18m 43s):
The projections told us that we weren't going to sell enough ice cream to stay in business.

2 (18m 50s):
So

1 (18m 51s):
we just changed the

3 (18m 52s):
projections kind of like the government.

2 (18m 57s):
So and I think that's the way everybody does it. You just make it up you have this

1 (19m 2s):
idea. Yeah that that people come up with these projections and they're based on something and they're just

2 (19m 8s):
made so true. Yeah, you see it all the time and in Silicon

1 (19m 12s):
Valley, right and And if they don't work you make up

3 (19m 15s):
different. It's brilliant. What

2 (19m 25s):
are their first tour look like was it was it sort of bright and and and you know it with with the clouds and painted on the walls and cows and things like that.

3 (19m 34s):
No, but it was beautiful. I mean most

1 (19m 38s):
been says it was beautiful and it was beautiful. Most people would have described it as pretty funky. Hmm.

2 (19m 44s):
Yeah, which is probably right. I mean fit with the aesthetic of what what you were selling anyway,

3 (19m 50s):
right? Yeah homemade ice cream guy who did very much looked homemade.

1 (19m 55s):
And it was very low budget as well.

2 (19m 57s):
Yeah, how would you when you open that for shop? How what what flavors were you serving to

1 (20m 2s):
remember? Vanilla chocolate

2 (20m 6s):
strawberries those basic cost straightforward pretty

3 (20m 9s):
basic. Yeah, you know the first two flavors that we did that we're not your normal ones were Oreo mint and Heath bar Crunch

2 (20m 19s):
and I read I mean ever that Jerry you were sort of the ice cream maker and Ben you were the taster and I remember reading a long time ago that you had like some you couldn't taste things because of some you know sinus or I can't remember what you things that you dealt with a had and so you would have focus on the feel of the ice cream. Is that true? Yeah.

3 (20m 41s):
I have a very very poor sense of smell. What's the term for that it's called

2 (20m 47s):
anosmia. It makes a lot of sense though in some ways not having a sense of smell was a kind of hidden. Thing right because you had to rely on other senses that maybe competitors weren't thinking about they were focusing only on flavor or smell rather than the feel of ice cream, right? How did you I mean, I remember the first time I tried Ben & Jerry's in the in the I grew up in Los Angeles so not until the late 80s, but it was it was so different because it was chunky ice cream had big chunks and was that completely different in 1978 was where other people making ice cream like

3 (21m 23s):
that. No, they weren't they weren't packaging ice cream like that. I scream like that came out of the homemade ice cream parlor genre

2 (21m 36s):
like with big chunks and like

3 (21m 37s):
nuts, right? Yeah, right. Right, right because a lot of them our shop and a bunch of other homemade ice cream shops. You're making ice cream essentially in overgrown Homestyle ice cream making equipment. So It's really easy to put in big chunks. The difference is that no commercial ice creams were packaging ice cream like that. And as we discovered the reason why they weren't doing it is because the Machinery the commercial ice cream machine over he was not designed to be able to handle large chunks.

3 (22m 18s):
Right? So all you would get would be these little itsy-bitsy pieces that would flow through the machinery. Well, but you didn't get the requisite mouth feel

1 (22m 29s):
right? I was making the ice cream. Yeah, and it was no picnic putting in those big chunks and Ben and I had many discussions

3 (22m 40s):
about it

2 (22m 42s):
like discussions like like what

1 (22m 44s):
so I was arguing for having a larger number of smaller chunks that were well distributed throughout the ice cream and you know, I was saying know what people want and this is what Ben wanted of course, but what people want is a really big chunk and they don't care if they get a chunk in every bite as long as they know there's a really big chunk coming up next and it turns out Ben was right people love it.

2 (23m 15s):
Well, and what happened after you open that first or will you just a huge hit in Burlington right

1 (23m 20s):
away? No, we were hit in the summer. The first summer was great. And then the first winter was also a revelation, you know, it can get very slow

2 (23m 32s):
and with their days I would go by where you get like one or two

1 (23m 35s):
customers probably a few more than that, but you know, it's very slow and it was actually during that first winter when Ben and I came up with the A free cone day that if we were still in business after a year, we would celebrate and treat all our customers by giving out free ice cream because we thought it was so unlikely that we would still be in business and and we recognize so clearly that if we were still in business it was going to be because of the support of our customers.

2 (24m 10s):
Was there any tension between the two of you at that time

3 (24m 14s):
just about the size? As of the

2 (24m 15s):
chunks

1 (24m 20s):
Ben and I have a lot of trust in each other and hear each other's judgment. So we were never doubting what the other person was doing. So there was that and then and then I think another thing was we have very different skills and interest been is tremendously creative very spontaneous. Very entrepreneurial and I Like a manageable agenda. So, you know it made sense that Ben would come up with all these flavors and do all the marketing and and I would sit back and make the ice cream because I sort of knew what I needed to do.

2 (25m 6s):
So, what was the Turning Point? How are you able to survive that first

3 (25m 9s):
year we ended up getting a you know SBA has this. service called score the service Corps of retired Executives and you know, if you're if you're a little business you could get in touch with the SBA and say hey, I like them a mentor huh, and they would set you up with some retired business guy who would volunteer to be a mentor and we asked for one of those and we got one and it was in the middle of the winter and we were losing our shirts and we couldn't make our Payments to the bank and yeah, he says oh, you know, that's no problem.

3 (25m 49s):
Just go to your bank and ask for a moratorium on your

2 (25m 52s):
loan. Who was this guy

3 (25m 54s):
Manny? He was an old guy named Manny and he said well just tell him you can't pay your loan right now that you can pay it, you know, when the weather turns, you know, they'll the like just let you pay interest and we went to the bank and we said that and I said sure no problem just pay interest and you know extend the loan. Loan and that got us through

2 (26m 17s):
wow, and this is only in Vermont at the time, right? Yeah. Yeah. Wow, so the shop opens in 78 and then I guess it was it was 1981 when Ben and Jerry's what happened to be in an article in Time Magazine, which was hugely influential magazine at the time. What what did what

3 (26m 36s):
did that mean? And when you read that

2 (26m 38s):
what they call you at the time

3 (26m 41s):
The best ice cream in the

2 (26m 42s):
world the best ice cream in the world. It's incredible. Yeah. It

3 (26m 45s):
was so real straight. Yeah. It was a real

2 (26m 47s):
struggle. What do you

1 (26m 48s):
expect? Well, but not only that so it was the cover story of Time Magazine. Wow, and that was the first sentence of the cover story

3 (26m 57s):
what you must understand at the outset. Is that Ben & Jerry's in Burlington Vermont is the best ice cream in the world. Wow. That was all we needed to read if you read on it. Didn't you just say that you know blah blah blah ice cream somewhere else is the best ice cream in the world somewhere else is in the best ice cream in the world, but you know who need it to go and he has an that. Well,

2 (27m 22s):
you know prior

3 (27m 23s):
to that article coming out I started to realize that you know, all these, you know reviews that you see for Broadway shows, you know, where they say. This is the best play ever all your laugh your ass off. Yeah, whatever it

1 (27m 39s):
is if you see only One play this.

2 (27m 41s):
Yeah,

3 (27m 43s):
and then they're all these little excerpts from an article that was you know, like to you know a page and you know, the page went on to say I really wasn't that great but you know, there was a moment where you laugh your ass off

2 (27m 57s):
and they just took that one little phrase laugh my ass off and and

3 (28m 2s):
I you know figured if they can do it I can do

1 (28m 5s):
it.

2 (28m 7s):
When we come back, once the Laughing died down how Ben and Jerry got a taste for the ruthless and competitive side of the ice cream business how the Pillsbury Doughboy tried to take a bite out of the company and how Ben and Jerry fought back stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

1 (28m 35s):
Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World

2 (28m 39s):
Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. The coronavirus pandemic is changing everything really fast. So we have created a podcast where you can hear conversations and stories from NPR journalists who are covering the pandemic the public health fight against it and how the world is coping. I'm your host Kelly mcevers. Listen And subscribe to coronavirus daily from

3 (29m 8s):
NPR.

2 (29m 13s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm Kai Roz. So in the early 1980s Ben & Jerry's was just one shop in Burlington Vermont and it was doing well. Then in Jerry gave a big generous scoops of ice cream. They had happy customers, but they were pretty bad at doing all the things it took to run a business.

3 (29m 36s):
We weren't making a profit, you know, the 16 hours a day that we were Open seven days a week the standards that we had for ourselves in terms of how a retail shop should be run. We're not standards that we were able to achieve.

1 (29m 55s):
We were really good at creating an atmosphere and the shop that was welcoming and fun less than excellent at hiring people at supervising people and out of all we were really bad at portion

2 (30m 15s):
control. You were giving away too much ice cream.

1 (30m 17s):
Yes. We you know, when you scoop out a nice big scoop for a customer you get this beautiful smile and really warm response and it's really positive reinforcement for over scooping and you know, Ben and I we wanted to make people

3 (30m 35s):
happy well, and also we want to keep our prices really low, huh, you know in terms of the Food service business in every business except for ice cream. The portions are controlled in the back. Yeah out of sight of the customer and when you're scooping ice cream, you're supposed to control the portion inside of the customer and of the scoop is too big. You're supposed to take a little off in the customer hates

1 (31m 5s):
that one of the reasons we started packaging our ice cream was because we weren't so good at At running a shop and one of the things we thought about was well, maybe we can't control how much I scream. We're putting on a cone but you certainly can control how much ice cream you're putting into a pint container because it only fits so much

2 (31m 25s):
right? So that was that that was a big turning point for you. When you decide to Let's

3 (31m 30s):
package of stuff. Well before it before that we decided to pack it in two and a half gallon tubs and sell it to other people and let them

2 (31m 38s):
figure out oh and control the ports and They were they were charging a massive premium for probably right?

3 (31m 44s):
Well, you know, I mean I was the guy who was going around selling the ice cream to these restaurants and the restaurants would say no, I'm not going to carry your ice cream anymore because my employees are eating it a lot of our problems would be solved. We made the ice cream shittier.

2 (32m 9s):
You guys you guys started to sort of get more attention and to distribute your ice cream in pints, I guess Pillsbury, which was Distributing other brands. Like I guess Hagen has they they threatened other Distributors. They said stop Distributing Ben and Jerry's to the shops, right?

1 (32m 28s):
Yeah. Well Pillsbury had bought Haagen-Dazs so they own them and they they went to Independent ice cream distributors. Who Are Distributing all sorts of different brands of of ice creams and you know told them that if those Distributors continue to deliver Ben & Jerry's that they wouldn't sell them Haagen-Dazs

2 (32m 51s):
anymore. Did it start to cut into your

1 (32m 53s):
sales? Well, you know, we recognize that this was a real threat plus it seemed like it was illegal that yeah that it was a Restraint of trade that Pillsbury was controlling. The marketplace and they were using their power to keep competitors

2 (33m 12s):
out, but you couldn't sue them right. I mean you were a four million dollar company and they were multi-million maybe billion dollar

1 (33m 19s):
company. Well, I think we I think we did have a legal case but we realized that that was not really going to be the best place for us to fight them because they were so enormous. So would you do we took our case to the people we started the what? The Doughboy afraid of campaign we decided to go after the Pillsbury Doughboy which was the most beloved food mascot in the country the

2 (33m 53s):
pledgee little dull boy. Had you go after them.

1 (33m 56s):
Well, it was started by me going to Minneapolis to the Pillsbury World Headquarters. I was a One person picket line the sign said what's the Doughboy afraid of it was a hand-lettered sign. Yeah, I'd never really done anything like that

2 (34m 16s):
before and did anybody at Pillsbury come out and say, okay we'll meet you or did they just ignore you like your this crazy man protesting in front of their

1 (34m 24s):
headquarters? Nobody had any idea what I was doing there. It was a fight for us. I don't know that it was a fight for them. It was it was a fight for survival from us. So nobody knew what was going on.

2 (34m 36s):
So do they eventually drop drop their restrictions and allow Distributors to presumably allow they did food stop forcing Distributors to to not carry Ben and Jerry's

1 (34m 48s):
right? Well, there were a lot of steps that we took escalating the the pressure on Pillsbury, you know starting with a small classified ad in the back of Rolling Stone magazine and we flew aerial Banners around the sport stadiums in Boston and we we took out signs of the on the signs of the transit buses in Boston, and we had a

2 (35m 15s):
annesley said in the science of the same thing. What's the Doughboy afraid of

1 (35m 19s):
this the sign of on the side of the transit buses had these two pudgy white hands squeezing a pint of Ben and Jerry's I think it said don't let pillsbury's dollars strangled and injuries or something very provocative.

2 (35m 37s):
It's amazing because it's just doing that is a lot of work like, you know, organizing that campaign. You will also running a business and and trying to sell ice cream do where you just were the two of you were just constantly working all the

1 (35m 50s):
time. Yes, but this particular case, it was a matter of survival, you know, this was like you're either going to get shut down and you can't get your ice cream out to people or you do whatever you can to get.

2 (36m 6s):
Out there. Do you remember that? You remember that band need to remember working all the time? Yeah,

3 (36m 14s):
I I certainly felt during many of the times had been injuries that the experience was like falling down the side of a cliff trying to grab onto whatever Branch was there. You can hold onto so, you know in that situation, you know falling down so, you know grabbing onto branches. You're not really thinking about well am I having a good time? Good, but you know you're you know, you're energized, you know, you're using all the skills you have, you know, you're doing everything you can to save your life. And you know, it's really interesting.

3 (36m 57s):
It's it's it's a peak experience.

2 (37m 4s):
Did you guys as you start as you as you grew and grew it was it was plainly obvious that you are you're going to both make a decent amount of money from from this where you okay with that? I mean, I mean did that that conflict with with your own values or were you able to kind of say? All right, you know, whatever where I'm got money and that's that's just the way it is.

1 (37m 26s):
I mean, if so for me, I think it was something I needed to Grapple with I mean, you know Part of the thing for both Ben and me was that we never really saw ourselves as bosses, you know from from early on we were scooping ice cream right next to everybody else who was scooping ice cream, right? We were mopping the floors at night and we didn't have a very good boss mentality. We had a good work or mentality. You know, Ben is the most anti-authoritarian person I've ever come across and here he was being in a Artie I mean it was it was

2 (38m 5s):
laughable. You were the CEO I was and how did you feel about that then? I mean did you did you also feel like you know, this is weird but I'm a businessman. I never signed up for

3 (38m 16s):
this. Yeah, there was a time when when Jerry and I both turned around looked at ourselves and said to each other, you know, we're not ice cream anymore were spending our time being bosses and hiring and firing. Hiring and so much of what we were doing was in order to pay our loans back to the bank and we felt like we were becoming just another Cog in this economic machine our reaction to that was to sell the business and we actually put it up for sale.

3 (38m 57s):
This was early on this was in the in the 80s. And then I ran into this older restaurateur that I had come to know a little and I explained to him that we were planning to sell the business and he said Ben, how could you possibly do that? The business is your baby. It's it has so much potential ahead of it. And I said Maurice, you know what business does it explodes the community it explodes its employees and exploits the environment and He said Ben if there's something that you don't like about business, why don't you do it different?

3 (39m 38s):
And that was when we decided to conduct this experiment to see if it was possible that business could be a tool for improving the quality of life for people as opposed to making people's lives

1 (39m 55s):
worse.

2 (40m 0s):
One of the things you guys you guys did was you had a policy where the highest paid employee couldn't earn more than five times as Hillary of an entry-level worker. You also had like daycare and you did College tuition a and a bunch of things profit sharing. Is that what you mean? When you say you wanted to try to do business differently

3 (40m 21s):
that's part of it, but I think the more critical part of it is using our business to address. Social issues through the very fabric of our business. So that meant like

2 (40m 38s):
taking very very vocal positions on hot button issues. But also doing things like like working with former

3 (40m 48s):
prisoners former former former

2 (40m 50s):
felons, right who are making brownies in a bakery in New York

3 (40m 55s):
that that that's our project with the greyston bakery and and deliberately choosing to use this ingredient supplier because this particular ingredient supplier was driven by a social mission of providing employment opportunities for formally unemployable people and that's a very good example of how Ben and Jerry's demonstrated that it's possible to make a profit and address social problems of the same time.

2 (41m 32s):
So after all your success in the 1990s, eventually Ben & Jerry's did end up selling it sold her to Unilever, which is this huge multinational right? It's old I think in 2000 and it was sold by the company's board without your

3 (41m 50s):
permission. That's correct.

2 (41m 53s):
How did it happen? I mean, how was your company sold without your Ascent?

1 (41m 59s):
Well it was It was a public company, which meant that anybody could own shares and Unilever ended up offering so much money that the board of the company couldn't find an alternative for the shareholders that they thought was

2 (42m 17s):
acceptable. Did you guys say to the board? You can't do this. You can't do this or or word or did you just sort of at a certain point saying? All right, nothing we can do.

1 (42m 26s):
Well eventually we we had to go along with

2 (42m 28s):
it. Why were you opposed to

3 (42m 31s):
You know, I think that the thing that was most important was to maintain the the social mission of the company we felt like, you know, if another company were to buy been injuries that they would not continue those cutting-edge social Mission activities.

2 (42m 53s):
What did it mean practically for the two of you to demean that you were sort of done going into Ben and Jerry's it to the This is everyday. You know, I think a

1 (43m 3s):
lot of it was up to us about what it meant. There was going to continue to be an independent board in the new entity that oversaw the social Mission and I think Ben and I could have remained on that board and we both chose not to why well, I can't speak for Ben. You know, I had no idea what was going to happen to the company and I mean quite frankly. I just didn't want to be part of it at that

2 (43m 35s):
point. How about you been why didn't you want to be on the board? You

3 (43m 39s):
know, I felt like I had lost, you know, a major battle in terms of trying to keep the company independent, you know, I didn't want to continue under the ownership of the Unilever. So did you both kind of

2 (43m 57s):
just mentally check out?

3 (43m 59s):
Yeah, I certainly I certainly checked out for

1 (44m 2s):
a while. Now. It's a good way to put it

2 (44m 5s):
were you sad. I mean were you upset me? So here's the thing like a lot of people who've been on the show and a lot of people listening would say, oh my God, they walked away with millions of dollars, like what an incredible achievement they started this little shop and Burlington and and and it's an international brand and it's done all these amazing things like this is their moment to shine and to do a dance and but but it sounds like you guys were really depressed about

3 (44m 29s):
this. Yeah, you know if the goal was to make a bunch of money then I guess it would have been a different reaction but that wasn't really the goal

2 (44m 40s):
great that you guys were very vocal about your positions on guns and on you know, obviously socially liberal the company still does that today? I mean, even though you're not, you know, you're not owners of it. Is that as a surprise you that they still do that?

3 (44m 60s):
Well it It became intertwined with the brand right, you know, if Unilever bought a brand and bought the Goodwill that goes along with that brand and bought the reputation that goes along with that brand. They need to continue those activities in order to keep that brand strong. Yeah. I'm very

1 (45m 28s):
pleasantly surprised. And proud of what the company does. I mean the company came out in support of Occupy Wall Street a few years ago, which you know is amazing because that was essentially an anti-corporate movement.

2 (45m 46s):
You're talking about Ben Jerry's night not Unilever.

1 (45m 48s):
Yes and within the last year the company came out with a statement in support of black lives matter. I mean the company does not shy away from Controversial issues and that is a really difficult thing for a business to do which is why you don't see businesses doing it and yet Ben and Jerry's is courageous enough. Yeah to wade into those areas.

2 (46m 18s):
Do you uh, do you guys see each other pretty regularly

3 (46m 22s):
pretty regular

2 (46m 23s):
still hang out like you hang out a lot? Yeah a lot

3 (46m 27s):
it is. I mean if there's one

2 (46m 30s):
thing about your story that to me is more interesting than anything else that your friendship. I just it's just it really is a powerful part of I know it's certain sound sensor too sappy and I don't mean to like make you guys feel uncomfortable. It's just it is amazing. It's really impressive that you that you really like to hang out. With each other you're good

3 (46m 49s):
friends, you know people say that and I don't really understand it that much. I mean, you know, lots of people have friends that they've had for most of their life.

1 (47m 1s):
Well II do appreciate it more and more the older I get I I must say, you know, and sometimes recently Ben and I have been talking about how we're a little bit like Fred and Barney on the floor because we drive places. Together a lot and I think we just relate like that. Yeah,

2 (47m 23s):
is it strange to think that this little ice cream shop you started as a 500 million dollar company.

1 (47m 29s):
Well, it's strange to I mean to me it doesn't feel like the same thing. I mean, they're just not the same the company has taken on a life of its own. Yeah, you know the ice cream shop will always to me be been in me in the store. Make a nice. I am scooping ice cream been behind the stove cooking up food. I mean that's that's what the ice cream shop

2 (47m 56s):
was I mean your name then Jerry, I mean that named Ben and Jerry like it's you and and and will be forever. It's like like Lea & perrins, you know, Worcestershire sauce. Akuze Lee whose parent right like

3 (48m 8s):
someday who's hogging who's

2 (48m 10s):
does that someday like in fifty or a hundred years people are going to say they're just gonna call it Ben & Jerry's like you're not going to think about the people. People behind it. You know what? I mean? Yeah. I know what you mean.

3 (48m 21s):
I mean half the people think we're

1 (48m 23s):
dead,

3 (48m 26s):
you know, and we get credit for it. I mean think about the guy who invented vanilla. Yeah, who was that? He don't get credit now. I know not at

1 (48m 33s):
all, you know, so to me, it's amazing to the degree that the company continues to be outspoken about Progressive issues and Progressive values, its not its of no interest to me to have Ben and Jerry's be Thriving and whatever if it's just selling ice cream. I mean who wants to be part of that?

3 (48m 58s):
When you guys think about

2 (49m 1s):
this incredible thing that you built how much of it was was because of all your hard

1 (49m 7s):
work and your talent and your

2 (49m 9s):
intelligence and how much of it was just because you were

1 (49m 12s):
lucky there is a very big part of Good Fortune involved. I think there's a lot of people who work really hard who have really good ideas who are really committed and they don't have the same level of success.

3 (49m 28s):
Ben and Jerry said yeah, I mean, I guess originally we were going to open our ice cream shop and Saratoga Springs New York. Yeah, and you know some other ice cream shop opened up before us and we didn't want to compete so that's what brought us to Vermont. I think if we had started in New York, we never would have gained the local following that we gained in Vermont Vermont. It would we could be a bigger fish in a small pond

2 (50m 1s):
teacher did either of your parents what will did either of them ever get to see what Ben and Jerry's

3 (50m 7s):
became? Yeah. Mine were still alive. Probably through the 1980s.

1 (50m 15s):
Yeah same for my

2 (50m 16s):
parents. Were they proud of you?

3 (50m 20s):
They were a whole lot prouder than when I was trying to be a

2 (50m 22s):
Potter. Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield founders of Ben & Jerry's ice cream, by the way, there was a study done by the international Dairy Foods Association, and they asked people to name their favorite ice cream. And as you can imagine The Usual Suspects turned up chocolate vanilla mint chip, but right there right near the top was cookie dough chocolate chip cookie dough. Which okay may not be all that surprising because everybody makes cookie dough, right, but it wasn't always a class. The flavor because in fact it was invented by Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield in that tiny little shop in Burlington in the 1980s.

2 (51m 9s):
What at what point did Cherry Garcia enter into into the Ben and Jerry's who've

3 (51m 16s):
we got a postcard that's we're both dead heads and we're also been injuries fans and we think you ought to come out with a flavor called Cherry Garcia because so it would be a real hoot for the fans and dead paraphernalia always.

2 (51m 34s):
So what did Jerry Garcia think of

3 (51m 36s):
it? Well, there was one quote that was reported saying well, at least they didn't name a motor oil after me.

2 (51m 51s):
And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from our sponsor zip recruiter hiring used to be hard but now hiring can be easy thanks to zip recruiter four out of five employers who post a job get a quality candidate within the first day. Try it for free @ zip recruiter.com built. Hey, thanks so much for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and today we're updating a story. We ran about a year ago about something. We almost never think about unless it breaks the common everyday zipper the moment of

1 (52m 35s):
oh my God, my backpack just split open on me and I'm on a

2 (52m 38s):
trip and Central America. This is Clay McCabe and he's kind of an expert on broken zippers because he's got hundreds of stories. I had a musician that was Ready for a show and his zipper had blown out on his pants, you know, and he was I mean who wants to go play a show in front of thousands of people with your pants unzipped and when those zippers break lots of people just throw the item away in the trash. Even if it's your favorite pair of jeans or the backpack that's been everywhere with you, but this is not the way clay was raised when he was a kid in McCall, Idaho his dad had a repair shop and he would fix everything.

1 (53m 19s):
Every day there was somebody who would come into the shop and have a broken zipper

2 (53m 23s):
and he'd fix it in about 5 minutes and eventually Clays dad built a spin-off business. He made a kit for people so they could repair their zippers at home.

1 (53m 34s):
So it was just kind of a full

2 (53m 36s):
do-it-yourself kit that had a handful of different Sliders in

1 (53m 40s):
them, which are that's the little metal piece that you grab

2 (53m 42s):
onto and the slider is the thing that can break or fall off a zipper. So this repair kit was like a little Bag that had a bunch of different types of these sliders and it also had these little staple things for attaching the slider back to the zippers teeth. Anyway, all this was happening back in the early 1990s Clay's dad put the repair kits on a very basic website and started to sell them in a few chain

1 (54m 7s):
stores. So that was kind of like

2 (54m 9s):
supporting our whole family, but it pretty much you know, it was it was a meager living but it was enough to get us by but things got harder after clay his dad died his mom. I'm took over the business, but she had a hard time keeping it up. So about five years ago clay decided to take it over because it didn't feel finished to me. You know, it felt like there was a lot more potential and what he had started, but in order to tap into that potential clay decided the whole look and feel of the business had to

1 (54m 38s):
change in the old website was like it was straight out of the

2 (54m 41s):
90s and it hadn't been changed since you know, it was almost got to the point where I was like so retro it was cool again. So Clay did they come Please rebranding of his dad zipper rescue kit updated the website designed a new logo and then he started to you know, go out and shake the trees a little you know, things started happening immediately. It was like, okay. I landed

1 (55m 1s):
us a new account here and started to kind of get a handle on what was going on with Amazon and how you know how it all

2 (55m 9s):
worked and actually once he got the kit on Amazon clay had to deal with a wave of knock-offs, but he says one thing he offers that the other guys don't it's Customer service. In fact, it takes a lot of the calls himself

1 (55m 22s):
it becomes so meaningful when you're helping somebody fix something. That's just literally Irreplaceable. You know, it

2 (55m 29s):
kind of gets me through my days like if I'm having a hard day and I get that called some cute old lady, you know, I've had a southern lady do like you walk on water and you know, she's there just so happy to have this little thing working again in their lives. That's clay McCabe of Portland. Oregon is company is called zipper rescue for now. Clay is not too worried about how the current Health crisis could harm his business. In fact in a down economy. He hopes that more people will turn to small companies like zipper rescue to repair and restore stuff. They already have if you want to find out more about clay or here previous episodes had to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org.

2 (56m 10s):
And of course if you want to tell us your story go to That npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. And while you're there. Please do give us a review. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this our show was produced this week by rumty narrow Bluey who also composed the music. Thanks. Also to Julia Carney Candace limb Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Randy toll I'm Gyros and you've been listening. Going to how I built this.

2 (56m 58s):
This is NPR.