2 (0s):
Hey, it's guy here. So before we start the show today, we are all following the news really closely as I'm sure you are and over the next few weeks and maybe beyond our team will be working remotely to make sure everyone is as safe as possible meantime, bear with us as we work through a new reality for the time being including figuring out new ways to do remote interviews. Now. Some of the interviews will hear of the next few weeks. We're done long before anyone even heard of coronavirus including this one today with Katya beecham of Birchbox and as we record new interviews in the days and weeks ahead. I'll be asking Founders about how they're coping with everything that's happening right now with the hope of hearing creative ideas that might help all of us make some sense of it for now if you've decided to stay home or if you have to we will work extra hard to bring you great stories not only on how I built this but on all of NPR's excellent podcasts, including Planet Money hidden brain through line and visit be Leah and if you've got kids Check out our kids science podcast.

2 (1m 2s):
Wow in the world. Okay now onto Today's

1 (1m 5s):
Show. Every day, I was just constantly met with these logistical challenges. Mostly and also I think some resentment of people that we were just Outsiders thinking we were so

2 (1m 20s):
smart who was

1 (1m 21s):
resentful some of the Brand's I think we come in, you know, just so optimistic and so naive basically saying we got this and some people looked at us and we're basically like, you know, nothing this isn't going to work you like silly little girls

2 (1m 43s):
Robin PR it's how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built I'm guy rise and on today's show how to catch a beecham put some beauty samples into a box and made monthly subscriptions a multi-million dollar industry with Birchbox. So remember when it seemed like almost everything came in a subscription box and I'm not just talking about Stitch fix or Dollar Shave Club or Blue Apron. I'm talking about the pickles or peanut butter and jelly or the artisanal.

2 (2m 27s):
We butchered meat that you can still get delivered to your door on a monthly basis. There is no item that is too weird or to Niche you can sign up for a subscription magic kit subscription air fresheners subscriptions succulent plants. In subscription skulls. Yes, look it up. Anyway for a Time investors through millions of dollars at subscription boxes kind of like Heather throwing money at podcast right now, but eventually of course interest died off and so did dozens if not hundreds of subscription companies, but one that still very much with us and perhaps one of the best known is Birchbox, which kaca beecham and her partner Haley Barna started in business school and their idea to put beauties.

2 (3m 12s):
samples the ones most people throw away into a subscription box was the first of its kind and it basically took off right away within four years Birchbox catapulted to a million subscribers and at its height the company was valued at nearly half a billion dollars and you might think that would have been a time for high fives and celebration but actually behind the scenes cut your Beacham was quietly freaking out despite being told how She was she just didn't feel it. In fact, she felt like the company could spin out of control at any minute and as we get into her story will find out what was behind all that but first, let's start in El Paso Texas where cauchy grew up.

2 (3m 56s):
Her. Mom was Mexican-American and her dad was Greek and when kochia was about 4 years old her parents split up and one of the earliest memories was flying back and forth between her dad and Europe and her mom in El Paso.

1 (4m 10s):
I saw my dad in the Summers pretty much every summer since I was four I would fly he lived in Germany. That's where they split up and he stayed there and I would fly there with my older brother, you know, you fly alone and

2 (4m 24s):
they yeah, they put like a ticket

1 (4m 26s):
around your neck. Yeah, they put a ticket on your neck and back in the day. I mean, I still remember that you smoked on the airplanes that were transatlantic still. Yeah, it was crazy. But we flew there every summer and then we spent most of the time in Germany and then usually like a month with our grandparents and uncles In

2 (4m 40s):
Greece too. And did you like those

1 (4m 43s):
Summers? I did almost always more in retrospect definitely was always anxious going because I really missed my mom and I really never wanted her to feel like alone. You know. Hmm. I was so aware of her emotional state even when I was really little but when I was there, yes, I definitely saw how how magical it was to have such a different reality in front of Me and that was just very eye-opening and wonderful thing to get early

2 (5m 15s):
on. So what do you what do you remember about being a kid in El Paso? Wouldn't you know, where you pretty good

1 (5m 22s):
student? Yes. I mean, I cared so much about getting straight A's and being a great student. It was a very important to me that my mom and I agreed and sixth grade that I would just start signing my own report cards because it meant so much more to me than her that I get straight in it. Just she always described like just never having to push me to to study or to Try so I really really wanted to get the best grades. I wanted to have perfect attendance. I wanted to be the president of the club's I want to be the captain. I cared about all of that a lot. What do you think drove

2 (5m 54s):
that?

1 (5m 56s):
I don't know. I've always felt just very ambitious just inside wanting to achieve as always felt really important to me because I mean when you're very young, I think if you're attracted to successor, you think that that matters to you I assume it just means you want control, you know, you want to be the one setting the rules not the one just kind of living someone else's

2 (6m 20s):
reality when you were a kid. Did you think I can't wait to get out of El Paso? Or did you think yeah, this is going to be like or I'm gonna you know, make it

1 (6m 29s):
happen. I never considered staying to the point that I didn't even have that monologue. That was like I can't be together. I was like, obviously I'm not going to live here. Wow,

2 (6m 39s):
and you went to Vassar College, which is in Upstate New York. Mmm. And that was the first time you ever been on the East Coast. Yes, was it like disorienting? There was

1 (6m 48s):
a it's extremely disorienting going from the desert where you can see everything to the woods where you Can't see anything, you know, like all the trees. I remember just feeling like how do people get around because in El Paso, you can almost see where you're going from any point. You can see where the mountains are. You can always see your orientation and the world almost it felt like and I remember just feeling just closed with all the trees and without being able to see the Horizon every day. It definitely felt very

2 (7m 18s):
different. What did you think of your experience here? Did you like

1 (7m 21s):
college? Yes, I loved College. I was intimidated kind of right. Because I had gone to public schools and I felt ill equipped at first, you know the first year I was I felt like I was just riding water. So I spent pretty much every waking hour at the library when I wasn't working or in class, but eventually I started to get more comfortable and confident and feel like I could keep up enough. I've read

2 (7m 48s):
that your first internship was at Estee Lauder that you got and it's internship to work for this massive Cosmetics company in In was it in New

1 (7m 56s):
York? Actually it was at Vassar. So they had this training program for their Executives or their top Executives would go to a college for the summer and they hired college students to work at I think they gave two possessions to Vassar students and frankly. That was the reason I wanted it. I was like I said just so motivated to win things and ambitious about if something was coveted then it must be great and that's what drew me to it. I knew. That it was going to be highly competitive very selective. And so I decided that I wanted to do

2 (8m 32s):
that, but you aren't necessarily interested in

1 (8m 35s):
cosmetics. No, I would not say I was necessarily interested in

2 (8m 39s):
cosmetics. Did you think that you were going to go and like what did you think you were going to do or you thinking I think going into business or Finance or or did you not really

1 (8m 49s):
no. Well, I loved economics. I mean economics has a lot about human behavior and I I found that to be really interesting to think about business but Through The Eyes of actual behavior of people and it felt practical. So I knew that I wasn't leaving college and going to have a helping hand. I didn't have anyone to support me and it seemed smart for me to focus on getting a job where I could support myself

2 (9m 17s):
she graduate and I guess your first job out of school is in finance it in Investment Bank in New York. Yes, and then you do that for a few. Years and decide to go to business school in 2008 to Harvard Business School. Yeah, and what did you think when you got

1 (9m 33s):
there? Well, it was hard. I mean it was hard to stay up on top of everything and catch up with other people who already knew about what careers existed in the world as well as careers. They wanted that I loved it immediately. I can say that.

2 (9m 48s):
Yeah, so I guess in the first year they sort of have everyone take a class on entrepreneurship. It's a Fireman,

1 (9m 56s):
right. It's called the entrepreneurial manager.

2 (9m 58s):
So you take this class. And what did you think?

1 (10m 2s):
I think that I had the opposite reaction of most people because the current chair of the department will tell you that it was the professor I had because I was talking to him about this, but he really gave a very honest account of Entrepreneurship. So we'd read the cases and I guess he would add the color around the struggles that these entrepreneurs were facing whether they were Financial struggles or Struggles in their personal lives as a result of it and he really painted a picture of this is like heartbreak. This is the most challenging the most roller coaster filled career you could ever have and I just found myself leaning in thinking I like found it.

1 (10m 45s):
This is what I've been searching for is nothing would be harder than this

2 (10m 50s):
WOW. Basically you come out of that thinking that's what I want. I want that. Roller coaster ride. I want the thrill I want the Triumph in the the Heartbreak and the joy, I want it

1 (11m 2s):
all I just remember thinking this is the way I'm going to find out what I'm capable of. I

2 (11m 8s):
mean, that's a remarkable and where do you think that came from? Like was there someone or something that you felt like you wanted to prove yourself to was it

1 (11m 17s):
yourself felt like it was myself. I mean, I think it's always felt like it was inside I'd say there's probably like a little bit of me wanting to prove something. my dad that didn't you know wasn't around and wanting to prove that I was worth it and something he missed out on I'm sure it was a little bit of it, but I don't think I consciously was visiting that thought it was much it felt much more me I told myself the story that a lot of my ability to do this is because I wasn't ever encumbered by the expectations, huh, you know, I never had the pressure of Of of you must do this and this is what success looks like and you will only be loved when I kind of was so free.

1 (12m 4s):
You know, people would say all the time like why you know, why aren't you afraid of starting and I don't even relate to the question you couldn't relate like what was scary about starting. I mean the worst thing that happens that is that you fail and I didn't understand why that was scary. I mean I was like what a scary life to not know what you're capable of that is terrifying.

2 (12m 26s):
You know, this is an important point because I do I think that you can train and teach yourself to kind of be comfortable with failure, but there are some people who just that fight-or-flight instinct like some people just don't have it when it comes to failure and you probably just don't have it.

1 (12m 43s):
I mean, I think II did failure to it's just what you interpret failure as you know, I think my conscious told me that I had already won this game. I had gotten into a great business school and now Now getting to try to do something was a win. So I thought like what's next. How do you go from being interested in entrepreneurship to learning some of the hard

2 (13m 5s):
skills, right? So I guess at Harvard Business School. You meet a woman named Haley Barna who will eventually become your co-founder. Did you guys like connect right away.

1 (13m 16s):
Totally. We became really close friends within the first few days. We were in the same section and we started doing things together like we Written a couple papers together for classes that were, you know intended to be projects and then Thanksgiving of 2009. We were recognizing, you know, we're graduating in six months. We should learn how to write a business plan and that's really where everything started is we decided. Let's write a business plan together and what you come up with so from there we started talking about different ideas and we pretty quickly landed on we landed on this question about why He was talking about disrupting the beauty industry.

1 (13m 58s):
I was just on our minds like kind of this glaring industry that was massive and everybody seemed to be tackling a lot of the other Industries and no one was touching Beauty and we got excited and we basically came up with the idea for Birchbox that didn't have a name within two days the full

2 (14m 18s):
model and how did the conversation even start around this idea?

1 (14m 22s):
Well, we were very interested that it Moment where female entrepreneurs were starting to start businesses for consumers that they could relate to so seemed like something was happening people were talking about finally like women starting businesses for women or predominantly focused on a female consumer a female buyer. And then that led us to well what aren't they talking about that we could relate

2 (14m 46s):
to was Beauty something that you were particularly interested in.

1 (14m 50s):
No, definitely not particularly interested in has a consumer. But I had become really interested in it from a business perspective from that little window into it. I had in my internship from Vassar at a state lottery at home. Saw that basically no Beauty was sold on the internet and it was almost 2010. It's like two percent and that was almost like a jaw-dropping moment to us just this idea that an industry. That was so big such a huge and important industry was not yet online. It was like a switch went off and I swear we were so excited and motivated to think about why and how we could change that.

1 (15m 32s):
It's

2 (15m 33s):
so interesting and we've told a lot of these stories in the show, but there was a period I think roughly like 2007 to 2010 Harvard Business School produce some incredibly successful women Founders Jennifer Hyman and Jennifer flies were in the runway Katrina Lake of Stitch. Fix Alexa Von tobel who dropped out who started learn best and I think an Some of those other stories there was a similar approach like where can we be disruptive and it sounds like in your case. It wasn't like you and Hayley were sitting around saying I love makeup makeup is amazing. I mean, maybe you liked it or you were interested in cosmetics, but it was more like this is an

1 (16m 9s):
opportunity. Yeah, I was I was actually almost that we related on the fact that we used it and we didn't feel smart when we used it. What do you mean? Yeah. I felt like in order to buy beauty better in order to invest in something. Would have to do a lot of work we would have to spend so much time to become smart consumers and beauty and that wasn't where our passion was. That wasn't where interest was so we weren't going to allocate the time. So we were just going to be stuck consuming badly that just seemed like a bad outcome.

2 (16m 39s):
Was it just an overwhelming amount of

1 (16m 40s):
choice? Yes, there's so much choice that just never ending aisles in a store and actually impossible to even quantify on the internet and also, you know, we didn't talk about this but Haley one of of the parts of the story that was very real was I would go to her apartment all the time and she had a very limited but really lovely selection of beauty products not very many but everything she had she was using she didn't have this like counter or these shelves of unused product and as we got to know each other she explained to me when I asked her about it that her best friend was a beauty editor at Conde Nast and she would go into the beauty closet.

1 (17m 23s):
To choose things for Hayley and then show her how to use it. So when we came up with this idea or when we identified the problem we designed the experience to feel like we were your beauty editor best friend. That was what we were trying to create

2 (17m 39s):
in this. I think we should remind people this is early days. Like now, of course, you know, you can go to a million websites and answer some questions and then you get a curated box or an article of clothing or something. But then it was still this was still pretty new and you guys were going to be the curators you and Hayley were going to be like the curators for your subscribers.

1 (18m 3s):
Yes, but the idea was that we would curate kind of the infinite World of beauty, but then we would personalize it. So it wasn't about our taste for everybody it was you know, our taste would help set the parameters of how far we'd go into different brands, but then you the individual would get it based on your beauty profile.

2 (18m 23s):
Our needs yeah, so just to get an understanding was the business exactly what it became. Like we will send out subscription boxes to people with samples of different cosmetics and then they can go and buy them from us if they want a larger size.

1 (18m 37s):
Yes. It was exactly that it was how can we help people buy beauty better and online. So we realized that the issue was that there was so much to discover and beauty that it made most people opt out in general. So we realized we Had to make the options that small and kind of doable at a time, but eventually get you in front of a fair amount of product for you to be really informed as a consumer and that led us to thinking okay monthly sending you four or five feels like doable. You will have time to try them all and eventually within a year, you know, you'll have 60 products or so.

2 (19m 16s):
So if you if you go into Bloomingdale's or Macy's or a Sephora and then you buy something Look at the Lancome or clinic or something, you buy it you spend a hundred bucks and they pop a couple of like smaller tubes in your bag and that is the sample but it's like a gift that you get right. So you knew that that existed that was out there and you thought what if instead of it being like this special gift. We gather all these samples. We curate a box we send it to people and then they're exposed to the samples and then that will be the way to get them into the Product to be a consumer of that

1 (19m 55s):
product. Yeah, and you missed it important layer to it, which is we sold it to

2 (19m 58s):
them. He would sell it to them, right? You wouldn't just give it to them.

1 (20m 1s):
It sell it to them versus give it to them for free and we were economics majors and nerds and we realized that if people paid for it the actual chance of them using it would go up because one of the things we revealed when we started talking to brands in the early days was that they estimated most samples were never even being

2 (20m 18s):
opened. So when you started to talk about this idea was Like did it all of a sudden just become an obsession for both of you. Were you guys just like, oh my God. This is

1 (20m 29s):
it. It was a Non-Stop conversation between us we were super excited. I think I was a little bit more ready like immediately, you know naive and ready.

2 (20m 40s):
You were like, let's do this. Let's go. Let's go form an LLC and

1 (20m 44s):
do it as I was so naive and I think it's because Hayley was raised around entrepreneurship. She was more. Okay. Well, let's see how our beta test go. Goes and you know, which helped me kind of slow down a little bit in the early days to see like did we actually have product Market fit but I was still

2 (21m 2s):
sure you are sure that this was going to work. Yeah. And what's the next step? Do you present it to any professors at Harvard Business School

1 (21m 11s):
or I mean we told

2 (21m 12s):
everybody he told everybody he did not keep this a secret.

1 (21m 15s):
Okay, but most people thought it was a bad idea.

2 (21m 18s):
Most people thought it was a bad idea because of

1 (21m 21s):
what because they didn't think Zoomers would pay for samples because it was such a dramatic change in Behavior consumers were used to samples being free this idea that people would pay for them that they would give your credit card for rebilling most. I mean a lot of professors we spoke to were men and they didn't obviously relate to how women were buying beauty products. So we try to explain how much waste there was and purchasing beauty that all of us had what we called like a product graveyard and that most of us felt like That was a really inefficient use of our time and our money and that we felt we would pay if we could bypass the waste and actually start investing in things that were worth

2 (22m 4s):
it. Where were you finding out your information? Where were you doing a research because it sounds like you guys really delve into this right you're finding out the statistics and numbers and data. Where were you going to get that to get that

1 (22m 15s):
info? We got some from the library just from having access to Industry reports and then we did a few. Surveys to it. Just asking people about their

2 (22m 25s):
behavior to who to fellow

1 (22m 26s):
students. Yes, and then eventually we started branching out to not works off of Campus of people who didn't know

2 (22m 34s):
us and what would you ask

1 (22m 36s):
them? Well, we needed to price the product and that was one of the first things that we try to figure out was the willingness to pay since this was something that had never existed. So we describe the product and we basically asked you know, would you pay one two, three four, I think 2:30. Dollars and we really wanted to price it at about 10. So when we saw that the drop-off was there that kind of validated that price

2 (22m 60s):
point so you were able to figure out the $10 was probably the right price point in the meantime. Were you did you start to contact major Cosmetics companies and say hey we're starting a business or did you say we're students at Harvard Business School? Like what was your

1 (23m 17s):
approach? I reached out to Brands and I he said dear so-and-so. In HBS, and I'm starting a company that's going to change the beauty industry forever. Wow.

2 (23m 29s):
That's that. That was the that was the email you

1 (23m 31s):
sent. Ya. He said I changed the beauty industry forever. And do you have 10 minutes to hear the idea and to give me advice and who were you emailing

2 (23m 41s):
or who were you cold pitching?

1 (23m 43s):
I was emailing the CEOs and the presidents of Brands I could think of and recognized

2 (23m 49s):
and you got their email addresses from where

1 (23m 52s):
I'm just guessing. During which I still do a lot. I tried like eight email address and your people do not

2 (23m 58s):
do this enough. I know it's not that hard to figure out someone

1 (24m 1s):
usually really straightforward. If you don't want to be found we should make it harder, right? All right,

2 (24m 5s):
so you've figure out who the CEOs were or the top Executives and you just started sending out emails and did most of the people you emailed get back to you. Yes, they did

1 (24m 16s):
almost everybody got back quickly. It was over the holidays and I remember being shocked because I was getting emails back on like the 26th of December. Amber and then I was asking my sister-in-law well now sister-in-law the time my fianc?'s sister to design logos, and we were you know, pasting samples and one of Haley's sister-in-law was a sample hoarder. So she had all these samples that we could use in our presentations and we tried to make a really short pitch deck and we were in meeting rooms in

2 (24m 46s):
January. This is January of 2010. Yes. Yeah your second year second final year of your MBA. And you have a name already. It's a heart you decide you're going to call it Birchbox by the way, how'd you come up with any

1 (24m 58s):
so we basically had a criteria that it was gender-neutral name that had beautiful imagery and sounded high end. We ended up saying, okay. Well, let's look at trees because trees have no gender. They could have some beautiful imagery associated with them and we found Birch really quickly and we loved it visually it's really striking and beautiful and then when we learned About it might have seen it sheds its skin kind of exfoliates itself. It likes to grow with other birch trees, right? So it goes better together and we really loved it right away. And we landed on Birchbox as the first name and then we said well, we can't choose the first name.

1 (25m 40s):
We have to make a list of names and we made a list of horrible other names and then basically we got a response back from one of the Brand's we were trying to meet with and they said this is interesting. What's the name of your company? And Haley was out of town and unreachable in Nepal and I you know, look to try to see if I could buy Birch box.com obviously course already then somebody who had purchased it. So I'm negotiating the purchase of it. Hoping Haley will still love the name and I was able to buy it and it was very stressful because I had so little money that spending money on it was scary.

2 (26m 18s):
How much did it cost you

1 (26m 20s):
it costs like $700. I can remember feeling Shaky that I was putting $700 there. And when Haley landed I was just like I've offered to box.com. I hope you still love it, you know and she's like, oh, it's the best name for sure.

2 (26m 33s):
So you secure the first meeting already in January. What company was it? Well, the

1 (26m 39s):
first call was with Benefit Cosmetics who's owned by lvmh and I remember that call so vividly is like pacing around and it was so exhilarating and so exciting and at the end of about What ended up being a 30-minute call he was like, okay, I'm in he said I'm in yes, it was for the test for 200 samples. But you know, it wasn't lost on us that they were going to let us put their logo on our really janky website and they were already a pretty big and important brand

2 (27m 10s):
they were going to put their logo on to say this is one of the companies one of the Brand's we carry. So you're basically Gathering samples for your first beta test which is going to be 200 boxes you're sending out. To who by the way who will your 200

1 (27m 25s):
people? So we emailed people that we knew and we basically said we can't have you sign up because you know us and you'll skew the data, but will you forward this along to people and it was just a short description and a link to a PayPal that would allow you to pay for two months $20 and it just described what people would get.

2 (27m 44s):
All right, so you get 200 people to sign up benefits in anyone else.

1 (27m 49s):
Yes, so because of benefit It was a lot easier to close other brands we were able to work with Kiehl's who you might have heard of and sure Nars but it's kind of like raising money. You need the first person to say yes to get someone to come with you. So for the most part most brands thought this wouldn't work.

2 (28m 10s):
You had educate them. You have to go to them and say listen, this is oh actually the way you're doing samples is is all wrong. It's all backwards. You're just giving this out after people buy your products. We are going to Use this as an entry point a way to introduce people to your

1 (28m 26s):
products, right? I mean that is exactly what we said. They were all basically in a similar place as a lot of consumers had said which is no one's going to pay for samples. But you seem like we could trust you with our brand and if we are wrong we'd like to be there for that.

2 (28m 43s):
Did they give you the samples for free? Did they charge? You know,

1 (28m 46s):
they gave us the samples and then we would purchase the full size because it was from the very beginning. It was the full model which It was sampling as the appetizer and then you can purchase anything you sample directly from

2 (28m 57s):
us. Yeah, so this is 2010 and you have to assemble 200 boxes and this is that what you and Hayley do do you start to like assemble the Boxes by

1 (29m 6s):
hand? Yeah, we found boxes online that would fit in the flat rate mailers the ones that look like old-school VHS size

2 (29m 13s):
almost and how many things were in that in those first two boxes like five or thing for samples? Because we would

1 (29m 19s):
have one makeup one hair one skin and then Maybe a body product or a

2 (29m 24s):
nail product fairly inexpensive to do this because you know, you're buying some cardboard boxes you get the samples for free and then you're paying US postage. So it doesn't sound like this was a you guys at the pool a whole lot of money into

1 (29m 35s):
this. No, so we we did invest money both of us about $5,000

2 (29m 41s):
each and that was probably money that you had saved up from your Finance job.

1 (29m 45s):
It was my entire life savings. Wow,

2 (29m 49s):
and this is all happening like in early spring. And ten, well, you send out the first boxes. Okay, so you're still students. You guys are still like doing your exams and writing your papers, but also running this business.

1 (30m 1s):
We're bad students at this.

2 (30m 3s):
I see okay barely making into class in

1 (30m 6s):
class and running out to take calls.

2 (30m 8s):
And yes, and you do this beta and what what do you find

1 (30m 14s):
out? We gleaned that it was a smashing success. We had 200 people participate in the beta and at that point we amassed over.

2 (30m 23s):
Thousand people on a waitlist and they found out about it just through word of mouth

1 (30m 26s):
Yes, Jesse word of mouth. And then the sample 2 full-size conversion was really high. It was like 25 percent people were purchasing full-sized

2 (30m 34s):
25% of people were going to a website that the two of you had set up.

1 (30m 38s):
Yes, and it was so it just did not look secure.

2 (30m 42s):
It was it let's just like a square space or just a something like

1 (30m 45s):
that that you know, that didn't exist. I mean your best bet was WordPress and that's what we had and we had a lot of really great clipart type of Stock images and PayPal. That's all he took.

2 (30m 56s):
All right. So the first two months the beta test goes great and you're about to graduate and where I mean, what do you need to do now? Because I'm assuming you guys are going to graduate and launch this thing for real, but you probably need money to do that. Right? Yes. And did you have any money at that

1 (31m 13s):
point? No, I had a lot of debt. So

2 (31m 16s):
negative Michael you just you just spent sixty seventy thousand dollars a year on a bun on an

1 (31m 22s):
MBA. Oh, but it can Really better. I also was getting married that summer. Oh, right. Okay,

2 (31m 27s):
so you are about to get married. You're graduating. You've got a massive amount of debt. Yeah from doing an MBA and you want to start a business and you've got no money to start the business. Yep. Who did you even approach

1 (31m 41s):
Haley and I had decided that we didn't want Venture Capital Money in the first round. We really wanted Angel money. So we basically said no to venture capital when we were on

2 (31m 51s):
campus. And so Are you going to people who were particularly interested in cosmetics and subscription models

1 (31m 58s):
that seems logical but we weren't getting connected to people and people were just saying. Oh, I know somebody who likes to Angel invest and they would introduce us and we took every single meeting how many meetings it had to be over

2 (32m 14s):
60 and and like describe. What would it meeting would be like you'd show up and you would sort of describe this thing in the person say, oh, that's so cool, you know. Generally, I generally invest in you know, semiconductors. Yeah.

1 (32m 27s):
Yeah. Basically it was like you're you know, you found these conversations were it was a lot of people saying well, this would be the first time I did a consumer non-software or not, you know technology play but I'm interested basically most people had a fair amount of critical feedback that they would leave the door open and right after about a dozen times. We were pattern recognizing this and saying, okay well, No one seems to close the door but no one seems to be willing to lead

2 (32m 57s):
around you are not walking out with

1 (32m 58s):
checks. No not even close to that. I mean we were inexperienced having a direct conversation and just saying like are you in are you out how much you know, we were just dancing around this like potential interest and

2 (33m 12s):
so you are probably going to these meetings thinking we're graduates of HBS, like you've done a beta test. It's been wildly successful. We've a 25 percent conversion rate would like you were probably at the beginning That way and then I guess after a cup-- 1215 meetings what were you

1 (33m 27s):
just crashed so crashed? I mean it was so upsetting. But I also just remember thinking we must not be saying it right like I just remember thinking there's no way that were wrong. So we're just not saying it right.

2 (33m 44s):
When we come back in just a moment how Birchbox took off much more quickly than anyone expected and why to kaca that felt less like a blessing and more like a curse stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible first to Microsoft teams. We all know meetings struggling to pay attention files seem impossible to find and if you're not in the room, you're not in the know welcome to the new way to work together Microsoft teams where you can contribute to meetings from anywhere chat with coworkers, you're never out of the loop and find all your files and even edit them in real time in one.

2 (34m 37s):
In place when you are ready to unleash the power of your team open teams, learn more at microsoft.com teams.

1 (34m 46s):
Support also comes from Uber Uber is committed to safety and to continuously raising the bar to help make safer Journeys for everyone for starters. All drivers are background checked before their first ride and screened on an ongoing basis and now Uber has introduced a brand new safety feature called ride Shack which can detect if a trip goes unusually off course and check in to provide support to learn more about boobers commitment to safety visit uber.com safety. Change is hard transitions can be even harder, but they're also an opportunity to explore and discover and reimagine things you thought you knew I'm a new summer OD the new host of NPR's TED Radio Hour.

1 (35m 31s):
And with all this in mind. We've decided to make my entire first episode about re-invention subscribe or listen right now.

2 (35m 42s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2010 and kochia and Haley are having trouble getting Angel Investors to buy into their vision for Birchbox. They're walking away empty-handed from dozens of meetings. But when they decide to change their strategy and start pitching to venture capitalists their luck changes practically overnight

1 (36m 5s):
when we move to venture capitalists from Angel Investors. It was a lot less friction. As obviously people were looking to deploy capital and what we did was we started meeting with people and talking to them about our plans and when we would launch and what the next steps were and we were you know on track exceeding our targets for when we were going to launch. So we were showing that we were executing and by

2 (36m 29s):
the way, how much money were you looking

1 (36m 30s):
for? When we were looking at angels we were looking at about half a million and then once we decided to go to venture capitalists, we were looking at about a million and we I ended up raising a million for and then we basically started taking payments. I think about three weeks before the first box shipped. We just opened up a splash page and with that we had enough traction where I think it tipped the conversations over and then we had a competitive process with a few options.

2 (36m 58s):
So you open up a splash page and you went to your existing customer

1 (37m 2s):
list. Yes to that list that had participated but also the people who were on a waitlist we went back to them and basically Clay said we're here. We're

2 (37m 12s):
launching and at this point everybody got the same thing and those first few boxes.

1 (37m 17s):
Uh-huh. Everyone got the same thing

2 (37m 19s):
and same process you get pretty much the same companies are participating Keels and benefit and Nars and maybe a couple

1 (37m 26s):
others. Actually. It was I wish it was so much harder than that. Basically after the beta test. Everybody said this is interesting, you know, yes, like, theoretically we would participate in this This and when we were getting ready to launch, we got a lot of feedback from the big brands. That was basically, you know, you're really small and this is interesting but come back to us when you're bigger when you have 10,000 subscribers because we really can't allocate our energy to this yet the scale and we ended up focusing on more Niche Brands. I guess like slightly more independent some of them well-known ish, but still independent and some of them really knew the We got so big so fast that when we went back a few months later and we said okay now we have thousands of subscribers.

1 (38m 16s):
We're ready to go. Now. They I was met with basically you're too big now and we can't just pull 200 samples out of a drawer. This takes plans we have to do this year in advance or years in advance. So it was a lot of learning on the supply side and I spent so much time both trying to learn the supply side, but

2 (38m 35s):
also trying to change it but it sounds like all of a sudden There's more and more people signing up. What was going on. Were you getting press coverage?

1 (38m 45s):
We were getting press coverage definitely and then people started seeing boxes come to places of work and two apartment buildings. And that coupled with press was really the Catalyst of growth until we also kind of just were lucky enough to be launching around the time we're vlogging started on YouTube and that had a huge Huge impact on our business.

2 (39m 12s):
This is like before people said influencers now, but no they would just it would just

1 (39m 16s):
randomly signed up. Yeah. So wow, what we started to understand was that these bloggers were looking for content and this was once a month something that was content. So they were signing up themselves paying for it. We really had no involvement

2 (39m 34s):
and the subscriptions just continue to grow just organically or we because

1 (39m 38s):
I guess you didn't have a marketing budget. We didn't have even time to think about it was growing so fast, we could barely handle

2 (39m 45s):
it and meantime that 1.4 million dollars was not it was gonna last that long right my

1 (39m 51s):
gosh. It was lasting us forever. So that was that was kind of the problem was our investors kept saying like you're not spending any money. You guys need to hire people and we were making money you were selling free samples. We were making money we were funding ourselves and as we started working more and more hours. Came clear. We had to hire some people to work at

2 (40m 13s):
Birchbox. But meantime you were spend. It sounds like you were spending most of your time quite literally begging and pleading with Cosmetics companies to get you

1 (40m 22s):
samples. I was never in the office. I was just constantly meeting after meeting. We had to put up a waitlist after the first year and it was every day. I just remember feeling so stressed out about Supply. I mean, I cried so much about Supply. I Just about breaking into department stores and stealing all the samples that were such a waste. You know, I felt like I was banging my head against walls trying to show people that people were trying to show brands that customers were willing to pay for samples. Like how could anyone not want to participate? I couldn't believe it but I was just constantly met with these logistical challenges. Mostly and also I think some you know resentment.

1 (41m 5s):
I have people that we were just Outsiders thinking we were so smart, you know.

2 (41m 10s):
Who was resentful some of the Brand's I think we

1 (41m 12s):
come in, you know, probably just so optimistic and so naive basically saying we got this and people some people looked at us and we're basically like, you know, nothing you've never worked in this industry. I've been in this industry for decades and this isn't going to work you like silly little girls. So there was some of that and I think learning how to overcome that learning how to build relationships and learning how to how to just show the humility and also come in to learn and come in to help our partners feel smart and successful was a big part of how we were able to get the relationships we needed.

1 (41m 55s):
And without those there is no way we would have had both been able to scale we would have been able to get through any of this

2 (42m 4s):
and I have to assume you had to hire quickly you guys had to really just ramped up. As you're getting 100,000 and 200,000 and 300,000 subscribers. I mean by this point 2011 this a personalized service you would send out a questionnaire and and then people would get products based on their answers. I think your first full year in business. You you did like five and a half million dollars in Revenue, which is super impressive for first-year company did that the success of all that attention and getting in all these subscribers make it easier to raise money because you did raise I like 10 a half million dollars. You just series a in 2011 - was it just much much easier?

1 (42m 45s):
You can always raise money when you don't need it and how to learn that the hard way whenever you really don't need money there. It is announced the situation we were in

2 (42m 56s):
and why didn't you need money then

1 (42m 58s):
because we were able to sell fund, you know, we were we were growing organically and we were Scrappy we were just we didn't eat it and obviously that made us a really Active candidate to take them.

2 (43m 11s):
So why did you take the money

1 (43m 13s):
because we were really ambitious from the very beginning. We felt like we could potentially expand Beyond Beauty. We felt like we had to go beyond the United States. We already were thinking about vertically integrating and creating some of our own product. We wanted to scale really big we were so sure that it was a really big opportunity. We weren't doing something Niche and we felt we could really Empower a lot of consumers to feel smart to spend their money when they knew they wanted to and to see an

2 (43m 46s):
Roi do you remember feeling just overwhelmed by how quickly it was growing? Definitely.

1 (43m 54s):
It was awful.

2 (43m 58s):
What yeah. What do you think is some people hear that and think oh my God was amazing was growing was incredible, but

1 (44m 5s):
awful if it started to be scary this thing that had Never Scared me started to feel scary, you know, there is just every month this chance that we wouldn't close enough product and we were going to let down customers or let down the employees now that we are now counting on us for paychecks or let down Partners it started to just feel really overwhelming, you know, this like the world was saying that we were so good and I felt these questions about whether There was really substance to the work. I was doing you know, I felt like I was a first-time manager, you know, I did not know how to manage and develop people and getting all of that positive attention and not feeling like I deserved it frankly now, I mean, I obviously I'm reflecting on it.

1 (45m 1s):
I think that just created a lot of cognitive dissonance for me.

2 (45m 5s):
So here's what I'm trying to understand at this point, right 2012-13 third full year of business. I think you did like 40 million in Revenue. You've got Venture Capital firms. Just knocking down your door to invest and you're growing like crazy, but you're still having this challenge with the beauty companies right that not all of them were on board or did it become to the start to become

1 (45m 33s):
easier. I'd say a few Things happened. I mean company started to really believe and what we were doing the beauty companies did but competitors that had launched in the market really change the dynamic because they started offering money for samples and Brands could not just get the samples paid for but they could make money on the sample something that we had never done. Oh,

2 (45m 57s):
you're saying that competitors started to pay the Cosmetics companies for the samples exactly. So it was a new Revenue stream for the Cosmetics company.

1 (46m 6s):
Yes, and we had never done that and I mean obviously they'd asked and we would just say no, but all of a sudden there was a market for samples. So now we had trust from Brands trust from the industry, but they had this alternative where they could start to monetize samples

2 (46m 22s):
as the competitors started to purchase samples. Did it Force you guys to do to do the same?

1 (46m 28s):
Yes. It did not in the exact same way because our business model is different, but it forced us to start spending. Some money on sampling. I mean I can't imagine how you were sleeping at night this like you

2 (46m 41s):
guys were the first ones but then you get all these competitors and your business is growing and you now have raised all this money and like we're you just up in the middle of the night a lot.

1 (46m 53s):
I mean I was up late working and then I was tired, but also, like I said this cognitive dissonance of just really wanting to be great and kind of being celebrated as being Great, but not yet feeling like I was great still feeling like I had a lot to learn to even be in that category that I had to deliver on being great as a first-time manager and entrepreneur and operator.

2 (47m 20s):
Did you feel Under Pressure either real or imagined because you had raised money from Venture Capital firms, and this has happened. We've had conversations like this in the show in the past with other Founders who have who have said a version of this, but I'm wondering Did you feel pressure to grow fast and grow at all costs?

1 (47m 40s):
Absolutely, but it I think we were Beyond complicit in that we drank the Kool-Aid of excitement in it. We're like absolutely of course, we will do this. Of course that is like the cup we drank from and we're excited. We're on that track and I really wanted to please our venture capitalist. It's like an interesting thing again to reflect on the Allure of like pleasing them and being a favorite and being liked was so there. It's interesting because you

2 (48m 9s):
were such a confident student, you know, like even in your original pitch letter like we are going to change this industry, which you had done at this and yet you still have that part of you because there and that's another thing right? There are people who really it is important for them to be liked and there are other people who just don't care what other people think about it.

1 (48m 29s):
I mean I really care about the relationships I have with people. Yeah, and as strange as it sounds like your First Investors, you spend a lot of time together and it felt like real relationships, you know, and in real relationships where you know have like warm feelings towards people you care about how they perceive you you want to deliver for them. It didn't feel just like a transactional business. It felt like people that had invested in me and who I owe

2 (49m 0s):
Load everything to you. There's a famous book by Peter teal 0 to 1 and you guys went from zero to a 485 million dollar valuation. Just so quickly like within three years of your launch when you think about that that three-year period in the just such a quick growth and the pressure if you were to do it again, would you set would you sort of say we're actually going to space this out. Let's get to 500 million dollars. As in like 10 years or 20 years from now or do you think you would have still pursue that three-year

1 (49m 37s):
trajectory? That's a really interesting question. I mean, I think at this point, I understand how theoretical valuations are. I think if it's possible to get a great one. You should get it. You know, of course. Yeah. I think the bigger learning I had since is that when you are coming out of business school, you think that basically the idea is that You should be spending all your time on and I'd say that what I really have come to appreciate and understand is that the strategy of the business is as valuable as the financing strategy of the business like being strategic and thoughtful about how you finance growth is just as important.

1 (50m 20s):
So I think you know considering who you raise capital from how you finance it what valuation means short-term and long-term and being just really thoughtful about that as thoughtfully as you'd be about the evolution of the product. It's it's so critical. Yeah,

2 (50m 39s):
so you're growing and you are you open a store in New York and eventually hit a million subscribers and 2015. Hey Lee decides to step down. She went into the Venture Capital. She's now a event and investor. Why did she

1 (51m 1s):
go? I think we you know, we had talked about it for a while before the decision was Final and just ultimately she decided that was what was best for her. That was what was best for the company and it was after a series of long conversations about building this business to be a forever

2 (51m 21s):
company the did you sense it was coming were you surprised

1 (51m 25s):
I sensed it was coming. It was just such a hard experience going through that kind of growth. With it took a toll. I think we were just both under an insane amount of stress and pressure to deliver, you know, every aspect of it felt it felt so personal we were so in the Press we were so exposed and it was I think just exhausting to be constantly, you know, scrutinized copied feeling like we're on the defense for some of it while also having these crazy ambitious. Plans internally to keep growing and evolving and innovating and I think ultimately you know, what we both cared most about was the inevitability of the company and our ability to obviously be happy as individuals.

1 (52m 20s):
And you know, that's where the decision came

2 (52m 22s):
from or are you taking care of yourself from able to exercise were you able to I was

1 (52m 29s):
really really not doing anything for myself. I just had My twins at that point I was literally being like sucked dry. But I was just spending so much time getting used to becoming a mother and then transitioning to being a single like founder was a lot. Yeah.

2 (52m 51s):
So here's what I'm learning about. I think somebody listening to this who may not understand the ins and outs of how this business or any business runs would be wondering which is you had a million subscribers, which is a huge. SAS, right and a lot of attention and you really pioneered the subscription Box model you would already at this point disrupted the beauty industry, but the business was having challenges you had to lay people off and in 2016 and figure out how to get to profitability. Why is that is that because it the box is alone. We're not going to be enough to drive Revenue that you needed people to actually buy the full size.

2 (53m 33s):
Sized product through you guys.

1 (53m 35s):
No, it wasn't that. I mean the unit economics were strong but the market changed I think that it was a perfect storm of there being some formidable competition and having not having access to Capital. That was Limitless. All of a sudden it was just this question around direct to Consumer businesses and how they would survive amongst, you know competitors like Amazon and there was no longer Capital flowing into e-commerce. So we had to take things into our own hands before it was late and that caused us to look at people and that was a really hard reality to face and a really dark time for sure.

1 (54m 20s):
Yeah. It just felt like this failure. I just hated myself for letting those people down.

2 (54m 27s):
It's so interesting because there's so many personality types and there's some people who just you know, they're very rational about things in ways that other people are you know, may see things differently and they you know, when it comes to firing people or letting people go layoffs, it's fine. It's just part of the process and the other people and identify with you on this it would be excruciating for me to have to do I would I would feel sick to my stomach even though like that's part of

1 (54m 56s):
business and also that there is a part of me that it was even ashamed of feeling that way those feeling like I didn't have the chops then you know to survive if I couldn't handle making these hard

2 (55m 6s):
decisions and do you feel like because you kind of went through those things and you may go through them again that you are better equipped now to handle those challenges. Oh my

1 (55m 17s):
gosh. I'm so much happier because I feel I feel like I'm good at this now. Not that I'm the best not that I don't have so much more to learn but I feel like I understand what it means to build and how hard it is to just stay in the game and to keep getting

2 (55m 39s):
up so you get through that rough year of 2016 where you know, there were layoffs, but you actually had a pretty good holiday season, and I guess you became profitable in 2017, but that year There were lots of reports and you know, I'm going to ask you about that. You were looking to find a buyer somebody to buy or acquire Birchbox and you did not sell the company in 2017 or get acquired but you did sell a part of it to one of your investors in 2018 to Viking Global. Hmm. I think they put in like 15 million dollars and now they have a majority ownership of the company, but I think there's a bigger pivot or strategy.

2 (56m 23s):
I think which is that, you know in the first three or four years you and Hayley do this in sane Sprint, right? It was just crazy Unstoppable. Yeah, and now it seems like you're running like a marathon because you want to make this a company for the Long Haul right? And you have to sort of slow down is I mean, is that

1 (56m 40s):
fair? Yeah. I mean I'd say we felt in the early days that we were sprinting a marathon because we we just had so much ambition and not enough experience to know how valuable would be. To have fewer priorities and be more potent on achieving them but learning how to be able to dream big but still think about it as this linear thing where you cross milestones and that kind of opens up the next step in the next thing versus trying to do everything at the same time or a lot of it at the same time is I think a really important lesson. It's really helped me just manage and think through how to create something that is operable.

2 (57m 22s):
And sustainable

1 (57m 24s):
and sustainable. Yes. We very explicitly I've told our customers now on numerous occasions this year that we are not a Beauty Box we are not trying to settle cell samples to people were really trying to change your relationship with beauty and help you take the time you have and maximize that time and I've been so I don't know how to say it the right way, but proud of just people embracing that because there was a long time when I was afraid that people just wanted samples. In a

2 (57m 52s):
box you guys start a partial with Walgreens where you are in Walgreens stores, and this is cool. I mean, this is like we've seen this with other brands like Burt's Bees is and you know CVS and and different brands have their like display areas. What was so far? What do you think? I mean our people I mean obviously great for brand awareness, right? Yeah, and and what are you learning from that so

1 (58m 19s):
far? I mean so far what we really wanted to Was whether customers would be excited to see us there and so far we're we're very excited by the early results and early signs that there's potential to really scale in person selling subscriptions because in person someone can actually tell you what this is versus the two seconds. We have to capture your attention on the internet.

2 (58m 45s):
I read that when you signed the agreement with Walgreens to feature your products there you were on bed rest. For a hundred days because of a complicated pregnancy and you were running the company from your hospital bed.

1 (59m 1s):
Yeah that whole experience really shaped my entire outlook on all of this I'd say in addition to the hard things that happened then being in the hospital away from my other three kids and my husband for a hundred days and then having very dramatic delivery and I actually signed the paperwork right before I went under. To deliver by my daughter has your daughter your daughter doing she's wonderful.

2 (59m 30s):
I'm thinking about all of these women Founders who were at HBS around the same time 2007-2010 who have had such a huge impact on the conversation around entrepreneurship. You're obviously a prominent among them Jen Hyman and Alexa Von tobel and Katrina like and I wonder like I have to assume that you take a lot of pride in in

1 (59m 53s):
that. Yeah. I mean it is a very privileged position. I think maybe before feeling proud about it. I felt pretty shocked about it onto friends. I'd say I mean when I realized what rare creatures we were as female Founders it I wasn't as aware of that when we started. I was upset mostly, you know, mostly recognizing how challenging it was to really get Capital particularly later stage Capital as a female founder to be seen as both Canary and the strong operator so that was really disheartening to me I'd say but yes, I do feel privilege and responsibility for trying to change that trajectory

2 (1h 0m 40s):
when you think about your journey, how much of this do you attribute to? Just grinding away your hard work and how much do you think this has to do with luck

1 (1h 0m 50s):
50/50? I think it's not just grinding but I think resilience is underestimated. I'd like to endure kind of being kicked down a lot. So when you have headwind or when you have the challenges, you know, what what do you choose to do in those moments? And I think it would be tough to imagine not building. It would be tough to imagine not trying to invent reality to be honest. It really excites me to imagine the world. I want to exist until

2 (1h 1m 28s):
Try to create it even though like some of the words you use are like awful stressful anxiety ribbon. I

1 (1h 1m 36s):
mean at the time it's I like nothing really rocks me now the moments when it seemed the best are the moments that I equate with it being the worst and yeah feeling now that very little frankly can stress me out very little feels dramatic or awful. I have all of my faculties to attack the challenges there still are always going to be many but I don't feel disoriented. I don't feel drama. I don't feel desperate. I don't feel any of that anymore. I feel curious. I feel gratitude. I feel like I'm growing so much and I love it.

2 (1h 2m 17s):
Let's catch a beecham. She's the co-founder of Birchbox and since 2010 at least seven former Birchbox employees have gone on to start their own companies including a Gulp line called lived tinted the furniture brand Maiden home and a facial spa called Globe are in all seven of those Founders have been nicknamed the Birchbox Mafia. And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from our sponsor wix.com with Wix, you can create your very own professional website choose a template you love and customize it with your own text images and videos go to wix.com.

2 (1h 3m 9s):
That's wi x.com pod 10 to get 10% off.

1 (1h 3m 19s):
This week on NPR's invisibie Lea we take you

2 (1h 3m 22s):
to a summer program for teenagers with sleepovers

1 (1h 3m 25s):
marshmallows and racial

2 (1h 3m 26s):
confrontation. I want you to all line up by skin tone lightest to

1 (1h 3m 34s):
darkest. That's up. Next on NPR's invisibie Leah.

2 (1h 3m 39s):
Hey, thanks so much for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and today's story comes from Athena Staton who grew up in South Florida where her dad was a car dealer.

1 (1h 3m 50s):
So my first job was greeting customers is they came into the dealership and introducing them to a since

2 (1h 3m 58s):
person and Athena actually love the job partly because she loved working with her

1 (1h 4m 3s):
dad. He taught me how to negotiate. He taught me how to talk to people. He taught me not to be afraid of the whole car buying

2 (1h 4m 13s):
universe and as she got older at the end, I was always surprised to hear friends tell her they're horror stories about buying cars. And as it turned out the loudest complaints came from women,

1 (1h 4m 25s):
they are not listened to their not looked at and what they tell me the Common Thread is we expect to be taken advantage of and we expect to

2 (1h 4m 35s):
overpay. Sometimes Athena would actually go with her female. Ends to help them buy cars. It was fun for her and then one night about four years ago. She was out having a martini with her sister

1 (1h 4m 47s):
and we were discussing how difficult car-buying can be for people so that very moment was when I decided to make this into something bigger than just a hobby

2 (1h 4m 60s):
something that could help demystify the car buying experience. So Athena decided to become wait for it a used car dealer, but not a Additional used car dealer or like a scout where she works with customers all over the country to help them find the right car.

1 (1h 5m 16s):
We get on the call and I login share my screen with you so you can take a look at what I

2 (1h 5m 22s):
see and what a thing that sees and shares is a used car auction happening in real time. These car auctions take place all over the country, but usually only dealers get to go to

1 (1h 5m 34s):
them and then a dealer is going to sell it for as much as possible. I've seen it. Eight hundred dollar cars retail for $3,700.

2 (1h 5m 43s):
And of course, this is normal there usually is a big markup and used car sales. But Athena decided she didn't want to do that instead. She goes to these used car auctions with you virtually. She helps you bid on the car you want and then she charges you a flat feet. $1,500

1 (1h 5m 60s):
Max really? I've sold everything from Porsche Cayenne for under seventy thousand dollars to Ford Focus. For

2 (1h 6m 10s):
$4,900, Athena calls her business she car and she also runs a charity called she care which gives cars away to women in need. But since she's launched Athena's clientele has been pretty mixed

1 (1h 6m 23s):
almost forty percent are men and not one man has ever questioned the masculinity of buying a car from she

2 (1h 6m 31s):
car at the end. It says in the year and a half. She's been in business. She's moved about a hundred cars which adds up to over a A million dollars in sales.

1 (1h 6m 41s):
There is some people that had such a great purchase experience that I still giggle because I know what a great deal. They got like you should giggle every time you get in your car.

2 (1h 6m 53s):
If you want to find out more about she car or here previous episodes had to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org. And of course if you want to tell us your story go to build dot npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe Drive, wherever you get your podcast. And while you're there, please do give us a review. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or at guy Roz our show is produced this week by Candice limb with music composed by rum teen Arab Louis. Thanks also to JC Howard Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers are in turn is rainy told I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this.

2 (1h 7m 48s):
This is NPR.