0 (0s):
How I built this is pleased to have Slack as our presenting sponsor. Slack, where the future works. Let's Slack be your digital hq. It's one digital space that brings together all of your people and all of the tools you need. Having Slack makes collaboration easier and more flexible so you can be a lot more productive. Don't wait to see what you can accomplish with your own digital hq. Head over to slack.com/dhq to get started. Slack where the future works. When building a business, there are tons of moving parts. One that's often overlooked is having a network that connects your business.

0 (41s):
Thankfully. With at and t business, you can pick the best wireless plan for your small business and offer your employees the features they need. Plus, at and t business wireless plans include nationwide 5G that's fast, reliable, and secure. Wherever business takes you at and t Business has the features you need. Visit att.com/get Biz unlimited. 5G requires a compatible plan and device. 5G may not be available in your area. Visit att.com/5g for you for more details. The great resignation, supply chain hiccups, digital finance. There's no shortage of volatility in business today, but volatility isn't the problem.

0 (1m 25s):
Doing nothing is within All of these challenges. Lie hidden opportunities and better ways of doing things with specialized experience and audit, tax advisory and consulting. Crow can help you embrace volatility in today's economy. Visit embrace volatility.com to see how Crow can work with you. Once again, that's embrace volatility.com.

2 (1m 52s):
Barry and I were in trouble. We had to figure out what our move was because there's no question we were gonna run outta money

3 (1m 60s):
When you're down to your last $150,000 in the bank. It's hard, but you have to make some tough calls

2 (2m 7s):
And we had to pivot. But we joke that back then the, the word pivot didn't exist right? As a strategy for entrepreneurial companies. It was literally, you're about to go bankrupt. What do you do?

0 (2m 26s):
Welcome to How I Built This, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz and on the show today how Marla and Barry Beck launched an online cosmetics company when it was way too early, pivoted to brick and mortar, and grew blue Mercury into one of the most successful beauty brands in the country. Back in 2008. I took my first and only business school class and what I loved about that class were the stories, the stories of business. And I realized that in business school a lot of the teaching happens through stories.

0 (3m 10s):
So a few years later when we started this show, I kept that idea in mind. We wanted this show to be like free business school. A place where you could learn from the mistakes and even the good decisions made by founders of some of the biggest brands in the world. And maybe apply some of those lessons to your own business or career or life. Well, today's episode has a ton of those lessons. For example, always have a backup plan or at least a way to keep the lights on if the business isn't working or another lesson in retail. Where you start is almost as important as what you sell.

0 (3m 50s):
And the founders of the company we're gonna talk about today, Blue Mercury, Well, they manage to learn and apply both of those lessons. The company is best known as a brick and mortar cosmetic store, but it's also a pretty significant e-commerce site for beauty products. Today there are nearly 200 blue Mercury locations across the us. Many of them are inside Macy's, which now owns the brand. The co-founders, Marla and Barry Beck started out as purely platonic business partners and ended up a married couple with three kids. Their first store wasn't launched in LA or New York, or even a glamorous city like Miami, but rather in Washington DC And that was back in the late 1990s when DC was pretty much a backwater when it came to fashion or trends.

0 (4m 42s):
But it also turns out that Washington DC was and is a place with a significant percentage of professional women, women who buy beauty products. And at Blue Mercury at the time, Washington DC shoppers could find products that were previously only available in New York or la. Now, beauty is a fiercely competitive sector. We've done tons of episodes about beauty companies. Sephora and Alta, for example, are much bigger companies than Blue Mercury. But by laser focusing on customer service, Barry and Marla not only managed to compete but to thrive and of course not without a few close calls.

0 (5m 26s):
When Marla and Barry first met Marla was a few years at a business school working at a private equity firm in dc. Her job was to vet companies for potential acquisition. On the day they met, Barry was meeting with a group of people from Marla's firm to see if they might wanna acquire his first business. It was a company that specialized in building maintenance.

3 (5m 50s):
You know, I went to this meeting, I had no idea what to expect. I think I was possibly even late. And I walked into a room and there were about 10 people there. And interestingly, I proceeded to talk to this president of the company. The entire meeting really ignored everybody else. I, you know, periodically they would throw questions at me and I didn't even pay attention to anyone else in the room. Hmm. Believe it or not, I thought Marla was the assistant. Wow. She was quiet. She didn't say a thing the entire time.

0 (6m 22s):
Hmm. But, but of course Marla was not the assistant. She actually turned out to be the most important person in that room. Right?

3 (6m 28s):
Yeah. And so at the end of the meeting, we went around the room. So typically what would happen in investment banking meeting like this, or a meeting like this, everybody would introduce themselves up front. What do you do? Where you from? What's your background? What's your role at the company? So I think when we went around the room and they got to Marla and she said, Well, hey, you know, Marla, you know, I'm vice president of strategy and I really am in charge of designing which businesses we buy and which ones we don't. But she was just there taking notes.

0 (7m 0s):
We call that unconscious bias.

3 (7m 3s):
Yes.

0 (7m 4s):
I mean, props to you for admitting that because that's the right, because you were working in an environment probably where that's what you saw a lot. So, alright, so you, so, so did you have any other interaction with Marla at that time? Just, just to, or was it just kind of introduce each other and that was it?

3 (7m 21s):
I, I think it was just a quick introduction, but I think at that time we were really polar opposites. Hmm. So you have to think, I, I'm a hard scrabble entrepreneur building businesses by myself. So I saw a person who came from a, what what I looked at was some sort of finishing school that people who weren't entrepreneurs went to, to learn how to run businesses, was just a completely different. And she was from California and I was from one of the most east coast of east coast cities.

0 (7m 54s):
All right. I'm gonna ask you to pause Barry for a moment. Cause I'm gonna turn to you Marla, and I want to bring you into the room. Well, you are in the room, you're in the room, you're in that boardroom. Yeah. This guy comes in, He's maybe, maybe a potential company that, that you guys are gonna buy. And what do you remember about his presentation?

2 (8m 11s):
Sure. So first of all, he was different from everyone in the industry, right? This was a very traditional industry.

0 (8m 21s):
How was he different

2 (8m 22s):
Young?

0 (8m 24s):
Oh, I see. Young, right.

2 (8m 25s):
Most of the companies we bought were from people that were at a point where they were looking at taking care of their families and succession. So first of all, he's young. Barry is incredibly dynamic and energetic and sort of jumping out of his chair all the time. It's, you know, hard in this environment because he has to sit still and talk to the microphone. But he's super high energy and, you know, talked nonstop the whole meeting. Right. Part of the reason there was no conversation was because he was so excited about his company and presenting.

2 (9m 9s):
So I'd never actually seen an entrepreneur or anyone like him.

0 (9m 12s):
Okay. I have to assume at, at the end of this meeting, you were not thinking, This guy's gonna call me up and ask me out. You were just thinking, okay. That was, that was an interesting person that, that we met or, or, or were you

2 (9m 24s):
I don't, no, I was interested in the business. I was, yeah, this was work for me. Yeah.

0 (9m 27s):
Got it. Okay.

3 (9m 28s):
You know, I remember going back to Philadelphia after the meeting and I actually mentioned to one of my, to one of our company lawyers, I think I met the girl I'm gonna marry. I think his quote was, What kind of schmuck goes to an investment banking meeting and meets a girl? And I said, I guess me, I actually waited three days and I called Marla and I thought to myself, if she liked me, she would call me back and you know, the next morning, you know, I, she'd call me very early that next morning and left a message for me.

0 (10m 8s):
And you called her to say what? To say, Hey, what do you guys think? Do you wanna buy the business? Or what were you calling her for?

3 (10m 15s):
I don't know exactly what I was thinking. What I wanted to do was have more time with her. That's what was important to me. What happened, and then maybe say I'm a bad business guy, was I began to, rather than think about selling the business to her, teaching her what we were doing in our business, You know, we had all kinds of different profit centers that we were forced to figure out because we were, you know, bootstrapping entrepreneurs using technology to, to make a difference in the industry. And Marla and I had successive meetings over time and we were working

0 (10m 46s):
Together. These were not dates. He was just like, Hey, you wanna have lunch? And I'll tell you what, that's what, that's what, that's sort of how you played it.

3 (10m 52s):
Yes.

0 (10m 53s):
Yeah. And Marla, that's how you Yeah. And by

3 (10m 56s):
The way, these were meetings in the office. Sure.

2 (10m 57s):
I was, I was doing my job. I was trying to learn sort of, you know, how we transform all of these companies that we had purchased to be sort of a bigger company at scale that was profitable. So, you know, they had figured it out.

0 (11m 13s):
Okay. This is interesting cuz this whole episode can just be about how you kind of engineered these professional meetings into what would eventually become a relationship in a marriage. That could be our whole

3 (11m 24s):
Episode, how I built this family.

0 (11m 27s):
Right. But, but, but from what I gather, I mean the, the romantic part of the relationship happens slowly. Yeah. Right. So, so for now, what, what I'm curious about is, as the two of you are kind of, you know, Marla, as, as, as the two of you are kind of meeting regularly at a certain point, do these conversations transition away from, Hey, here's what you can do with this private equity firm, Albert Gro to hey, like, maybe, maybe we should start our own business together. Do you remember how that that conversation pivoted into that direction?

2 (11m 60s):
Yeah, so Barry would nudge me and say, What are you gonna do work for this firm your whole life? You know, why don't you go out on your own? You're, they're never gonna put you in charge of your own business. Right? Because one of the reasons I had joined there was to get closer to being an entrepreneur, closer to running a business. So I was dissatisfied and I had someone in front of me saying, Hey, you know, go, you should go out on your own. And, you know, I think being a consolidation capital, working in private equity, what I saw when I saw these entrepreneurs, many, many entrepreneurs of companies that we had acquired, was they weren't superhuman.

2 (12m 40s):
They were just regular people that had struck out on their own. And so I started to feel like I could do that too. And Barry was nudging me and, and we were both dissatisfied in the industry we were

3 (12m 55s):
In. I, I think during that process of spending time with Marla, I realized, you know, I spent, you know, I remember early on one of Marla's cohorts from Harvard Business School to she, she said, How'd you make X ygc decision? And I said, It's instinct. And she said to me, in business, there's no such thing as instinct. And I carried that with me for a long time until I was talking to a Harvard Business School professor Linda Applegate. She says, Of course there's instinct, it's pattern recognition. And so for whatever instinct I had, I, and Marla was young, I thought that I felt like, you know, and I think time has proven me correct that she was a genius.

3 (13m 40s):
In fact, later on when I said to my father, I was gonna start a business with Marla and my father had met Marla, I said to my father, Marla's one of the smartest women I've ever met. And my father looked at me right away and he said, I think she's the smartest person you ever met.

0 (13m 59s):
Hmm. Alright. So clearly you two are, are seeing all these great qualities in, in each other. And you're starting to work together and, and, and you're looking at different business ideas. Tell me, tell me about some of the ideas that you sort of batted around. What do you, what do you remember?

2 (14m 16s):
I mean, I think there, you know, there were a myriad of businesses out there and, you know, beauty products was a category actually knew really well.

0 (14m 29s):
How, how did you know, how'd you know, beauty products?

2 (14m 31s):
So it was just a hobby. And growing up in California, California's always been, you know, an innovator in the beauty sector. So when I was in high school, there was a brand called Dermatological that was a couple years old

0 (14m 44s):
Out of la,

2 (14m 45s):
Three years old. And I tried at high school. Yeah, Jane Sure. Yep. She's

0 (14m 50s):
On our show.

2 (14m 50s):
Yep. Yeah. So I became hooked on those products. Mac in the early days was sold at one place in the San Francisco area, was sold at Nordstrom in San Francisco. So I got to know Mac when it was a really young company. And so it was just a hobby, it was a category, like there was, there were shops in Berkeley that handmade beauty products. One called the Body Shop, not Anita Rods body Shop. She actually bought the name from this first location in Berkeley. So I just knew everything about beauty products. And in fact, when I moved to Boston for graduate school, I could not find dermatological anywhere. I had to call the 800 number and they would ship it to me.

2 (15m 33s):
And then Mac was sold at one location about 45 minutes from school. And so, you know, in the back of my mind, this was not at the front of my mind. You know, I knew that these products were hard to get. And so we started thinking about, okay, what about beauty products? Not on the internet yet. Why not that?

0 (15m 55s):
And we should, I should mention this is, this is 1999, so this is really before, I mean, Sephora existed, but it didn't come to the US really until the two thousands. Alta was not what it is today. It was a very small company at that point,

3 (16m 11s):
Had one point, they were selling cigarettes.

0 (16m 14s):
Right. It was not a, it, it wasn't like you could go to the, you know, anywhere and just get, like, to get cosmetics. You'd go to like Macy's or Bloomingdale's or whatever, Right? I mean, or, or your drugstore, Like you'd go right to to right aid or something.

2 (16m 29s):
Two points of distribution, right? The drug, the drug stores or the department stores at the malls and nowhere else.

3 (16m 36s):
I think that we at, at some point had a hypothesis that the department stores were really created for sort of two reasons, right? A convenience and breadth of selection. Yes. And that we saw a possibility that they could no longer be convenient because of just travel times and distance and more urbanization and densification and the breadth of selection could be possibly solved, you know, through the internet. And so we thought that this could be a disruptive way to attack the beauty business.

2 (17m 14s):
There was one other factor going on at the time, which was, it was the rise of the independent brands, which is for the first time in a very long time, you had founders that were breaking into the industry. So you had Bobby Brown, you had Marcia kgo, you had Lev and Alina Glassman Atreus, you had Fran Nas at nas. And so there was a whole new category of independent brands that in retrospect created another opportunity to break into the industry.

0 (17m 49s):
Mm. Yeah, because I mean, I think what what started to happen was a lot of these entrepreneurs realized that you could go to these manufacturing facilities that were essentially making the same stuff for everyone else as, you know, white labeled. But you could pick your ingredients and you could formulate your, you know, your product and you could, you know, start to sell it small and then maybe big

2 (18m 11s):
One day. Yeah. I mean, Bobby Brown's a great example here. You have a fabulous, amazing makeup artist that says, I don't like exactly the textures of these lipsticks. And by the way, these are the really, the seven colors you need. And she starts by launching with seven colors, with the best packaging, the best texture. And people went crazy for her lipsticks. Same with Fran, ours, which is, they, they were all makeup artists. They knew better than anyone else what the customer needed.

0 (18m 42s):
All right. So, so the, so I'm curious, I mean, because I have to assume you did a lot of research before you, you said, let's do this, let's pursue cosmetics. Did you, what did you, what did you have to know? I mean, you knew that this wasn't out there and available on the internet and you knew that there might be an opportunity. What else did you need to know before you were really convinced that this, this was the direction that you guys should head in?

2 (19m 5s):
You know, it's an interesting question because I don't think we overthought it. I think at a certain point we knew we had hidden the idea and we developed like a 10 page PowerPoint and we were in a go try to raise money. I, we didn't do enough research. And by the way, it was hard to do research at that point. You had to call people, right? It's not like

0 (19m 29s):
They weren't, they weren't internet. You couldn't just go on the internet and pay, pay for a report.

2 (19m 34s):
Correct. And by the way, if you wanna reports, they were, you know, tens of thousands of dollars at that point. Yeah. So I think we just went for it and we started pitching. Now we did our first pitch. We knew we had to expand it beyond cosmetics because people wanted to fund businesses that had huge potential. So Right. Our first pitch was we were gonna do this marketplace for professional women, which also included cosmetics. We were gonna start with beauty,

0 (20m 11s):
And then eventually it would be clothing and apparel, Right. And things like

2 (20m 15s):
That. Right. You had to pitch really big ideas to get funding. Yeah. Just

0 (20m 19s):
Like today. And, and, and yeah. And it was, and it was going to be an e-commerce cosmetics and eventually sort of marketplace for professional women. That was the pitch. That

2 (20m 29s):
Was the pitch.

0 (20m 30s):
All right, here's a question for you. You had some money, Barry, from the sale of your business. Why didn't you, I mean, why didn't you just finance it and, and then you'd own the whole thing? Why did you even bother with investors? Because a lot of people, even on the show, you know, they've had mixed experiences with investors.

3 (20m 48s):
Yeah. And, and, and as you know, we had some challenges throughout time with our investors, but the truth is, this was a shoot the moon business. We had no idea how much money it would take. I think it probably to build out at that time would probably cost it, it cost probably nearly $600,000 to build an eCommerce site. And today you can build it on Wix for

0 (21m 11s):
Free or Shopify. Yeah,

3 (21m 13s):
Right. Or Shopify for free. Sure. But at that point, it, this was new technology. This was very, very hard to do at the time.

0 (21m 22s):
So it was gonna be too risky for you to put your own money in. Yeah.

3 (21m 25s):
It was too early, too risky. Right. And there was so much money to be around and the money was seemingly free. Anyway,

0 (21m 33s):
Alright. So where did, So, so Barry, you, you both of you had pretty good connections, certainly in, in Washington DC and, and Marla, you had connections in private equity and I can't imagine it was that, and and this is 99 when like money is just being thrown left and right. You guys, ra I mean, from what I understand, you raised a million dollars in a week from investors. It was

3 (21m 58s):
Two weeks. Two weeks.

0 (21m 60s):
Two weeks. That's, that's, I mean, it sounds kind of crazy today, but also I guess the, the time, right? People were just, money was just looser. Is that fair to

3 (22m 11s):
Say? Yeah, I think our first, one of our first checks, we went down to the Carlisle group and Dick Darwin, Ed Mathias wrote the first checks. And I sort of remember, just to underscore the point is that Ed signed a blank check and then called out to his assistant and had her fill out the details. And I think on the way out of the office, I said, Don't you want the paperwork? And he said, Nah, we trust you. And then I think he stopped us one more time in the elevator and he said, And don't get me an i r I want Pom. And I looked at Marla cuz she went to Harvard Business School and I said, What's Pom?

3 (22m 52s):
And she said, I don't know. And we looked at him with a blank series, said, I want piles of money

0 (22m 60s):
When we come back. Ian, just a moment how Barry and Marla quickly realize they are not going to make POM for their investors, not without totally revamping their business model. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to how I Built this. My schedule is pretty busy, so I don't have a ton of time to do the things I wanna do, like reading, which is why I love Audible. Audible offers an incredible selection of audiobooks across every genre. From bestsellers and new releases to celebrity memoirs, mysteries and thrillers, motivation, wellness, business and more.

0 (23m 43s):
All Audible members get access to a growing selection of audiobooks, audible originals and podcasts that are included with membership. You can listen to all you want plus more get added every month. Lately I've been listening to the Company by Robert Little. I've been listening while I work out and do chores around the house. And it makes the time fly by really quickly. Let Audible help you discover new ways to laugh, be inspired, or be entertained. New members can try it for free for 30 days. Visit audible.com/built or text built to 500 500. That's audible.com/built or text built to 500 500 to try Audible free for 30 days.

0 (24m 24s):
audible.com/built support for this show comes from Clavio. Clavio is the email marketing platform that brings all of your customer data into one place with hundreds of e-commerce integrations. Clavio helps you send relevant email and SMS messages to the right people at just the right time. So you can build genuine customer relationships and grow revenue as brands face a more volatile economic climate and a challenging digital landscape. Clavio's powerful marketing automations and Customer First data are critical to retaining brand loyalists and increasing roi.

0 (25m 4s):
It's time to talk to your customers like you know them because you do with Clavio. Learn more@clavio.com. That's K L A V I Y o.com. Hey, welcome back to How I Built this. I'm Guy Raz, so it's 1999 and Barry and Marla have a million dollars in investment to launch an online cosmetics business. They hire a company to build out the website and now they need the cosmetics. So they start pounding the pavement. We

2 (25m 43s):
Would go up to New York City and pitch these independent brands. So we went up to the NAS office, which was, you know, probably a 20 by 20 room and we would pitch them on Blue Mercury and how we were bringing beauty products to the internet. And you know, they would, they took a chance and then we'd go pitch another company. And so we had Nas, I think we had Keels, we had Shum Mara, there were a bunch of brands that took a flyer fresh, They were all independent

0 (26m 18s):
Brands, all independent. So you weren't, you weren't selling like the big, you know, huge brands at that point you weren't

2 (26m 25s):
Selling. Oh, I don't think, we didn't try, they just wouldn't return our phone calls. Right. And I remember at a conference after we embedded ourselves in the industry, even a year or two later, Leonard Lauder at a conference just announced, I'm gonna wait and see how e-commerce shakes out and then I'll make my decision. Which was smart,

0 (26m 44s):
Right? Leonard Lauder, who was at the time the head of Estee Lauder. Of course. Okay, so 1999 you've got the, the working on the website, you're buying as much, you know, stuff as you can. And by the way, the name Blue Mercury, how'd you come up with that name?

2 (26m 59s):
So we made it up, I mean, I love the color blue. And Barry went down to Barnes and Noble in Georgetown.

3 (27m 8s):
Yeah. And I was thumbing through an atlas and we envisioned ourselves as becoming and ultimately did become a source for information for, you know, we thought about building not just an e-commerce site, but a community for information and a place for learning. And so Mercury was the God of information. And so it was Blue Mercury. I called her up and we settled on that. I do remember that when we told the investors we were gonna name the company Blue Mercury, they hated the name and they think thought that we should call it Marla's Beauty shop. Barry's Beauty Shop have beauty in the name. And we said to them, what's in a name? What does Starbuck mean?

3 (27m 48s):
And what is what's in a name a company would, the company would take on the attributes would take on the meaning of the attributes assigned by our customers.

0 (27m 58s):
I gotta say Barry's beauty shop doesn't sing to me. I don't know if HUD buy stop at Barry's Beauty shop. You maybe

2 (28m 5s):
Barry's

3 (28m 5s):
Bootcamp you say that, but 90% of your listeners probably don't know who Starbuck was.

0 (28m 11s):
Oh,

3 (28m 12s):
He was the navigator on the ship of Mo of Hern. Melvin Moby Dick. That's, that's right. And so I'm just saying like, what does a name mean in other words. Right. And that's, people don't realize that's why there's a mermaid on your coffee cup.

0 (28m 22s):
Yeah, that's right. Right. Okay. So you, so you have this name, right? And, and, and at the time when you, and how long, do you remember how long it took? So 99, you raised the money, how long did it take before you had the website up and running out in the world?

3 (28m 37s):
Probably six months. Yeah,

0 (28m 38s):
Exactly. And, and then you, you hit the launch button and, and did, did anybody know, I mean most people aren't dial up in 1999, right? So did anybody, did the orders start coming in fast and furious?

3 (28m 55s):
I think that we had a philosophy that if you build it, they will come. And I think when we turned on the website and had no sales,

0 (29m 7s):
No sales,

3 (29m 8s):
Very, very little sales that we were, that we were still on dial up. I think the day we turned on by the second day that we had the website turned on, we looked around the room that all the people in our team and we saw the writing on the wall,

0 (29m 24s):
Which was

3 (29m 25s):
That we were gonna have to shift

0 (29m 29s):
In right away. You could see that no one is ordering from your site. Not cuz they don't like it just cuz too early. It was early. There was an awareness and also, Right.

3 (29m 40s):
Yep. I think that what we realize that sometimes being too early is really just being wrong. Yeah. And I think that not only, so I, I think there was a confluence of several challenges. And so number one is that there's no traffic coming to our website. So that's problem one. And I think number two is that we also were unable to get material supply to the major brands that we needed to attract customers to our website. So maybe we were in discussions with Nas to sell some of their items.

2 (30m 17s):
I think you're right, they had committed some items but not

3 (30m 19s):
The full line and maybe some other sort of more sort of esoteric type brands. Machu Amore, which wasn't a big, it was a cool brand, but it wasn't really a major brand.

0 (30m 30s):
And did you have any, did you have any marketing, I mean you had a, a was the million dollars that you raised your, like that was your runway for the first year? Or did you have to go out and raise more right away?

2 (30m 40s):
We needed more money. We knew we needed more money and so I went out to Silicon Valley in the fall of 99, you know, went to a bunch of firms where I had friends from business school pitched them.

0 (30m 55s):
Yeah.

2 (30m 56s):
And they told me that there were four or five other competitors that were trying to do the same thing as us. Hmm. eve.com, gloss.com. All of these other companies had raised 10 to 20 million each. And so yeah, we were way behind.

0 (31m 13s):
And how did you feel when you heard that that must have been kind of dispiriting?

2 (31m 18s):
Yeah, actually devastating, because I knew we didn't have enough money to survive very long. There was no chance that someone was, someone was going to fund the player that had already raised the least funding. And so, you know, Barry and I were in trouble. We had to figure out what our move was because there's no question we were gonna run outta money.

0 (31m 43s):
Yeah.

2 (31m 44s):
We had to pivot. But we joke that back then the, the word pivot didn't exist Right. As a strategy for entrepreneurial companies. It was literally you're about to go bankrupt, what do you do?

0 (31m 56s):
You could not raise any additional money or did you eventually raise the money? We

2 (31m 60s):
Did years later. But

0 (32m 2s):
But that first, those first two years, you couldn't raise any more money.

2 (32m 5s):
Not a dime. And the market was starting to cool, right? Everybody was starting to look at sort of, okay, what had I invested and you know, was this going to, you know, give me a return? And so the market was starting to cool at, at that time.

0 (32m 22s):
W was any part of you Marla, feeling like maybe this thing is just not gonna work? Maybe, maybe we've gotta go back to the drawing board.

2 (32m 35s):
I mean, I certainly had days where I just couldn't get out of bed. Every entrepreneur has those days. They don't usually talk about them. But, you know, I had all these degrees I, you know, had, you know, put my, gone out on a limb to start this business and I saw a failure ahead of me and it was like, you know what, what do I do?

0 (32m 59s):
Barry, were you ever worried?

3 (33m 1s):
Yes, we were.

0 (33m 4s):
I thought you were gonna say no. Well keep going.

3 (33m 6s):
Yeah, no, I mean of course, you know, I was concerned we were down to our last 150,000. I mean this is very, many, many entrepreneurs came out of Harvard Business School at that time. But big ideas and big thinking. Yeah. There's a lot of big thinking going on. But when you're down to your last $150,000 in the bank and you look around the room and you have 20 employees and you realize you have 60 days of cash left, but you have to make some tough calls.

0 (33m 35s):
You had 20 employees, you hired 20 people.

3 (33m 39s):
Yeah. So there was a model or a philosophy, and you may say that it's going on today, this model, you know, this sort of, the horror for business school model G B F get big fast at any cost. Yeah. And when you run outta money, there's always more right there. But at that point in this sort of adversity, I realized that we could find opportunity. And so, but we had to make bold moves. Moves which might and, and what might not were actually were not popular with our investors. When we told them that we needed to pivot, which was a word we didn't use at that time, they were not happy

0 (34m 21s):
And, and they were not happy because the pivot would be to, to a brick and mortar store, to, to put your products into a physical store somewhere. And, and, and the investors didn't, didn't like that idea. Right?

2 (34m 34s):
Yeah. At that point in time, all of our sort of e-commerce techy investors only wanted pure play internet businesses. That was a thing. Yeah. There was no value in retail. Retail was out of favor. It was eCommerce and the internet was where it was at. Yeah. So when we went to them, they said, no way, this is a pure play internet business. You will destroy the value. And bear and I are thinking what's the value in having $150,000 in the bank?

3 (35m 5s):
But what what happened was that in order to get access to the brands to sell online, we found a solution right around the corner from Marla's house on Am Street in Georgetown. It was an independent beauty stores, more like a gift

0 (35m 21s):
Shop. Right. I think it was, it was owned by a woman who, who who ran the business. It was a store called efx.

3 (35m 28s):
Yes.

0 (35m 29s):
And what seems clear to me is that, that at the time, in order to have access to e even like a small variety of cosmetics, you really had to have a physical store Right. Like that that was sort of non-negotiable for a lot of these brands that, you know, essentially. And, and you knew that

3 (35m 46s):
That's correct. And, and, and the physical world store to these young independent brands was sort of a trust that they had a place where they could see their products and they built a relationship. These were small little independent brands working out of a room in New York. And so we would be able to tap the vein of these incredible niche beauty brands who were on the rise.

0 (36m 13s):
So, alright, so you have this and, and now now we're in, in late 99, you can't raise money. You've got this relationship with this brick and mortar story FX in, in Georgetown. So how did it get to the point where you were the two of you said, you know what, let's, let's, let's take over the lease or let's buy this, you know, business and put a physical blue mercury store there, change it to Blue Mercury.

3 (36m 39s):
I think it was an iterative process. So we, so let's get to that moment. We we're down to our last $150,000 and then we make a decision to actually enter into to this management and purchase option. And we present that to our investors.

0 (36m 59s):
Yeah. And they say, Great idea.

3 (37m 2s):
No, the investors say there, there's a rule of corporate opportunity, which is if we, if we decide to buy the store, we, we have to present it to them. They would have to reject it because we couldn't buy, you know, we couldn't, we couldn't take that opportunity on our own because we were supposed to be giving our full time and attention to the internet business. And so we presented it to them, they rejected it. And in fact, what they said was, if you wanna buy the store, Barry and Marla buy it with your own money,

0 (37m 31s):
You buy it.

3 (37m 32s):
And what we did was we formed a company called 29 Street Partners. We, Marla lived on 29th Street and we caused that company to acquire the

0 (37m 43s):
Store. And Barry, you had some money from the sale of your previous business, so presumably you were gonna finance this thing.

3 (37m 50s):
Yeah, not only that, I had been going without a salary since the inception of Blue Mercury, the the internet business. But I was able to do that. Yeah. And so we talked to this person who, who ran this business and we said that we would consider making an investment in their business. We would help them. They were having problems too. They couldn't even pay their bills and they were late paying their bills. And so we struck up a management and purchase agreement, which said that, hey, we'll we'd like to take a look under the hood, but if we like what we see, we have the right to buy the business. Hmm. And as we spent more time with her, she kept coming to us saying, I can't pay my bills, I can't pay my bills.

3 (38m 31s):
And the answer is that she's like every entrepreneur on the surface, she seems like a swan cruising across the water, but underneath she was paddling like hell.

0 (38m 41s):
Hmm. And in fact, I think when you did buy the store, you found out that, that the owner of the owner of Bfx was, was like in a ton of financial trouble. I it was was pretty bad, right?

3 (38m 52s):
Yeah. We realized they were in default of their bank debt Every week I was writing more checks to the company, 20,000, 30,000, 50,000. We were just writing checks to pay the company's bills in what was like a seemingly end endless sort of reservoir of needs of cash. And so we went down to see bb and t Bank who had, who essentially really owned the business that she was in debt to to them. And that the business was essentially insolvent. And we went down to see BB and t Bank and the vice president of the bank, John Ryder and Alexandria, Virginia. And I remember walking into the room and I said, John, you've lost all your money.

3 (39m 36s):
And we said to him, Your only hope of getting your a return on your money would be to double down

0 (39m 45s):
When we come back in just a moment. How doubling down pays off for Barry and Marla and how the store becomes a destination for all kinds of people, including one day out of the blue Rod Stewart. Stay with us. I'm Guy Ross and you're listening to how I Built This. Doing the right thing isn't always easy and that includes ordering drinks at a restaurant. I recently discovered a new company called Tractor Beverage that's doing things differently. They created a line of delicious, non GMO, certified organic lemonades, aua frescas craft sodas and teas made with natural sustainably grown ingredients.

0 (40m 31s):
My favorite flavor is root beer. It's made with ingredients like nutmeg, juniper, and vanilla. It's pretty epic. Chances are you've already seen the tractor bubbler dispenser at places like Chipotle and other restaurants that care about providing you with a better beverage option. To find tractor visit drink tractor.com/locations and punch in your zip code. This one's worth the search. As a founder, you should spend your time bringing your vision to life, not worrying about banking. Luckily Mercury makes banking tasks simpler and even a little enjoyable. No matter your company's size or stage manage F D I C insured checking and savings accounts, send money seamlessly grow with alternative financing and more.

0 (41m 17s):
All with confidence. Don't settle for a second rate business banking experience that distracts you from building your company. Sign up in minutes and join more than 80,000 startups that trust Mercury for banking. And visit mercury.com/pod to claim your special offer. Mercury is a financial technology company, not a bank. Banking services provided by Choice Financial Group and Evolve Bank and trust members. F D I C. Hey, welcome back to how I built this. I'm Guy Ros, so it's around 2000. And Marla and Barry have talked their bank into lending them more money to keep their Georgetown cosmetic store and the website afloat.

3 (42m 6s):
And the bank probably had to think long and hard of that and I actually had them double down on their investment. I backstop it with a personal guarantee, plus the money had already put up for the business. They reinvested in the business, stabilized the inventory, and we built the business out from there.

0 (42m 23s):
And I, I wonder, I mean did, did that, did that immediately change, you know, sort of change the situation for Blue Mercury? I mean did all of a sudden did, did your cash flow situation change?

2 (42m 37s):
I mean a couple things. One is we stabilized the business right away, right? So we had a new bank loan. So we bought a ton of inventory, we added brands, we hired staff, new staff and paid them really well because the old staff was not actually getting their paycheck every week. And so we transformed that one store. And store businesses are good because you actually get the revenue right away from the customer, Right? You know, you get the next day from the credit card company and then if you have inventory terms, which we convinced everybody to give to us, the cash flow is great.

2 (43m 21s):
And so it took us a while, but we actually built up the cash flow and the revenue of this store and it ended up funding the e-commerce business.

0 (43m 31s):
The e-commerce side, cuz e-commerce side was probably, you know, what percentage of your sales in 2001?

2 (43m 40s):
Less than 1%.

0 (43m 41s):
Less than 1%, Yeah.

2 (43m 43s):
Less. And it was, it was just, we were just really early on that. And so, but the store business was a rare opportunity to actually build out a specialty cosmetics business.

3 (43m 56s):
And I would just say that I don't know that we saw that. Yeah. That wasn't, and and for many not right? Anyway, and many years we looked to the brands and thought maybe we should, we were in the wrong business, we should be in the brand business. So we didn't see all that. It was much more of a survival

0 (44m 9s):
Move Yeah.

3 (44m 10s):
To keep supply to the internet business. What we realized, of course over time with this was the real

0 (44m 16s):
Main of that was the business. That's the thing. Like when you, when you went out and raised money in 99 for Blue mercury.com, did you think, you know, in about a year's time, we're also gonna have a brick and mortar store in, in Washington dc?

2 (44m 28s):
Not at all.

0 (44m 29s):
Not at all.

3 (44m 30s):
It's a great, great business lesson because it's one of these things where you live long enough to live forever and that you have to be able to survive in business long enough for good things to happen. And this was one of the things that we quickly saw cut our overhead, had went down to our last $150,000 and looked to the left and right. There was this store opportunity, which probably had we not gotten into trouble would never have availed itself to us.

0 (44m 56s):
Yeah. But I mean you are focusing all of your energy on an e-commerce business, designing a really cool site and making it easy for people to use. In 1999, it wasn't easy. There were a bunch of steps. Now you're pivoting, focusing tons of your attention on a store. What did that mean? I mean, how are you going to differentiate this store from what it was before to actually make it work?

2 (45m 22s):
You know, it wasn't that hard. I mean it was, people were coming there already for cosmetics. It was the only place you could buy cosmetics in Georgetown. It was just a poorly run business. And so I would say we worked at it, but it wasn't that hard to turn it around if you invest in the staff and invested in the inventory because it was such a unique business.

0 (45m 48s):
So all right, so you have now this store, you're gonna manage it better. And by the way, a lot of people don't think of Washington DC as a center of fashion or you know, on the vanguard of like a cosmetic store. You know, it's seen as like kind of a sleepy, you know, it's sort of a joke, you know, when it comes to fashion, people kind of think, you know, there's boxy suits with Brooks Brothers for men and you know, Ann Taylor for women, it was just not to criticize those brands, but it was just very conservative. People didn't think of Washington DC as a place where you would like open a cool cosmetic store. Why? Why did Washington DC actually work to your advantage?

0 (46m 28s):
You know? Cause you would think New York, la

3 (46m 30s):
It's essentially the Walmart effect, which is the sense that, you know, this family was able to build a business out of the limelight away from the city.

0 (46m 41s):
Yeah.

3 (46m 41s):
I will tell you that it was some insecurity for us because we would go to New York City and meet Marla and I would go to New York City meet with these vendors and they, and they would say, Well what do you know about the beauty business? You're in Washington DC And we used to have to come to New York and do the rounds and we would have to go and essentially pay homage and see all these brands and they were all in New York City and we would run around New York. And this was really important, this relationship part of the business. It was, in fact, I remember one investor asking me, how much longer do we have to continue to dance with these brands?

0 (47m 20s):
Yeah.

3 (47m 21s):
And I said, it never stops. It's a constant relationship building. And so, you know, we were, we were out of the New York scene.

2 (47m 29s):
But I think the other thing is Washington DC is much more cosmopolitan and was than you would expect because you have the embassies here, you have people from all over the country that moved to Washington. And by the way, you know, there were a lot of international hotels here. And so the hotels would send their clients to Blue Mercury if they asked, you know, I need, you know, I need beauty products or I need a

0 (47m 58s):
Gift. Yeah. I mean you're right around the corner from, from a Four Seasons and a Aris Carlton. Sure.

2 (48m 3s):
The Four Seasons sent all of their clients and even their celebrity clients to us.

3 (48m 8s):
Yeah. And I'll never forget, one day we saw a thong of customers. Marle and I used to work the store ourselves and a thong of customers were racing down em street chasing this poor man. And then as he came to the store to the door, we realized it was a guy and a gal. And as they got closer, we realized it was Rod Stewart very quietly open, opened the door. He was, there was no one in the store at the time. He ducked in to protect himself, you know, from everybody. We clicked the dead bolt on the door behind him. We never acknowledged that we own the store. And he never acknowledged that he was Rod Stewart. And he, Wow.

0 (48m 44s):
Did he get a, did he get a facial?

3 (48m 45s):
He did not. He shopped and spent $2,000 and he left. Wow. So we started to build this sort of notoriety around the business locally.

2 (48m 53s):
We used to laugh. We're like, are we cool?

3 (48m 55s):
Well we, Well I guess at one point he has a funny point is that we opened up our fourth store, I guess this is fast forward in Philadelphia. And one of my friends from high school was near my high school in Philadelphia. And he said, Is it true that you and your wife founded Blue Mercury? And I said, Yeah, is there a customer service issue? What's the problem? He goes, Wow, you guys are so cool. This is so cool. I remember calling Marla, I was like, You're not gonna believe it. She said, What? What's what now? I said, I think, I actually think we might be cool.

0 (49m 24s):
All right. So you have this cool store. Right? But, but why was it different than just going to, I don't know, like Bloomingdale's and getting makeup there?

2 (49m 33s):
Yeah, I mean the difference was when you go to a department store, like a Macy's or a Bloomingdale's, everything is sold counter by counter. And back then everything was behind Glass Counter. So if you wanted to Clinique, you would go up to the counter and ask for your Clinique tone or famous product, pay for it. And then if you wanted your mascara at the Lancom counter, you would have to start over with the sales associate from Lancome that is paid for by the company. So the department store model was designed to serve the brands, not to serve the customers. So the difference at Blue Mercury was that the staff were trained in every brand.

2 (50m 15s):
And so the focus became on the client, which is if you came in and asked for a new moisturizer, immediately the Blue Mercury beauty expert would start diagnosing what you wanted. Which is, is your skin dry? Do you want something in a jar? Do you like lotion? And so the focus now became on not the brand, but the client and what she mainly she wanted. And we had a really fun mix of brands, some of which they had never seen.

0 (50m 44s):
And by the way, meantime, the e-commerce business was just sort of like on autopilot.

2 (50m 49s):
It was there, we were filling,

3 (50m 51s):
It was more like on no pilot.

2 (50m 53s):
Okay. We were filling the orders out of the basement of the Georgetown store. Right. We had just moved every operation there. And actually we had a full-time internet fulfillment person. So we, we had

0 (51m 3s):
Orders, but it was tiny amount,

2 (51m 5s):
Tiny. And also mainly from existing Blue Mercury customers that may have shopped with us in Georgetown and gone back to Chicago or LA or wherever they lived and would order from us online. Hmm. So the client acquisition model actually was the store.

0 (51m 23s):
And by the way, by 2001, cuz at this point you have two stores now in Washington dc, the.com bubble bursts. And these other competitors who were e-commerce only, like eve.com, they just kind of blew out. They went, you know, they go to business. I mean, in a sense you kind of, you guys kind of got lucky by struggling in 99 because you didn't have all your eggs in that e-commerce basket.

2 (51m 51s):
We were very, very lucky. We would've gone bankrupt also. And so, but we also, at that point, we weren't paying attention so much to the internet. We were spending 24 7 in the stores that were open seven days a week and trying to figure out that business. And I, I said if we wanna prove out a new a model, a business model that works, we have to go to a new city and a new market.

0 (52m 16s):
Yeah. And where, where where'd you decide to go?

2 (52m 19s):
Philadelphia.

3 (52m 20s):
It was a major city that was reasonably nearby. And guess what, If we had to, we could always sleep on my sister's couch. So it was convenient.

2 (52m 29s):
Again, we were scrappy then. I mean we had almost gone out of business. You know, that sort of near death experience. We turned over every penny. We were really thoughtful about everything we did. But we debated, Barry didn't wanna go to Philly, he did not wanna make that move. He thought it was too big of a reach. So I won, I won that debate.

3 (52m 52s):
It was, it was a bet the company moved for us. If Philadelphia didn't work right, we would've been done because we spent the last bit of money opening the store. It was very hard. The Blue Mercury model wasn't proven yet. You know, we weren't sure that it was really gonna work. But Philadelphia was an amazing success for us. And so that really solidified

0 (53m 18s):
In, in those early days, like a, like that Philadelphia store. What kind of revenue would that store do? A year? Like a million, 2 million more

2 (53m 27s):
Three, It was about a $3 million store. But we learned over time how to drive that revenue high. We had decided early on to invest in our people, which was, they were our secret weapon. So

3 (53m 43s):
Yeah. So we ended up retaining these beauty experts and then, you know, and they retained this knowledge, expertise and these relationships with our customers. And then because of that, the customers continued to come back searching out a particular beauty expert who, I guess at one point when we hired Goldman Sachs and Company to, to look at our business, they found an anomaly. There were certain employees they couldn't understand. It said that they worked at the company longer than Marla and I and we founded the company. How was that possible? Because there were several employees that came along with the purchase of the EFX store and just never left. And so, you know, we really had incredible retention of our people

2 (54m 27s):
20 years. You know, for some,

3 (54m 29s):
I, I would just say one other thing about that. We were also in the high advice category, and I'll never forget when we were looking to raise money, was Marlow's very set upset about this, a very well respected investor said to us, visit us at our most successful store, Princeton, New Jersey at the time, store number five. And said that this business will never work, but it won't scale. It will never scale. And the challenge was that he thought it was too complex cuz we wanted to be consultative, give samples. It wasn't enough of a supermarket or a factory. And that's never what we strive to be. It was just something completely different.

2 (55m 6s):
Yeah. So traditionally, you know, when you scale businesses like a Home Depot or a Target, you try to move to be more self-service. Yeah. And that's really the genius of Sephora too, right? It's very self-service, very accessible. We took a different path and figured out how to do it in our own way.

0 (55m 23s):
Here's what I'm wondering about. As you were, you know, getting more buzz, you open the fifth store in Princeton, I think cuz between 2000, 2005 you would open 10 stores. Right? Which is pretty remarkable. So that's, that's, and you're getting more and more attention and it's clearly you're, you've got this reputation for great customer service and nice products and, but even by 2005, when you 10 stores, you still couldn't sell all the things you wanted to sell. Right? There were still cosmetics brands that would not sell to you.

3 (55m 52s):
Remember the question, when do we have to stop dancing with the brands? And the answer is never.

0 (55m 59s):
But why? I mean, I don't understand. Like why wouldn't, I mean at this point, you know, you've got a reputation for being a good outlet. Was it the department stores who wouldn't let them do it? Was it the Barneys of the world and the, you know, the, I don't know the,

3 (56m 14s):
If you're a cosmetics brand like Chanel

0 (56m 17s):
Yeah.

3 (56m 18s):
What's the difference between what your lipstick you're selling really and, and another brand that's sold at cvs

0 (56m 27s):
Another, Well they're better, better quality of ingredients, but, but not, you know, a few other things. But it's a brand ultimately it's a brand name

3 (56m 35s):
And there's high risk. Yeah. To the perception that your brand is either lower quality, it's gone down market less exclusive. I mean the brands are just very protective. How exclusive they are, how many street corners, how many points of distribution they have in Philadelphia. Well we already have one here and you know, we don't wanna have too many because the perception, you know, this is, there's a lot going on there. And then you couple that with 50 brands and they're all got their different perceptions of what their perception should be. I mean it's a lot, it's a pretty complex like Venn diagram,

0 (57m 9s):
Right? But you saw an opportunity with these independent brands and really it's like dominoes. Once one goes in and then they see they're doing okay, then the others want to come in. Yeah.

2 (57m 18s):
But what also happened in the industry about three or four years in, is that all of these independent brands were purchased by L'Oreal, by Este Lauder and Edo So, yeah, overnight, we were then in business with the big companies and that did two things for us. It provided a wall around us for new entrants because the indie brands didn't need distribution anymore. They were in these big companies. And so, you know, the, the next person that wanted to build a cosmetic store had to now go to the big companies, which put in barriers. And it also gave the big companies Estee Lauder and L'Oreal window onto what Blue Mercury was doing.

2 (58m 2s):
And so then they started adding more of their brands to our mix. And so actually the way the industry transformed really added another tailwind to Blue Mercury.

0 (58m 18s):
Let me, let me ask you about, about the two of you. I mean, at what point did your professional relationship become personal? I mean, I, I know it's a little awkward, but I mean, you know, you're married, you've got kids and family and stuff now, so I shouldn't be awkward, but at what point, I mean, cuz Barry clearly was, he saw Barry in Marla, you saw somebody that you definitely, you know, were attracted to. And Marla, I guess initially you just, you know, this is an interesting person to have a business with, but at what point in this to of journey, it's intense. You're working together, you're going through the crises together. Did it, did, did you guys become a couple?

2 (58m 56s):
For me it was more of an evolution, right? We were working together 24 7 and you know, it was, we were in the battle together and

3 (59m 5s):
Yeah, we completed each other's sentences. I mean, it was just, it was, it seemed to be pretty obvious that we were gonna, to me, that we would end up together. And I frankly had been enamored by Marla the entire time. But I, it was very, we kept it professional.

0 (59m 25s):
Yeah, it's a slow burn, Marla.

2 (59m 28s):
Slow burn. Yeah, I'm kind of tough.

3 (59m 30s):
Kind of tough. My father says I'm an choir too.

2 (59m 35s):
I'm kind of tough like that. But, but once we were going, I mean we, you know, I love, we got married, I, we were opening store for and

0 (59m 44s):
Right. But did you keep it secret at the beginning so your employees would know, or, or were you kind of open about it?

2 (59m 50s):
I think we were secret. I mean, I was trying to be a professional ceo, right?

0 (59m 55s):
Yeah. Yeah.

2 (59m 56s):
Especially I think I had some form of armor on, right? Which is, you know, first, So we went to these investors, raised the money, We almost lost the money. You know, I was, had some sort of, you know, shield where I was trying to be a strong ceo.

0 (1h 0m 16s):
And, and, and by the way, sometimes investors don't like that. They don't like married couples or partners, romantic partners to be just our business together. They don't like to invest in those businesses cause they're worried they're gonna split up

3 (1h 0m 29s):
Later on. It was, I, I believe as we did a recapitalization of the business, this was a question that came up and I just think for whatever reason, either it was our professionalism or it was, you know, the, the reading of the fact that how much we loved each other or how important we both were to the business, that they were able to get past that.

0 (1h 0m 48s):
All right. 2005 you got 10 stores, flagship stores still in Washington, DC and Georgetown. And by this point, lvmh, the massive multinational conglomerate they own Sephora. Sephora is, is now really expanding in the US at this point. And they open up a shop in Georgetown, Washington, DC Do you remember feeling anxiety about that? Like, oh my god.

2 (1h 1m 16s):
Right. And one of their first 10 stores was put right next to our first Blue Mercury store in Georgetown, two doors down from

0 (1h 1m 24s):
Us. Wow.

2 (1h 1m 25s):
That was very purposeful.

0 (1h 1m 26s):
Quite aggressive.

2 (1h 1m 28s):
Very aggressive. And so the clients were coming in and saying, I'm sorry, you're gonna go bankrupt. Sephora's opening up next to you.

0 (1h 1m 34s):
Right? Yeah.

2 (1h 1m 36s):
But the advantage we had short term was that when they first came to the United States, their brand mix, the brands they sold were not that great. So we had a little bit of time and you know, we also got really focused early on about how our clients service and our staff would be our secret weapon. So it wouldn't matter what our brand mix was, that we would be better at serving clients. And so the fact that they opened next to us made us stronger because we had to get really smart about how to compete really early.

0 (1h 2m 11s):
But did that cause anxiety knowing that they had just massive, massive dollars behind them to expand

2 (1h 2m 18s):
A little bit at, at first, but their first strategy for expansion was malls. And we were not in malls. We liked the streets, we liked Georgetown, we liked downtown Philadelphia, we liked the suburbs, we liked Princeton. And so our real estate strategy was fundamentally different from theirs for a long time.

3 (1h 2m 37s):
One of the greatest compliments we ever got in the early days, which really helped sustain us was the senior vice president of merchandising. We ran Tim in New York one day and he said, I have to give you a compliment. He says, We just can't make a go of it in Georgetown. And he says, I,

2 (1h 2m 55s):
The senior vice president of Sephora,

3 (1h 2m 57s):
Of Sephora, excuse me, the senior vice president of Sephora Merchandising, said, We just can't make a go of it to Georgia and we just can't get our customer that you keep taking the best customer and we can't make it work. And that they just prefer you. And it was a big compliment to us. It was nice of him to say that. And that really helped sustain our thinking a little bit, that we were on the right path.

0 (1h 3m 17s):
Hmm. But still, I mean, to, to continue to expand. I mean, you guys needed lots of money. You needed tens of millions of dollars at this point. And, and so I guess in, in 2006 you decide to partner with an investment company called Invis. Why did you decide to do that? What was the thinking at the time?

3 (1h 3m 38s):
I would say, candidly speaking, we wanted to rebalance our risk equation. And so that, that we were interested in selling some of our stock to fuel our lifestyle. Cause we'd poured our entire life into this business. And I think it would be reasonable for us to, in other words, we, we looked at this business. We, we had become, at that point, by store 10, we'd become known as the Starbucks of cosmetics. I mean, we had a great reputation. The future seemed great, but we had our entire life savings, everything we had tied up in this business.

3 (1h 4m 19s):
And we didn't wanna ever turn to our kids and say, Well what happened? Well, mom and dad went bankrupt. Well why? Cuz we were so greedy and we wanted to build this 400 store chain. Yeah. Oops. It didn't work out. Maybe we should've just kept it at five stores. So it was a way for us to sort of sell our cake and have it too.

2 (1h 4m 35s):
The other thing I would say is because of our early experience with, you know, everything fell apart, right? E-commerce out of favor can't raise money. You know, we, we were much more conservative than many entrepreneurs maybe would've been. But we had had that experience and so we had seen really bad times.

0 (1h 4m 58s):
Yeah. So, alright, so you decide to partner with a private equity firm. I mean, you had experienced some private equity, Marla, I mean that now you've got a boss, but did, did, how did that work out? I mean, was it, I mean, I mean did you see eye to eye on what you wanted this to be and, and how to grow it?

2 (1h 5m 18s):
You know, the commitment we had made to them was to scale much more rapidly. Right. And so, you know, one idea they had was to also expand to malls, which we had not done before. And so we put together a huge expansion plan. Malls, street stores, really aggressive. We open the mall stores, they don't go that well because it's a much more competitive environment than our street stores. And then the oh 7 0 8 crash comes.

0 (1h 5m 51s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 5m 52s):
And so we closed the mall stores.

0 (1h 5m 56s):
All of them

3 (1h 5m 57s):
Essentially. Yes.

2 (1h 5m 58s):
Yeah. That's,

0 (1h 5m 59s):
How many mall stores were there?

3 (1h 6m 0s):
About eight stores. Approximately eight. And so I, I would say that we psychologically hid behind the recession. He said, ah, it was the recession. The recession. The truth is it was an operational misstep. And what we realized was our customer wasn't at the malls. It wasn't convenient for them. We didn't get the frequency of visit. It wasn't a client that was gonna test and learn. And the, and the, and the sort of higher end client in the beauty categories was really roaming the urban streets and the suburban streets. It was

2 (1h 6m 32s):
A disaster.

3 (1h 6m 33s):
It was essentially an unmitigated disaster. It just didn't work. And then with the backdrop of the of, of oh eight, you know, we closed these stores and the truth is, our investors were right with us. It was, they stepped right to our side and they backstop the business. Hmm. I will tell you, in oh eight, one of our great sort of claims, the fame is even in oh eight at the, the nadier of, of, of what, what may be the last 20 to 30 years of the American economy still grew our revenue. Hmm. We grew our revenue every single year from the beginning of, of, of time till the date that we left the company.

0 (1h 7m 11s):
I think by, you know, sort of around 2015 the company was acquired by Macy's. And I think by that point you had close to 50, maybe a little more than 50 stores, I think. Does that sound right? By 2015,

2 (1h 7m 25s):
I think the day we closed, we had 60, I

0 (1h 7m 28s):
Think 60 stores.

2 (1h 7m 29s):
Right.

0 (1h 7m 31s):
And, and I wonder whether, I mean it's interesting cuz 2015, by that point, the whole idea brick and mortar was now, I mean really it was turning, it was all about direct to consumer e-commerce and, but now you, you know, Macy's was acquiring the company fully, reportedly for 210 million. What, I mean, I mean I I I, the question isn't, why did you sell to Macy's? Cuz I, cuz Macy's is huge and they could scale it. But was, was there any concern at that point, you know, that the future was not gonna be brick and mortar. I mean there was at that point a lot of concern and talk about, you know, there's just a waste of time.

0 (1h 8m 13s):
It should all be direct to consumer and, you know, what did you think about that, about those conversations?

3 (1h 8m 20s):
I would say just one thing at that point, and was was that the, the, the rumors of retail's death were greatly exaggerated. Yeah. The, those rumors were untrue. If you looked at our numbers,

2 (1h 8m 32s):
Let me also take you back to 2014, which is Sephora was expanding aggressively, Ulta was expanding aggressively. Barry and I really wanted to step in the step on the gas. We saw a path to 350 stores, but we needed money, we needed resources to do it. And so partnering with Macy's would really enable us to fulfill our dream of this national brand with 350 locations. And we knew if we didn't have a new partner, we would fall behind given the pace of retail expansion at that point in the beauty industry.

3 (1h 9m 10s):
I, I would say also that the irony of selling to a department store wasn't lost on us, but it was an amazing recognition of the value we created and it ended up being an incredibly symbiotic relationship. And they let us operate with resources we couldn't even imagine as a standalone company.

2 (1h 9m 32s):
And so it was really fun. I mean, I stayed running Blue Mercury is a division of Macy's as a CEO of this division for six years because it was a blast. Right.

0 (1h 9m 45s):
At any point did the e-commerce business, which originally what this was supposed to be, did it ever get bigger than the brick and mortar business?

2 (1h 9m 53s):
No. I mean, in beauty, 80% still bought in stores until Covid hit. And so the adoption of beauty onto e-commerce really, you know, took a lot longer than we ever imagined in 99. Yeah. Beauty always lagged because of this desire to try and feel texture and there's colors that you need to try and no matter what you do, the Tryon technology is just not the same as the real thing.

3 (1h 10m 23s):
So one of the reasons why we weren't ever really disrupted by other eCommerce companies, because even to this day, beauty is one of the least penetrated categories online is compared to electronics, which is nearly almost

0 (1h 10m 36s):
All because you wanna try it on. Correct. We, we didn't talk about this for at all during the interview, but I mean, throughout this journey you also built a family. You guys had, you have three children, three grown children. Well I mean they're, they're, they're two sort of pretty grown. Yeah, but I mean throughout, you know, I think you're youngest 15, 16 years old, so you have, I mean you were in the thick of it while you were also, you guys were raising a family.

2 (1h 11m 1s):
Yeah, I mean, you know, our family has milestones based on store count, right? So we got married at store four, you know, I had our first child, Ariel at store five, who's now 19, and our Sophie at store eight, and then our son stored 12 through 20. So he was the growth phase and so they grew up in retail and e-commerce. Right. Running from store to store, you know, and it was probably intense. I missed moments, you know, of their lives because I was traveling so much. So even, you know, the other day, you know, I still travel here and there for business now, my son said, Could you please just tell me when you go to a different state?

2 (1h 11m 43s):
So,

3 (1h 11m 45s):
But we never really saw a separation between our personal life and our professional life. It was one thing, I mean we were in the beauty business, we loved the industry, we brought our kids to store openings, they helped us clean the shelves. And even I remember our son, Luke, we would ask him what he thought about this location and he said, Oh, I like it. I think it's next to Starbucks so customers will come by. And he was only eight years old. So it was really an incredible journey for us.

0 (1h 12m 15s):
Barry, when you think about this journey that the two of you have been on, right? And, and what's happened since, how much of of it do you, do you, how now that you sort of thought about do you attribute to luck and how much to the, the hard work you put in?

3 (1h 12m 30s):
The idea that we don't realize that the success that we've had at Blue Mercury is really a sequential set of miracles. If we were to say that we didn't realize that it, it wouldn't be fair and that we looked back, I think during our journey and said if these sort of five things didn't go right, if we didn't meet Invis, we didn't raise that initial capital. If we couldn't have bought the store that Blue Mercury, that would've been a, what we would call a single point of failure. So luck plays into it, but I think, you know, for listeners to know that you have to be doing the hard work, you have to be prepared.

3 (1h 13m 12s):
I mean, who said it better than Nike? Which is just do it. You have to get in the game. You have to be in the game because you have to be in there for these good things to happen to you.

0 (1h 13m 22s):
Marla,

2 (1h 13m 23s):
I, yeah, I mean, you know, first one story that we didn't talk about, which is Leonard Lauder wandered into Blue Mercury in about 2000 and I happened to be there, so that's luck. But I seized that opportunity and went right up to him and said, I wanna sell your brands, you know, and he, you know, he said to me, You're too small, but stay in touch. And over the years he became a mentor of ours and when we had tough times or we needed advice, we went to him. So, you know, I tell our kids, never miss an opportunity to be fabulous.

2 (1h 14m 6s):
Those opportunities come and you need to know how to seize them. But it is, entrepreneurship is not an easy journey. I mean, sometimes I teach a class at Harvard Business School and I say to the entrepreneurs, you know, Okay, raise your hand if you've ever had a sleepless night or a morning you can't get out of bed for. And about 95% of people in the room raise their hand. Entrepreneurship is really, really hard. And I have tremendous respect for anyone who not only starts but you know, really pushes to survive long enough for good things to happen.

2 (1h 14m 45s):
There is no such thing as overnight success.

0 (1h 14m 49s):
That's Marla and Barry Beck, co-founders of Blue Mercury. Marla stepped down as CEO in 2021 and Barry a few years earlier and founded a new company that specializes in orthodontics. By the way, the two of them say that every day since the beginning, they've tried to take a four mile walk together to talk about business, the kids, their dreams and to pretty much clear their heads. So if you do the math by now, 20 plus years later, they've pretty much walked around the world. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you wanna contact our team, our email address is H I B t, id.wondery.com.

0 (1h 15m 34s):
If you wanna follow us on Twitter or Instagram, our account is at how I built this and mine is at Guy Roz on Twitter and on Instagram at Guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by Carrie Thompson with music composed by Era Bluey. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Katherine Cipher. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, Liz Metzker, Alex Chung, Josh Lash, Sam Paulson, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, and Carla Estabas. Our intern is Susanna Brown. I'm Guy Ross and you've been listening to How I Built This.

0 (1h 16m 25s):
Hey everyone. So I wanted to make sure you knew of all the different ways you can listen to how I built this. The show is always free and available wherever you listen to podcasts, whether it's Amazon Music, Apple Podcasts, or wherever you're listening right now. But if you wanna listen to the next episode of How I Built This Today, one Week Early, you can do that on Amazon Music or you can listen to it early and add free by subscribing to Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts or on the Wondery app. So please do follow us on your podcast app so you always have the latest episode downloaded and get your How I Built This merch and gear@wonderyshop.com.

0 (1h 17m 9s):
Another way to support the show is by filling out a survey at wondery.com/survey. And thanks.

7 (1h 17m 18s):
Hey parents, if your family enjoyed the last season of the podcast, Adventures of Chiro, join Chiro and his friends and family as they embark on more adventures and learn new valuable lessons. And if you're new to the neighborhood, welcome Chiro Carter is back for an exciting new season full of surprises and new faces. From wondering, the second season of Adventures of Chiro brings you stories about family values, responsibility, and getting out of your comfort zone. Life in the big city is never boring. In this new season of Adventures of Chiro, seven year old chiro comes face to face with even more surprises. Whether it's moving up to the third grade or joining the swim team, there's no stopping him.

7 (1h 18m 1s):
Follow Chiros Adventures with Friends and Family. Follow Adventures of Chiro on Amazon Music, Apple Podcasts, or wherever you listen, you can listen early and add free by joining Wondering Plus in the Wondering App.