0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Discover, matching all the cash back. You earn on your credit card at the end of your first year excepted at 99% of places in the U S that take credit cards. discover.com/match 2021 Nelson report limitations apply. Hey everyone, just a quick heads up that we've got a bonus episode coming your way this week. It's a really fascinating conversation I had about what it takes to innovate with three former guests of the show pal Kadakia ClassPass Perry, Chen of Kickstarter and Tristan Walker of Walker and company. We recorded it live at our virtual, how I built the summit back in may. So look for it in your podcast queue this Thursday, July 22nd, and today's show is from our archives.

0 (46s):
It's a conversation with yet another amazing innovator, Bobby Brown of Bobbi brown cosmetics. It first ran back in 2018. Enjoy.

1 (59s):
I used to hire an interview. Every person that walked in that brand and then I didn't anymore. And all of a sudden there were people working on my brand that I never met before, and that I might not have hired. And you know, it was a struggle and I tried to let go of the details, but then I realized the details were what makes the company so special. And so I kept thinking I could fix it. If we could just do this, if I could get this, it could be better. And it didn't get better.

0 (1m 39s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Raz and on today's show how a makeup artist named Bobby Brown built a billion dollar line of cosmetics by doing one simple thing, making women look like they weren't wearing any makeup. When I was a kid back in the 1980s, my older sister had a collection of those porcelain Mardi Gras masks on her bedroom wall. And they had these colorful faces painted with blue eyeshadow and deep Rouge streaks across the cheeks and the reddest lips that no human could possibly be born with.

0 (2m 29s):
And the thing about those masks is they looked like models. You'd see on the cover of fashion magazines models, who didn't hide their makeup makeup, that was loud and brash, and the look was anything but natural. And this is the world that Bobby Brown kind of broke into as a young makeup artist and the fashion industry. She loved everything about makeup, except, you know, the way it actually made people look. And so she was searching for a to use it. So that models look like they weren't really wearing it at all. So, you know, lipstick, that was the color of actual lips or blush that didn't make you look like you were blushing or eye shadow that matched your skin tone.

0 (3m 15s):
Now, this doesn't seem particularly revolutionary today, but back in the 1980s, when Bobby Brown started to mash together off the shelf cosmetics to come up with a new look, she was trying something totally different. She was trying to convince women that makeup could be well almost invisible. And some of her fellow makeup artists told her she'd had zero luck trying to sell that natural look. But of course today Bobbi brown cosmetics is a brand that's been estimated to generate over a billion dollars of revenue a year, a year. And Bobby never thought of herself as a business woman. She didn't set out to design a whole new line of cosmetics, but even as a little girl in suburban Chicago, she remembers how much she loved watching her mom get ready to go out for the evening.

1 (4m 6s):
My mother was the most glamorous, stunning woman. She looked like a young Jackie Kennedy, and I still watch her put her makeup on with her false eyelashes, her eyeliner, she was skinny as could be. She'd be standing there with a cigarette hanging off of the counter. And I would just be sitting there watching her. And she, I watched everything. I watched her take her brown pencil, which now we know is led and fill in our eyebrows and with a toothpick put on false eyelashes and bronzer on her cheeks and a pale lip on and go out, you know, with my dad Wednesday nights and Saturday nights.

1 (4m 47s):
And I was in awe, you know, I could never, ever, ever be that glamorous. And, and I was, you know, the shortest always and you know, not the skinniest, but I was really lucky because the other side of that, I had my grandmother and my aunt Dallas, who were more like me, really simple wearing comfortable shoes, you know, people comfortable in their skin. And at the same time, by the way, the, the girls, the models that were really popular were Cheryl Tiegs. Oh yeah. And all these, you know, blonde, Barbie doll looking girls, which I was not one of them, I, you know, had thick eyebrows and dark hair and, you know, I wasn't that.

1 (5m 33s):
And then the thing that changed my life was going to see the movie love story. Oh yes. With Allie McGraw. And I'll never forget. I, I was somehow in middle. I must've been in seventh grade and I remember sitting there and looking at this girl with dark shiny hair, parted down the middle, no apparent makeup. And literally for the first time in my life, I, I could be pretty too. She changed my life,

0 (6m 0s):
Allie McGraw and love story, change your life, change

1 (6m 4s):
My self esteem and my, you know, my, my confidence and figuring out who I am.

0 (6m 11s):
So when you, soon as time for you to leave home and go to college, what did you what'd you study?

1 (6m 18s):
Well, I went to, you know, with a lot of my friends, there were probably a dozen of us that went freshman year of college to university of Arizona in Tucson. And I was so bored in school, you know, because you would sit in, you know, it's a huge university and you'd sit in these big giant halls with 500 a thousand people and see this little teeny professor at the, you know, lecture us with, you know, an overhead projector. And I certainly, it was not the way that I was meant to learn. So, you know, I went through the motions and the end of the year I came home and I told them, my mom, I wanted to drop out of school.

1 (6m 59s):
And my mother says, you can't. And I said, but why mom, it's so boring. I don't want to go to college. She says, I never graduated college. And she says, you have to. I said, but mom, I have no clue what I want to do. And my mother said, I remember the two chairs we were sitting at. I was sitting cross-legged as I always do. And she said, okay, forget what you want to do with your life. If today was your birthday, you could do anything you want, what would you want to do? And I had no idea. And I remember as I always do quickly saying the first thing that popped into my head was I want to go to Marshall field and play with makeup, the big

0 (7m 35s):
Marshall fields in downtown Chicago.

1 (7m 37s):
It actually in the suburbs because that's where I live, but I wanted to go to the store and play with makeup. So my mom said, why don't you, you know, why don't you study makeup? And I said, just then, right, just that, why don't you study makeup? And I said, mom, I don't want to go to beauty school. And she said, no, I'm sure there's a college somewhere where you could study makeup. So I actually, my dad's friend told me about the school in Boston called Emerson. That will let me study makeup. This

0 (8m 9s):
Is the summer after your first year of college. Right? It was

1 (8m 11s):
Literally two weeks before I was supposed to go back to Arizona. And my car was actually, you know, packed when I made the decision to go to Emerson. So it was, it was like, it was like days before I flew up with my dad, went to Emerson and they S and I asked if they had a makeup program and they said, no, but we have something called an interdisciplinary program. And you can create your own major and short, you can study makeup. I said, I'm in, I'm going. And honestly, when I got to Emerson, I found myself, cause it was a school full of kids like me, creative, fiery entrepreneurial, and you're creating films and you're creating, you know, all different art.

1 (8m 56s):
And I remember even doing films and, you know, they pair you with someone and instead of doing things the normal way, which is like, oh, what kind of films should we do? I remember thinking about what kind of makeup I wanted to do and writing the film around the makeup. Hmm.

0 (9m 9s):
What was it about makeup that you liked or that spoke to you? Well, it

1 (9m 13s):
Wasn't even just the makeup. It was everything that goes along with it. So I've always been someone that knew how to use makeup differently than other people did. So, and, and doing theatrical makeup, making someone look old, or like a character was amazing for me because in order to do makeup for a play for a film, you have to read the script and you have to talk to the director. You have to create what the, what the person is going to look like. Did they have a hard life? How do you make them look tired? How do you make them look old? I'd have to go figure it out and understand it, and then make the girls look like that.

3 (9m 52s):
So when you, when you finished at Emerson, did you, was your intention to do theater

1 (9m 60s):
Makeup? Yes. So I graduated Emerson in 79 and a month before I graduated, I was in my bedroom reading Mademoiselle magazine. And there was an article about a freelance makeup artist in New York named Bonnie Malheur. And I never heard of a freelance makeup artist. And she was doing all the fashion shows and doing makeup work for Calvin Klein and Perry Ellis. And I wrote to her and I said, can I come to New York and assist? She never wrote

4 (10m 34s):
Me back. I was, no, no, no,

1 (10m 38s):
No, no. She didn't write me back. But I looked her up in the phone book and I called her on her answering machine. She said, hi, it's Bonnie. If I am not getting back to you, I'm probably on location. Call my agent Brian Bantry two one, two, blah, blah, blah. So I go to New York for a visit and I call Brian Bantry. Huh. And he said, come on up and talk to me. And he explained to me how the freelance works and I started just figuring it out. So I'm, you know, I moved to New York and I didn't know anyone. You know, I had Brian, Bantry had a meeting with him and he started, you know, slowly calling me to be an assistant to some of his people.

1 (11m 21s):
He didn't represent me, but he let me be an assistant. So

0 (11m 23s):
You, you get to New York and you decide that you want to be a makeup artist and that this was going to be your life. Like, so how did you, how did you start to get jobs?

1 (11m 34s):
I actually thought I would do fashion on the side until I broke into TV. So one of the things I did, there's another makeup artist. Her name was Bobby and she was the makeup bars for Saturday night live. I assisted her a few times. So, you know, that was cool. And I remember doing a couple times, you know, the makeup artist on the evening news couldn't make it, I would do that. So I, you know, it was, I started a freelance career. The only way I paid my rent at that time was my dad gave me $500 a month to pay my rent. Hmm.

0 (12m 11s):
And, and was like, at this time, in your life, did you feel like there were expectations that you weren't fulfilling? I dunno. I mean, you, you know, you came from this sort of middle-class home in Chicago and your dad was a lawyer. And so were you ever thinking like a man, you know, like my parents have these expectations of me and I need to, I dunno. I mean, were you ever thinking like that or worried about

1 (12m 36s):
That? Yeah. Can I tell you why one, I have this really weird gift and you know, you don't know it's a gift until you're, you know, of a certain age and look back. I am so naive, so I never think something's not going to work out and I never did. So I was not worried, you know? Yes. I was always anxious about how I was going to pay the rent or if I had enough money for this. And my, I remember calling my dad one day and I said, dad, I just can't stick to this budget. I had a credit card with a limit. I think I had $250 a month limit. And I kept, you know, incurring all these fees. And I said, dad, I can't stick to this. And he said, all right, stop for a minute. Put it down. I said, okay. He said, stop trying to stick to a budget or create a budget.

1 (13m 20s):
Why don't you figure out how you're going to make more money? I said, Hm. Okay. And I remember telling myself, Monday morning, you get up and you fill your date book with appointments. So I go sees as they call it. So I went, I started making appointments. And as long as I Monday was my day to fill it. And then I had the whole week to go see people. So I started calling magazines and I'd look on the masthead and I would see the booking agent. I booked with them PI and Bobby Brown. I'm a freelance makeup artist. I'd love to come in and show you my book. I had a, you know, a book of like faces that you'd have faces that I've done. Yes. And you know, you start to make relationships, you come back and see people.

1 (14m 3s):
And I did that for a while.

0 (14m 5s):
So here, here's my question. I mean, what does it like, how were you good, like a better makeup artist than someone else? Like what is it that you were able to offer?

1 (14m 16s):
Well, all right, so let's go back to the seventies and the eighties, the makeup back then was the epitome of unnatural foundation was pink. It stopped at the, at the jawline. It was contour. Eyes were eye shadow was yellow and purple blue. It was all of those things. I was always doing more of a, now it's called a Bobby face and now it's called nude makeup. But back then, it was just, I always made people look healthier. I wanted people to not look like they wearing makeup. And I even had one very, very famous makeup artist. You know, who I asked his opinion on stuff said, you will never work because people don't want to look like that.

1 (15m 4s):
And I don't want to look like that. People want to look made up and you know, I just couldn't do it. So even when I was doing makeup on TV, I had these really simple things. I, I looked for. I wanted to make the foundation to actually be the color of the skin. Yeah. And I had a mix and blend because most makeup on the market was bad. And, you know, having a giant kit, I had everything. So I would kind of, you know, smush a lot of it together. And people started taking pictures of it. It looked really good. So

0 (15m 37s):
You are getting steady work, you're doing more and more magazines. What was the first, really big gig that you can remember getting like a, with a major

5 (15m 46s):
Fashion model? Probably

1 (15m 48s):
Two of my hugest aha, like back then was when I had a six or eight page spread in American Vogue with one model Tatiana Petite's. And it was literally full face, full bleed, full face makeup story. Only on, you know, different looks, different makeup that was like, put me on the map. And then the next map was a cover of Vogue with Naomi Campbell.

4 (16m 16s):
Wow. When was that? Now we're

1 (16m 18s):
Into, I think 88 or 89 when she was just starting to be a huge thing.

0 (16m 24s):
Yeah. So, you know, you are doing makeup and that's your life. That's your career. Yes, it was at the top of

1 (16m 31s):
My game. And by the way, you do magazine work and editorial. It's fantastic. You, no matter how big it is, you still get $150 a day. So you really don't make a whole lot of money. No. But when you do advertising and catalog, like catalog at the time was paying between two 50 and 500 a day. And that's when you do make up on a bunch of models for a Saks fifth avenue or a Macy's. Right. And then if it's a commercial, you got a couple thousand, but everything you do, you meet people and you, you know, you tend to move in packs. If a hairdresser gets booked for something, they book you and then, you know, then you start doing advertising and that's, you know, could be up to 5,000 a day.

1 (17m 12s):
And by the way, while I did those things, I also had a very, very serious relationship. I got engaged. I moved out of the city. I had friends, I had a normal life. I started having kids at the same time. And I chose that. I chose that. I wanted to be, I wanted to go through that tunnel, put my hair in a ponytail, put my sneakers on, be in the park with my dog. You know, I'd rather be home with my husband and my baby. Then, you know, stay, I couldn't understand why they wanted me to stay at a fashion shoot until 10 o'clock at night. Just because they took a long time deciding things.

1 (17m 54s):
I'm like, no, I'm out of here at six. Yeah. So

0 (17m 58s):
In 1990, I guess that was around the time when you started to kind of experiment with your own makeups. What, what, how, how did that even begin? How did that even happen? So, so

1 (18m 11s):
I was pregnant with my first baby and I was on a photo shoot for Mademoiselle magazine. No, it was self magazine and it was called makeup shopping at alternative places with makeup artists, Bobby Brown. And I, they took me to different places. And one of the places downtown, I guess I took them that I took the crew to was Kiehl's pharmacy. And Kiehl's at the time was this independently owned, cool place. I brought everyone down there. We were shooting there. And while they were shooting, I was talking to the chemist that was there. And he had a little, a couple of lipsticks

0 (18m 47s):
Before Kiehls became what is like private equity money or whatever. It was just one shot,

4 (18m 55s):
Looked like a pharmacy, like,

0 (18m 57s):
Okay, everyone's wearing white. And exactly. And there was a chemist on site

1 (19m 1s):
As a chemist onsite. And he had these lipsticks and I remember touching them and I said, wow, these are really nice. He said, oh yeah, I make those. And I said, you make them. And he says, yeah. I said, oh, I, I would love to be able to make a lipstick. He said, I'll make it for you. I said, I said, all right, ma. I said, what I want you can't buy? I said, I want something that doesn't smell. I want it to be creamy, but not greasy. I want it to look like lip color. I can't find a lipstick that looks like lip color. And he's like, what do you mean? I said, well, I, and I pulled out my tope eye pencil and my pinky blush. And I said, look at when you put this together, if you put a little bit of balm on it and blot it on your lips, he's like, all right, give me those things.

1 (19m 44s):
And he went home and he sent it to me and I said, oh my God, I love this. I said, I bet I could sell this. And he said, all right, why don't you sell it for $15? He said, I'll make it. You sell it. You'll get seven 50. I'll get seven 50. I thought, okay, that's a deal. So I had a lipstick that I called brown because I thought it was brown based, not because of my name. And then I thought everyone's going to love that. And then I said, you know what, not everyone has the same color lips. And I started studying people's lip color. And then I sat down and I thought about all the different lip colors. And then I said, you know, some people don't like lip color lipstick.

1 (20m 25s):
They like red, orange, someone likes a good beige, a pink, but I said, you don't need 15 different pinks in your makeup kit. Let me make the ideal pink. Let me make the ideal orange. So I sat down and I thought of 10 different colors. I worked with a chemist. He made these colors and I thought, all right, let's put a number one to, but let me name them. And I wasn't going to name them the way lipsticks are named, you know, cherries in the snow. And I'm like, why don't we call them beige pink, orange, red. So, you know, raisin, I named them what they look like. So you were doing like more understated, understated, and what was on the market, on the market wearable, by the way, the word wearable people could put them on an actually

3 (21m 12s):
Look good. How's that for a concept. So

0 (21m 15s):
You, it would take like, I'm just trying to, to, to get the right color to what was the name of this chemist, by the way, Steven, Steven. So to get, to get Steven the right color, you would take, like, I don't know, paint or, or different makeups and just like rub it together in like a Petri dish.

1 (21m 31s):
And yeah. And I, you know, I would, I would either mail it to him or I would say do this and yeah. You know, back and forth, back and forth. He made them for me. And I did everything else.

0 (21m 41s):
Yeah. Make like how many, like five, 10 sticks. I think,

1 (21m 45s):
You know, he probably made a hundred of each color. Yeah. So no, once we agreed that we would be partners, there was nothing in writing. It was just, wow, this could be interesting. It wasn't anything more than that. And he

0 (21m 57s):
Had like a fabrication plant or the ability to like make moldings. Yeah. Yeah. He did. I

1 (22m 2s):
Don't, I think he did it in his home. You know, it wasn't, it was his side thing. Cause he was a chemist. And

0 (22m 8s):
What were you going to sell each ticket lipstick for again,

1 (22m 10s):
15, $10. 15 bucks. Yes. 15 bucks. And when I first started, my plan was to sell them to models, to editors. And then one day I was having lunch with a girlfriend who was the beauty editor of glamour magazine at the time. And she said, so what's going on? You know, we'd both had young babies and I talking about the kids and I said, you know, I'm doing, let me show you this thing. She goes, oh my God, that's so cool. She said, can I write about it? And you

0 (22m 37s):
Had kind of a reputation in the industry, cause you were a makeup artist. You get this article in glamour. And what happens,

1 (22m 45s):
People started calling up and ordering lipsticks and you know, it wasn't like, oh my God, I'm going to be rich. Oh my God. I could pay my mortgage this month. It was just, you know, steady things coming in. And we got a bunch of offers, you know, people wanted to purchase lipsticks. So I don't even think, you know, we sold 400 of them. I mean, we sold a bunch of

0 (23m 9s):
Them. It's not called Bobby Brown at this point, right? Yes, it was was, it was called Bobby Brown. I didn't know what else to call it. You just put your name on the side.

1 (23m 17s):
Yes. And that was really cool. And then I meet the lady at Bergdorf and that's when things actually needed to change.

3 (23m 25s):
You meet who at Bergdorf. I ended

1 (23m 29s):
Up going to a party in the city with some friends and friends that actually eventually we're going to be our partners in the company. And I met her friend, Alison and I said, thanks for inviting me. I'm Bobby. She said, nice to meet you. And I said, what are you doing? She said, I'm the cosmetics buyer at Bergdorf Goodman. Wow. Oh, that's nice. Well, I never even shopped at Bergdorf Goodman back then. And I said, whoa, I'm doing this line of lipsticks. You know, perhaps you want to look at them. And she said, love to let me bring them in.

0 (24m 3s):
So what happened? You went and you brought your lipsticks to, to, to show her. Then a couple of days later

1 (24m 8s):
She brought them in. I mean, I had no press release. I had nothing. She called me back and she said, they're really interested. We'd love to take them. And that's when I realized I had, it really changed the way we were doing things. And you know, I had to find a different way to scale up than the chemist because that was the only way he knew. So I parted ways with the chemist and I had to find a lab to recreate the lipsticks the way I wanted. And we needed to find someone to do it. I remember making all these calls, but then one day I was in an elevator and I said, hi to the girl in the elevator.

1 (24m 51s):
And she said, hi, I think we're on the 11th floor. So we had a few minutes elevator

3 (24m 55s):
In your apartment, building in, in my

1 (24m 57s):
Apartment, building in New York city. And I said, hi. She said, hi. And I said, what do you do? She said, oh, I work at, at a cosmetics lab in Queens.

6 (25m 8s):
And I said, oh, do you have a card?

1 (25m 11s):
And I had my lipsticks recreated there and they made my lipsticks. I met her in the elevator

0 (25m 23s):
Coming up more chance meetings for Bobby Brown and how they helped her grow the company. And then eventually how that company got away from her. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, comm committed to helping you kickstart your mental wellbeing initiatives, empower your employees to stress less rest better and build resilience year round with calm for business companies can partner with the mental fitness app to provide support and tools for their employees.

0 (26m 5s):
Right now, calm is offering a free wellbeing ebook for HR and benefit leaders. And one month free after you attend a free demo. When you go to calm.com/built, this message comes from NPR sponsor, American express business, American express business offers a line of cards, packed with features and benefits like membership, rewards points, flexible payment options, employee cards, and much more to help take your business further because with needs like yours, you need a car designed for business built for business by American express. Don't do business without it terms apply. Learn more@americanexpress.com slash business cards.

0 (26m 49s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, click up a productivity platform. That's saving people one day every week. How it's simple, click up brings all of your work into one place. You get tasks, docs, goals, chat, and more in one tool. So you can focus on getting work done without switching apps. It's how teams and companies like Uber, Google and web flow save time. Click up is free forever. So try click up today. I click up.com/npr.

7 (27m 25s):
There is no denying that there is a lot going on in the economy right now. So

8 (27m 29s):
Far in 2021, about 3,600 retail stores have closed. You know, China has banned Bitcoin many times before, but this time it's looking pretty serious understanding

9 (27m 41s):
This stuff. It is kind of our thing

7 (27m 44s):
Here at the indicator. It's how we like to spend our free time. Everyday. We explain something that is going on in the economy, listen and follow the indicator from planet money on NPR.

0 (28m 5s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's the early 1990s and Bobby Brown has come up with 10 new shades of lipstick. She's got a new cosmetics lab to make them and a department store that wants

10 (28m 17s):
To sell them Bergdorf Goodman. But in order to get things going, she needs an infusion of cash. We pretty

1 (28m 26s):
Much emptied our bank account, which was, I remember 5,000. My husband remembers 10,000. I trust him more than I remember my memory. And we actually partnered with these friends of ours, who one girl was in PR and the husband was in the cosmetics industry. You know? So the four of us partner together, w what were their names? Their names were Roslyn, Ken Landis. And why did

0 (28m 52s):
You decide that you want to partner with other people? Because

1 (28m 56s):
My husband and I did not have the expertise, you know, we had no idea. We were, you know, 31 year old kids, you know, with the new baby who was in law school, he was a real estate developer. I was a makeup artist. I knew how to make these, make the lipsticks. I knew what it should be. And we were friends this couple that we're friends with. He had been in the cosmetics industry and she was in PR. So it was, you know, a magical pairing. That's how we started the brand. And

0 (29m 28s):
Bobby Brown was born as a product at Bergdorf Goodman. Yes. And how does it do when it debuts there?

1 (29m 34s):
Well, we thought we would sell a hundred lipsticks the first month, which, you know, that was the thought. And we did a hundred the first day. And were you in, in the store? We were away. He had an avenue right on fifth avenue and there was no room in the cosmetics department. So they put us on a table outside of the cosmetics department where I think they had, you know, handbags. And so, you know, w w it wasn't for any other reason, but people thought it was a brilliant genius idea that we marketed ourself apart from the noise of the cosmetics floor.

0 (30m 7s):
So you could finance it with whatever cash you had between the four of you, and then, and then you would sell product, and then you would get paid by Bergdorf Goodman. When did it go to the next store? Well,

1 (30m 19s):
We were at Burgerville. We, we added pencils and then we added eyeshadow. Like we did everything, not like strategic, but as they came up and we, we added them and we were pretty much with the same lab for most of the time. And then Bergdorf, you know, one day we were doing so well at Bergdorf Goodman. They said, you know, we're a sister company of Neiman Marcus. They would love to try you in four stores. So we opened up four stores in Neiman's on a store is like a counter, a counter. Yes. They call them doors actually. So we opened four doors, four stores started adding, you know, products, and I would visit the stores and do personal appearances, usually with my husband and my baby or babies in tow.

1 (31m 3s):
Cause we always, you know, I never liked to be apart from them. And they always came and I would travel to these markets and I would be on their local TV, I'd be on in their newspapers. So it was a full-on, you know, press thing

0 (31m 17s):
Where there, w did you ever get a vibe from people like, well, who are you

1 (31m 21s):
Certainly, you know, and especially in Dallas, you know, where they would look, look at me like, she's the plain Jane type now. Cause in Dallas, the makeup, the hair, the jewelry, you know, it took a while to Neiman Marcus. That's, Neiman's, that's the fancy stuff. You know, it took a while to be beloved by those women. But also at the same time, I was becoming a known beauty expert on the today's show, which was really a major launch in the, the brand and the business. So the story behind the today show was that I wrote my first book

0 (31m 57s):
About, about cosmetics, about makeup. Yeah.

1 (32m 0s):
And then I was happened to be in Florida doing a personal appearance for one of my makeup products and also for my first book. And I'll never forget it was in, you know, the inner circle, which were the fancy ladies at Neiman Marcus. I finished my speech and I said, any questions and this little red-headed lady, you know, grandma type raised her hand. And I went back, I remember I put my hand on her shoulder. She was so cute. And she said, yes, I have trouble keeping my lipstick on how do I do it? And I said, well, and I gave her the answer and she looked at me and she says, thank you. She said, are you Jewish? I said, yes, I am. And she said, I've seen you on the today show I've been on once.

1 (32m 42s):
I said, thank you. And she said, as a Jewish, this was off microphone. She said, she said, you've done so much. Is there anything else you want to do? I said, I don't know. I said, I don't know. Maybe I'd love to be a regular on the today show. She said, honey, Jeff Zucker is my grandson. Jeff soccer was the executive producer of the today show at the time. And it was a Friday, Monday. I was on the today show. I was in my dressing room. You know, my PR team at the time was beyond excited, doing how to put your makeup on something. Probably Katie was interviewing me. Jeff came up and he said, Grammy, you know, wanted me to have you on. I said, that's awesome.

1 (33m 22s):
And he said, I hear you want to be a regular. I said, I'd love to be a regular. He says, okay, you're a regular. I said, when, when can I come back? He said, how about next month? I said, okay, once a month, he said, okay, fine. I was on the today show for about 12 years, 15 years. And honestly, being an beauty expert on the today show probably put me on the map.

0 (33m 46s):
And you did this at the, at least at the beginning for free.

1 (33m 49s):
I know they never, they never paid me a nickel and I never ever pushed my brand. They would say Bobby Brown from Bobbi brown cosmetics. It was an amazing thing because it, it established me as a beauty expert, not just someone who makes makeup. It was really my expertise. So it's separated me, the person from the brand, which was good, but it also really helped the brand you

0 (34m 14s):
In, in 19 95, 5 years after you first make those 10 lipsticks, you get an offer. I guess you pretty early on, you guys are approached by big, the big cosmetic companies who wanted to buy your brand. And you, I guess you rejected a couple offers at the beginning, right? Who, who were, they

1 (34m 36s):
Let's see. There was a lot of talks with Shiseido. Oh yeah. The Japanese companies, a lot of meetings, a lot of talks, no official offer, but a lot of meetings. And then there was a Dallas based company that tried to buy us a finance company that basically finally said, if you won't sell to us, we're just going to knock you off with another make-up ours, which they did, which is fine. I never afraid of that. Oh, they, the knockoff brand. Well, it was different brand, but yes, a makeup artist, you know, a well-known makeup artists that created products

0 (35m 13s):
Is still out there in the market. Yeah. Laura Mercier,

1 (35m 15s):
You know, it was a competitor. I mean, we were very, we were always very different and that was fine. And they

0 (35m 21s):
Wanted it to kind of buy you out and they did, they wanted to buy us.

1 (35m 25s):
We weren't for sale. We didn't think they were the right people to buy us. And we weren't for sale. When, you know, we got the call from SDL.

9 (35m 33s):
This is five years

0 (35m 34s):
After you launch it as Tailwater calls you and take the call.

9 (35m 38s):
Yeah. I kinda think it was four years, but yeah, four years it was four years. So I

1 (35m 42s):
Got a call from Frederic Fekkai who, you know, had a salon and was a well-known hairdresser. And he said, you know, Leonard Lauder would like an introduction to you. Can I do that? And I said, sure, sure. So we were invited of dinner at Leonard Lauder's home, my partner, Roz, and I were invited one night to his home and him and his wife at the time, Evelyn, we had a beautiful dinner and you know, fell madly in love with him, with her. And he basically said, you know, I'm really interested in buying your company. You've done. He said, what he said to me, he says, you have done such an incredible job.

1 (36m 25s):
You are beating us in the stores. And we were beating Estee Lauder in Neiman Marcus. At the time you were beating us, we can't beat you. So we thought we would buy you. And

0 (36m 36s):
You were open to hearing, hearing offers.

1 (36m 38s):
Well, when Leonard said to me, you know, that we can help you grow your business and you could do what you really love, which is be creative and work on shoots work, you know, on the brand, but not have to worry about the details. And we could help expand your business and you can have complete autonomy, you know, which means I could do what I wanted with the company and still be in charge.

0 (37m 1s):
And they were, they were offering a hundred percent. They were going to buy a hundred percent, hundred percent, a hundred percent. And I guess we'll just burst the bubble. You did sell to them, which we'll get to,

1 (37m 12s):
But no one's ever gotten the number. Right. And I'm not good at numbers. And I can't even tell you what it is, but it was like more than I could ever

0 (37m 19s):
Have imagined a lot of cash. Now you get to core, split it with your partners and then pay your taxes. But you were left with a more cash than you'd ever had in your life. Yes. All right. Just pause for a sec. Looking back on that decision. 1995, to sell to Estee Lauder, for whatever price they offered you. Some people say 74 million, let's say 50 million, whatever. It was more a million hood, something. Yeah. Was it the right decision to make a hundred percent? It was the right decision. A hundred percent. Couldn't have scaled Bobby Brown to what it is today without that. Yeah. I

1 (37m 50s):
Don't know, but I didn't want to, because, because I just wanted to have a fulfilling life with my family, my friends and my kids. Yeah. I there's no question. I have no regrets

0 (38m 4s):
Becoming a billionaire. Wasn't wasn't that, that wasn't a goal. Yeah, no millionaire is fine. You don't need to great

10 (38m 11s):
Billionaire. Yeah.

0 (38m 13s):
All right. So Leonard Lauder writes you a big check and Estee Lauder now owns Bobby Brown. What does that mean? Does that mean that you then become an employee of Estee, Lauder and employee? Yep. They paid you a salary. You were an employee with a 401k and all that stuff.

10 (38m 28s):
And at the beginning, was it, did you like it? I love it.

1 (38m 32s):
It was fantastic. I loved it for, you know, out of the 22 years, I probably loved it for 15.

0 (38m 39s):
And, and so the idea was once Estee Lauder was running the business side, you didn't have to worry about going to banks for financing. You didn't have to worry about supply chain. You didn't have to worry about payroll or accounting or not filing a letter with the office of tax and revenue, and you didn't want to do any of that stuff. I

1 (38m 57s):
Had no interest. I didn't like the big corporate meetings and I would sit there and some meetings. And I know I used to drive people crazy because I didn't do things the corporate way. And I'm sure people either looked at me as brilliant or really difficult, or, you know, whatever, you know, the thing is, unfortunately, men could be brilliant when women are considered difficult.

0 (39m 22s):
I can't imagine that would have been an easy transition.

1 (39m 26s):
It wasn't easy. And I'm sure it was harder for, you know, our partners at the time. They didn't stay very long. You know, we, we had a little bit

10 (39m 36s):
Of a tough relationship, you know, for a while,

1 (39m 40s):
Because you know, you start a company with friends and, you know, things happen and things get tough. And it was a tough time. There was a bunch of years where things, there was a struggle between, you know, Roz and I, and then the four of us. And, you know, after, you know, we sold the company, they, they move Roz off the brand and she ended up working for the company for a while and then she left and I'm a stranger friendship.

10 (40m 13s):
Oh, really stranded. Do you think

0 (40m 16s):
That it's a good idea in general to avoid going to business with friends? Yes. It's not a good idea. Okay. All right. A hundred percent.

1 (40m 25s):
And, and, you know, we were not friends for many years after we sold the company and we just recently got back together the past couple of years. So, you know, life is interesting.

0 (40m 37s):
You walked away from Estee Lauder in 2016 and walk away. Maybe it's not the right term. I don't know.

1 (40m 44s):
No. What the right term is. It was, it was a joint decision. Was that hard?

0 (40m 48s):
I mean, your name, your company, you built it. Right. And that's it you're out.

1 (40m 54s):
Well, like probably two to five years, five years was a struggle. The last five years, the last five years was struggled. But just because, just because it got so big, the company got so big, the corporation got so big, they bought so many other companies. It was growing. It was huge. I am not a follow the leader kind of person. I am the leader. Okay. I can't help it. And if I see things not working where it makes sense to me and wasting energy and time, I don't like it. And I like to do it differently. So, you know, and I like to try new things and invent new things. So yeah, it was always a struggle, always a struggle.

1 (41m 35s):
And so then the last couple of years were really tough. Like what happened? Oh my God. There was just, you know, they start in, I used to hire ever approve and hire and interview every person that walked in that band. And then I didn't anymore. And all of a sudden there were people working on my brand that I never met before and that I might not have hired. And you know, it was a struggle and I tried to let go of the details, but then I realized the details were what makes the company so special. And so I kept thinking I could fix it. So I would walk in every day with an imaginary, you know, tape around my arm saying, okay, let me fix this.

1 (42m 16s):
Let me fix this. Let me fix this. I couldn't. And you know, the last year was really tough. I'm sure they were not happy with me. I was not happy with them. And it just was time for both of us to move on. Was it

0 (42m 32s):
Tough in the sense, like you dreaded going into the office in the morning? Yes.

1 (42m 36s):
Wow. Not only dreaded going in in the morning, I was depleted and spent when I came home. So for two years, my aunt Alice, who was 80 at the time would say to me, it's time for my husband would say, are you ready? Like my friends would say, come on enough is enough already. And I kept saying no, because I think if we could just do this, if I could get this, you know, it could be better. And it didn't get better. Like

0 (43m 6s):
I'm imagining I'm walking down some street in New York. I pass you. And I know it's Bobby Brown. I'm like, oh my God, Bobby Brown, I love your makeup and you're on your way to work. And you would say, oh yeah, thank you so much. And I wouldn't know that you were miserable. Yeah. Walking to your powerful job at Bobby Brown. No,

1 (43m 24s):
Honestly, if you really asked me why I left, I needed to be the boss again. Yeah. Like when you're the boss, then you, okay. Something doesn't work. We could fix it. So yes, I, when I left Bobby, it wasn't easy. The second it happened or I went down the elevator and, and I knew that it was that second. It was done. I had a relief come over me. Like, I can't tell you this first relief was, oh my God, all these problems are lifted.

0 (43m 50s):
All right. So here's the thing. We've had lots of founders in the company who sold and then, you know, S some, some were angry with the way it was run and, and some have mixed feelings, some indifferent. It depends, but you know, Ben and Jerry, for example, those guys they'll, they'll knock Ben and Jerry's now, and again, in a good natured way, but they will still, they're still the face of the brand. And they're happy to kind of be the Brent, not happy, but they are the brand ambassadors. Yeah. So did you ever think of doing

1 (44m 21s):
That? No. No. It had no interest. It was offered to me, Bobby Brown.

0 (44m 26s):
I mean, the face of the, you didn't had no interest in that. No

1 (44m 29s):
Interest. I don't care how much money they offered. Why, why? Why not? Because what I love, I'm a, I'm an entrepreneur. I like to mold and shape and be in control of how things are. And so, no, I have no, I had no interest, you know, honestly, it's been a while it took, I'm not going to say I walked out the door and it was fine. There was a lot of emotion. The first month or two, there was a lot of emotion, you know, the first year now it's, you know, year and a half, I literally could look at what's happening there. And I, and I unfollowed everything. So I don't see anything. But when I do see it, it's like, there's nothing there because it's not the company.

1 (45m 11s):
I, I found it. And it's not the company that, that, it's not my company, it's their company. And yes, I'm really proud of the products. I'm proud of everything I did, but you know, the world has changed and what their, the direction they're going is fine is what they want to do.

0 (45m 29s):
And by the way, were you, were you prevented, are you prevented from your contract with Bobby Brown of starting a makeup line? Oh yes. You can never do that for the

1 (45m 37s):
Rest of your life. No, no. That's not accurate, you know, but I, my name, I sold my name. So

0 (45m 43s):
You can't, you can't use the name poppy brown anymore? No.

1 (45m 46s):
No, but I would never, yeah. I would never put, even if I could, I would not put my name on a product anymore because I have to be the face of that product. I don't want to be responsible for everything I did that already.

0 (45m 59s):
So Bobby, with all this, the success that you've had in your career, how much of it do you think is because of your, your intelligence, your hard work and how much of it? Because of luck?

1 (46m 11s):
I think that my, my intelligence is mostly emotional intelligence, which is, you know, dealing with what's around me. I am incredibly lucky and, you know, fortuitous and grateful and all of those things. I'm not the only one that works hard. I am not the only one that seizes opportunities. I don't know why, you know, things I do are successful and not everything I've done is successful, but I keep going. And I'm really good when I'm really good at, and I hope there's other entrepreneurs out there that understand this. I am really good at hiring people that are good at things that I'm not,

3 (46m 52s):
That's really important,

1 (46m 53s):
Cause I'm not good at everything. And I'm not. I told my aunt Alice, I'm not really good at anything. I'm just

3 (46m 57s):
Going to tell him people what to do. I'm really good at telling people what to do.

0 (47m 4s):
That's Bobby Brown, founder of Bobbi brown cosmetics. And although

3 (47m 8s):
She can no longer use her own name

0 (47m 10s):
As a brand, she can sell her own makeup. Again, her non-compete with Estee Lauder ended last year, and she just came out with a brand new line of makeup called Jones road. And by the way, how lucky were you to have such a cool name? Bobby? I never liked my name growing

3 (47m 27s):
Up. You hated it? Oh yes.

1 (47m 30s):
When they decided what to name me, I was named after my great grandmother Berta. Thank God they didn't name me Berta. I'm not sure anyone would use lipstick called Berta brown.

3 (47m 40s):
Virta brown. You could just, that could be your new vertebra. Maybe time. Maybe it Bobby, maybe it's time Berta. I'm not sure that would work.

0 (47m 50s):
And thanks so much for listening to the show this week, it was produced by Rachel Faulkner with music composed by REM teen Arab, Louie I'm guy Roz. And you've been listening to how I built this.

11 (48m 4s):
This is NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, click up a productivity tool that saving people one day a week by bringing all your work into one place, click up brings your tasks, docs, goals, chat, and more into one it's free forever. So sign up today@clickup.com slash and PR.