0 (0s):
If you're looking for something new to watch, check out, slow horses on apple TV. Plus it's a thrilling spy series, starring Gary Oldman and Kristin Scott, Thomas you'll be taken inside slouch house, a dead end division of the British counterintelligence and security agency. Am I five here once elite agents pay for the mistakes in the field by whittling away on trivial tasks. But all of that changes when a heinous crime forces, <inaudible> five to enlist the services of slouch house and investigation that goes deeper than anyone could have predicted stream, slow horses exclusively on the apple TV. Plus you started a small business because you had a passion for pottery, a skill for software or a mind for manufacturing and not necessarily for your know-how of the business side of running a small business.

0 (43s):
Thankfully, that's what QuickBooks is all about. Providing new small business owners with the tools they need to feel confident from day one, because with QuickBooks, you can get paid, run payroll and know where your business stands from the start. So while you may not know everything, when it comes to the business side of things with QuickBooks, you can still get everything done for your business, new business. No problem. Success starts with Intuit, QuickBooks, QuickBooks, payroll, QuickBooks payments, and QuickBooks online account required.

1 (1m 12s):
Hey everyone. So next week you'll start seeing two episodes of how I built this in your feeds every single week. And as you probably know, you can follow how I built this on Amazon music, apple podcasts, or wherever you're listening right now. But I want to let you know that you can actually listen to the next episode of how I built this right now. One week early on Amazon music. Also, you can listen to it early and without ads by subscribing to Wondery plus an apple podcasts or the Wondery app. So while our team works to add more content to the feed for all of our listeners, we thought we'd visit some favorite episodes from the archive this week. It's my conversation with Andy Dunn, the co-founder of Bonobos.

1 (1m 53s):
It first ran in January of 2019. It's a good one. And I hope you enjoy it. How were you able to kind of stay optimistic? I mean, were you just looking at projections and saying this is going to be fine,

3 (2m 8s):
Stay optimistic. What makes you think that? I was optimistic? I was, I was defiant in the face of a terrifying reality companies don't die because the companies fail. They die because the entrepreneur gives up and that was the approach. Just keep the lights on, keep growing. And that's what we did.

1 (2m 35s):
Welcome to how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Raz and on today's show how Andy Dunn realized that men would shop in a clothing store without any clothing in it built a multi-million dollar fashion brand Bonobos. Okay. So I just want to talk about a serious issue in men's fashion, the khaki diaper, but you know, you see men all the time with pants that might fit perfectly in the waist, but they're a, shall we say a little too baggy in certain other areas, and this is really common because your other option is wearing pants that are really tight in the waistband.

1 (3m 29s):
And he might be thinking well, if every man is wearing khaki diaper, butt pants, what does it even matter? Except that when Andy Dunn and his co-founder Brian Bailey were in grad school in the mid two thousands, they had a hunch that there could be another option, a best of both worlds type of trouser with a curved waistband that fits really well on the hips and eliminates that, you know, diaper look and they turn this idea into a giant company Bonobos, which in 2017, sold to Walmart for a reported $310 million. But the story is a little more complicated than that because as you will hear, Andy Dunn made a lot of mistakes along the way.

1 (4m 14s):
There were times when Bonobos could have gone under including a very messy fallout with his co-founder, but we'll get to that a little later for now. Here's what you need to know. Andy Dunn grew up in the suburbs of Chicago. His family was squarely middle-class. His dad was a high school teacher born and raised in Chicago and his mom, an immigrant from India was an x-ray technician. So Andy grew up in a bi-cultural household, even though, as he tells it, he didn't really identify that way for a long time.

3 (4m 45s):
I didn't know I was different at all until I think it was in high school. This kid ed invented a nickname for me, which is window, which I guess stands for white Hindu. And I was totally, it became a thing. And you know how teenagers are, you know, it became like a good derogatory nickname. And of course those can catch on like wildfire and it, you know, depending on how you feel about it, it can be a little bit upsetting or meaningfully upsetting. So I came home and I told my parents expecting empathy. And instead they both started laughing really hard cause they also found it funny.

3 (5m 27s):
And that was the only time in, in terms of awareness that I started to think like, okay, wait a second. I'm not, I'm not just among mostly white people. I'm, I'm not just, you know, I'm half white, half Indian, which is a little bit different. And I think I did a bad job of connecting deeply with the Indian side because of the dominant white culture that we have. I sort of engaged in it culturally with, through my mom, but I didn't really own it until I went to India in 1997 when I was S I think a freshman or sophomore in college. And that really connected me in that, that helped me kind of shatter the bubble that I think in a lot of ways, I grew up in, in the suburbs of Chicago, you know, all the way through college,

1 (6m 14s):
Andy went to Northwestern for college. And at first he thought he wanted it to be a doctor. But after studying for the MCAT, he decided to switch gears and go into business consulting and private equity. And eventually he wound up enrolling at Stanford business school.

3 (6m 30s):
It was amazing

1 (6m 31s):
In, in what way

3 (6m 34s):
They filter for empathy. And self-awareness I think, and then there's no great disclosure to employers. So they removed the competitive dynamic of how you do in your classes. And then it's smaller. It's three hundred and fifty three hundred seventy five people, which is, I guess, twice the Dunbar number, which is the number of people that existed in hunter gatherer villages. And supposedly as the number of people where you can know every member of a tribe. Sure. So you kind of are friends with everyone or one hop away and you put all those ingredients and you mix them together and it's a magical place.

1 (7m 8s):
All right. So you go to Stanford in the fall of 2005 and you become friends with, with somebody who is going to factor in into your life. Tell me, tell me about meeting Brian.

3 (7m 20s):
We became housemates actually. So once we both got into school, we had a common friend, a guy named Jeff and I, I called up Jeff, who was an alumni of Stanford. And I said, Hey, how do I think about getting a, a roommate for Schwab, which is the building where a lot of first years live. And he's like, oh, you gotta, you gotta live with this guy, Brian Bailey. And so I invited him to come out one night and thought he was terrific and funny and fun and super smart. And so we became roommates.

1 (7m 54s):
So you and Brian become roommates and you're doing your own thing. You're taking your classes and you, I guess when you're a business school, you presumably you're constantly like bouncing ideas off other students, right? Because the, the idea is that they might be somebody you could build something with.

3 (8m 13s):
Exactly. Yeah. I kind of thought about it as a entrepreneur and residents opportunity. Like you're amongst all these brilliant people and you can learn from them and figure out, Hey, what do they think of, of different ideas? And I had a bunch of dumb ideas and most of the time people told me,

1 (8m 31s):
But what were your dumb ideas?

3 (8m 32s):
So taking different things I'd seen when I traveled and investing in new ideas to create those products in the U S and there was a south African beef Turkey called biltong that didn't exist in the U S I'm a vegetarian now, but I used to love this. It, it it's very different than American beef jerky. It tastes almost like dried flaming yawn with salt, pepper, and coriander. And I couldn't believe this didn't exist in such a carnivorous country like America. And we got to the end of the project and the guy who was the professor overseeding minute, a guy named Joel Peterson, who would factor in meaningfully into Banabos said, I think this is a bad idea.

1 (9m 10s):
So you and Brian Bailey are roommates, and you've got a bunch of weird ideas. And, and he had an idea as well. Right?

3 (9m 19s):
Well, he had one weird idea, which is, he was obsessed with the idea that pants don't fit. And so he did a project similar to the one I did on biltong, where he really dove deep on the idea. He got customer feedback. He went out to a bunch of guys in our class and asked them, you know, what, what do they think about their pants? And everyone said the same thing. We, our pants don't fit. So we wear jeans, number one, number two, we don't like shopping for him. So it's not worth the time to figure out what fits.

1 (9m 45s):
I mean, this is not, I mean, there was banana Republic and J crew, and like, you could get pants, but, but, but he felt that that men's pants just didn't didn't fit well.

3 (9m 59s):
Yeah. He felt that if the pants fit around your thighs, they tended to be too big in the waist. And if they, and so they would cinch under your belt. And if it had the right fit in the waist, it would be too tight through the thighs. So you were either like super uncomfortable or wearing something that was really boxy. That was his insight, which was brilliant.

1 (10m 22s):
That, that men's pants just didn't hot or not cut. Well,

3 (10m 25s):
Exactly. And what he did that most guys wouldn't do is he would take pants that fit his thighs to a tailor and have the waistband tailored in. And now was this genius insight that actually the way to do this is to make pants with a curved waistband, which would bring in the pant around to your waist in a way where the overall shape looks, looks gray. And that hadn't really been done in a meaningful way in men's pants before.

1 (10m 55s):
So, so how did Brian turn this, like this project into, into the next step? Like, what was he, I mean, he had this idea and wrote a paper on it and then what,

3 (11m 9s):
So yeah, I'll, I'll never forget this. It was spring break of our second year. I was going to Kenya and Uganda on a service learning trip. Brian was going to head down to Brazil for a wedding, one of our classmates. And he said, what should I do? Should I go to Brazil for the sweating? Or should I stay here and flight and head down to LA to buy fabric and make pants? And I was like, oh, this is a no brainer. You got to go to the wedding in Brazil. When are you going to have a chance to do that again with, you know, a couple dozen of our classmates. And so I flew off to Kenya and Uganda and had an amazing trip there. And when I came back, I said, how was Brazil? And Brian said, I didn't go. And in our house, there was like rolls of fabric that Brian had bought in the garment district of LA.

1 (11m 56s):
Cause he, he decided he was going to make the pants that, that he thought men would like

3 (12m 3s):
Exactly. He thought he was going to make pants that fit by tape. And he took a pair of pants that had been tailored the way that he liked to a pattern maker in San Francisco, that San Francisco pattern maker then made an original pattern based on what, what the overall fit should be with the curve waistband. He had bought all this great fabric, really cool, like turquoise corteroids and really fun eye catching stuff. And then he found, I think one of the last factories in the bay area, actually in San Francisco, not far from where the giants played baseball, which maybe had five or six cut and sew women working there. And they started making pants.

1 (12m 42s):
We went there and said, Hey, start, start making my patterns. But like, with, with what money with, with the idea of, to sell it to who

3 (12m 51s):
He was a great pre-business school moneymaker and safer. So he had, he had made some money from a company he worked at. So he, he funded Banabos in those early days. And then he turned the, the pants that he was making into sales by selling them to our classmates.

1 (13m 10s):
He was just like taking this fabric that he bought in LA and making orders with this small factory in the bay area. And then he would like walk around and hock them, like sell them to other students.

3 (13m 23s):
Literally he had, he loved trader Joe's. He had two trader Joe's bags, the red ones back at the time filled with pants. And he would walk around telling people about them. And they would be like dropping pants behind parked cars and trees like trying them on. And people love the pants. And at the time they called him Bailey pants. And I think he was charging a hundred bucks a pop one day we had a pants party at our house. And I think we sold $16,000 worth of pants that day. And that was when I kind of looked at him. I was just pitching and helping, you know, taking some pictures for the website and we kind of looked at each other and we're like, wow, this is becoming something.

1 (14m 3s):
So when did you formally get involved?

3 (14m 7s):
So I can remember sitting in class one day and on a post-it note, I was sitting next to Brian. We had a different ideas for, he had ideas for what to call the pants. And one of the ideas said, elbows, B O N O B O S. And I said, what's a bonobo. It's like many people. I couldn't pronounce it. And he goes, oh, it's a, it's a peaceful chimpanzee that makes love not war. And I was like, what, how do you know about that? He's like, I dunno, you know, he read about it somewhere. And so we kind of talked about Banabos should be the name. He was making all the decisions at this point, cause it was his hobby. And then there was this weird thing where he had taken a job to go into private equity.

3 (14m 50s):
And I said, Hey, what doing is awesome selling pants on the internet? Like maybe I can make that a thing.

1 (14m 55s):
This was his side hustle as a graduate student. Exactly. He didn't think that this necessarily had legs,

3 (15m 2s):
Pun intended. I think that, I don't know why, but he, I think felt like I could do it at that stage. And so once I expressed interest, I became the co-founder and the CEO and the deal was that if it really did well that he would come back

1 (15m 19s):
Where people, they may say like, are you sure you want to do this?

3 (15m 26s):
I had a summer road trip that I took with my parents after graduation. And I sat down with them and I said, Hey, I have this offer from a venture capital firm, which was a firm up in Seattle called Maveron. And I said, but I don't think I'm going to take it because I'm going to sell pants on the internet. It was like, my mom looked at me and was like, oh my God, Andy, you know, you sure? And I said, I was sure. And they said, okay,

1 (15m 53s):
So this is in, I guess the summer of 2007, you stay in Palo Alto wanting to turn this into something bigger. How did you pitch this to cause presumable, you needed money now. I mean, to making clothing, manufacturing, clothing, you've got to have a lot of capital. Did you have any of your, your own money at that point?

3 (16m 16s):
I had nothing. I had, I had spent all my money traveling and on school, I think I had about $160,000 in debt. And so I had one asset, which was a 401k, which I think if you cash in early, you put, you pay a penalty. So I did that and I had a couple of thousand dollars in the bank. So we definitely needed some money. Brian had funded it with 50 or $60,000 of his savings and it was time to get some outside capital.

1 (16m 41s):
And what was your pitch? I mean, I mean, they were companies making men's pants and they were doing just fine. There was J crew there's banana Republic. There was gap. I mean, there were lots of options. So how are you pitching this to people who you needed to, you know, PR presumably raise money from,

3 (16m 56s):
It's an awesome question because the, you know, the insight of Bonobos, other than the better fitting pants part was just the role that the internet was going to play in the future of retail. You know, retail, isn't just physical products. It's a bundle of physical products and customer service. And those two things together create the experience that drives customer enthusiasm. And I believe, well, if you could make a big brand using a catalog, it stands to reason that you can make even bigger brands using the internet, given the power of the web. And that was the pitch was this isn't just Ralph Lauren. This is Ralph Lauren plus Zappos.

1 (17m 35s):
So who did you put, did you go to, to ask for money?

3 (17m 39s):
So my first meeting was I think like a seven in the morning meeting with Joel Peterson and Joel had been the guy who had presided over the biltong experiment. He

1 (17m 49s):
Was a at the business school.

3 (17m 52s):
Yeah. He was a lecturer at Stanford. And then the rest of his time, he spent still doing investing. And so I kind of pitched him on the idea and he said nothing, the whole meeting, he just nodded silently. And I thought, oh my God, he hates this. And then we got to the very end, you know, 40 minutes in. And he said, this reminds me of my first meeting with David Neeleman, from jet blue. Wow. Which is we're going to go into a stagnant category, not focused on customer centricity. We're going to build a much more customer centric offering and disrupt the whole industry. And he said, I'd like to invest. And I couldn't believe it.

3 (18m 32s):
I couldn't believe it.

1 (18m 33s):
How much did he give you?

3 (18m 34s):
Well, at the time he, he said, he said, how much are you raising? I said, $300,000. He said, well, w I said, at what price, I said, we'll sell 10% of the company. And he said, okay, that's about a $3 million valuation. He said at, at three, we'll take a hundred thousand, but if you dropped it down to two, we'll take the whole round.

1 (18m 53s):
So if you drop evaluation to 2 million, he would give you $300,000 and you were thinking, that's great. That's, let's, let's do it.

3 (19m 2s):
No, I was thinking let's stay at 3 million. So how

1 (19m 5s):
Did you resolve that?

3 (19m 6s):
Well, then I went to see the other professor from school who is an amazing business person named Andy Rachleff, one of the co-founders of benchmark. And he also offered to invest and he was willing to do it at the $3 million price. And I said, okay, we'll have the two of them. Co-invest at three. And then we'll figure out the rest.

1 (19m 26s):
I just want to, I just want to pause for a sec and ask you, you know, your, when, when you met with your first two angel investors, I mean, it seems like you were able to convince them pretty quickly that this thing, you know, had a shot. And I remember a couple of episodes ago on, on our show, we had Katrina lake on of StitchFix also went to Stanford business school, also created a, an online clothing retailer. And she had a problem initially raising money in part, because she said a lot of the, a lot of the investors she would go talk with would say, well, let me ask my wife what she thinks.

1 (20m 7s):
Well, let me ask my secretary what she thinks about this. And it's just surprising that these guys instantly were like, yeah, this sounds good.

3 (20m 18s):
I'll tread carefully here because I don't want to imply. This is about Joel and Andy, but I think I've seen this experience. My wife's an entrepreneur. My sister's an entrepreneur. I think there's a lot of gender issues when it comes to entrepreneurship and fundraising, you know, we're at 9% of all, VCs are women. And a lot of the consumer spending in our world is controlled by women. I think the numbers somewhere between two thirds and 80%. Wow. So we a mismatch where men who don't understand women or how women shop are trying to decide how to make investments. And only 9% of VCs are women. So it's a fundamentally misogynistically wired system.

3 (21m 1s):
So I was fortunate that these two amazing investors were willing to put money in. And I think that's, that's one part of the story, but I think the other part of the story was I had had experiences with them where they knew me with Joel. It was the biltong project with Andy. I had written him a love letter. Basically. I wrote him a four page letter when one of our classes ended, I spent two pages saying you're one of the best teachers I've ever had. And here's why. And then I spent two pages saying, Hey, here are the things I think you could improve from having spent a lot of time around a great teacher, which is my dad. And Andy later years later told me that when he got that letter, he cried and Andy's not the kind of person where that would seem like something that could happen.

3 (21m 46s):
But he said that it had validated a career move that he had made to leave venture capital and to become a teacher. And when he saw that he had that much impact on someone, it really, it really moved him. So I had a relationship with the two professors who invested that I think was why they invested. I don't think if I had just cold pitch them, even if I could have gotten the meeting, it necessarily would have been the same thing.

1 (22m 8s):
You raised the first seed money. And what was your next step?

3 (22m 13s):
So then I flew to New York. I flew to New York with a duffel bag full of pants. And we called on a friend who had graduated before us who had a job. I named Michael spirit out and we did a little trunk show at his apartment. And I think I had 20 pairs of pants in the duffel bag and set them out on a table. And he invited some friends through to try on these, you know, allegedly better fitting men's pants

1 (22m 38s):
And who, I mean, who was the guy? Like, what, who are you targeting? Like who came to that trunk? Show

3 (22m 45s):
It wasn't the fashionistas. It wasn't the people that have a really strong understanding of, Hey, here's exactly where I go for this part of my wardrobe. It was kind of the next tier of guys who wanted to look good, but didn't necessarily invest the time in it or didn't know how to do it. So it was New York professionals, you know, guys in advertising or startups or finance who were in Michael's network, who came to this event and I'll never forget. This seven guys bought three pairs of pants. Six guys bought two pairs of pants. Only one guy didn't buy anything. And it was at that moment that I decided we needed to build this company in New York.

1 (23m 26s):
So you moved to New York, I guess, in the summer or the fall of 2007. And did you get an office? Was it just you like, where, what did, what did you do?

3 (23m 39s):
The guy who helped me build the website for what was then called Bonobos pants.com over the summer? I can, he drove me to the airport with two suitcases. One, one was personal clothes and the other one was, were Bonobos pants. And I flew to Chicago for a friend's wedding. I made these bright blue corduroy pants too, for the wedding of a friend inspired by Cubs baseball. And I thought I'm going to sell all these. And I only sold like one pair because the color was so weird. And I, I then flew to New York and I can remember kind of coming down second avenue and heading to an apartment that a classmate of mine had rented. And I just hit agreed to live there.

3 (24m 20s):
I'd never seen it and moved into the apartment, put a couple hundred pairs of pants up on shelves, on the walls of the apartment, like in the room where I slept and we were off to the races.

1 (24m 32s):
And like at that point you have this $300,000. And what was your next move? I mean, you had to, you had a website and pants and then, and then what did you, what do you do at that point?

3 (24m 47s):
Well, 300 wasn't enough money. And so what happened was I started to sell as many pants as I could in person to guys in New York through referrals. So there was sort of a direct sales operation with trunk shows and sales in person. And then there was attempting to get some coverage. And so what happened was our first press hit, came from urban daddy. I remember I was sitting at the Heartland brewery and cafe in union square, and I got a call from our first employee and he said, Andy, we're getting too many orders. Should I turn off the site?

1 (25m 26s):
And then you were like, how'd pedo people know about this.

3 (25m 29s):
Yeah. Urban daddy wrote an article called monkey business, which has half, right? Because Bonobos are apes, not monkeys, but let's set that aside, basically telling the story of this brand with great fitting men's pants. And to this day, I'm not sure how they found out.

1 (25m 47s):
You were literally, I'm imagining you were going, you were just calling anybody you knew and said, Hey, can you host like a, like a pants party? Like, like, like a Tupperware party for me, but w with pants and guys at your apartment.

3 (25m 60s):
Exactly. And then the pants had these kind of signature pocket liners in the back where you could see a different fabric, usually with a floral or geo print. And so they attracted a little bit of attention. Cause there, there was a little bit of flair and Verve to it. And that also created a bit of virality. You know, the name was interesting, the story of these non-fashion guys. So we properly launched Banabos pants.com in October of oh seven. And we did 10 grand that month. Then in November, we did 20 December. We did 30 came back from the holiday break in January and we did no sales for the first five days. And I thought, oh my God, this was just a fluke.

3 (26m 41s):
And then all of a sudden, January, February, it went 30, 60 90.

1 (26m 45s):
So at what point after you moved to New York in 2007, did things look pretty good enough where you could actually get an office?

3 (26m 56s):
Oh, that was when we got kicked out

1 (26m 58s):
Of your apartment.

3 (26m 59s):
Yeah, because they're starting to be, I guess, complaints about all the packages stacked up outside the door. And the landlord met with me and started yelling at me and said I had to move out. Cause I was violating, you know, you can't run a business out of an apartment. And so I said, I, I totally understand. And we found a little, a little lofted space on 16th street and sixth avenue and we moved.

1 (27m 25s):
So I have read that like within the first six months, you guys, what we're projecting to do like a million dollars that year. And so the, I guess that was the point where Brian comes back to the company that this is like 2008.

3 (27m 37s):
Exactly. Yeah. This was March of oh eight or somewhere right in there.

1 (27m 41s):
How did that go?

3 (27m 42s):
He was awesome because Brian was able to jump in and take on all of the clothing work, the sourcing, the production, the design, the merchandising, which freed me up to work on the marketing, the technology, making sure the fundraise was coming along. The limited hiring that we were doing customer service and we were just jamming. It was an incredible time. So

1 (28m 7s):
I mean end of story, like fairy tale ending, right? I mean, that's amazing.

3 (28m 12s):
Here's the thing, which is having two leaders, two founders in there. I think it started to get more complicated as we grew. And, and that, that then became the challenge of who makes the decision

1 (28m 26s):
More complicated between you and Brian.

3 (28m 30s):
Exactly.

1 (28m 31s):
What, what was going on.

3 (28m 33s):
So I remember this debate about what to do after pants. I think we'd spent at some point maybe a year and a half just focused on pants. And we started thinking about the next product category. And Brian was excited about swimsuits and I was excited about shirts and there was a really good rationale behind both. And so we were, we were in conflict over business decisions like that. And then on a personal level, what I realized is once you get into a business partnership with a friend, the friendship gets totally sublimated to the business partnership. So a lot of the stuff that you used to talk about or do you don't have time to do because you got to work on this little growing baby company.

3 (29m 15s):
And so it went from what was really fun and kind of the laissez Faire world of friendship, where you talk about the things you want to talk about and do whatever is fun and support each other when things are difficult. And it actually flips that it takes away all the fun, the support that you need. You're no longer going to get from that person, except for very fortunate friends and business partners where it can kind of all the magic can come together. And then for us, it just became talking about big decisions at the company and frequently not seeing, not seeing eye to eye. And so it, it really, it unwound, how do you resolve that conflict? Because we were 50 50 partners, you know, I had the title of CEO, but Brian had a ton of business acumen.

3 (30m 0s):
And so it really was a partnership of equals and it becomes difficult to figure out who makes the call.

1 (30m 7s):
And, and how are you personally coping with w was it, was it like weighing on you or did you have like sleepless nights?

3 (30m 16s):
I got depressed. So it turns out I have a propensity clinically for depression. And so I got to the place where I kind of had to fake it at work that I was doing. Okay. Drag myself out of bed and come to the office and kind of put on a show. Yeah. It was super tough to navigate that because you're, you're definitely on display in a small company.

1 (30m 38s):
So what, what was the, the office environment like, like were there days where you and Brian were just not speaking or was it just like clipped conversation or what?

3 (30m 50s):
I thought we were doing a pretty good job of talking in private and then presenting a unified front and right. Kind of the way you talk about, you know, parents and kids. And then I got a call from one of our investors and he said, I heard that you and Brian are fighting a lot in front of your team. And I thought, wow, how did that come out of that happen? And he said, that's really bad. And I said, you know, what do I do? And he said, you got to kind of get to the bottom of what's causing that and, you know, get to a place where, where you can work together. And, and that was the beginning of a process of figuring out, you know, how do you resolve it?

1 (31m 31s):
I cannot imagine that because you have this business that's growing and it's exciting. And you can start to see where this might be headed, but the whole thing could also unravel, like there was a, you must have thought in your mind, maybe the sex is going to crash and burn.

3 (31m 51s):
He was a little different than that in that I thought, you know, Bonobos is going to make it and it's got to make it, it was more, should I leave or should Brian leave? Because I thought the company was going to do fine. It was just, it, it, we needed a clear CEO,

1 (32m 8s):
But you had come to this conclusion in your mind, or maybe Brian had too, that you were not going to be able to, to do this together.

3 (32m 16s):
Yeah. I didn't have the, the ability to do it just based on the depression. And someone said, Hey, see it, see a therapist of loved ones. And I, I had some shame or embarrassment around that at that time. And I finally said, all right, I got to go do it. So you did. I did.

1 (32m 34s):
And you probably were so busy, like you had to probably carve out that time as well.

3 (32m 38s):
Yeah. I used take a taxi up to random part of the upper west side and do work calls on the way there, and then went and saw this therapist. And we were a few sessions in and she said, Hey, Andy, are you in touch with anger? And I said, anger, what's anger. And that was the beginning of this realization that like, Hey, if you're, if you actually are angry or you have an emotion, you've got to express it because if it's sublimated, she goes, you know, sublimated, anger can become depression. And so that was when I realized actually, gosh, I'm angry about a lot of these dynamics and, and we've got to figure something out,

1 (33m 20s):
You're going through this and kind of trying to work through your depression. And also related to that depression obviously was, was what was clearly at the beginning of a breakup with your co-founder and friend? What happened? How did you guys solve this?

3 (33m 40s):
So it was a very bad way to do it. And probably speaking to the challenges I had with difficult conversations and candor in person. But I wrote Brian, a long email where I basically said, look, I think one of us should become the chairman and the other be the CEO. And I'll take either side of the trade and the CEO can run the day-to-day and run the company. And the chairman can focus on external work. That was how the conversation started was through that kind of open it up. And then one day we were in the office on a, we used to work on Saturdays and just get stuff done at the office. And one day I just asked him, I said, Hey, would you be willing to step aside?

3 (34m 21s):
You know, given, given everything that's going on and he got a little teary and he looked at me and he said, yeah,

1 (34m 28s):
Wow.

3 (34m 29s):
It, which was so weird. Cause I had envisioned that conversation so many times and was so terrified to have it. And he was just unbelievably dignified about the whole thing. And that was when I learned you learn a lot about a person, by the way, they leave something that they love.

1 (34m 46s):
Yeah. I mean, it, it, it speaks to his, the kind of person he is that he had the foresight to know that one of you had to go and he was willing to, to be the one.

3 (35m 0s):
It was an unbelievable gift. I mean, he gifted the company that he had originally conceived of to me and to this day, the loyalty that I feel to him for having done that. And, and then the fact that afterwards it it's difficult, right. That friendship has, has been eviscerated by that business issues. And it took kind of years before we could sit down and have dinner and go to Cubs games together. And so

1 (35m 35s):
You've, you've reconciled, but by point you've reconciled today.

3 (35m 39s):
Yeah, I think so.

1 (35m 40s):
If you could do it all over again with Brian, do you think you guys could have worked through those things?

3 (35m 49s):
I don't think Unless I could have been more enlightened at the time about how to, how to do it. I think we were both so young and in some ways insecure and trying to prove ourselves. And, you know, in some regards I think arrogant, I think that it was going to be hard at that stage of both of our lives to figure it out. But I would, I wouldn't do it any other way. You know, the way that we did it was how it had to be done. And, you know, Brian went out and built another company called trunk club and did an amazing job with that. And, and he's got two amazing stories.

3 (36m 30s):
And so I'm so grateful to him that he enabled Banabos to thrive and gave me the opportunity to continue to build it.

1 (36m 37s):
Hmm. So, so Brian leaves, this is 2009 and you're you're left, I guess, as the, as the CEO, as the top decision maker,

3 (36m 47s):
2008 was the, was the co-founder separation thought that would, and all this depression, I thought that would be the worst year of my life. 2009 was far worse because I couldn't, I could no longer blame anything on Brian. I had to blame it on myself.

1 (37m 8s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Andy kept Bonobos alive, despite mistake after mistake, after mistake, I'm guy, Roz, stay with us. You're listening to how I built this. So many of us work on teams that are spread across the country and the world, including me in the team at high, built this building and maintaining strong team connections is essential to good collaboration and achieving big results.

Peloton (37m 51s):
Peloton corporate wellness helps businesses connect and motivate employees by encouraging regular movement and mindfulness. The Peloton app offers your employees a world-class wellness experience. They can take anywhere. There are thousands of classes like strength, yoga, cardio, meditation, and running. And of course, spiking, Peloton members report higher levels of productivity at work and improved mental health. I try to exercise an hour a day every day, and I can tell you it has a huge impact and keeping my stress levels in check. And the Peloton app is a super easy way to get some exercise. Learn more about bringing the power of Peloton to your team@corporatewellness.one, peloton.com/built that's corporate wellness.one, peloton.com/built.

1 (38m 47s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this. So it's the beginning of 2009 and Andy just went through the hardest year of his life. His co-founder Brian Bailey left the company and Andy is now alone at the top, and it's not too dramatic to say that the company was in a bit of a crisis.

3 (39m 7s):
It was a scary year. I thought I was good at hiring in a bunch of people. I had hired didn't work out. I thought that I was good at fundraising and we were running out of money. Like how

1 (39m 16s):
Close were you to insolvency?

3 (39m 19s):
I flew to Silicon valley one day from New York because our then head of finance told me that we weren't going to make payroll. We had enough cash in the bank, I thought to make payroll. But then we had a guest promises supplier through a letter of credit. And we were about eight days away from not making payroll, which is not an inspiring moment for your employees. And I went to Hertz Rent-A-Car in San Francisco to rent a car and I swipe the card and it was declined. So, you know, swipe my personal credit card, which, which was somehow still solve it in spite of all the debt that I had.

3 (40m 2s):
And I drove to a Starbucks and sat down with, with someone who knew about the company and explained to him our growth and said, we definitely need some more money. I didn't, I didn't say we're going to, we need it in the next week. And he offered to invest $300,000 in the business. And then I had another 90 conversations like that over the course of the next couple months and pieced together another round. And, you know, we, we ended up raising our first 8 million from, you know, over, over 120 investors. So we just pieced it together

1 (40m 39s):
Because you had, I mean, the, the trajectory looked good. I mean, you were still presumably growing every month, but I have to imagine that sales were not able to fund the business. It was not profitable.

3 (40m 51s):
Yeah. We, we did 2 million in that first year and kind of full operations in oh eight and then four and oh nine. And then we were heading towards seven or so. And I think we made one of the Cardinal errors that an entrepreneur makes, which is the second angel round that we raised. We raised at too high of a price. And actually Joel was pretty upset about this. I actually, I think I wrote the email to Joel, that was a condescending email in some regard around supporting the company. And it was the dumbest email I've ever written. And Joel then said he wanted to sell his shares and created a whole issue for ourselves.

3 (41m 32s):
Wow. And then ultimately ultimately figure out a way to get the round gun and, and Joel didn't invest.

1 (41m 39s):
So you, I mean, you're patron like the guy who was your first investor, he's out, he's out of that next round.

3 (41m 48s):
He was out,

1 (41m 49s):
Wow, that's a big deal. Cause he was like a mentor to you.

3 (41m 53s):
It was terrible. It was, it was really, really bad. And so I flew out to apologize to him and I said, I really screwed this up. And I said, would you consider now that we have this discussion, would you consider ever investing again? And he said, look, not right now, but maybe let's talk later. And for the next round that I raised, I went out and saw him. And I said, look, I've, I've learned so much from you. I learned a ton from you in terms of how badly I handled that situation. You actually tell me the truth and hold me to account. Would you consider coming onto our board? Not only investing, but coming under the board. And he said, yes,

1 (42m 29s):
Well, aside from raising money, you were still running a company. It was both a men's fashion company, any technology company, right? Because it's, this is e-commerce, this is not brick and mortar stuff. So how was the technology side of Bonobos? Like how was that working?

3 (42m 48s):
It was a huge challenge because at the time the New York tech ecosystem was pretty small or at least it felt small to me. And at the same time, it was really hard to attract talented software engineers. And because

1 (43m 2s):
They were all in the bay area, I guess

3 (43m 5s):
They were in the bay area or, you know, they wanted to work at a company where the core enterprise is technology versus a pants company. Yeah. It was really a, a rift between the folks who worked on technology and the folks who worked on the rest of the business. It wasn't,

1 (43m 21s):
Why was there a rift,

3 (43m 22s):
There was a battle over the soul of the company, you know, was it a technology company or was it a menswear company?

1 (43m 31s):
But it was both.

3 (43m 33s):
It was both, which is the challenge. I mean, if I had been a better leader, maybe I could have figured out how to do that. You know, we opened an office in Palo Alto and it turned out to be a catastrophic error.

1 (43m 47s):
'cause all of a sudden now you've got your New York office and then the technology people were in Palo Alto.

3 (43m 53s):
Exactly. And if you think tribalism and human nature is still alive within one office, when you have people in different places with different ideas about what the soul of the company is, and you increase the expense. And by the way, you're now competing to hire software engineers with Facebook and Netflix and the pay is higher. You know, all those ingredients came together and it was clear after about a year that we had hired the people, but it wasn't working. It deepened the divide between let's just call it tech and retail. And it's hard enough to be a good, when you've got five days a week in the same office, all of a sudden, you're two days a week in each office,

1 (44m 38s):
You were flying back and forth between New York and Palo Alto.

3 (44m 41s):
Yeah. And then you're letting people down on both sides.

1 (44m 46s):
And, and so I'm trying to try to imagine you as a CEO, going back and forth and, and trying to kind of, I guess, keep everybody happy. But, but the tech, the tech folks, right? The engineers, like they have knowledge that you just didn't have. You're not a, a tech guy. That's not your skillset. So did you feel like you couldn't just tell them what to do?

3 (45m 11s):
I don't think you can tell anyone in this life what to do. I mean, I think you can try, but human beings are a Gallant species. We don't love authority. And so what you want to do is inspire people And you want to set a common vision and context and shared values. And then there are times where you have to step in and intervene and make important and difficult calls. But what it was was it was clear to me in my gut that the organizational harmony at the company was being destroyed by this cross coastal conflict. And so in some regard it became pretty straightforward and I brought it to the board and they couldn't believe that we were going to pull the plug a year in.

1 (45m 53s):
You went to the board and you said, I want to pull the plug on this west coast office.

3 (45m 57s):
I said, this isn't working. And they said, well, how do you know in a year? Yeah. Why don't we give it two or three? And I said, look, this is becoming more costly. This is becoming harder by the day the culture is deteriorating. This is just wrong. And spending more time is going to only make it more expensive, more doubling down on a sunk cost. Let's let's adjust. Let's be intellectually honest here. And let's adjust course.

1 (46m 23s):
How could you do that? I mean, these, your core bit, your business depended on these engineers. Like you are, were, are a technology company too. I mean, how do you just say, let's pull the plug on it and we'll figure it out. I mean, that's the, team's like crazy,

3 (46m 41s):
A lot of stuff in this entrepreneurial world. It's crazy.

1 (46m 45s):
She was scared to do that. I mean, how do you just pull the plug on the whole division?

3 (46m 50s):
I was really scared, but I, what I've learned in 11 years of doing this is sometimes when you're the most afraid is when you're making one of the most important decisions, right? Like if it's not scary, it's not hard. And I think ultimately what we, what we need to value more in this life for everyone, not just entrepreneurs is courage. The courage to look at yourself, honestly, look at the decisions you're making honestly and say to yourself, you know what? That was my fault. I got that wrong. I'm not going to blame anyone else. I'm going to take responsibility for it and I'm going to fix it.

1 (47m 30s):
So it's 2013. You've closed this office on the west coast. You have almost no engineering staff left. You've got no chief technology officer. I'm assuming at this point either, right? No.

3 (47m 46s):
So

1 (47m 46s):
What did you do?

3 (47m 47s):
We, we got two engineers in this data scientist to relocate. Literally. I remember sitting at a, at a coffee shop in Palo Alto, just bagging. I mean, literally begging being like, will you please come to New York at least for one to two years? And so it really did work out. I don't, I'm not, I don't even want to think about running that play in retrospect, you know, without those two who came.

1 (48m 10s):
So once you kind of recover from that, the kind of the tech, no mini disaster, or more than many disaster and things started to stabilize, first of all, w w w was the company profitable? Was it making money in 2013, 2014?

3 (48m 26s):
Not yet, but we were, we were massively turning the corner towards breakeven.

1 (48m 31s):
I wouldn't be freaking out. Like, I mean, how do you, how were you able to kind of stay optimistic? I mean, were you just looking at projections and saying this is going to be fine,

3 (48m 41s):
Stay optimistic. What makes you think that I was optimistic? I was, I was defiant in the face of a terrifying reality. And ultimately you just got to believe it's almost religious. It is religious it's faith. And there's a really good saying, I don't want to say this is true because I've been lucky, but that companies don't die because the companies fail. They die because the entrepreneur gives up. And that was the approach. Just keep the lights on, keep growing, keep learning. And that's what we did.

1 (49m 13s):
So what was the thing that enabled you to, to turn the corner? Just more customers, more awareness, more what

3 (49m 21s):
I think it was actually more focused. So what, what really changed the company was the move from single channel to multichannel,

1 (49m 28s):
Meaning,

3 (49m 29s):
Meaning that the build out of the relationship with Nordstrom and the reinvention of the retail store with the guide shop model. And this was an incredible paradox because everyone was betting on e-commerce venture capital was flowing into e-commerce. Countless companies were rising and falling in the irony of our business was after years of being told that wholesale was going away. And that department stores were dying. Our most profitable business became Nordstrom.

1 (49m 57s):
Wow.

3 (49m 59s):
And our second, most profitable where our retail stores in those two businesses profits were funding losses from the e-commerce business, which is a wonderful paradox to the way that we can see for the company.

1 (50m 10s):
Yeah. So I guess, I guess we could, we should explain this for people who have not been in a shop cause I've been to a guide shop, generally, you don't go in and then walk out with a pair of trousers, right? You, you go in and get fitted and then the trousers are sent to you.

3 (50m 23s):
Exactly. It's, it's a fit to ship concept. And so when you think about our, and this was another really fun board meeting, was this debate around, is this an e-commerce company or is this a men's wear experience company? And I made the case, and this is the people that funded the company with the view of e-commerce being at the core that our company was actually not an e-commerce company. It was about serving this customer. And if we could invent a way to deliver the same level of fit and service in person, then that would actually be consistent in a deepening of who we are getting us closer to, to who we are to our, to our soul, as a business, versus getting away from it.

3 (51m 6s):
And so the question was, well, how do you do that with physical inventory? If the whole model of Bonobos is offering a lot more sizing and a lot more fits and a lot more colors, if you look at our chinos business, we've got 36 waist and inseam combinations for different fit solo ads. And we might be running 15 to 20 colors. So if you gave the math, that's four to 5,000 variants, how do you possibly stock that? And so that the incredible insight was you don't, you don't stock it. You create a clothing store that has no clothing.

1 (51m 41s):
When we come back after the break, how Andy, his clothing stores with no clothing began to bring more money to the business and how he handled the anxious mood at Bonobos and word leaked out that Walmart wanted to buy them. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's round in 2012. And Andy opens his first guide shop in New York and soon other cities follow.

1 (52m 21s):
And his idea is that you can have a men's clothing store without any men's clothing, actually in it, basically you stock enough for people to try on, but then they order the stuff they want online.

3 (52m 34s):
And that was the insight, which is the customer doesn't need it right away. And that flew in the face of everything. Everyone in retail told me from the traditional industry instant gratification, and it turns out for a busy customer. That's just not true if they get great service, which is what you can put out. If you ripped it inventory out, you put the service in, It actually is a much more magical combination in terms of dollars per square, foot productivity and customer delight.

1 (53m 2s):
Yeah. As you, I mean, as you started to turn a corner, I guess you also started to attract more and more investors and more and more capital to fuel the growth. What does that mean for, for your own stake? Did you w were you just getting more and more diluted and did you care, was that important to you?

3 (53m 23s):
Wow. This is a fun question. What would it leads to? You know, I think a lot of times, as a founder, you're thinking I'm going to go do this for two years and see if it works. And then I'm going to do it for five, which you don't realize is it takes a decade to build a real business. And so what happens is after four years, you're fully vested. And then you've got a debate which is stay where you are take on more capital, get diluted, which is what's happening to all the other shareholders or ask for more equity. Hmm. One day I woke up and said, you know what? I'm going to ask for more. I want to get my stake back to a more meaningful level. And then I had this really unusual kind of zero-sum game standoff.

1 (54m 1s):
You went, you went to the board and said, I want more equity seems like a fair request. And what did they say?

3 (54m 8s):
They said, no, at first. And you know, said, Hey, like, you need to work. You need to work for the shares that you've got. And then, you know, ultimately, and just warmed down. And I got some alternative perspectives from people in the venture capital backed company space and said, Hey, this is, this feels right to me.

1 (54m 32s):
Was Sarah. I mean, you know, we've interviewed lots of entrepreneurs, some who take on capital, some who don't, who bootstrap, and then, you know, sell it for hundreds of millions of dollars. Y as you saw the value of the company go up, but your cut of it, you know, going down, did you, did you care? Or did you say, you know, there's a certain point. I mean, a certain number is just a number and that's great. You know, if this works, I'll have, you know, a little bit of money.

3 (55m 5s):
Oh my God. I thought I'll be so lucky to have to have any of this. And I think it's warped to live in a world where let's say you're going to make $20 million, the difference between $20 million and a hundred million dollars. It's not clear.

1 (55m 22s):
Yeah.

3 (55m 23s):
Right. You know, for me, the only things that excess capital are good for is giving money to family and loved ones who were a part of getting you to where you were my case, you know, an immigrant mom in a high school history teacher, dad, that's number one. Number two is investing in other entrepreneurs and companies. Number three is making political contributions. If you want to influence the future. And number four is being philanthropic. Now I'd love to throw in some nice seats, the Cubs game too. But the idea that you're trying to optimize for making

1 (55m 57s):
More than,

3 (55m 58s):
Yeah, it's just, I don't get it. I think you get warped because you start to heal about, hear about what other founders are making and you hear about you start to it's the human problem, right? When you start to circle with people where you start to live in these bubbles, where people have so much money. Yeah. And then I would just cut back to, Hey, when I graduated business school, I had $3,000 in the bank and $160,000 of debt. And I started a company with that balance sheet that was scary. And so I tried to stay true to that and think instead about how do I make sure everyone else makes money? How do I make sure that our shareholders from every round, you know, that we're up into the right on the post-money valuation and ultimately gonna make people money?

3 (56m 43s):
How do I make sure the management team has enough stock and employees have stock and I'm going to be fine.

1 (56m 48s):
Yeah.

3 (56m 49s):
And now I'm speaking out of two sides of my mouth because on the one hand, that's when my philosophy is on the other hand, I did say, look, look, I want to be incentivized. I do feel like at the end of the day, you know, owning two or 3% of the company is probably not commensurate with the work put in. And while it sort of is my fault that we had to raise so much capital, it also is the price of innovation. If you're the first mover in the digitally native brand space, and you're going to invent that model, I can't go back in time and, and do this company on 20 to 30 million, which is what I think it would take knowing what I now know. But wow, did we get to have fun learning everything we did in wow. Is it gratifying to be the pioneer in the category and a phrasing? A lot of capital was the price of that.

3 (57m 29s):
You know, then that's what the price of it was.

1 (57m 32s):
So you guys, you know, you finally turn a corner and you're growing and this brand is out in the world. And then what seemed to hit the rest of the, you know, what seemed to hit the rest of us following this? Like lightning was in 2017, you, you sold to Walmart, how did that happen? Did they, did they approach you guys? Did they say, Hey, you know, we want to buy you. Did you go to them? Or you did you get to a point where you thought, okay, we've got to find a buyer because I've got to pay these investors back.

3 (58m 5s):
I was at a wedding and I was talking to a friend and he knew one of our angel investors. And that angel investor said, you know, Bonobos is great, but I wonder if I'll ever I'll ever get paid in. I think at that point he had invested eight or nine years ago in the very first round. And that wasn't the only reason. But once you've got venture investors, who've been in for seven years and angel investors who've been in for 10. It just would be wrong to not make other people money. So I felt like we were at that stage where the company needed to get ready for the next stage. We had discovered our soul as a consumer retail company.

3 (58m 47s):
And we needed to learn from people that were good at taking consumer retail companies public. So that's the point we're at. And then at the 11th hour, I got a phone call to do a reference and I did the reference. And then the individual who's calling me said, how are things going? This is someone that I a colleague from from way back. And I said, look, we're in the middle of this process. And the colleague says, Hey, why don't you come talk to us? He worked@jet.com and I was like, I knew jet had been acquired by Walmart. I've known mark Laurie for years. And every time I saw him, we had a game-changing for me a game-changing conversation.

1 (59m 24s):
Our glory was

3 (59m 25s):
The founder of jet, right? So probably the best third party e-commerce entrepreneur on the east coast. And I said, you know what? I know mark. I can't understand how, how would Walmart in Bonobos be a fit that just doesn't make sense? And he's like, just talk to him. And I thought, you know what, every time I've talked to mark, I found him to be a bit of a Jedi and we sat down and it was amazing. I didn't think mark cared about brands. And then we had this incredible mind-meld that the future of e-commerce was going to look a little bit like the history of Netflix, that a platform that was streaming other people's content and distributing other people's content would vertically integrate and start to develop their own proprietary content.

3 (1h 0m 7s):
Right in mark. And I mind melded that was going to happen in commerce. And that Bonobos was going to be the brand that would lead that and that we would go and lo and behold, that long, that long dreamed of multibrand vision was going to come to fruition and the least expected way I could have ever imagined, which is with the power of Walmart and Walmart's balance sheet behind it.

1 (1h 0m 31s):
How long did it take before you close the deal?

3 (1h 0m 34s):
Yeah, it took months and it was made tricky by the fact that the deal leaked in the middle of the process. And because Walmart's a public company, the world's largest in revenues. Yeah. I couldn't say anything.

1 (1h 0m 45s):
You had to walk, go to the office and show up like nothing was going on.

3 (1h 0m 49s):
Well, that's not that wasn't the approach, ultimately because people, you know, the quote unquote water cooler talk was jamming. And then there were messages on slack saying this is a catastrophe for the brand with no context, Walmart acquiring Bonobos. I get it like that. Wouldn't if you didn't have the understanding of the strategy and the way that Walmart and jet.com are transforming e-commerce for the company, it wouldn't make sense. And so I had to call a very strange meeting.

1 (1h 1m 18s):
This is before you close a deal, this was leaking out internally.

3 (1h 1m 22s):
It leaked. I was out of the office. I was actually working on the deal elsewhere. And I rushed back to the office and I got everyone together. And I said, we're going to have a very unusual meeting. Here's what I can tell you. I love this company, at least as much as you do, you know me, I would never guide us to doing anything that wasn't in our self-interest as a brand and as a company and as shareholders and employees of the brand, what has been published is not a fact. It's not an announcement. It's speculation. We have not decided on our path and our process.

3 (1h 2m 2s):
And when we have news versus rumors, of course, you'll be the first to know when we have news and in the meanwhile, please get back to work. It was the weirdest thing I've ever had. Everyone just got up and went back to work and I'm sure the conversations continue, but it just, the energy changed by directly addressing it. It felt like, wow, that turns out that just telling people like it is the truth and the truth was we hadn't decided at that moment. And then I think it was another couple of months before we actually could announce.

1 (1h 2m 39s):
And there's a big difference in going into Walmart and buying a pair of jeans and going and buying Bonobos. I mean, there's a, it's a premium brand, right? Like there were people who said, wait a minute, now I own Walmart, a, a closet full of Walmart clothes, you know? And you can't blame some people for, for kind of reacting that way.

3 (1h 3m 1s):
No, not at all. So we anticipated meaningful blow back. And if you go back and look at what I wrote at the time, I was pretty direct the day of the day of the announcement around the future of Bonobos. And I said, look, I think a lot of people are going to be confused by this. And it was fascinating for 72 hours. There's a really big reaction and an availability bias of the most vocal people. And then, and then business returns to normal. The vast majority of people don't think about this stuff that much every day. And for me, what I couldn't say to them is, Hey, Banabos gets to continue to exist.

3 (1h 3m 42s):
Right? Like we get, we get a home, you know how hard that is actually like security outcomes.

1 (1h 3m 49s):
Yeah. Walmart reportedly paid $310 million for Bonobos, which is impressive. I mean, it's a lot of money. How did you, how did you respond to that number? Did it to mean anything to you? Were you proud that you got it to that point? Or was it just a signature at the bottom of a sheet?

3 (1h 4m 12s):
Oh, I'm so proud. It's so hard to do that. It's so hard to build a company that ends up being worth something really meaningful. And it was just a staggering number. And I was so grateful that we got that done and got a chance to, you know, there are very few things in this life that you can look at and say, we did that in selling a company is one of those moments. And so I'm so proud that we got to chalk that went up and that we get, we get to keep going in a really safe home. You know, people ask, why are we doing this? And part of it is, Hey, I'm excited about the strategy. But part of it is we get to exist. Now, if we do our jobs well for a long time, maybe, maybe 50 years or more, maybe a hundred years, Bonobos will be around.

3 (1h 4m 55s):
And that that's rare.

1 (1h 4m 57s):
Andy, I always ask this question are most often asked this question to the people I interview, which is how much of what happened to you and, and the creation of Bonobos and its success was because of you and your talent and what the decisions you made and how much of it was because of luck.

3 (1h 5m 19s):
Luck is a concept that I thought of in a straight forward way for a while. And then when I converted to Judaism last February, I became acquainted with this concept of kismet, which is, I don't even pronouncing it right, probably, but it's kind of the intersection of luck and serendipity. And maybe even some measure of destiny. I don't want to go that far because I still don't know why really bad things happen to good people. So I think you've gotta be open in life to the way that the universe is trying to help you. The people who love you, who if you just listened to them and cultivate relationships with people who are direct will tell you what you need to hear.

3 (1h 5m 59s):
If it's not what you want to hear the same thing at accompany, the people along the way, your board, your investors, your employees, who know as a collective, what to do more so than you, but in combination. And you can unlock that. So I think if you bring self-awareness and you bring empathy and you bring positivity and you bring intellectual honesty and courage, you ultimately try to make good decisions. I think you can influence a lot, but I would attribute this outcome in this company at the end of the day to three things, to the quality of the people around me on all fronts, to the hard work of those people who, who really believed in this and made this happen, the team, and then a healthy, healthy dose of self-awareness in the pursuit of, of kismet.

1 (1h 6m 51s):
So you're not a believer in luck.

3 (1h 6m 54s):
I am. I am. I think that the two things that you're the two really big things that influence your life, the family that you're born into. And I don't know what I call it, that your DNA, the genetic stock, who, you know, who, how you show up as a creature, as a human being, you have no control over those two things. And so I feel like in life I was dealt. If we call it luck, you know, I don't want to say pocket ACEs. Cause I don't know what, how to think about my genetic makeup, but I was born into the most incredible family ever. And I was given the best of all opportunities, wanting for nothing educationally or experientially, the best mom, the best at the best sister.

3 (1h 7m 40s):
Now I've got the best wife. So with all that and all the amazing groups of people I've been around, I owe it to everyone to do something akin to this. And at the end of the day, the credit goes to them in so many ways.

1 (1h 7m 56s):
That's Andy Dunn, co-founder of Bonobos last year after working for a while at Walmart as a senior vice president, Andy left the company to pursue other business ideas. In the meantime, he's still the chairman of a children's apparel company that he started with his sister, Monica it's called Monica and Andy. And by the way, Andy Brian's <inaudible> story has been used as a case study at Stanford business school, including the email Andy sent to Brian that eventually led to Brian, leaving the company. It's a sort of what to do and what not to do guide for new students. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week.

1 (1h 8m 36s):
If you want to hear the next episode of the show one week early, check out Amazon music. If you want to listen one week early and add free subscribed to Wondery plus in apple podcasts or on the Wondery app, please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded. And another way to support the show is by filling out the survey at wondery.com/survey. If you want to follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this. And mine is at guy Ross on Instagram. I'm at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by Rachel Faulkner with music composed by REM teen era bluey. He was edited by Neeva grant with research help from JC Howard.

1 (1h 9m 16s):
Our production staff also includes Casey Herman, Juliet Carney lane coats, Liz Metzker, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung. Our intern is Margaret Soreno. I'm guy Roz, and you've been listening to how I built this.