0 (0s):
Hey everyone. So some of you may know that I host another show called a wisdom from the top. It's a show where I talk with leadership experts, former and current CEOs of huge companies and people who've written some of the best business books in the last 20, 30 years. People like Jim Collins and Indra Nooyi. Anyway, that show is available for you to listen to and subscribe for free. So please do check it out. Cause if you like how I built this, you will really like wisdom from the top. I've had a chance to talk to leaders from brands like Lego and Gatorade and NASA and American express and so many others. And today, as a special bonus, I want to share one of my favorite episodes of wisdom from the top right here on the, how I built this podcast feed.

0 (45s):
This is an episode I did with the former CEO of best buy named Uber, Shirley, who took over that company when it was on the ropes, when people were like best buy is dead, you know, Amazon's going to crush it and he totally turned it around. It's amazing story. So enjoy this interview of wisdom from the top was recorded in 2019 from luminary built it productions and NPR it's wisdom from the top stories of crisis failure, turnaround and triumph from some of the greatest leaders in the world and guy Roz and on the show today, the story of Uber Jolie and best buy

1 (1m 31s):
Fish rots from the head. And it was some aspects of the top leadership of the company that were not appropriate. In fact, the CEO had been fired, but, and Denise, that you had unbelievable passion and talents at the company and they felt it was all the ballads, you know, mobilizing this talent into suits, the turnaround plan. And that proved to be correct

0 (1m 57s):
How Uber Jolie became CEO of best buy just as the company and the market for brick and mortar. Big box stores was careening towards disaster. Okay. So in baseball, there's an old term for a relief for closing pitcher, a fire man, and these pitchers earn that name because they're really good at performing under pressure in critical moments, moments that would make a typical pitcher, balk or choke a fireman, takes the mound, assesses the situation and fights the fire, you know, saves the day.

0 (2m 40s):
And why are firemen so good under pressure? Well, in part, because they crave adversity, they can navigate stressful situations with calm and clarity crisis feeds their focus. So now imagine it's the bottom of the ninth inning and your team is best buy in 2012 to say there was a crisis is an understatement. In January of that year, Forbes published an article with a headline why best buy is going out of business. And then in March, the company reported a loss of $1.7 billion in April. The CEO resigned because of an inappropriate relationship with an employee.

0 (3m 21s):
And in August, the founder tried to buy back the company and during all of this, the stock price was plunging. So at that point, best buy needed a fire man. Now, Uber, Shirley neither played baseball nor had much experience running an electronics retailer, but he never shied away from a challenge or a crisis. In fact, he had built an entire career around saving companies in crisis. So when the leaders at best buy went searching for a fireman, they chose Uber Jolie. Uber grew up in France and by the time he was 13, he knew he wanted to go into the business world as a young man. He managed to land himself at one of the most demanding business schools in the world, HEC Paris.

0 (4m 6s):
And soon after he was recruited by the international consulting firm, McKinsey and company.

1 (4m 12s):
Yeah. So I worked first, I think one of my first project at McKinsey was a study for is Swiss jam and canned food manufacturer in their Dutch markets. And so I was in the south of the Netherlands in the winter eating piece soup and trying to understand how they could improve their operations, which was sort of odd because it was like 23. So, but great learning experience. I've learned so much at McKinsey over the years

0 (4m 47s):
And I mean, you stayed there for a long time, right. And you got there in 1983, I think you were probably in the early twenties. Yep. You were there until 1996. That's right. So you were working on a project for them as a, as an associate with McKinsey where you were your partner by that.

1 (5m 5s):
But in 1980 I became a partner. And so I was a partner working.

0 (5m 9s):
I mean, once you're 10 years in, once you make partner, it's very difficult to leave because it's the golden handcuffs, right? You've got the, a job, a tenure job, essentially. You've got increasing income. If you've got a family, that's a risk.

1 (5m 24s):
Yes. But I was driven by what do I want to do? And I really enjoyed my years at the firm in particular, the partner years, as a matter of fact, because they learned so much from my clients, the irony is that they were paying me and it was learning from them. And I have very fond memories of several amazing CEOs. And I learned so much about how they were leading their literacy philosophy, how they were leading in a very human fashion. And this is what has led me to then want to be a leader as, as opposed to just a, an advisor in problem solver.

0 (6m 1s):
And at McKinsey where you working in specific areas, technology or

1 (6m 5s):
Predominantly in the tech sector. So I worked for telcos. I worked for a printed circuit board, manufacturer defense and aerospace country, computer company, it services company. I had a, a range of clients, both in France and in the

0 (6m 20s):
U S and did you have a family by then?

1 (6m 22s):
I had a family. I had two young children.

0 (6m 25s):
So you were working on a project for EDS, electronic data systems as a McKinsey partner. Clearly they liked your work. And they said to you, Hey, would you consider running our French division?

1 (6m 37s):
The way it happened is that the president of the friends business called me and said, I'd like you to help me think about the profile of my successor. And so we talked about anytime I was leading in a particular direction, he was bringing it back to somebody who looked like me. So two days later, I called him back and said, I like where you trying to tell me that you would like me to consider the job? And he said, no, but now that you mentioned this, I think that'd be a good idea. And that's how it happened.

0 (7m 11s):
So you were, I think probably about 35 when you became the president of EDS. This is a big international company,

1 (7m 19s):
The president of BDS France, which was my first real job. I was two. It was about a 3000 people organization.

0 (7m 27s):
What, what was EDSS main product

1 (7m 31s):
Each? Was it services outsourcing. So running it infrastructures for large corporations and developing or maintaining applications, that was what EDS was doing

0 (7m 44s):
At that time. Did it feel unusual or it was any part of you sort of nervous about taking on such a big job at such a young age?

1 (7m 56s):
How did I feel when I walked in? See, I didn't know whether I was going to be a good leader because I had never led anything. And it was a little bit odd. The first time I attended a management meeting at EDS, France as the president of the business, they wanted me to sit at the head of the table and I said, no, no, no. I want to sit with everybody else. You know, it's just a team effort and so forth. So I was a bit self-conscious I guess. And I discovered that I was able to lead an inspiring people.

1 (8m 37s):
And that was based in large part to, or thanks to what I had learned from some of my clients during my partner years at, at, at, at McKinsey. One of the leaders who inspired me the most, his name is <em></em> quite a French name. He was, he had been the CEO of Honeywell, boom, and he was a turnaround expert. And what I learned from him notably was the purpose of a company is not to make money. People get confused between purpose and necessity and imperative. And I believe that strongly today that the company has multiple imperatives. It started with a people imperative, meaning you need to have good people.

1 (9m 19s):
Well-trained well motivated. Then there's the business imperative, which is you need to have customers that are happy and that, you know, that allow you to grow. And then you have a financial imperative, which is needed to make money for your shareholders and that you can, that you can invest in the business. And of course there's a sequence, right? Excellence on the people. Imperative leads to excellence on the business imperative, which leads to excellence on the financial imperative. But financial performance is more an outcome rather than the goal. So contrary to Milton Friedman, I don't believe that the main purpose or way for companies to create value for society is through the profits and necessity, but they have a bigger aspir aspirations it's it's to contribute to the, to the common good.

1 (10m 3s):
And his view was that between these three imperatives, you actually should not choose. You should refuse the tyranny of, or embrace the power of. And so when people ask you, should we take care of the employees or the customers or the customers or the shareholders he says, and it's all of them. And these companies, you know, will Excel simultaneously on the people on the people imperative, the business imperative and the financial imperative. And then the last thing you said is that at the end of the day, and I firmly believe this too, to this day, you know, it always goes back to the human beings because the only thing that exists in life is human beings and human interactions. So eventually the purpose of a company is to contribute to the development of the, and the fulfillment of the individuals working at the company.

1 (10m 51s):
And it has to do also with the impact that the company has on people, around the company, that the customers, the vendors, the communities, and so forth. So that philosophy, which I continue to embrace to this day was very familiar, even helpful as I walked into to VDS building in 1996.

0 (11m 15s):
I mean, aside from, from having seen examples of other leaders, when you were a consultant, how did you begin to implement that? Because I can imagine that on day one, you could say, you know, okay, you do this, you do that, you do this, you do that. I mean, you're coming into a new company. It's the first time you're leading a company. I have to assume I'm McKinsey. You probably didn't have any subordinates. Right. A partner has teams and maybe assistant

1 (11m 39s):
Begin right

0 (11m 40s):
Now you're in charge of what 3000 people, 3000 people, it's, it's kind of an overwhelming responsibility. Yes.

1 (11m 48s):
And so the truth is that site, I believe size does not matter whether you have 100 people, 1000 or a hundred thousand, it's actually the same because you actually leads with a close team of about 10 people. And then you really interact with maybe a hundred people. And then beyond that, it's very indirect. So whether it's 1000, 10,000 or a hundred thousand, it's actually the same. And so when I studied at EDS, you know, which we did with the management team was we did a diagnosis together. And we, and because of what I learned from, we structured a diagnosis around people and organization customers.

1 (12m 29s):
And in financials, even though this was a turnaround because the French business was not doing it was not doing well. The revenue was going down with who was the roughest competitor. France has a good number of very successful it services companies. So cap Gemini was one, the company that became Aptos, it was another one. IBM was another one. So we had an Anderson consulting at the time. So we had formidable competitors and for a variety of reasons, we, by not doing well. So we studied with a good diagnosis around people at McKinsey consulting. And, but the way we did it of course, with, with a team, because you want to, you know, you want the team to co-create the diagnosis and the, and the strategy.

1 (13m 13s):
And so that's how we started to work on that. And what happened? Well, we, we developed a turnaround plan and I had, you know, I have these principles around turnaround plans, again, start with people. So first thing you want to do is to make sure that you have the right team to lead the turnarounds. In fact, you know, one of the things people who have done many turnarounds believe is that at the top of the company, you want to be very precise. You'd never fire somebody too quickly, because these are not training training grounds. You want to make sure from day one, that you have a great, you have a great team. So you have to assess the team.

1 (13m 54s):
And everybody starts with an, a forget about what happened before. Now, you, you decide whether you're going to keep the EA or not, but you start with an a, and then, you know, you start working on this. So we did the, so we built a team and then the, that we developed a plan to turn the company around. Ironically, we didn't start with head count many times when there's a turnaround, when a company is not doing well, you see people and it's, it's, it's oftentimes heartbreaking, announced a big reduction in for sure we're going to fire 1000 people, 10,000 jobs. And sometimes the share price goes up because of this.

1 (14m 34s):
I find this very distressing. So my approach is different is to say the first part, we tend to turn around and see how you can increase the revenue. That's probably the number one protein in between. You're going to have to cut cost, of course, but you start with what I call non-salary expenses. So all of the, that have nothing to do with people in most companies, it's 80% of the cost structure,

0 (14m 57s):
Inefficiencies,

1 (14m 58s):
Inefficiencies, it's you know what you buy from third-party it's it's waste. So first focus on that. It's a wonderful source of, of opportunity. Then you really get to head count as a last resort. So if revenue growth and we'd actually have done salary expenses is not sufficient. Then you look at head count reduction, but the fact that you do this as a last resort, I think changes everything. Because if you believe that a company is a human organization made of people working together, just eliminating jobs is not, you know, the principal goal

0 (15m 37s):
Stay with us. We're going to take a quick break I'm guy Raz, and you're listening to wisdom from the top. This message is brought to you by NPR sponsor. Airbnb. If you've ever thought about hosting, you might have a few questions. What's it like, where do I store my stuff is hosting worth it. Now with ASCA Superhost you can get free. One-on-one help from Airbnb's most experienced hosts, whether you're curious how to get started, or just wondering if it's right for you, you can now ask someone who's already hosting, learn more at airbnb.com/ask a Superhost. This message comes from NPR sponsor, Wix, where do you go? When you want to create, manage and grow your business online.

0 (16m 20s):
Wix, a leading website creation platform create a site with designer made templates that can be customized for your business and looks great on all devices. Reach new audiences with intelligent SEO tools designed to get you found on search engines and manage it all from one place. Join over 200 million people already doing it and head over to wix.com to get started

3 (16m 49s):
This week on the indicator from planet money, we're revisiting our favorite episodes of the year, like behind the scenes of how inflation is measured. We also visit a New Jersey hotdog stand that explains a small business. Boom would also an economist using auctions to save the birds, follow the indicator, a daily economics podcast from NPR.

0 (17m 11s):
Welcome back to wisdom from the top I'm guy, Ross, you help turn around EDS. This is really the first time, I guess you were involved in a real turnaround as the leader of a company, and you're tapped by the vendor, huge media group in France to be the CEO of its games division. Is that right

1 (17m 29s):
Now is Activision. Blizzard is a wonderful success.

0 (17m 33s):
What did you know about, about video games?

1 (17m 36s):
I have played a few video games. I knew that. So

0 (17m 41s):
What were they looking for you to do when they, when they recruited you?

1 (17m 45s):
So there's a story. So I think it was in April of 1999. It'd been at EDS for three years and felt, you know, we had turned around the company for a variety of reasons. I felt it was time for me to move on. It was having lunch with one of my former colleagues from McKinsey and Jez twine who had just acquired this company in Los Angeles, this video games company. And I said, yes, you look tired. I didn't say yeah, we had been trying to recruit a new CEO for that company. And it's really hard. And, and so I said, well, maybe we should talk because I'm open to taking a new challenge.

1 (18m 27s):
And she said, nah, we we've decided to quit an American CEO. And that's what the Vivendi board wants to do. And then a month later they offered me the job. I actually knew the CEO of Ivanti. He had been a client of mine, and

0 (18m 40s):
He'd been a client of yours when you were at McKinsey

1 (18m 42s):
McKinsey. And they felt that I think the turnaround expertise, not just at EDS, but what I had done at McKinsey, the fact that I had worked in tech and the fact of course that, you know, we, we, we knew each other was, was helpful. And so they took the risk on me and offered me the

0 (19m 3s):
Job at the time.

1 (19m 5s):
So venti was transforming itself, a traditional utility company in France that was hunting 50 years old into a media and entertainment company. So this was before they acquired universal, but they were already in the mobile telephony business. They were in pay-TV in, in, in Europe. And this was their first, I think, major acquisition in the media sector, in, in the U S.

0 (19m 33s):
And so you were tasked to take over the, the video game part of the company and what, what I mean, w was it a growing part of the company? Was it stagnant? Was it non-existent what was going on with, with video games?

1 (19m 48s):
The V this video games company was actually the leader, a worldwide leader in PC gaming. They had a wonderful studio called blizzard.

0 (19m 59s):
It was in France at the studio. The studio

1 (20m 1s):
Is actually in Irvine, California police, or the entertainment is the studio that has done world of Warcraft, right? The Jabil games, the StarCraft games, it's a wonderfully successful studio,

0 (20m 14s):
Owns that on that, on

1 (20m 16s):
That. And so acquired that company at the time, that was part of what they had acquired. So it was the leader in PC gaming. There was some challenges though. So this was also a bit of a turnaround, even though they were the leader, they were, they had some struggles. So this was my second turnarounds of that,

0 (20m 34s):
Of that business. What did you have to do there?

1 (20m 37s):
So part of it, we had to shrink a little bit the portfolio, cause there were some parts that were not as successful as they should have been, but then it was also about growth. One of the things I'm the most proud is how we expended international success of that, of that company and blizzard in particular, which was one of the divisions at these wonderful games, you know, StarCraft, Diablo, and they were about to launch Jabu to, in, in the summer of 2000 and historically they had been very successful in the U S but not so much in Europe and Asia. And so I did a workshop in London with the blizzard team and then the international team and say, let's review what's in the way.

1 (21m 23s):
And we made two decisions at the time. One was to ensure that their discs were at the time they were sending around that they were a copy protected in that we would launch the game simultaneously on the same date around the world. The reason for this was that historically the knowledge of the game in the us in only launch the game later, internationally, that meant the international players. We try to get the game before it lost the gray market. So they got illegal copies or there was a gray market. And so when they launch internationally, it was, you know, not a big noise because most, you know, a lot of people already had the gantry.

1 (22m 6s):
So the retailers didn't want to make a big deal out of this and so forth. And we said, all right. So if we do a similar tenuous launch, and if we copy protect the games, then that's going to make a difference. And it was challenging to launch simultaneously because that meant you, you need to work on the translations of the games at the same time. And so this was a wonderful experience of mobilizing a team around an opportunity. And in the, in the weeks leading to the launch of the game, you know, we would have weekly calls looking at how the game was being polished and, and making the decisions together. And indeed Diablo did 3 million copies. Whereas their previous damask StarCraft had only done 1 million simply because we nailed the international piece.

1 (22m 52s):
And we, we made the cover of the New York times, the business section of the New York times next to Harry Potter, two successful launches, Harry Potter and Diablo two. It was a

0 (23m 3s):
Cool, because I mean, there was a time in the not too distant past when you were to launch something over the course of a year or a year and a half around the world that would always start in the U S and then eventually we get, and, and that doesn't make sense in a world where everybody can watch, you know, video conference on the new iPhone, and everybody can see Tim cook today. And whatever. I mean, if you're sitting in Bangladesh or in Singapore, and you're watching this in real time in the U S you wanted at the same time,

1 (23m 30s):
The world has changed. Yes. Yeah.

0 (23m 32s):
So you last Vivendi for a long time, you're there until 2004 based in Paris.

1 (23m 37s):
So first based in Los Angeles, then Vivendi acquires universal in 2000, and I'm asked to oversee the merger between <em></em> and universal out of the New York office. It was in the Seagram building where it was actually an interesting time, in a sense, this was the worst time of my professional life. The reason why I had applied for this merger management. So pretty much a management role was that I felt it brought it would, it would bring me closer to the top of the company. So I was attracted by the advancements and the power associated with,

0 (24m 19s):
If I oversee the merger of Indian universal, maybe I can become the CEO of this whole.

1 (24m 24s):
Oh, that was not that clear, but it was driven. I think it's a very important question to ask what you are driven by and have now developed a view that if you're driven by power, fame, glory, or money, this is a big danger. And this was the one time in my career where it was, I was driven. The decision was driven by, I can get more power closer to the top and so forth. The best leaders don't climb to the top. They are carried to the top. So it's this idea that once you're in a job, focus on doing a great job at that time, you know, producing great results, being helpful to colleagues, develop your teams. It is assumed that God will provide, you know, in that you're gonna advance.

1 (25m 5s):
You're gonna advance, but not be driven to climb to the top. And for me, that was a big lesson at the time, you know, I had to be aware of the seduction of power, fame, glory of money.

0 (25m 17s):
You, you say it was the toughest time of your career,

1 (25m 20s):
The toughest, the worse, the worst, because it was, it was driven by the wrong motivation. And then it be, when you have a nonsensical job, then it's not very rewarding.

0 (25m 31s):
Why was it nonsensical?

1 (25m 33s):
It was nonsensical because the business logic of the merger was weak. These were the crazy times around the.com period. Sure. AOL and at acquired time Warner. So it was a merger mania around this, and then cultural differences were very significant. You could see the, the, the nuances around many, many different things, including, you know, emails in the U S we respond to email immediately in, in France. It was, you know, so, so the U S executives were sometimes very frustrated

0 (26m 11s):
Because they sent an email and they have to wait five or six hours

1 (26m 14s):
Or days. So this was when something doesn't make sense, you know, then bad things happen. So,

0 (26m 23s):
I mean, it sounds like pretty soon after you go back to Paris to try and get this merger sorted out in your mind, at least you're thinking I gotta get outta here. I gotta figure out my next, the next thing

1 (26m 39s):
The, the sequence guy is I'm in charge of the, the synergies from late 2008 fast, one to mid 2002, an embassy in New York at the time in, in June, rather July of 2002 , then the chairman and CEO is asked to leave the company. There's a big liquidity crisis. And the COO of the, of the company, it asked me to move back to Paris and now be part of the team that essentially did the restructuring of the company. So it's a different regime.

1 (27m 19s):
There's a new CEO, <em></em> to a new team, and I'm part of that new executive team. So this is actually one of the best times of my life from a professional standpoint, because, because this is a, it's a big crisis and I love challenges and how we, during the summer, you know, I think Moody's tells us that we're going to run out of cash at the end of July. And so we quickly secure a billion euros, a credit line, and then in August another 2 billion, and we have these debt maturities that are coming up. The construct of the group doesn't make sense as we've discussed.

1 (28m 2s):
And so we have to restructure the company. And so this, this commando, if you will, has been assembled this team of executives, and we both have to manage the company and see what assets we're going to sell. So we have to sort out the portfolio because we have too much debt at the time and not much cashflow any of this anticipated by the, there was, I mean, the period of 2001, early 2002, the board of event, the becomes increasingly concerned about how somebody Missy is running the place, moves, making too many acquisitions.

1 (28m 46s):
So they tell him, and then there was a bit of bad luck in the, in the spring of 2002, as you all remember, the financial markets froze because notably of Enron. And so Vivendi had some debt maturity that in normal circumstances, they would have been able to refinance, but the financial markets freeze. And so you're really stuck at that point in time. And there was not enough focused on liquidity. We all cash, you know, cash matters. And so the reason why it was a, an exciting time is that we had assembled this team and we, we did save the, the company.

1 (29m 27s):
And so for two years, learned a lot learn how to sell businesses. And, you know, we ended up selling universal to GE NBC. And because in team, I was in charge of overseeing, following the us assets of the, of the company. Once we had sold universal to NBC, I worked myself out of a job, right? But very fond memory of that team, many of them are still friends and learn a ton from that time,

0 (30m 2s):
2004, you leave and, and you go in and work for a travel company, a big one Carlson Wagonlit travel company. Hadn't that happened.

1 (30m 14s):
I was approached by a head hunter to become the CEO of castle faculty travel or CWT counsel valley travel has been a client of mine at EDS. I had helped them with their system. So I knew the retiring CEO at the time counseled <em></em> was a joint venture between Coulson out of Minnesota, family owned, private hospitality and travel company that also owned Friday's TGI Fridays and Raddison and whatnot. And I called a French hotel company, and it was a very much a French American company, like two parents, 50 50 joint venture.

1 (30m 54s):
And even though I didn't know anything about travel, they thought I could do a good job there. So did

0 (30m 58s):
You move to Minnesota?

1 (31m 0s):
No. The, the, the, my job was based in Paris and I would travel to Minnesota every month now because that's where I'd us business was based in, of course, one of my two parents was based there

0 (31m 12s):
As well. And this is a company that I guess, primarily what you were overseeing was w you were overseeing the entire portfolio of the restaurants and the hotels. And this is a company that does like corporate travel and events, right? They,

1 (31m 25s):
So Castlevania only travel is what I was first from oh four to oh eight. I was the CEO of that parrot. And that's a corporate travel agency. So what it does is works for, and those will be multinational companies like geo Accenture, or JP Morgan

0 (31m 41s):
Employees need to travel. They're doing all the backend.

1 (31m 43s):
And they work with the company to optimize the travel space right now. And then at the end of oh seven, when Marilyn Carlson Nelson, the daughter of the founder of council decides to retire, they decide to offer me the job to be the

0 (31m 58s):
Title company.

1 (31m 59s):
Calcine exactly

0 (32m 1s):
At that point. Did you, were you still in Paris or where you go?

1 (32m 4s):
This is when I moved. I moved to Minneapolis at the beginning of 2008. That's when I became the CEO of Kelly.

0 (32m 11s):
Meantime, you're doing all these moves, presumably with your family right there. They've lived in LA, they lived in Paris. They lived in Minnesota. And was that challenging or was that exciting for them?

1 (32m 23s):
I think it's a great opportunity, right? Because the world has shrunk and the son of a son steady SLAs and a daughter I got, and they've lived across the two continents. So they are bilingual. They understand two cultures. My son now lives in Dubai, my daughter in Paris, and they're quite worldly. And they're wonderful kids moving is never easy, but I think they, they, they found some, some benefit to that. My daughter went to college in New York after, I mean from oh eight to 2012, she went to Barnard college. And so it's been good for them.

0 (32m 60s):
So you get to Carlson, doesn't sound like Carlson needed a whole lot of turnaround compared to your previous experiences at EDS and Vivendi. Well,

1 (33m 10s):
I joined Coulson on March 1st. I become the CEO on March 1st, 2008, two weeks before bear Stearns. Right in September, we have a board meeting to discuss the strategy. That's the week that led to the Lehman brothers weekends. And if you are in hospitality and travel, a great recession is not a good thing for you. And so why D two is a wonderful portfolio of assets with opportunities, for sure. Like any company. The great recession was a big challenge because revenue went down precipitous to everybody, stopped traveling Stephanie on the corporate side. And so,

0 (33m 50s):
And their whole business was, was bad. I mean, Radison hotels, TGI Fridays, and

1 (33m 56s):
Exactly, and, and, and castle marketing, which was loyalty, but also events. So we faced a major crisis. In fact, you know, nine, we thought we were going to run out of cash. Given how significant

0 (34m 11s):
Was the company at the

1 (34m 12s):
Time, the company SU what they called the system wide revenue was about $40 billion. But the actual revenue of the company was a few billion dollars, indirectly employed about 150,000 people more directly. I think it was maybe 30 or 40,000 people. So for a family, a privately held business, that's, it's a very significant

0 (34m 38s):
And 2009, it looked like you would run out of cash. Yes. You'd been in that same position at Vivendi, right. What, what do you do at that point?

1 (34m 48s):
So a few things simultaneously, we first, we, of course, we had to go after cost. And so we adjusted the cost structure by about a half a billion dollars, but we also simultaneously looked at how what's the best trajectory for each one of these businesses. What's the, what's the strategy. That's going to take each of these assets and make them the best possible. In third, we looked at the portfolio. If you're a family owned company, you don't have the access to the fascial markets for flying investments. So, which was the best configuration of the, of the portfolio. And we decided to sell one of the businesses, which Wisconsin marketing and I had learned at Vivendi how to sell businesses.

1 (35m 28s):
So we were able to, to do this, which was a combination of, of restructuring and growth.

0 (35m 35s):
So you, you stayed there until 2012. He turned it around January of 2012. Forbes runs an article saying why best buy is going to go out of business. I think in the second quarter of best buy as net income slid like 91% and then its net income in the second quarter was $12 million. I mean, that sounds like a disaster. You are announced as the CEO on the 17th of August, 2012. And that day, the share price drops 10%. So what shareholders are saying, who is this guy?

2 (36m 12s):
They did say this.

0 (36m 14s):
It sounds like best buy was in a major crisis. What was going on that year? It's

1 (36m 19s):
Was the all you can eat menu

0 (36m 27s):
Coming up in just a moment who bears Jolie, turnaround artist faces his biggest challenge yet stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to wisdom from the top. This message comes from NPR sponsor, Intuit, QuickBooks live as a small business owner. You do everything yourself, but now you don't have to introducing a major advancement in small business bookkeeping, having someone else do your books for you, right from your laptop into it.

0 (37m 20s):
QuickBooks live connects you with trusted experts who understand your business, guaranteeing your books get done, right? So do the best thing you can for your business. By letting QuickBooks, take bookkeeping off your plate, learn more@quickbooks.com. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Early public offering investing in early stage. Startups can be difficult, but picking the right early stage investment can have a huge impact, but how do you pick the right investments? Early public offering provides unprecedented access interviews and investment analysis. Usually only accessible to venture capitalists and private equity firms get behind the scenes access to some of the most exciting startups.

0 (38m 5s):
only@earlypublicoffering.com

4 (38m 13s):
In 2021. A lot of the old rules just went out the window. And that's true for music to,

5 (38m 19s):
I think one of the biggest trends that we saw this year on the pop charts was something that we've been calling the death of the chorus.

4 (38m 27s):
It sounds sad how music changed in 2021. Listen now, too. It's been a minute from NPR.

0 (38m 38s):
Hey, welcome back to wisdom from the top I'm guy Roz. So it's 2012, who bear Shirley is about to take the helm as CEO of best buy and the company isn't a full blown crisis, but apparently one person's crisis is another. Person's had an Uber put it all. You can eat buffet of challenges.

1 (38m 59s):
When I get the call from the head hunter in may of 2012, there's a series of tenancy, strategic challenges. The internet is going to kill the company. Also a lot of the vendors are building their own stores like apple. There was operational challenges because the quality of service, the experience in the stores, the experience online, and really, you know, with mediocre leadership challenges with the previous CEO had been, been forced out and there was Brian Dunn. Brian does,

0 (39m 33s):
He was, he was forced out because I guess he had a relationship that was deemed inappropriate with a subordinate. The founder and chairman of the company apparently knew about it. Didn't disclose it. He was sort of pushing.

1 (39m 47s):
So that was these leadership challenges. And then there were sheriffs shareholder challenges with the share price going down precipitously and the founder and larger shareholder wanted to take to do it privately.

0 (39m 57s):
He wanted to take a private, he, I think he had about 20% of the shares and the share price went down to what 15 or

1 (40m 3s):
Eventually in November of 2012, went down to $11, $11. And so this was a troubled company at the time.

0 (40m 8s):
Okay. Now, let, let's just pause here and reflect on this remote because 2012, I remember walking into a best buy. It was hard to find somebody to help you out. It was just big and stuff was all over the place. And you know, you could go in there and look at stuff and then go home and order it through Amazon, which is what a lot of people were doing. I mean, in fact, I think in 2010, Amazon introduced an app that allowed you to price check to go into best buy and compare the prices, right?

1 (40m 42s):
So a lot of people thought we were going to die. I mean

0 (40m 44s):
You would, but you wouldn't be irrational to think that

1 (40m 47s):
It was a lot of reasons. So before I joined the company, because I was neither crazy nor suicidal before I joined the company, I took the time to assess the opportunity. And of course, where after I had joined, we did with a team, a diagnosis. And the conviction I developed was that the company's problems were essentially self-inflicted because poor quality of service, Amazon was not create creating this. It was best buy, not executing effectively. And second, the company had enough assets to effectuate a tournament. Of course, online, we all shop online, online. It's such a convenient way to share research and buy it.

1 (41m 29s):
Also, I also saw that the stores, if well, run at a big, positive role to play. And so in particular, the many of us need, want to touch feel and experience the product before we buy it. And price perception was an issue, but we could fix that. So one of the first things we did, he said, we're going to take price off the table by matching online prices.

0 (41m 57s):
No question, Amazon or wherever.

1 (41m 59s):
Exactly. So if people were in our stores, they were ours to lose and we would take care of them. The other thing is that the stores could be a wonderful asset for the vendors because these companies, whether it's apple, Samsung, Sony, any one of these companies, they spend billions of dollars in R and D. They need to be able to showcase their products and have customers see them everyday,

0 (42m 24s):
Rather than it like a convention like CES. Exactly.

1 (42m 27s):
Because not everybody goes to CS.

0 (42m 28s):
Oh, you're talking about the way it sounds like the way you were thinking about it was look. All we have to do is think about how we operate this company differently. But I have to imagine, not only were there analysts saying this model is dead, but there were people you knew from your time, you know, running companies telling you Uber, this is just think about it. This is, this makes no sense. Look at JC penny, look at toys, R us look with all these big box. Retailers are, are headed. That model is over. I mean, I mean, you could make a plausible argument that it didn't matter how well you ran the company.

1 (43m 5s):
And what I had learned guy over the years through the turnaround of EDS in France, the turnaround of the video games company and the transformation and growth of Carson valley travel is that, you know, people may have points of view, but there's nothing like facts and nothing like a good diagnosis. And if you can truly dig and understand what matters for the customers and what they want and what they need and what you can do to meet these needs and build a competitive advantage around that. So you have to do the work around diagnosis and in developing a strategy, sometimes the dominant point of view is not right. And in the case of best buy.

1 (43m 46s):
And I told this to the board two weeks after I started that, you know, not seen every company on the planet, but I had seen a few. And this one was by far, the most dysfunctional company I'd ever seen. And because they were all divided and doing their own thing, they were not focused on the, on the right thing. But this other, it was great news because this was all fixable.

0 (44m 6s):
It was Morel like, first of all, at the corporate level when you got there.

1 (44m 12s):
So when I walked in Mar morale at corporate was terrible. Imagine this. So you're you live in, in Minneapolis and all of your friends are telling you every day, what do you, what are you doing exactly? You're going to be covered. They were worried. Morale was terrible because you know, when you have a CEO that's fired because of the circumstances, there's a feud with the founder,

0 (44m 37s):
$12 million in net sales in one quarter,

1 (44m 41s):
12 minutes of, of, of net profit profit. So the share price is going down. So all of your, for the executive, all of your options are underwater. So morale was terrible at the same time, because this was a company that had been very successful for many years. You had a bunch of people underneath, you know, maybe the top layer that wanting to do a great job. They wanted

0 (45m 4s):
This to work

1 (45m 5s):
And they were incredibly talented. The, it, I'm a big believer that some, a bit of a Maoist

0 (45m 13s):
Maoist fish,

1 (45m 15s):
Fish rots from the head. And it was some aspects of the top leadership of the company that were not appropriate. In fact, the CEO had been fired. Sure. But underneath that, you have unbelievable passion and talents at the company. And I felt it was all about, you know, mobilizing this talent in pursuits of the turnaround plan. And that proved to be

0 (45m 40s):
Correct. So you didn't come in and just bring in your team with you and brand new team and sweep the

1 (45m 45s):
Decks. I brought no team. You brought

0 (45m 47s):
No team. You decided to work with the people who were there and make them part of your team.

1 (45m 52s):
Day one, I told the management team, everybody starts with an Ang. You get to decide whether you're going to keep the a so, but we F we got to forget about what happened before, right? Cause it's all about what we're going to do going forward at the same time. You know, I've learned in turnarounds that, you know, you need to make sure you have the right team. So you have to quickly assess at the top of the company, whether you have the right team, people who are qualified and mobilized to do what's needed. So we made a few, I made a few changes very quickly out of the top seven people at the company removed three in the first couple of months, recruited a couple of people from the outside promoted from within, in immediate, some layers.

1 (46m 36s):
So quickly move to build a team. But then we work together to establish the diagnosis. And then what we were going to do, how are we going to turn around the company? How much

0 (46m 46s):
Time did you have before you would run out of money?

1 (46m 49s):
So the company was actually profitable in generating cash. So the danger in retail. So you're right to point this out. Your market cap was Shrinking. The risk, the way circuit city went away is that the vendors pulled the plug. And so we had a risk and I joined just a few weeks before the beginning of the very important cutting season

0 (47m 12s):
Bankrupt in oh nine, I think, or

1 (47m 14s):
In November of oh eight. And that's how it happened is the vendors pulled the plug. Of course this was in the middle of the great recession. So there was a

0 (47m 22s):
Risk that could happen to

1 (47m 23s):
Best buy. And yes, cause we were running into the, the, the, the, the holiday season, which is really important in, in the business of best buy, as you can imagine. And it was critically important that we quickly start moving in a different direction. So I, my first official day on the job was September 4th, 2012, 2012. We presented our plan to the markets to wall street in November of 2010. So I had two months to, to present a plan. And the plan was roughly two. So renew bloom was the plan renew blue. So we had, what did we do first? We decided that we had to take price of the table.

1 (48m 6s):
So we say to match prices, we have to improve the online shopping experience, right? Because this is where the shopping journey starts. And our website, our website was really terrible that the search engine couldn't find what you were looking for because I spent guys spend the first week on the job working in a, in a series of stores, I learned so much cause I would, you know, in, during the day they would show me how the stores operated. At the end of the day, we would do focus groups, tell me everything that's going wrong that we need to fix. And I learned so much, including this bundle, the search engine on the side was not able to find what we were looking for. So we improve the online shopping experience. We worked on improving the supply chain to increase the speed of shipping so that we could essentially neutralize Amazon by having the same prices, a good online shopping experience in fast shipping.

1 (48m 54s):
Then we worked to improve the shopping experience in the stores. We invested in the training, the proficiency of the associates invested in improving their systems so that they could do their job. The price match was really important for them because this was a way for them not to lose the customers. And then we did the vendor partnerships, we in, in December,

0 (49m 15s):
All in the plan and in November of 2012, exactly. And the vendor partnerships were primarily with, I think, with migraines.

1 (49m 22s):
So the first one was with Samsung. So in December of 2012, in dark, darkest days, JK shin, the CEO of Samsung electronics flies to Minneapolis coming from Moscow. And we have this idea together of, instead of Samsung building stores across the country, like apple had done, which would have taken him years and build a fixed cost for him. We decide that he's going to be able to do Samsung stores within our stores, best buy instead of rent and pay us. It's not rant, but give us good economics, which was good for the customer because the customer in the same store could see the apple product and the Samsung products.

1 (50m 5s):
It was good for Samsung because in a matter of weeks or months,

0 (50m 9s):
How many stores across how many best buys

1 (50m 11s):
1000 stores in the U S as a store, wait locations, great traffic. And it was good for us because good economics attached to this. And then we did the same with, with Microsoft, with Sony, even today, with Google and Amazon and all of these tech companies have. But

0 (50m 28s):
When you made that deal with Samsung, didn't that piss apple off.

1 (50m 33s):
So I did have conversation with Tim and the, you know, we have a wonderful partnership with all of these tech companies and they, they know they all compete against each other, but if we can work with each of them in a way that helps them promote their products, create a great customer experience. If you think about the apple store within best buy it's it's, I think apple would probably say that this is the best shopping experience for apple products outside of their own stores, because we have all of these apple tables. We have 3000 apple experts within our stores.

1 (51m 13s):
We sell apple care, we unauthorized service provider for the apple products. And so, in a sense, following some of these deals, we've actually strengthened the partnership with apple and made it much better. And so this is not a zero sum game. This is a game where we can partner with each of these companies to help them grow and grow the markets.

0 (51m 35s):
So, in a sense, you sort of said, let's think of best buy, almost like you go to a tech convention, right? Where you walking on the convention floor and there's the apple, there's the Samsung, there's the Google. You can kind of do many versions of that. You thought, because the best buys are huge, right? How big are best buys?

1 (51m 53s):
That's my food. I 45 huge. And so we have a lot of space. That's a great asset, right? So with the idea that the stores are dead, now, there are wonderful assets for the vendors. And then for the customer of us, the ability when we're not sure about what to buy, sometimes if we know that click, click, click, we buy it online or ship it to you or pick it up in the stores. But if, if you need to discover or ask questions, it's a wonderful asset. And that's what we've been doing.

0 (52m 21s):
Were there people who are on the board or who resisted this idea saying, you know, we're going to cannibalize ourselves by, you know, we're, we're essentially giving space for these big companies to show their stuff and what people don't buy them from us.

1 (52m 34s):
And so if, if you're asked one day who killed so roaming in the west, I told him in this phenomenon, people go to the store to our stores and they will buy online share. I have to admit, I personally killed. So in the way we did, it was through the price competitiveness in the price match. Because once you are in one of our stores, if you're interested in the product, why would

0 (52m 58s):
You leave? Because

1 (52m 60s):
We're not going to be beat in any, we offer you this great experience of being able to, to talk to our associates, our blue shirts. I mean, I admire them so much. They're so proficient. They're engaged. They're trying to understand what, what are you trying to do? Not just reach features on a box that makes no sense because you've come, you've already research, but they're trying to match what you're looking to accomplish the problems you're trying to solve in your life with the technology solutions we have to offer. So it's a great experience. And then you're not going to pay more than a, at any one of our competitors. So what is what's, there's nothing wrong with that picture.

0 (53m 34s):
Now I have to imagine that when you got there in 2012, first of all, I would never have invested in your stock in 2012. What a mistake? What a mistake. I know, but I wouldn't have, because I would have thought this, this stock price is down at $12. I mean, this business is going to collapse. This is why I'm not a millionaire. Most people at best buy are saying Amazon is killing us. People are going to Amazon, Amazon, Amazon. You actually decided to partner with Amazon open a kind of an Amazon store within the store.

1 (54m 9s):
Yes. So Amazon is of course a competitor. You know, I admire them so much. They're the, they may be the best company or one of the top companies ever. And I'm a big Amazon customer. This said Amazon plus best buy combined. That's only 25% of the overall market. And so when the things, you know, I tell our investors, Amazon is gaining share for sure. They're a great company. Oh, we're getting shared to, and both companies offer a great experience,

0 (54m 40s):
Which put 25% of the consumer electronics market is, is Amazon and best buy. So 75% Walmart,

1 (54m 46s):
Other people, small regional players. And I think that one of the things the two companies share is the view that, you know, focusing on competition is interesting, but not fascinating. It's all about a focus on the customer. If you're passionate about understanding the needs of the customers and then creating ways to provide a great solution for the customer, this is how you win. One of the things our customers are interested in is the best available technology. But Amazon is of course a retailer. They also a tech company. Yeah, they do these products and the tablets. You don't remember that they do the fire TV. They do the, these black cylinders that tell jokes, you know, Alexa and echo products.

1 (55m 28s):
So they have a great product line in best buy. We've always been clear that started before my time, but I confirmed it as a strategy. We're going to sell the best products in the market that includes the Amazon products and fear. You know, it's not a great strategy. Customer focus is a great strategy. So best buy will a bit like the Coliseum where the gladiators come and fight for the interests of the customers. We're the place where you can walk into either a site or the stores. And now we go to your home and you're going to have access to the best technology in the world.

0 (56m 6s):
You guys see Google there. You're gonna see apple. They're going to Amazon. They're

1 (56m 10s):
Does this take any major tech company? Right? They have a significant presence. Associates, specially trained. You're going to be able to understand what's possible with technology because technology innovation is wonderful. Many of us, we don't always know what's possible what system to choose, how everything is going to work together and how to keep it going. And so you need help one help and where the place where you can see the technology and get good at.

0 (56m 39s):
So you're like, you're like Switzerland, every you're neutral, everyone's there. And

1 (56m 44s):
Like the idea of the Sam where it's exciting, Switzerland is exciting for skiing, but I'm not sure it's exactly.

0 (56m 55s):
I want to ask you about customer service, right? Because one of the obvious advantages of going into a store is you can ask for expertise and help from a customer service rep. My, my impression is that that was true. At one time in history in America, you went into a Macy's or a JC penny or, or a Bloomingdale's and Neiman Marcus. You get really, you get expertise. The people offering you customer service had jobs that could sustain a middle-class life. Is that, is that model still possible today?

1 (57m 31s):
Absolutely. And I need to walk you through a little bit, how we're thinking about this in a sense, after the turnaround phase, we worked on defining our reason for being who do we want to be on purpose and the way we've thought about our strategy, what we don't think of ourselves as a retailer, selling gadgets, we have a Mich bigger purpose. Our purpose is to enrich lives through technology, by addressing key human needs and the human needs. We're talking about entertainment, communication, productivity, security, food preparation, and health and wellness. So if you walk into our stores or online, or we go to your home, what are you trying to accomplish?

1 (58m 15s):
If you're interested in the TV, what is it for? Is it, do you like to entertain with sports or do you like to watch movies or do you have kids that play video games? What are you trying to accomplish? I remember story a in a, in a, in a mountain view store here, a woman walks into the store and she's looking for headphones and Anthony VU, who is the sales supervisor, who talks to her, doesn't ask her, what kind of headphones would you like? What features he asked her? What are you going to use them for?

0 (58m 46s):
Are you going to exactly?

1 (58m 48s):
And she said, this is for the office. And so it's important to me that I can hear my coworkers. If they ask me a question and so forth. And so he probably sold her one of the least expensive headphones because he wanted to meet her needs. And so that's our mission in order to fulfill that mission, we have, you know, the employees, whether they work in the stores, the blue shirts or the geek squad agents. So people who are merchants or work on the site are data scientist. They're all interested in pursuing this purpose and being helpful to, to customers. So the stores, the store employees, they're going to be, of course, very knowledgeable about products and they're going to have this wonderful human attribute of being able to have a dialogue entered, saying what you're looking for and then matching your needs with the technology in a full, you know, full employment market.

1 (59m 47s):
We've been able to reduce the turnover in the stores to about, to less than 30% from 60%, a few years ago.

0 (59m 54s):
And in general, in the consumer or in the retail space, it's true.

1 (59m 59s):
Yes. And 30% is remarkably low. In fact, there's some pockets of frontline employees like in-home advisors, where the turnover is like 8%. And these are, these are salaried full-time sales position. Where are you going to be able to raise a family with that job? And so we've created an environment in which people can, you know, have an exciting job, can have a career and feel that they're doing great things for the people they're interacting with.

0 (1h 0m 29s):
So I want to, I want to get back to something you mentioned earlier in the interview about Milton Friedman. Of course, the famous economist who really met many people say is responsible for the idea that today corporations believe that their primary fiduciary responsibility is to their shareholders, which means the CEO is focused on the stock price and on the boards demands and on shareholder value because they have to be right, that there is an increasing criticism of this view, right? We see where this movie has headed. Yes. Vast inequality in the U S right when I was a kid, my best friend's dad worked at Marshall's right. He raised a family. He worked at Marshall's. That is virtually impossible in, in the biggest Metro areas today in America.

0 (1h 1m 15s):
Is there a, do you think there's a connection between that Milton Friedman view of the world and what has happened, you know, with corporate America, with employees of corporations?

1 (1h 1m 27s):
I think there is a, an increasing view that the Milton Friedman view is deeply flawed. And certainly I believe that there's a completely different perspective. I don't believe for a second that the purpose of a company is to make money. You have to make money, of course, because otherwise you couldn't pay salaries and invest in the business. And it's actually okay to reward the shareholders. In fact, that best buy, you know, the share price has gone from $11 to 67 or something like this, but there's a big difference between the necessity and a purpose. And so I've been passionate about this topic for many, many years. There's really five key beliefs. And the first one is the view that as human beings, we're driven by, you know, finding the meaning of our life being life is a very important question for all of us.

1 (1h 2m 17s):
And because work is an important part of our life work is an essential element of our humanity. And it'd be good if it could be connected to the search for meaning in our life. That's the first belief. The second belief is the idea that a company at the end of the day is a human organization made of individuals working together in pursuit of a certain goal. And the third belief is indeed the fact that the purpose of a company is not to make money it's to contribute to the common good and at best buy it's to enrich lives through technology, by addressing key human needs. If you're not clear about why you exist and what service you provide to society, this is not good.

1 (1h 3m 1s):
The next belief is the idea that in fact magic happens at a company. If you can connect the search for meaning with the purpose of the company, if people at the company can build human interactions, meaningful human interactions with their colleagues and with their customers or with the vendors, if they can acquire skills and become masters of a sentence skills, if they have autonomy. And if they're in a growth environments, if you can create this environment, then extraordinary things happen for all stakeholders. As a company, we need to serve all of the stakeholders, our customers, our employees, our vendors, our shareholders, and the communities in which we operate.

1 (1h 3m 48s):
And by the way, there is no need for any trade-off between these things, because it's, by simultaneously doing a great job for these various communities and aligning all of these communities in pursuit of the purpose that you create great outcome for all of them. And two that best buy, you know, we're not perfect, but the customers love as much more than they did. Seven years ago, the employees are happy. The vendors have seen what we can do for them. We've had one of the top total shareholder return for customers and try to be good citizens. Ironically, I think you get to a better outcome for shareholders through this approach than being singularly focused on shareholders,

0 (1h 4m 26s):
Uber, how important is it as a leader to be liked? How important is it to you that, that the people who work around you like you,

1 (1h 4m 38s):
I would say it's not about being liked to the, in fact there is a danger. If you're a self centered, I believe that the greatest danger for all of us as leaders, irrespective of the level at which you are a leader in the company, is if you're seduced by the attraction of power, fame, glory, or money, if your ego is what you're trying to serve, this is a huge dancer. I'm not saying you should not be liked.

0 (1h 5m 10s):
It used to be like to on some level for people to be, feel motivated, to really deliver,

1 (1h 5m 13s):
We have to inspire, right. Which is very different. So there's a question of who, who are you serving as a leader? If you believe you're serving yourself or your boss or the CEO of the company, I tell actually leaders it's actually okay, but I don't think you should work here. You're not going to be happy. You have a choice, but you should not work here. If you believe on the other end, that who you're serving other servants, quote, unquote, meaning people on the frontline, in your work as a leader is to serve the servants. Then this is much more meaningful. So your role as a leader is indeed to inspire. And I believe for a long time, that being the being smart was really important, but that's not my role as a leader is not to be the smartest person in the room.

1 (1h 6m 4s):
In fact, there is a danger of trying to appear like this and make sure that everybody knows how

0 (1h 6m 9s):
Smart you are in the room. Nobody can make a decision

1 (1h 6m 12s):
And it's not very inspiring. You're not going to get anywhere. Your role as maybe as your role as a leader is to create an environment in which others can be successful through, you know, the call it, we call this one of our values at best buys and leaves. The power of the people is create an environment in which people want to come to work and do great things.

0 (1h 6m 31s):
How do you make sure that best buy stays innovative? I mean, there are so many disruptors and potential disruptors. There's obviously there's direct to consumer is a big trend. I'm wearing Allbirds. I got my electric bike directly from the manufacturer. How do you create or make sure that the people who are working with you are innovating are, are, you know, disrupting internally.

1 (1h 6m 56s):
And so after the turnaround phase, after we knew a blue, we entered it in a new phase, which we've called building the new blue best buy 2020 building. How do we reinvent the company for the future?

0 (1h 7m 8s):
How do you do

1 (1h 7m 8s):
That? Went back to what are the needs of the customers that we can address? One of the needs we're trying to address is health. We have a focus on aging, seniors helping them live a, their life independently, longer in their home with the help of technology. We acquired a company to help us do this company out of San Diego called great call. You know, we all have aging parents, right? Sure. And the sensors and analytics and artificial intelligence and care centers, we try to detect changes in BV, behavioral patterns. So she stopped getting to the kitchen and probably you're not eating or go to the bathroom if you're not asleep well.

1 (1h 7m 50s):
Sure. And then we create an intervention to make sure that it gets taken care of. And so this has the impact of helping them live independently longer, and then preventing catastrophic events like falls. And, and of course, which reduces healthcare costs. And we're setting this service through Medicare advantage providers. So the insurance companies, or, you know, the, the Kaiser Permanente's of this world. And so this is something that never touches our stores. We leverage our geek squad agents because you need to install these devices in people's homes and make sure they keep running because it's a matter of life or death in many cases.

1 (1h 8m 34s):
And so by going to the true need of the customer and seeing how we can use technology to meet these needs, we create a new market, a new opportunity and make a big difference in people's lives.

0 (1h 8m 47s):
I mean, it sounds like what you're saying is that your competitive advantage is that you're selling the thing you're selling is human interaction.

1 (1h 8m 57s):
It's a combination of touch tech and technology again is increasingly exciting, but many of us need help with that. And so it's allowed us to innovate in a way where it's really hard for anybody else to compete. Sure.

0 (1h 9m 13s):
Uber looking down the road, right, I mean is in, in 10 or 20 years is best buy, going to be, what do you imagine me? There's the BP, you know, there's tons of people out there say, look, Amazon bought whole foods. Maybe they'll buy best buy. And that will be their answer to the apple stores or their answer to, you know, the Samsung or whatever it might be

1 (1h 9m 35s):
Exactly what it looks like 20 years from now is hard to predict because we're going to continue to innovate. And if we're continued to be driven by this, by this sense of purpose and mission and being a human purposeful company, I think we're going to continue to do great things. At the same time, we have to remain very modest and humble and vulnerable and know that if we don't challenge ourselves in a bad things could happen to us.

0 (1h 10m 2s):
Do you think that you were born with leadership qualities? Were you born with the ability to lead or do you think you learned how to do that

1 (1h 10m 8s):
Was not born with that? I got all sorts of great Griffes, but leadership is something that I feel I learned over many, many years, and I learned it from other individuals observing great leaders, learning from them when I watch some of our frontliners from our store. GM's, you know, my view is when my next life I want to come back just like us. There's a story about a store GM that I was visiting a store in Boston in that store. GM asked each one of the employees, what is your dream in your life at best biotech? What is your dream in my job as the store general manager is to help you achieve your dream

0 (1h 10m 55s):
That's chairman and CEO of best buy you better show Lee. And by the way, best buy just recently announced that after nearly seven years, Uber will be moving into the role of executive chairman and he'll pass the reigns on to his CFO, Cory Berry, who will be the first female CEO to lead the company. Hey, thanks for listening to the show. This week, our music was composed and performed by drop electric I'm guy Ross, and you've been listening to wisdom from the top from luminary built-in productions and NPR.

6 (1h 12m 4s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, Yogi tea, uplift your spirit with Yogi sweet Tangerine, positive energy tea blended with energizing, Yerba, Mati, and bright and delightful Tangerine support your wellbeing with Yogi tea.