0 (0s):
Support for NPR. And the following message come from jobs, Ohio say yes to more, more options, more opportunities, more paycheck. That's what you'll find in Ohio where the economy is booming. Upward mobility is rising and affordability is the name of the game. Visit find your Ohio dot.

1 (18s):
Hey everyone. So this week we're doing something a little different. We're going to put out a new bonus podcast in your feed. Just this one time, it's called the limit. And it's hosted by the very talented Jay Williams. He's a former pro basketball player and a commentator on ESPN. And each episode, Jay talks to people from the world of sports or business or pop culture. And he does a great job finding out how they overcame all the kinds of obstacles to get to where they got. You can find every episode of limits wherever you get your podcasts. But for now here's J's interview with Maverick Carter, the business manager for one of the world's most successful athletes. Hope you enjoy.

2 (53s):
Welcome to the limits. I'm Jay Williams. You know, there's this moment that I absolutely love from the year 2013.

3 (1m 4s):
Yeah. First of all, I want to give a lot of credit to the San Antonio spurs first-class organization. They pushed us to the limit.

2 (1m 10s):
This was the year LeBron James won his second straight MBA championship with the Miami heat. It was a decade after his NBA debut, and he was already submitting his legacy as one of the greatest, if not the greatest of all time. And here's what he said in the side interview, holding that championship trophy.

3 (1m 31s):
I'm LeBron James from Akron, Ohio from the inner city. I'm not even supposed to be here.

2 (1m 38s):
I'm not even supposed to be here, but see here for Bron was not just on the court. It was in, C-suites sitting down with investors, private equity, venture capitalists, and moguls in sports, finance and media. See all these years while everyone was so focused on what Brian was building on the court, he was also building a business empire that today is valued at three quarters of a billion dollars. The Keystone of that empire is called the SpringHill company. They do marketing branding content. They own a part of the Boston red Sox. They've been produced the shop and HBO talk show in barbershops where Brian other NBA stars chop it up with everyone from Barack Obama to make a repeater.

2 (2m 25s):
And if you didn't hear SpringHill recently secured a massive round of funding from corporate investors, including Nike and epic games, the makers of fortnight, but all that the brand doesn't do alone. The architect behind the scenes is his partner in the business and his childhood friend from Akron, Ohio, my guest today, Maverick Carter. So how did two kids from Akron bill? One of the biggest athlete driven business empires on the planet. It wasn't easy. The story of how they did that is full of so many things. I want this show to be about challenging. The status quo, the power of ownership, growth, staying true to who you are fighting and clawing against the idea.

2 (3m 11s):
You're not even supposed to be here. It's a struggle. We all know in some way, right? Imposter syndrome, walking into a room and feeling like you don't belong. You've been there, right? People's preconceived notions of you, your background, where you come from, what you look like, how you sound when you speak those struggles. Where's real for Maverick Carter as anyone. And this is a guy I knew from way, way back in the day. In some ways he still reminded me of the kid. I met at basketball camp decades ago, but there's also a part of his struggle that he's never shared before until now.

2 (3m 53s):
Here's my conversation. And the first episode of the limits with the architect, Maverick Carter. Thank you for doing this, man.

5 (4m 11s):
Thank you for having me. I appreciate it. Congrats on the show.

2 (4m 14s):
Level one become very corporate with each other. It's like a congrats on the show.

5 (4m 19s):
I would tell you that if we were at a bar having a drink, like just congrats on the show, it was amazing.

2 (4m 24s):
It's it's been a dream come true for me, frankly, man, you know this actually go back to when we were both kids, because it was like yesterday, you and I were at five-star camp playing on the same team, man. I'm dating myself 25 plus years ago. If I would have told you then that you would be the architect for one of the biggest, most powerful athlete driven businesses in the world, what would you have said?

5 (4m 50s):
Oh man, you're taking me back. Yeah, you're making me think about to your point. I was 16. So you and I are probably both 16. You might be set. You might be just a year, Adam. I was

2 (5m 1s):
15. I was a year younger

5 (5m 2s):
Than you. You're you're younger. Yeah, man, that was a long time ago and people don't know this, but I got a division, one basketball scholarship and I was not good enough to play division one. But when we took out,

2 (5m 15s):
Oh, stop, I'm not going to let you do that to yourself that you had

5 (5m 18s):
That week at camp, you were serving me up and I was just finishing it. I was just finishing the breakfast, but you, you were doing the hard work. You were so fucking good, but what I've viewed and told me that then I would have not even understood what that meant or I thought that was possible. Or, you know, I didn't even know what it meant to work in sports other than being an athlete or an athletic trainer. Then I knew what a trainer did. So I would have been like, what are you talking about? What is even an athlete business mean? You know? So when I was able to understand that learning, that kind of changed my perspective, which was many years ago.

2 (5m 54s):
When was that? And how did that moment come about? It was

5 (5m 59s):
When I was 19 years old, I met a gentleman named Lynn Merritt who still works at Nike to this day who I met. And he was, you know, he was, he is an African-American man who worked in sports marketing at Nike. And I had no idea what that meant. And I was having dinner with him in Chicago and got introduced to him because he was coming to Akron obviously to see LeBron, by that time, LeBron was, you know, a 17 year old best high school basketball player in the country. And he got introduced to me and I just asked him a lot of questions. And I started to understand that, whoa, there is this other business that kind of, you know, is around sports.

5 (6m 42s):
So meaning when I was a kid, I thought, you know, Michael Jordan, I love Jordans and I love the commercials, but I, you could have told me, Michael Jordan made the commercial. Right. But he's a big part of it, but there's a whole team. So I started to understand that and learn that. And that's when I first was like, well, this is what I want to do.

2 (6m 58s):
It's fascinating here. You say that because I remember my sophomore year in college, there were so many people on my doorstep, man. So many people through childhood relationships, through random relationships that all wanted to be in business with me. And it had me scared as hell because I didn't know how to navigate nor vet who was the most competent. Right. I knew I wanted to make, but I didn't, I didn't know who I wanted to put in a position of power. And how did you navigate the sensitivity of that relationship with Brian and his family to be in that position to start to architect what the future of your business look like?

5 (7m 38s):
You know, that's a great question because much like many young athletes and basketball players, which, which I happen to be around and you are one at first, he, when he first came out, his agent was basically chosen by his mom and then two years in when he decided to move on from his agent and asked me to leave Nike, I was working at Nike and come back and work with them and come back, meaning, leave Nike and moved back to Ohio where he was playing. And obviously for the calves and work with him, he kind of, he arrived at that decision and then said, yeah, I'm making this decision. And he was like, it's time. You know, I love my mom, but this is why I gotta make this decision for myself.

5 (8m 21s):
Well, the truth is, I've never really talked about this, but his mom called me furious and Glo who I love dearly curse me out because she thought I get kind of pushed him to that decision. She was. And then there, her next point was, you know, basically YouTube idiots don't know what the hell you're doing. You're not ready for this. She didn't call a city. It's, I'm being a little facetious, but just that you guys aren't ready. You know, he was probably 20 at the time and I was 22, you know, what did we know? We had no experience. And she thought I had pushed him to the decision and I kind of talked her down, but then I kind of talked her through what we were thinking. And the truth was to your point, our thought was we understand who we are and where we want to go and what we want to be and how we want the world to see us.

5 (9m 11s):
But we definitely going to hire some experts. And that's what I explained to her, a lawyer and accountant, but the vision and the creative is going to be and how we map who we want to be. And what we're going to do is going to be up to us, but the experts we're going to bring in and do their job. And so she got comfortable with that, but it definitely was a point where she was a little

2 (9m 29s):
Christophe. Oh, I can see that. I mean, have you ever had a conversation with Brian about how he got to the point, because for a 20 year old to do that, with everything that came along with it, for him math, I mean being on the cover of sports illustrated being called the chosen one, having a Nike deal right out of high school, what was the vision initially for you guys?

5 (9m 53s):
The vision always was longterm. Meaning think about everything and big picture long-term because our bet was you either had to bet LeBron was going to be the LeBron that he is today that we know which is awards and all-star games and win championships and become kind of who he is today, who he actually became. Or you take the short view and go, who knows what he's going to turn into. So let's do what I would call a, a cash grab being do as many deals as possible, just grab as much money, do as many things as fast as possible, and then hold on and see what happens. And our bet was that he was going to be, the Brawny is today, as far as I'm just talking as far as a basketball player.

5 (10m 37s):
Right. Cause everything else we had to figure out, but if he's going to be that as a basketball player, then it's a long view of like, how do we get to a place where we own things, build things, create value in enterprise, but also be able to decide if we want to, how and when we want to capture that value was always the, kind of the long-term mission.

2 (10m 60s):
I guess this is where stereotypes come into play because it's something that my parents and I talked about being a young black athlete. You talked

5 (11m 7s):
About it when you were, when you first came out or later.

2 (11m 10s):
Exactly. Because you know, we hired a black agent in bill Duffy who represented us and there were some stereotypes that came along with that. And I remember some of the things that they were saying about you guys in the media about cash grabs and a lot of the parties you guys are doing on the road and LeBron would show up for cast grabs. Like how did that ultimately massive effect, just what you thought about the industry in general, because you had a lot of people and you know, this man swiping at your knees, trying to backdoor cut you guys to get in business with Bron

5 (11m 43s):
Because I try and consider all of the, when I'm thinking about something or going through something, I try and consider all the perspectives that are at the table. The players probably a little bit from growing up, being a card player, you try and understand what everyone's thinking in order to decide where this thing is going and how then what decision you gotta make next. I think, you know, there was media, lots of media that broke horrible stories about us. And I remember Adrian Warren house. He just had like an obsession for awhile when he was working with Fox and just cut writing, article an article, an article going after me and LeBron and, and what the conclusion I came to is when you really looked at all the perspectives, the media has to, you know, sports media, which is right.

5 (12m 30s):
They're very tied in with GM's and agents. That's where they get their information from a report. So from a GM standpoint, what did they care unless they were just being nosy. But from an agent standpoint, it was more about the fact that if this thing worked, if LeBron and his, you know, his friends thing worked, where does that leave us? We could be out of business because if LeBron and his friends are successful, then the next LeBron or the next Jason Williams is going to have their friend, who's going to want to represent them. And then how do we get in and represent them? So the fact of the matter is from an agent's perspective, trying to wipe us out was, was just them trying to protect their territory.

2 (13m 13s):
How did you navigate that? They'll map? Because I don't care what anybody says as an athlete. I always paid attention to what people said, either motivated me, or it gave me love, right? There was no in between, there was no gray space. So when there were crazy articles written about maybe mistakes that you had made or, you know, perspectives that were different than the ones you guys had internally, how did you communicate that and manage that with LeBron?

5 (13m 39s):
Yeah, I think, you know, a lot of it was a frustrating, you know, and pisses you off and is a little bit like, you know, also you have to take into perspective, you know, this is largely, especially then even, you know, white controlled media was white agents and white GM's and you're going while we're these young black guys and that just taking aim at us. So you take it personal at a point, but then also it becomes personally motivating too. So you, you, the same way you take it personal and get frustrated and piss, take it personal and, and let it motivate you and drive you. So, and you just had to have that discussion and talk about it and understand it.

2 (14m 22s):
Last name here. You say that. Cause I remember scooter, even though his name is Scott, you know, he tells me to call him Scott now, but we had a moment when I was 20 years old, where he brought me to Puff's place in Atlanta, Mav and puff was telling me at that time I was a sophomore in college. How I could be the face of bad boy and how they were going to help me build the marketing around his brand and how we're going to be involved in business. And I remember sitting down with my dad saying, this is an opportunity. This is the culture of sport. And I know it's drastically different than the approach that you guys feel like I should take, but I want to explore it. And my dad said, you know, son is something we can look at, but how people view you is very important.

2 (15m 8s):
And are you going to be a person that sits in a room with executives, with younger people who are talking in a hip hop slung? It was almost in the early two thousands. My dad was like, I don't know if that's acceptable son.

5 (15m 21s):
Totally, totally. I don't know. But it's crazy

2 (15m 23s):
Though, man. Cause then when I hear guys like Phil Knight, I'm Phil Jackson, excuse me. When he was working with the Knicks, when he referred to you, Randy Mims, rich Paul, as a posse for LeBron, that's how a certain part of people view you guys at that time. Like what happened with that? And how were you able to counter that?

5 (15m 47s):
Yeah, absolutely. I think what your dad is dealing with saying, which is he was not wrong, which is in that time, can you show up in that room and express exactly how you feel and that expression could come through, how you talk, how you walk in, how you're dressed, whatever. And it's funny to your point now, if, if you're not in those rooms, being yourself, you're going to be frowned upon back then. It was like, well, whoa, how do you, you sure you want to go with younger people at night? And we did that. And we went in as ourselves, but we got that. I always tell people, we got that audacity from the Jay-Z's and the Puffy's cause they, you know, through hip hop and hip hop language, we were able to go in the room and be exactly who we were.

5 (16m 34s):
And we were doing it a bit earlier. I think that most people in the sports world, but also, you know, we were fortunate enough to work with Nike for a very long time. And they always wanted us to be us and wanted us to express who or, and so then when you, so that was my point when I was upset about what, I don't know, Phil Jackson, I'd never even met Phil Jackson. So, you know, for him to use that language, we all knew what he was trying to say. And my point was mostly anyone who knows us, no, that's not true. And you never hear them say that you never hear them use that kind of coded language about owners. You know, when LeBron played in Cleveland, the owner of the Cavs, Dan Gilbert, he show up to a game of 40 people, three airplanes, 2, 3, 4 vans, and he could do whatever he wants is he owns a team, right?

5 (17m 23s):
He has suites and access, but great. But nobody says, well, look at Dan Gilbert's crew or his posse. That was my point about Phil JAG. I don't know Phil Jackson never met him. I don't want to meet him. But for him to say that we know what he was trying to say. And especially in the way that he put the context of

2 (17m 44s):
Speaking of being yourself in rooms with powerful people, which is not easy to do by way in just a minute. A story about have MAB did just that to unite pro athletes with the little tiny startup headphone company called beats by Dre. You have to hear this I'm Jay Williams. You're listening to the limits from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, the American express business platinum card, which is packed with features like 1.5 times membership rewards points on big purchases and in selected business categories over $1,000 in statement credits per year with select business partners and five times membership rewards points on flights and prepaid hotels booked through Amex travel.com.

2 (18m 35s):
Get the card built for business by American express terms and point cap apply. Learn more@americanexpress.com slash B platinum. This message comes from NPR sponsor, future a new workout experience that pairs you one-on-one with a fitness coach who will map out a custom workout plan to meet your goals all through the future app. Your coach will even check in with you via text and FaceTime and is available at any time to answer all of your questions, fine, tune your workout and celebrate your progress to learn more and to get started with 50% off your first three months, visit try future.com/mpr.

2 (19m 15s):
Hey, before we get back to the show, I have a secret for you. There's so much more to hear for me and my guests stuff. You won't hear anywhere else. So for bonus content, a sponsor free version of the podcast and more subscribe to the limits. Plus you'll be supporting the show and NPR and each week you'll get bonus episodes made, especially for just you the subscribers, but you gotta subscribe, do that at plus.npr.org/delimits. That link is in our episode description as well to all the people in the back. Here you go, write it down.

2 (19m 52s):
plus.npr.org/delimits. So it's 2008. Maverick Carter is sitting in a meeting in LA with legendary music, executive and mogul. Jimmy I-beam. The founder of Interscope records I've been is just starting up a business with Dr. Dre and they want to make headphones that deliver studio quality sound. Of course, you know the name of the business and the headphones beats by Dre today, athletes in every major sport, walk off buses and into stadiums where in these headphones, apple acquired the company in 2014 for $3 billion.

2 (20m 32s):
But long before that, Maverick Carter had a wild idea for Jimmy Ivy. He said to Jimmy, listen, I know your hipbones aren't even out yet, but why don't you let me have a handful. I'll get LeBron James to give them to his teammates on the U S Olympic men's basketball team. That team of course was just about to leave for the 2008 summer Olympics in China. And when they got off that plane in Beijing, yeah, they were all rocking beats by Dre. Can you provide us context with how that all went down?

5 (21m 4s):
Yeah, I mean, that was obviously beats was the brainchild of Dr. Dre and Jimmy IVN and Jimmy and Dre were set out to disrupt the marketplace. And, and we were fortunate enough to know Jimmy, I had just started my relationship getting to know Jimmy. And again, he showed me the headphones and I thought this was cool. And he talked me all through the kind of marketing and how he's going to bring them to market. And I, my first thought was, he's not thinking about sport. And I kind of explained to him why I thought sport was going to be very important to have phones. It was right. He didn't think about sport, right? He was in the music business and running Interscope records. But the brilliance of Jimmy is he understood that I had passionate about what I was talking about and he's like, well, show me.

5 (21m 49s):
And so getting the headphones to LeBron to give them to the oh eight Olympic team before they landed in Beijing was kind of my way of doing it. I had this idea about marketing through the form of gift giving and did it solve the, how it took off. And Jimmy then offered myself and LeBron equity in the company. It was just starting. They hadn't even sold the one pair of headphones yet and kind of built a brand that was mostly, honestly, became about sport. And that was kinda the kicking off of it. And obviously ended with the exit to apple, which was a, obviously a fantastic deal and a great partnership with apple, for sure.

5 (22m 30s):
But, but that idea was another one about disruption also.

2 (22m 33s):
What went through your mind that made you want equity more so than a traditional sponsorship deal?

5 (22m 39s):
Great question. Well, I had started to understand and think about, as I said, if we think about long-term patients and really building something in the value you get in that versus just taking cash. And you start to understand that owning a piece of an enterprise is much more valuable than cash, as long as that enterprise is growing and flourishing. And it is because you have much more things you can do because we all need a platform. So once you have an enterprise, like, you know, SpringHill has become my platform, right? So people get all caught up on the evaluation or this or that, but it's the place I work on. It's the thing, you know, NPR is now your platform J so we all need a platform.

5 (23m 20s):
That's much greater if you control a platform, right. If you really are in control of a platform versus just getting cash. And, and then I, you know, secondly, you just think about from a pure tax standpoint, if you own assets and you sell them, you, you know, you pay capital gains versus ordinary income against just getting cash payments. So it was just those two things where my, or my main thought was

2 (23m 44s):
Thinking, is it something that you always felt you were supposed to be in these rooms? Math? You know, when I talked to Tim cook, you know, he gives me insight into what you guys are thinking. When I talk to some of the biggest people in media, in business, it's always centered around what's happening in the sports realm and what brands like the one you've been able to create with SpringHill entertainment, with uninterrupted, what you guys are doing to constantly move the needle in that marketplace. Have you always felt like you belonged in those type of rooms?

5 (24m 21s):
Yes, I do. Honestly. I've always felt like I belong for sure. Even when I was still young and green or I am still learning, I pride myself on learning all the time, but because I'm willing to admit what I don't know. And I'm clear on what I know. So I've always felt like I belong because I'm able to learn and listen. And what I do know is I know I can bring things to the table that will drive value, and I know where I need help. And, and, and to be surrounded by great people.

2 (24m 49s):
How did, how the hell did you get the name? Maverick. Can you just, it's something I've always wanted to ask you. I don't think I've, I'm sitting here thinking all these questions I want to ask you and I never asked you them.

5 (25m 1s):
Well, I have my grandmother think who gave me the name based off of a TV show with the characters name. The show was called Maverick and the character's last name was Maverick. They were called Brett two brothers, Bart, Maverick, who were Cowboys in the, in the west and played poker. But my grandmother who was a bit of a cow girl herself, she ran an after hours where she had card games on Thursday and Friday night and sold liquor when the bars closed. And that was her business. So she loves like poker players and old westerns and love that name. And my, it was my dad's childhood nickname. And then she told my mom that gave me that name as my first name.

5 (25m 42s):
And that's how I

2 (25m 43s):
Got it. It almost feels like destiny, right? People

5 (25m 46s):
Oftentimes don't believe me. It's my real name. Yeah, I guess

2 (25m 49s):
I was talking to a kid the other day that heard you speak at USC and you are given a commencement speech, but he said, one of the things that hurt you say somewhere, cause he was just rambling on and on about you. He was in love with you. And he said, you said something like some people are just more prepared to take risks than others. I grew up a gambler. That's my name? Maverick. It's kind of serendipitous, isn't it?

5 (26m 13s):
Yeah. I mean, yes it is. It's a little bit of nature nurture. Yeah. It's it's for sure when it comes to risk taking, I just have some people are just more prepared. I think my, what you're talking about is I gave the commencement speech at USC a couple of years back and I based my whole speech cut around my grandmother and, and the difference between kind of going forward and settling for what I call a good ass job and like having that appetite for risk and how do you manage it and think it through and think about the upside versus the downside. But yes, some people are more equipped and I think maybe that's a little bit of nature, but a big part of it's my, you know, I was nurtured into it also for sure.

5 (26m 58s):
And I think to your point, it goes a bit with my family history and my name for sure.

2 (27m 2s):
I think one of the things I've always admired about you is that you don't seem to like making yourself the story. Am I right about that?

5 (27m 11s):
Do I? I don't like, no, I don't like making myself the story, but even further, I'm not the stories, you know, I've spent basically my whole career standing next to the man who was always the story. Right. It was always the center of the story. So it's not my thing and it's not my place. So no, I don't, I don't look to make myself the story ever.

2 (27m 30s):
But how do you balance that though, man? Because not everybody can strive to become LeBron James, it seems like it's a lot more realistic for especially young minority kids to see the path that you blaze and say, oh, I want to become the next Maverick Carter. So how do you balance the story being LeBron and an entity compared with what your story is? Because your story obviously is very inspirational to people.

5 (27m 55s):
Thank you. I appreciate it. I think, you know, a lot of people know my story and know who I am, but I think if I make it the stories actually the company and our mission and what we do then that is the most inspirational to me. When you think about empowerment and I wouldn't even be on this call with you or in the position I am, if I wasn't empowered by LeBron. So I think that the best thing I can do is actually build a company, a place, a platform that empowers others. I think that's better for young kids than me kind of, you know, making myself the story or looking to promote myself. It's more about how do I build a company or a place that really, or content.

5 (28m 35s):
And sometimes I'm midnight content, right? That is truly they can watch and be empowered by that content.

2 (28m 48s):
Empowering people as one thing. But as the saying goes with great power comes. Yeah. You know, the rest coming up, math takes responsibility for one of the most controversial moments of the Bron James, his career, an hour long prime time TV special in 2010, no one has the decision where LeBron announced his choice to leave his hometown in Cleveland and signed with the Miami heat and free agency. MAB weighs in on that and on Brian's decision a few years later to go back to Cleveland. What he says about that though, at a shocky I'm Jay Williams, we'll be right back.

0 (29m 31s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor aspiration. Now you can help combat climate change with aspiration zero. The credit card that rewards you for going carbon neutral, plant a tree. Every time you swipe and earn 1% cash back every month that you reach carbon zero aspiration zero one card, zero carbon footprint, visit aspiration.com/credit to learn more. The aspiration zero MasterCard is issued by beneficial state bank member FDIC, pursuant to licensed by MasterCard international incorporated.

1 (30m 3s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, LinkedIn, this black history month, as we reflect on trailblazing historical figures, LinkedIn is also celebrating those working to build a better tomorrow. That's why they're sharing the journeys of black entrepreneurs who started with a vision and then inspired and championed by the communities around them. They became success stories that inspire us all. Join the conversations happening on LinkedIn this month to learn more about black founders who are charting a new path, LinkedIn welcome professionals.

2 (30m 36s):
So I remember being in the boardroom with you and LeBron and rich Kleiman, who was the architect for Kevin Duran and Kevin Duran as well. And I was asking LeBron a question about how he manages his own brand. And I'll never forget this math because it's something I learned from you that day, as I worked with other athletes in the future of my own business, I said, so LeBron, you know, how do you manage your brand? He said, well, Jay, well, I'm not really a brand. Nike is a brand Louis Vuitton is a brand and he talked about himself more as a human being. And as I'm listening to him talk, I remember looking at you and me thinking at that moment, that MAB would probably answer that question differently, but you didn't interject yourself in the conversation.

2 (31m 22s):
You just kind of lay it out. And it was almost to me that was a great lesson because there's not a need. When you work with athletes who are so powerful to always inject yourself in the conversation, you have to let them breathe, to let them paint their own narrative, their own picture of how they see it in their mind. And you build your narrative intertwined with theirs. Do you find yourself doing that when you disagree with something maybe one of your clients says in real time, or how do you navigate that aspect of

5 (31m 53s):
No, listen, I've been fortunate to know a lot of athletes and spend a lot of time and help, but the one I've kind of basically only worked with this LeBron right, from a business, from a working relationship. So I'm always able to give good advice to other athletes because I don't have a, as my grandmother's had, I don't have a nickel in their quarters. So, but with LeBron, it's always kind of give and take and we go back and forth and disagree about a lot of things. And it's just a matter of respect, right? Like him respecting my understanding, my respecting of his understanding also, as you know, the saying in basketball KYP kind of knowing your personnel, knowing who you work with, what they're willing to do or not willing to do and what they are good at and not good at.

5 (32m 38s):
So I think that's how we get to a level where we can really understand each other and, and, and have good discourse because I believe in good discourse, I believe in diversity of thought and diversity of environment that you come from. Cause that leads to us, not always agreeing, but as I say, iron sharpens iron. So you need that clashing of ideas and thoughts to get to something really amazing.

2 (33m 1s):
Can you give me an example of good discourse between YouTube,

5 (33m 4s):
Between LeBron and I? Yeah, I would say going back to Cleveland, I was against that. I didn't understand it. I didn't get it, but he was like, for all, a bunch of reasons, he really thought it was the right thing to do. And, and we went back and forth and, and really, I think it, you know, pushed him to really have to think about it, but he landed in a place and where he w what he thought was right. And he was right. I was wrong and he did it for all, but he was doing it for the right reasons. And as he said, it was, it was progress over pride. So he got to a place where he wanted to do it. And, and, and I understood it though. I didn't agree at the end, but it worked out.

2 (33m 42s):
Why, why didn't you agree with it? I

5 (33m 44s):
Just, you know, I thought it was a bit of going backwards, a buck, but most importantly, I just thought, you know, he was going back to help a man who had wrote a letter that was just so slanderous of him. It's just like, whoa. And that was where he came up with the thing of like, yeah, but that's pride and I'm in favor of progress over pride. So I'm going to choose progress.

2 (34m 7s):
Wow. I've never, I never knew that map. I have to ask you because I, you know, obviously having my accident, I've had some investments that have fallen flat. What has been your biggest failure thus far? Or let me rephrase that. What is being your biggest moment of growth thus far in your career?

5 (34m 28s):
I've had a lot of them while I learn things like, you know, bigger, isn't always better and going wider too soon is a problem. And really understanding people's perspectives. I think I learned that the big lesson came through post the decision when LeBron decided to go to Miami, we did the decision and I just looked at like, everything that was going on and how he was being killed in the press and public perception was so down here. But, but that year, it was weird. Like that was the biggest year he had in Jersey sales and sneaker sales. So it was like, you have to learn to separate the consumer perception from public perception, from press perception.

5 (35m 10s):
Cause they're all very different than what you realize is like, you have to pay attention to them all and, and, and be thoughtful with them or put you can't think they all line up. So the 17 year old kid in Houston, Texas buying the Jersey, doesn't give a shit what the column, this New York times is writing. Like you just have to be thoughtful and that, and I learned that, you know, a decade ago, and that was a huge lesson for me, for

2 (35m 35s):
Sure. Math, I think it's safe to, you're a master operator considering you just got $725 million for a SpringHill deal with Nike red bird and Fenway sports group. You guys own a piece of the Boston red Sox. You're, you're doing so much at only the age of 41 years old. What's the end game for Maverick Carter.

5 (35m 57s):
That's a good question. By the way, I'm only 40. I just turned 40 last month.

2 (36m 3s):
I am older than you. That's on me.

5 (36m 5s):
I told you, you're older than me. I knew you were older than you. You graduated in 99. I graduated 2000. All right.

2 (36m 11s):
Respect. I got to, you know, I just like to make myself feel younger, man. That's all. Listen,

5 (36m 15s):
It's your show. Yeah. If you want to be younger, go ahead. No, I'm kidding. Whatever I gotta do, man. Exactly. What's next? I mean, listen, I think we're just getting started. You know, our aspiration is to be on the Disney for culture and do that through the lens and pull that thread of empowerment. As you said, we just got this infusion of capital. Plus we have cash on the balance sheet to grow on this company, through all of the organic growth that we're doing. We're looking at some M and a that where I think shortly we'll be announcing some stuff. So, so I think we're going to keep doing that. I think, you know, LeBron, I personally am going to keep, you know, we do our personal investing stuff that we do. So we're going to keep looking for amazing investments.

5 (36m 57s):
But I think ultimately, you know, the work that he's doing at his foundation and through our company are really, truly trying to change kind of how young kids, young, black kids like us kind of have to look forward to. And what they think about going forward is a big part of what we do and is kind of everything. And ultimately that's kind of going to be at, I would hope that definition of what we ended up doing and kind of what is longterm for us that we leave behind

2 (37m 26s):
Mav. I can't tell you how much I appreciate you taking the time out of your crazy day to spend time with me. I think providing a platform for younger people to understand how to push themselves to the limit, to learn how to build hustle into an actual business and not cut corners. You've just given us a masterclass. So I wanted to say, thank you for me and for all my listeners, man, and I have so much respect for you and everything that you've accomplished in that you're going to brother and I couldn't be happier for you, man.

5 (37m 55s):
Thank you, Jay. Thank you for having me on the show and congrats on the show again.

2 (38m 1s):
So big shout out to Matt and his team for making this happen and our team here at the limits. Karen Kinney, Charlotte, Ricky Lena's sons Geary, Trent Bachman, Rachel Neal, Yolanda St. Gwynnie. Our executive producer is Anya Grumman. We're back next week, stay tuned. I'm Jay Williams.

0 (38m 20s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Charles Schwab last year taught us. We don't know what tomorrow holds, but Schwab knows that successful financial planning can help propel net worth by 2.7 times find easy flexible planning options and more at schwab.com/plan.