wondery Plus (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How I, Built This Early, and ad free Right. now join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts.

NPR Life Kit (10s):
Whether you've got a small goal for 2024, or you wanna change your life in a more monumental way, head over to the Life Kit podcast. We've got 50 potential New Year's resolutions for you, and we will help you pick out the right one with our handy resolution planner. Take, your goals off hold by. heading over to npr dot org slash life kit Or. by searching life kit Wherever, you get your podcasts

Amica (34s):
When it comes to auto, home and life insurance. You want a company that's always there for you. Like Amica, they take the time to understand what you need and tailor a policy to meet your needs. When you need Amica, their representatives put you first and let you know what you can expect from them. They'll tell you exactly what you need to do and walk you through it. By choosing Amica, you'll know you'll have someone in your corner when you need it. Most, as they say at Amica, empathy is our best policy.

Airbnb (1m 4s):
Maybe you've stayed in an Airbnb before and thought to yourself, this actually seems pretty doable. Maybe my place could be an Airbnb. It could be as simple as starting with the spare room or your whole place when you're away. You could be sitting on an Airbnb and not even know it. Maybe you're planning a trip for a long holiday weekend while you're away. You could Airbnb your home and make some extra money toward the trip. Or maybe there's a big tournament or concert in town, and lots of fans will be visiting. You could Airbnb your home or extra room while people are in town. Whether, you could use extra money to cover some bills, or for something a little more fun, your home might be worth more than you think. Find out how much at Airbnb dot com slash host.

0 (1m 53s):
Hello and welcome to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. So, back in 20 16, 1 of our very earliest episodes was on the founding of the Boston Beer Company, makers of Sam Adams Beer. Our guest was its founder, Jim Cook. I know lots of you remember that episode because so many of you have come to talk to me about it when you meet me. It was really funny. It was full of great lessons. And Jim talked about a framework he came up with that gave him the courage to start the company. And that framework was pretty simple. He asked himself, what's worse? Doing something scary or something dangerous? Well, for Jim, leaving his comfortable job as a consultant to start a beer company was certainly gonna be scary, but not doing it, not taking the leap and staying at a job he really didn't love.

0 (2m 45s):
Well, that was dangerous because one day he might regret not trying and it would be too late to start. Fast forward to today, and a lot has changed in the beer industry. Even in the time since Jim first joined us, there's been a flood of craft beer brands that have started up. Some have prospered, many of them have failed, and American drinking habits have changed as well with more people opting for spirits or even non-alcoholic drinks. None of this has ruffled Jim Cook or stifled his creativity in any way. In fact, it's just made him more innovative. As you will hear, Jim no longer runs the day-to-Day operations at Boston Beer Company, but he's still very much involved in a big part of product innovation there.

0 (3m 33s):
A few weeks ago, I asked him to come back onto the show for an update, and when he sat down in the studio, he decided to celebrate our conversation with, well, a nice cold beer.

2 (3m 45s):
And I actually, and you were talking about the last episode, it, it reminded me of actually the secret of why that came out so well. And if I may, I am gonna give you the key to that, which is I discovered long ago that I'm really boring when I'm dead sober. So

0 (4m 7s):
Back, back then, there were about 5,700 craft breweries in the US Boston Beer company, still considered a craft beer company. It's, I think you make about, you know, eight and a half million barrels of beer a year. So you're still considered very small compared to the big guys. Not the biggest, I think Yanging is the biggest craft beer, beer number two. But at the time, there were about five, five and a half thousand to date. There are almost 10,000 by 2022, almost 10,000 craft breweries in America. You, Jim, are widely considered to be like the, the guy who reinvigorated craft Brewing in the us. Like you're like called the Godfather Craft Brewing.

0 (4m 49s):
But I wonder, Whether, you think that there's too many, I mean, is there market saturation now? You know what, what do you think

2 (4m 57s):
You're asking a brewer? Is there too many beers? I mean, a brewer always wants another beer. Yeah. So I'm very happy that there are 10,000 craft brewers and you know, in all seriousness, this is sort of what success looks like. Yeah. You know, when I started Sam Adams, it'll be 40 years ago, that was kind of what we dreamed about. That someday everybody was, you know, 10 minutes away from a craft brewer and that there would be great beer everywhere. And you know, the downside to that is there is so much competition.

2 (5m 39s):
Yes. Everybody's innovating, everybody's trying to make the next new thing. But that's wonderful. Yes, it's a much harder business to be in. But on the other hand, it's stable. It's not going anywhere. It has totally changed the landscape of beer in the United States. And today, the place where brewers from all over the world look for inspiration and innovation is not Germany. It's not Belgium, it's not it England, it's America. We are teaching the rest of the world how to make great beer.

2 (6m 19s):
Yeah. And when I started Sam Adams American Beer was a joke. Yeah. And you know, I come from a, a Brewing family with a deep history of Brewing in America, and it bothered me. And today nobody makes that joke anymore. Right.

0 (6m 33s):
Because things like IPAs really, you know, what you see in Europe and, and it's amazing. I mean, those are really influenced by American brewers. But I'm just curious, 'cause I've been reading things like, you know, craft brew Brewing we know is more competitive and the market share is slightly decreasing. I mean, the market share of spirits has really jumped from 2000 to today, and it's now greater, a greater share of the overall alcohol market than beer. Slightly. You know, beer is still big and 40, 40, 40 1%, but spirits now outselling beer a little bit. Do you think that it's, it's sort of foreshadows what is gonna happen over time.

0 (7m 15s):
Doesn't mean that, you know, Boston Beer Company and other companies won't come up with other products. But I mean, do you think that in 20 years from now, it's possible that, you know, beer consumption accounts for let's say 15% of all alcohol consumption in the us?

2 (7m 30s):
Well, lots of things are possible. And there's a country western song called The Hard Way. And one of the lines in there is we've got two lives, one we're given and the other one we make. Yeah. And maybe 15% is the life we're given, but it's not the one we make. I want a different future. And, you know, I'm willing to take the challenge of creating that different future. And to me, as a brewer, there are great beers that have net been made yet. Right. And they may take a form that we can't imagine today.

2 (8m 11s):
And to me, that's the opportunity. That's what's exciting. You know, I've been making beer for 40 years and I wake up excited every day by the possibilities. And we make things that are almost beyond imagination. We make a special beer, we release it every two years. It's called Samuel Adams Utopia. It weighs in at about 60 proof. It's the strongest naturally fermented beer in history. And we sell it for $250 a bottle, and we sell out.

2 (8m 51s):
Yeah. We have to ration it. And to me, a beer like that easily stands next to, you know, a vintage port or a fine cognac. An old sherry. Yeah. We've moved into a flavor space where beer has never been. Yeah. You know, and then on the other hand, you know, we've made canned cocktails that are just flat out delicious. And it's not technically a beer, but it leverages our culinary skills, our flavor innovation. And you know, it's in a can.

2 (9m 33s):
Yeah. You make it in a brewery, goes through beer wholesalers and so forth, Whether, you call that spirits or beer. To me, it's just part of this wonderful universe of beautiful things you can do with the fermentation of grain.

0 (9m 50s):
How do you begin to think about, you know, innovating? So you, you, you start as a beer company, right? And then you make different kinds of beers. But now Boston Beer company makes hard ciders, it makes seltzers, it sells a hard iced tea. So let's kind of break this down. How do you decide what to do next? I mean, is it based on market research and looking at like where, you know, where younger consumers are going, what they're drinking? Do you sort of follow the consumer essentially?

2 (10m 23s):
No, no. There are plenty of people who are very good at that. Big companies have lots of research and they buy reports. Yeah. And, you know, they get all this quantitative stuff and so forth. So we can't really compete with these big companies. They've got all these feelers out there. We have to, to be successful, we have to be different. And so for me, this starts with ideas that are, if you will, paradigm shifts. You know, we approach the world in paradigms. Yeah. And we are prisoners of those paradigms. And I, I've always tried to take those blinders and that structure away because it forces you to think in the same way that everybody else is thinking.

2 (11m 12s):
And so it inhibits innovation and new ways of adding value. Yeah. For, you know, our whole time in alcohol last few centuries, alcoholic IPAs basically divided into three realms. There's beer, there's wine, and there's hard liquor or, or spirits. Yeah. And those are three lanes. Okay. And, and an insight about that is, you know, they're all acquired tastes. They all have a flavor structure that as human beings we're not actually evolved to like wine. So true. Actually is tannic and acidic, you know, beer Yeah.

2 (11m 55s):
Is bitter and has that Yeah. Tongue sting of carbonic acid on the palate. And of course hard liquor has that ferocious ethanol attack

0 (12m 4s):
That burn

2 (12m 5s):
Upfront. Yeah. So they all are acquired tastes, which

0 (12m 8s):
Is why kids don't like them. Kids, you know, drink a sip of beer, wine.

2 (12m 13s):
No, no. You have to evolve your taste to like them. And, and that's fine, but you're fighting something. So the term I use is a fourth category, and that's kind of our blue ocean where we can innovate because nobody's really there.

0 (12m 32s):
And the fourth category is, what do you call it?

2 (12m 35s):
I call it the fourth category. The fourth

0 (12m 37s):
Category. I love it because

2 (12m 37s):
It doesn't have a name, but it is the space of intersection. Yeah. Of all of them. Things that are not traditional wine, traditional beer. Yeah. Traditional liquor. I mean, there's a place for all these wonderful things. But there was this unexplored territory of wonderful beverages that had not yet been made, but were, to me, I think of them, they exist. Yeah. They're just unrecognized and lying dormant. And my job is to kind of dust them off and find them in this junkyard of bad ideas.

0 (13m 14s):
We're gonna take a quick break, but when we come back, how Boston Beer Company brought an alcoholic twist to some of our favorite non-alcoholic beverages? Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This

LinkedIn (13m 26s):
Lab. As a business to business marketer, your needs are unique. B2B buying cycles are long and your customers face incredibly complex decisions. Isn't it? Time you had a marketing platform built specifically for you? LinkedIn ads empowers marketers with solutions for you and your customers. LinkedIn ads allow you to build the right relationships, drive results, and reach your customers in a respectful environment you'll have direct access to and build relationships with decision makers. A billion members, 180 million senior level executives, and 10 million C-level executives. 79% of B2B content marketers said LinkedIn produces the best results for paid media. And so many of the brands on How, I, Built This use LinkedIn to reach customers every single day. Make B2B marketing everything it can be and get a $100 credit on your next campaign. Go to linkedin.com/built this to claim your credit. That's linkedin.com/built. This Terms and conditions apply

Miro (14m 39s):
this episode of How I. Built This is sponsored by Miro. If you haven't heard of it, Miro is this incredible online workspace. Our team relies on it for a lot of our own brainstorms and processes. And I think it's super useful to try out, if you wanna build something great with your team. One of my favorite features of Miro is called the Miro verse. Sometimes starting work on an online visual workspace can feel overwhelming, but with Miro verse, you can select pre-made boards for pretty much any use case, collecting feedback, running meetings, icebreakers. It saves you the hassle of building from scratch. And what's really cool is that a new template has just been added this time for me. We partnered with the folks over at Miro to create a how to build a podcast Miro verse template to help kickstart your journey to making a podcast. Check it out and let me know what you think. Head on over to miro.com/ HIBT. That's MIR o.com/ HIBT to check out our Miro versus template for yourself,

0 (15m 51s):
welcome back to How I Built. This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. So Jim Cook loves thinking outside traditional paradigms. A great drink doesn't need to be a beer or wine. It can be something totally different.

2 (16m 4s):
So for example, we've developed an ability to ferment grain and then clean it and take out a lot of the less pleasant notes. Hmm. We are essentially making this beautiful, clean, clear, 20% alcohol liquid that then conform a base for other flavors. It's Huh. Like the pizza dough on the, the counter. And you can put anything on it you

0 (16m 37s):
Want. And you can turn that into several other products.

2 (16m 41s):
I can turn that into an Unlimited number of products. One of the first things that we developed, it was over 20 years ago, was hard tea. And it was very appealing to me because tea has, you know, like beer and hops and so forth. Tea has a couple of thousand years of tradition. It's got big flavor variations between different teas. You've got black teas, green tea, red tea, white tea. And you know, it's a, a flavor I know that people are familiar with, but I can introduce it to them in a new way. And so we came out with a, a hard tea called Bodine's Chalk that one up.

2 (17m 23s):
That was another failure. Yeah. But I, it didn't do that Well. And then there was a band that sued us, so that was a fiasco.

0 (17m 31s):
So just to, just to clarify, you're talking about as a Twisted T brand. Yes. And already 20 years ago, Boston Beer Company released a a hard tea, but that didn't work. It it failed initially.

2 (17m 44s):
Well, yeah. And then it failed again.

0 (17m 46s):
So what happened? How did it, how did that turn around?

2 (17m 49s):
Well, it failed the second time as Twisted T, but it had little pockets. Okay. And we're, you know, we're not a big company. Big companies, if something fails, they they shoot it in the head and they move on. Yeah. But this was like our baby. And it had these little pockets where it actually was doing reasonably well. Huh. What it was, was states that start with M but weren't Mississippi. So it was doing well in Maine, it was doing well in Massachusetts, it was doing well in Maryland, in Montana and Michigan.

0 (18m 27s):
That does not explain anything though. That is, that explains nothing to me. There has to be a reason why people

2 (18m 33s):
Exactly.

0 (18m 34s):
Why.

2 (18m 36s):
Well, that's the question you have to ask yourself. You know, and that's part of this paradigm thinking people every, you know, people focus on the paradigm and what works within the paradigm. And what you really have to do is focus on the aberrations. Hmm. Things that are outside the paradigm. Yeah. That's how Copernicus were, that's how Einstein worked. A lot of great scientists, they look at the aberrations. So we went to these aberrations and I started with Maine and I just went to Maine and I stood in convenience stores, which was the main place that it was selling. And I stood in one of 'em all day long.

2 (19m 16s):
And there were like five people that came in and bought Twisted Tea. And I asked them why they were buying Twisted Tea. And what I was told, well I like the way it tastes and it's not carbonated so I don't get bloated. And it makes me feel good. And it, it had, you know, a very familiar taste. It had the modicum of caffeine in from the natural tea. Not a lot, but enough to just kinda change the contours of the buzz that you got from it. And it, it was very flavorful. So you didn't chug it. You'd have one or two.

2 (19m 56s):
And

0 (19m 56s):
It tastes like a, kind of like a, a regular iced tea A little bit.

2 (20m 1s):
Yeah. It's actually a bigger tea flavor profile. 'cause a lot of the non alk teas, the snapples in Arizonas there, there's not much tea flavor. I mean,

0 (20m 9s):
There's powder, right? They use powder.

2 (20m 11s):
Yeah. And the tea isn't that, I mean they, they're, they're very successful. They sell a lot. 'cause the tea flavor is sort of recessive and the sweetness and the, the fruit, the lemon and things that get added are essential elements to it. And we were, it was very tea forward, but it was very high quality tea. And the core drinker was a blue collar drinker, but a kind of educated blue collar drinker. 'cause it wasn't cheap, you know, this was selling for basically craft beer pricing. I mean, the first guy I talked to in Maine, he was a mason and he was building a stone wall. And the next guy was a sheet rocker. You know, he put up the plasterboard in a construction site.

2 (20m 54s):
And so, and these were people who were very sort of clever Yeah. With doing odd things. And they started sending us pictures of them drinking twisted tea. The first one was this guy who looked like he was in a pool, but then when you opened the aperture, he put all a plastic sheet in the back of his pickup truck, filled it with water and was sitting there in his bathing suit having a twisted tea. And it made me smile. And this is our drinker, this is great. So it started to get traction. Bikers adopted it, it's like the official drink of Sturgis, the big bike rally in North Dakota.

2 (21m 37s):
And it's just grown over 20 some years. It started with that base. It's still the base for it. And then it sort of spread out. Now there's college campuses. I, yeah, remember moving my daughter out from her dorm at Harvard and she was on the top floor. So we walked down all the, the five floors and on two of them there was an empty case of twisted tea.

0 (22m 3s):
Wow. Alright. So let, let's d dig into this a bit more because obviously the tea sort of gamble worked. One of the thing that that you introduced, this was back in I think 2016 was hard seltzer. And initially hard seltzer also didn't take off like exactly. It, it was seen as a gimmick.

2 (22m 25s):
Well no, we, it was actually, I mean, I'll tell you a story of it. We misconceived it, you know, 25 years ago we developed this clear malt base.

0 (22m 34s):
This was before Coors released Zema.

2 (22m 39s):
This, it was after Coors release Zema. But the base that Coors had was not clean. Okay. It had some off notes of sulfur that came out of the fermentation. They didn't know how to get those molecules out of there. So we had to, I mean I'll, it's a little complicated, but we had to develop this ion separation technology. And I'm not a scientist, but I know it tastes good. And we actually did that in partnership with Brown Form with the people who make Jack Daniels. And they had some chemical engineers and it was a very fruitful partnership. And outta that came this clear malt base that the Jack Daniels country cocktails are built on.

2 (23m 20s):
And we kept thinking about, well what else could we do with it? And that was, it took 20 years to come to this idea, which was hard. Seltzer truly was the first hard seltzer here. And it just came from just thinking, pushing, what could we do with this? And it was a very simple idea. You know, LaCroix was taking off, seltzer water was taking off. Yeah. And we said, you know what if we made an alcoholic version of that.

0 (23m 49s):
So you were, you were paying attention to LaCroix. 'cause LaCroix really just exploded. I mean, even though it's been around for a long time, it really started to explode in the 2000 tens. Yeah.

2 (23m 59s):
Yeah. And you know, to me, when I'd go into a, a store, you know, everybody stays in the beer aisle and they look and they try to copy other people's ideas. You know, I'm walking the rest of the store, I'm looking in the non-A section. Yeah. And just drawing stimulation from that. And so this idea of an alcoholic hard seltzer and the parameters, the framework for 'em was what if we made something that had a hundred calories? You know, we were gonna do no sugar, no artificial sweetness. So we put relatively complex fruit flavors.

2 (24m 40s):
And I mean, again, we were totally wrong when we formulated, we, we thought, now who's gonna drink this? Well, our drinker is gonna be a white blouse woman who didn't want sugar and starches and she's gonna drink it after she plays tennis. And it's gonna be a, a substitute for like chardonnay on the rocks or vodka soda with a lime. This is gonna be a better version of that. And we're gonna sell a million cases a year, which is not a whole lot in a business, you know, with this like 3 billion cases or some huge number. Right.

2 (25m 20s):
And what we've learned is make a beautiful flavor profile, make a beautiful product and it will find its way to the right drinkers. We learned that from Twisted Tea. We thought that was gonna be from like urban yuppies, Snapple drinkers. And we were totally wrong. So we put this out and we had it in the market a couple of months. And we had our wholesalers, our beer wholesalers on a, they got an incentive trip and we take 'em to the Caribbean. And one of the days is this booze cruise on a trawler. And these, these are beard holster, they're like professional world class drinkers.

2 (26m 1s):
Sure. Yeah. So, you know, this is a 10 12 hour booze cruise. We go to some famous, you know, Caribbean bars, foxes and salty dollar and things like that. But the boat is stocked with all of our things. And there were four of our wholesalers sitting on the back bench of this trawler boat. And they started drinking truly the hard seltzer designed for the white blouse women. And these were like big guys. Yeah. There probably was, there were four of 'em. There's probably 1200 pounds of wholesaler on that bench. And I said, guys, do me a favor, just count the trulys. 'cause we're gonna be on this boat for like 10 hours.

2 (26m 42s):
I just, I'm curious 'cause I said I'm only gonna drink truly 'cause I want to understand what kind of buzz I get. Yeah. Do I get a hangover, like using my body to experiment? And at the end of the day, those wholesalers had like 64 of them, so Wow. 16 a piece. And I realized, oh, this is different. And I asked, why are you drinking all this truly your beer drinker? Yeah. Yeah. And he said, well Jim, I gotta watch my girlish figure too. And this, it tastes great and it doesn't fill me up. And I thought, oh, that, that sounds like tastes great.

2 (27m 22s):
Less filling. So I realized, hmm, this is different than I anticipated. Let me explore that. And after that we changed the packaging to make it less feminine. And a great product that's really delicious will find its way to its natural drinker. So I don't try to anticipate that.

0 (27m 44s):
It's so interesting 'cause you, you start out by sort of marketing and packaging it for a specific consumer only to Discover that actually, you know, it, it appeals to very different types of consumers. And I know, I know lots of big burly dudes who love truly so and prefer it because in part 'cause they go to the gym and they, you know, they don't want to, to consume all the carbs. So, alright, so it's about sort of experimenting, but they're also failures, right? I mean, you, you, you come up with products that are going to fail

2 (28m 17s):
Dozens and dozens and dozens guy

0 (28m 20s):
And that's part of it, right? 'cause any of these things, like the things we've talked about, you know, twisted tea or truly we haven't talked about Angry Orchard, which is a hard cider. But even tho those products have by and large been huge successes for, for the brand. But, but in order to have those successes, you have to take risks, right? Yes. And presumably taking risks means you're gonna have a, some, some dogs there that just fail.

2 (28m 45s):
Oh yeah. I mean they were all births as failures. Angry Orchard, hard cider began life as hardcore in 1996. You know, we revived a very traditional beverage. Beer was not always the number one alcoholic beverage in the United States. So before the Civil War then the number one alcoholic beverage was hard cider and beer displaced it, you know, after the Civil War for a bunch of reasons.

0 (29m 13s):
Hard cider even in the us.

2 (29m 15s):
Yeah. And so I thought, let's do that. And we called it hardcore and it failed, but the same kind of thing. It had a few pockets and it, we were about to kill it, but it started growing and we went and see who was drinking it. And we realized we had to clean up the flavor profile because our original hardcore was based on traditional English cider. It had some sulfur, some sort of rough notes that, you know, was made it a rural drink. And let's clean this up. Let's make it nicer. Let's bring forth the apple flavor. Let's use great ingredients. So we still bring in apples from Normandy and from northern Italy because true cider apples are not grown in the US anymore.

2 (30m 4s):
And we wanted to make this from true cider apples, not grocery store apples. Yeah. It's very much like wine. You're not gonna make great wine from grocery store grapes.

0 (30m 13s):
And so that again, it just took some time.

2 (30m 15s):
Yes, it did. It took 14 years.

0 (30m 20s):
Yeah.

2 (30m 21s):
So we are patient. If we believe in something and it finds a niche, you know, we grow it from that niche. And we ended up, we changed the name from hardcore 'cause everybody associated with porn, which was not a good idea. And we changed it to Angry Orchard, which was kind of a weird name, but it was a nice juxtaposition. Yeah. And, and the orchard is a very primal image of childhood simplicity. If you, you know, you four quartets the, the TS Eliot poem, the, there's a line in there. The, the children in the apple tree.

2 (31m 2s):
An image of complete simplicity. Hmm. And that was to me this beautiful metaphor of you have an angry orchard, it takes you into the orchard. And that's a place that we would love to return.

0 (31m 16s):
We're gonna take another quick break. But when we come back, why Jim started Brewing non-alcoholic beer. A drink that for a long time was notorious for how bad it tastes. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This Lab.

State Farm (31m 37s):
This episode is brought to you by State Farm. If you're a small business owner, it isn't just your business, it's your life. Whatever your business might be, you want someone who understands. And that's where State Farms small business insurance comes in. State Farm agents are small business owners too. And know what it takes to help you personalize your policies for your small business needs. Like a good neighbor, State Farm is there. Talk to your local agent today.

Squarespace (32m 6s):
I've talked to hundreds of founders on How, I Built This. And I've heard time and time again how important it is to have a strong web presence in order to really grow a business. Squarespace is an all-in-one platform for building a brand and engaging customers online. Squarespace lets you easily create a dynamic website and sell anything your products and services and even content you create. Squarespace makes it really easy to get started with best in class website templates for all types of businesses that can be customized to fit your specific needs. Squarespace also provides the tools you need to run your business smoothly, including inventory management, a simple checkout process, and secure payments. And with Squarespace email campaigns, you can build a community of email subscribers and customers. Start with an email template and customize it by applying your own brand ingredients like colors and logo. And once you send built-in analytics, measure your email's impact. Go to Squarespace dot com slash built for a free trial. And when you are ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

0 (33m 21s):
Welcome back to How I Built. This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. So Jim has ified all kinds of drinks, but he's also done the opposite as he's gotten into the very complex art of Brewing, non-alcoholic beer

2 (33m 36s):
For a long time, non-alcoholic beer didn't taste good. It was

0 (33m 40s):
Terrible. Yeah,

2 (33m 40s):
It was pretty crappy. Yeah. And for 35 years people would say, you know, I've used up my quota, but I loved Sam Adams, you know, when I was still drinking, can you make a non-alcoholic beer? Why don't you make a non-alcoholic beer? And I'd say, well the reason I don't is 'cause non-alcoholic beers taste like crap. And pretty much all of them, 'cause they're basically an an unfermented beer that they carbonate. So they don't get any of that yeast complexity in it. Or you know, they make a a beer and then they strip it and it ends up being unpleasant. And that was true for 30 years. And then I was at beer conference and I tasted the first non-alcoholic beer that was really good.

2 (34m 26s):
And that was actually Heineken zero zero. And I, I remember to this day, it was like six years ago in San Diego and I poured it to see, well I'll see if this one's as bad as their previous one, which was called Buckler. And it was night and day. It was a revelation. It's like, this tastes like good beer. And I don't know how they did it, but I'm gonna figure this out. 'cause they have opened the door and we started rethinking it. There was technology that didn't exist before. It was a vacuum distillation. So you could essentially draw the alcohol out of the beer at almost room temperature and then, and it got a little complicated.

2 (35m 9s):
And then take the distillate and reist distill it, throw away the alcohol and put the flavor elements back in the beer. And then you build some complexity with some hop character, blah, blah blah. At the end of the day we got a hazy IPA that was non-alcoholic and had the ta, same taste scores as the alcoholic version of it. When people tasted it blind, they could not identify it as a non-alcoholic beer. Wow. And the scores on it that we were getting were equal to the alcoholic variation. And I thought, alright, this is something we can be proud of.

2 (35m 51s):
This is something we can put out there. I mean, there's times when I want a beer, but I really don't want the alcohol. Yeah. Like summer long bike ride. Sure.

0 (36m 1s):
Hike

2 (36m 2s):
Four hours later. Yeah. You know, I'm a little, I'm depleted, I need the hydration, but if I have a couple of beers, I'm gonna go to sleep. Yeah. That's a beautiful time for it. My most fun time is in summer, you're blasting down the highway at 70, 75 miles an hour and you're drinking a beer. That's an experience we've been deprived of. Yeah. Rightfully so.

0 (36m 27s):
So, so let's talk about a failure. What, what is something that you've introduced in the last 20 years that you maybe hung onto a little too long that just didn't work?

2 (36m 36s):
Well, there was Sam, Adams, nitro. Again, the conventional idea for beer is, it's carbonated. Yeah. Right. That's, we drink beer, you get that tongue sting of carbonic acid. It's part of the overall flavor profile. But the counter idea is what if we nitrogenated it? What if it wasn't CO2 with that, you know, really sharp sting to it. What if it was nitrogen? And nitrogen has this velvety smoothness

0 (37m 8s):
Like a creaminess, right? Yeah,

2 (37m 11s):
Exactly. And very small tight bubbles instead of the bigger CO2

0 (37m 16s):
Bubbles. And it gives it that beautiful head, that creamy. Yes, luscious.

2 (37m 22s):
Yes. And everybody thought about, you know, that's Guinness. Yeah. So that was our idea. It was let's hydrogenate other beer styles, let's do it for a white ale and we'll put some coriander and some orange in it.

0 (37m 38s):
Like a cison. Yeah.

2 (37m 40s):
A variation of a cison. We're sort of riffing on that. And let's try that with a red ale that has this sweet multi smoothness that will just rides along with that creamy hydrogenation. So it just, you know, once you get the idea, you can riff on it. A lot of times the ideas also require not just culinary and aesthetic innovation, but there as a brewer we're, in some ways, there's an aspect of what I do other brewers do. It's like Christo

0 (38m 17s):
Christo, the the artist. Yeah. Giant installations of of fabric

2 (38m 23s):
And Yeah. And crazy things. Wrapping a building. Yeah. Things like that. And when he talks about his art, he will point out, there's two forms of innovation that are totally different. One is the art itself and the other is making it exist in the real world. That is physical elements, governmental elements, social elements. And both of them require creativity. I mean, you wanna wrap a building, you know, you gotta get permits, you gotta get people who will go along with your crazy DA, you've gotta figure out engineering things of how do you fasten it to the building?

2 (39m 3s):
How do you keep a wind from doing this and that. And that was the same sort of dichotomy of creativity that, you know, we needed in order to make this beautiful idea. So we had to go to England and find a can maker that could put a small capsule in the bottom of the cans that was filled with nitrogen pressurized to a level where once you opened it, you changed the pressure balance inside the can released pressure, which then allowed this little capsule in the bottom to rupture through tiny little pinholes and spew out all this nitrogen that created all those beautiful gushing bubbles.

2 (39m 51s):
Yeah. So creativity comes in many forms and, and I enjoy all of them.

0 (39m 58s):
So what happened? I mean, why did you guys give up on that?

2 (40m 3s):
Because nobody bought it. So I've learned, except the verdict of the drinker, it was more expensive because we're, you know, the cans were quite expensive. It was a wonderful beer, but it just could not find a place. And I'm okay with that. I mean, I, yeah. You know, I, if I make something really wonderful, beautiful that I believe in, I'm done. I mean, that's okay. People don't have to enjoy the same things I enjoy as long as, you know, once in a while I can create something that changes the beer landscape. That's enough.

0 (40m 42s):
Sam Adams is a product that will, I have no doubt will be around in 50, a hundred years, maybe beyond. It's like an enduring brand of beer. Right. There you go.

2 (40m 55s):
I hope so.

0 (40m 56s):
And, and now, but my question to you is, aside from Sam, Adams is an enduring brand and doing product, does it matter if, let's say, truly is just a, a successful brand for, you know, seven or 10 years and then fizzles out? Like is it important to, in your view, to build enduring products and brands? Or is it okay if something's really successful for a couple years and then just kind of fizzles out?

2 (41m 22s):
The answer is no. I do want to build an enduring products and brands and, and I, I believe that if you're making something really good, it's not a flash in a pan, it will grow. People will acquire a taste for what you're giving them. So I don't want things that are sort of boom splatt. Yeah. I want things that are slow builds. I mean, like we were talking, you know, hard cider is now 27 years and it's now an enduring success, but it took it 27 years to get to where it is today.

2 (42m 6s):
And to me that's all built on the quality of the product and the delightfulness of the taste experience and those are enduring characteristics.

0 (42m 19s):
That's Jim Cook, co-founder and chairman of Boston Beer Company. Jim, thank you so much for coming on again. It's been great having you.

2 (42m 26s):
Well, this has been a great pleasure. I got to finish my first beer and I'm halfway through my second, so that tells me this was a great time and thank you for bringing us together.

0 (42m 38s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. This episode was produced by Sam Paulson with music composed by Rum Arablouei. It was edited by John Isabella with research help from Chris Maccini. Our audio engineer was Neal Rauch. Our production staff also includes Alex Chung, Casey Herman, Carla Estevez, Carrie Thompson, JC Howard, Malia Aguello, Neva Grant, and Catherine Cipher. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This Lab.

wondery Plus (43m 21s):
If you like How I Built This, you can listen early and ad free Right now by joining Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts.

Amazon (43m 30s):
Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon music.

0 (43m 33s):
Before you go, tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Wondery (43m 41s):
Being an actual royal is never about finding your happy ending, but the worst part is if they step out of line or fall in love with the wrong person, It changes the course of history. I am Aisha Skidmore Williams. And I'm Brooke Sifron. We've been telling the stories of the Rich and famous on the Hit Wondery Show, even The Rich, and talking about the latest celebrity news on Rich and daily. We're going all over the world on our new show, even the Royals, We'll be diving headfirst into the lives of the world's kings, queens, and all the wannabes in their orbit throughout history. Think Succession meets the Crown, meets real life. We're going to pull back the gilded curtain and show how royal status might be bright and shiny, but it comes at the expense of, well, everything else like your freedom, your Privacy, and sometimes even your head follow. Even the Royals on the Wondery app or Wherever, you get your podcasts, you can listen to even the Royals early and ad free Right now by joining Wondery Plus.