0 (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How I, Built This Early, and ad free Right. now join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts.

The Indicator from Planet Money (10s):
Think, of all the things you can do in 10 minutes or less. Scroll through social media, Check your bank balance. make a sandwich or learn about the surprising economics behind all these things. The Indicator for Plan of Money is a quick hit of insight into the economics of business, work, and everyday life. Every weekday in less than 10 minutes. Listen now to the Indicator podcast from NPR.

Peloton (32s):
When you find something you love, you stick with it. Like this podcast and like working out with Peloton and with up to $950 off Peloton purchases this holiday, bring home a Peloton bike, bike plus, or tread and workout like nobody's watching. Unleash Yourself. Ride, run box, or freak the hit out. It's your workout, your rules. I always find myself looking forward to my next ride with Peloton. For Pelotons best offers of the season now extended through December 5th. Head to www do one peloton.ca/offers all access membership. Separate terms apply

3 (1m 10s):
Hello listeners. this is Mike Cory of Against The. Odds. You might know that I adventure around the world while recording this podcast. And. over the years, I've learned that where I stay when I travel can make all the difference. Airbnb has been my go to place for finding the perfect accommodations because with hotels, you often don't have the luxury of extra space or Privacy. Recently I had a bunch of friends come down to visit in Mexico. we found this large house and the place had a pool, a barbecue, a kitchen, and a great big living room to play cards, watch movies, and just chill out. It honestly made all the difference in the trip. It felt like we were all roommates.

3 (1m 50s):
again, The, next time you planning a trip, whether it's with friends, family, or yourself, check out Airbnb to find something you won't forget.

0 (1m 59s):
So for today's show, we're rerunning an interview that I did back in August of 2020. And in addition to being a really great story about founding a business, it's also a pretty powerful tale about the importance of family hope you enjoy.

5 (2m 17s):
So I walk into this auditorium and I look around and I'm like, Ugh, here we go again. There were five of us who were going on stage to pitch our ideas. The four other men who were presenting all had tech companies. And I just remember being like, oh my gosh, not again.

0 (2m 37s):
It's like, what's your app? Yeah, right. Wait, this is a what? Shampoo.

5 (2m 41s):
Exactly. Where's your app? It was painful.

4 (2m 47s):
Welcome

0 (2m 48s):
To How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I am Guy Raz. And on the show today, how old Family skincare recipes and a personal tragedy inspired Nancy Twine to build a natural haircare line called Briogeo. One of the fastest growing hair brands sold at Sephora. The easiest part about building a business is the day you imagine it in your head, because everything that happens after it is really hard.

0 (3m 32s):
The research, the business plan, the pitch to investors, finding the factory, the distributor, the shops to sell your product, each one of these steps is an obstacle. And for the most part, each step creates a new problem. Too many problems can become overwhelming, and soon enough it can also become tempting to just ditch the whole idea entirely. So to avoid that trap, Nancy Twine took each problem one at a time, which is good because her idea was pretty complicated to build a line of natural shampoos and conditioners without most of the synthetic ingredients you'd find in other haircare products.

0 (4m 18s):
She also wanted to design a line of products for all hair types and textures, and she wanted those products on the shelves of Sephora, one of the premier beauty retailers in the world. All of these problems, Nancy would eventually solve her brand. Briogeo is now carried by Sephora and is expected to do almost $40 million in sales this year. But to get there, especially with zero experience in the beauty industry, was gonna pose a series of major challenges, starting with finding a chemist who actually believed you could make this stuff without parabens or sulfates or phthalates, or any of the other common chemicals you need to make shelf stable shampoo.

0 (5m 6s):
Her biggest early challenge, though, was having the courage to start the business at all. It was 2010 and Nancy was in her twenties on the fast track as a traitor for Goldman Sachs in New York. And one day, without any warning, a tragedy completely upended her life and prompted Nancy to reevaluate the way she was living it, which we'll get to. Nancy grew up on Long Island in New York. Her parents split up when she was a kid. Nancy's mother was a physician, and the Twines were one of the few black families in their neighborhood.

5 (5m 44s):
My mom was a family doctor and I don't even know if that term is quite used anymore. And I do remember at a young age being at her doctor's office and it was always full. Hmm. You know, a lot of people ask me where I got this very confident entrepreneurial experience from, but I think that there was so much value and power of me seeing my mom running a successful practice, really running a business. My mom was an entrepreneur, and seeing that at a young age, seeing her confidence, seeing her joy, and the fact that being a female, being a black female was not a hindrance to any of the dreams and goals that I would ultimately have in life.

0 (6m 31s):
And I read that like as a kid, used to go to West Virginia a lot, but what's the connection to To West Virginia?

5 (6m 37s):
Yeah. So my mom is from West Virginia. She's one of eight children, and my grandmother is from there. And that's where she raised her tribe in a very small rural town called Rand, RAND. Huh.

0 (6m 52s):
What did you know about her upbringing? I mean, it's like, I think to this day it's one of the whitest states in the country and obviously one of the poorest states in the country. Did she ever talk about what her childhood was like there?

5 (7m 3s):
Yeah, it was, you know, it was definitely a tough childhood. They didn't grow up with a lot. And the fact that my mom grew up in that type of environment, not only not having a lot, but not being able to see what success and beyond that lifestyle could look like, because so much of wanting to become better or becoming successful comes from seeing other people who look like you that have done it. And when you don't even see the possibility, but knowing within you that it exists and having that faith and belief in yourself, it's so, so powerful.

5 (7m 43s):
And that was very much my mom's story.

0 (7m 46s):
So I guess as a kid, right, you used to go to West Virginia to visit your grandma, who was, from what I understand, the like the local beauty guru. Like what did that mean? What did she, she like gave people beauty tips.

5 (7m 60s):
It was a little bit different than that. I think. You know, my grandmother, again was really kind of faced with the challenge of providing for eight children with very, very little, and she was very thrifty. I know one of the things that she used to do is she would stretch the little bits of product that she would get her hands on. So, you know, maybe she used some oils and extracts to stretch, you know, a quarter bottle of lotion to be able to fill it back up to a full bottle. And she learned how to distill her own essential oils.

5 (8m 40s):
And this kind of natural chemistry created this unique situation that I think ultimately too inspired my mom to later become a chemist and then a MD PhD.

0 (8m 54s):
So what do you remember, remember what your grandmother used to make?

5 (8m 57s):
Yeah, so one of the things that was kind of interesting, because it wasn't really a product that I used growing up, but these kind of thick kind of butters that you could use for all different sorts of things. Really dry skin, feet, elbows, knees. Yeah. And then, you know, other sort of medicinal needs like cuts or burns, different types of cells that would almost leave your skin glistening. But I just remember visiting that house and it was just like a lot, a lot of stuff, lots of jars. Anything you needed you could find in that house. And if you didn't find it precisely, it could be made or derived from something.

5 (9m 41s):
And that was really kind of the attitude and spirit. Yeah.

0 (9m 45s):
So you, you went on to, when you went to college, you went to University of Virginia. Yes. First of all, what did, how would, what was your experience like at UVA?

5 (9m 56s):
I had a phenomenal experience at UVA, but I think one of the things that was so different starting out there was that a lot of the other black men and women didn't have the same type of diverse high school experience that I had. So I know that there were a lot of people where it was the first time really ever in their life they were around white people. So there were elements of self-segregation that I witnessed during my early times at UVA that I didn't quite understand in terms of, you know, black groups separating themselves in the libraries or in the dining halls.

5 (10m 42s):
And it was so new to me because it just was so different than my experience in high school where everyone sat with each other. Yeah. But one of the things that I focused on or made emphasis of was that I was able to really build a community of close friends that span all different sorts of ethnicities and backgrounds.

0 (11m 5s):
A And when you went to college, did you, did you like have any idea of what you wanted to like eventually do for a career?

5 (11m 13s):
So entering UVA, I would've never thought that I would become a finance person. What I did know is that I loved music. I was in an acapella group Hmm. In college.

0 (11m 25s):
Oh wow. Did you, would you guys wear like matching blazers?

5 (11m 29s):
No, we were actually a really cool HIBT acapella group. We were actually UVA's first HIBT hop acapella group. And so I had so much fun and that stemmed from me really finding music in high school. And it created kind of this fantasy for me of one day being a pop star, like a Mariah Carey. But when I went to UVA and got exposed to hundreds of talented singers, both within my acapella group and outside of it, it was a awakening that I was just, okay, that this

0 (12m 9s):
Is not gonna be what was gonna pay the bills in the future. Right,

5 (12m 11s):
Got it. E exactly.

0 (12m 13s):
So no, no music career, but instead you, you decide to study finance. And what, like, what was the idea behind that? Did just kind of like, seem like a, a good way to get a, a well paying stable job.

5 (12m 25s):
So outside of wanting to be a, you know, musical pop star, I also had this hobby of creating and selling things. I was very, very entrepreneurial as a child in middle school. This was when the movie Clueless came out. Yeah. And those cool, like feather pins were so popular, but no one like knew where they could get them because Etsy wasn't around. And I went to Michael's, my local craft store and got ribbon pens, all sorts of stuff, feathers, and created replicas of those clueless feather pens and I would sell them at school.

5 (13m 6s):
Wow. Yeah, I, I have a lot of different stories of these like little mini entrepreneurial ventures I loved creating. And then the validation that came from people actually wanting to spend their money on my creations. And so ultimately when I kind of gave up on the idea of becoming a famous pop star, I started to think more about how I could translate the passion for entrepreneurism into a career path and major. And so that was really kind of the first part of my journey of even contemplating a career in finance.

0 (13m 44s):
And you did a summer internship at, at Goldman Sachs I read. Yep. And what, what did you do there?

5 (13m 50s):
Yeah, so I actually interned for two summers. I spent my first summer in legal and compliance. And I quickly realized that that part of the firm was just not something I was interested in. I was very, very bored. And while I was in legal and compliance, I was actually sitting on the sales and trading floor and I was so intrigued by what was going on around me. And I said, I don't know what that is, but I wanna do that. That is where the action is at. I mean, people are standing up in their seats, they're shouting across the room. People were having fun, there were so much energy. And I thought to myself, I have another summer that I could spend at Goldman.

5 (14m 31s):
I wanna spend it in sales and trading. And so voila, that next summer I did a sales and trading internship and you come in each morning and you never know what you're gonna get. Markets are constantly moving, they're so dynamic. And not only that, there's just a lot of comradery on that sales and trading floor.

0 (14m 52s):
Hmm. So right after that you graduate, it's 2007 and that internship lands you a job working for Goldman Sachs on the trading floor. Yep. And then a year later, 2008, the financial crisis. And obviously there must have been layoffs, you had managed to hang onto your job, but were you, were you nervous, ever nervous about getting fired?

5 (15m 17s):
I was definitely nervous because so many of my friends in my internship class had gotten laid off in 2008. It was part of the reason why I knew I had to make myself invaluable. I knew that if I became invaluable, it would be very hard for my team to lay me off. Which is why I invested the time and energy into being an incredible support, not only for my team, but teams around me that needed support.

0 (15m 47s):
I mean, were, were you just working all the time? Did you have even have time for friends or to do anything outside of work?

5 (15m 53s):
I was working a lot and I think that my goal of making myself indispensable to protect my career during a tumultuous time probably put me in the position of being taken advantage of. At times there were, I'm sure some of my classmates who would never come in on a Sunday night randomly because their boss texted them. However, everyone knew that I would be the first person to say yes and leave a dinner with my family to go into the office to work on a deck for my boss.

5 (16m 34s):
Even with 15 minutes notice.

0 (16m 36s):
Is that something that your mom would've, would've expected you to do? Like your dinner with your mom and you get the call and you're like, and she's like, go, you gotta go. They need your help.

5 (16m 45s):
Yeah, she was the type to say, you know, get there and get on it. You gotta do what you've gotta do. Hmm. Yeah. I never was guilt tripped. I was encouraged. And so from that standpoint, my family and my friends understood. Alright,

0 (17m 1s):
So you are clearly working like crazy on Wall Street. You're in your mid twenties, you've got a good salary, and your life takes a turn and tragically unexpected turn, your mom is killed. She is hit by a car and that's it. I mean, what, what a just probably shocking thing to experience in your life. I mean, you were go, go, go and all of a sudden your mom's gone.

5 (17m 42s):
Yeah, it was a huge shock. I have friends who have lost their parents through battles with cancer, Alzheimer's, but it was a journey that they had mentally prepared themselves for. I didn't have that opportunity. But not only that, it was the first time that I truly realized that this life is not promised to anyone and we owe it to ourselves to find our happiness, to pursue our passions, and to make the most of this life because it's so, so fragile.

5 (18m 24s):
And I feel like I had been so naive. I never even fathomed my mom not being around to see her grandchildren, any of that.

0 (18m 35s):
Yeah. None of us do. Yeah.

5 (18m 38s):
I will say that my brother and I have always been close, but that experience, you know, brought us even closer and I couldn't have imagined going through that experience on my own. And I did take some time off. Yeah.

0 (18m 56s):
How much time, do you remember how much time you took off?

5 (18m 59s):
I took off about two months, which doesn't seem like a lot of time, and it probably wasn't, but because I had been working so much that two months felt like a year. Yeah.

0 (19m 13s):
And during that time, did you start to kind of reevaluate your own, like, I don't know what your life was about and what you wanted to do with it, and did your mom's death kind of force you to think about, well, what, what is this all about? What am I doing

5 (19m 27s):
It, did you know? Another thing that was really sad for me is I remember, you know, the weeks and even months leading up to my mom's passing, so much of our conversations were just around the fact that I was working way too much and I was exhausted. And even some nights I would call her crying because I felt like I couldn't do it anymore. And I wish that our conversations would've been more substantive. And you know, after the experience of losing my mom so suddenly and realizing that this life isn't necessarily promised to me either, I knew that whatever I was gonna do, I wanted to wake up every day and be excited about going into the office.

0 (20m 14s):
At the time of your mother's death, was she, was she still working as a physician full-time?

5 (20m 20s):
No, she was retired. Wow. She was retired,

0 (20m 24s):
So she was starting to enjoy retirement and, and I guess she was thinking about a business at, at that time, right?

5 (20m 32s):
Yeah, my mom was in the process of starting her own skincare line. It was called something like Skincare rx, but it was all about kind of taking what she learned, chemistry, and even her medical career. I mean, she was talking about, you know, infusing plasma into facial creams, like really cool advanced stuff. And yeah, I remember she had like two or three formulas that were pretty developed and there was some packaging. It was like these white jars with gold lettering. And I was so kind of caught up in my finance life that I kind of forgot that my mom was working on this project in the background.

5 (21m 13s):
And it really wasn't only until, you know, I I had to start going through her stuff after the passing that I found, you know, the photos and was reminded of this project she was working on. And so I think definitely created this light bulb moment and also brought me back to some of the childhood memories that I had with my mom where we were making a lot of our own beauty products and the kitchen of our home. Huh. Fortunately, we had access to a lot more than what my mom did growing up. We had a local health food store where we could actually buy extracts and oils and butters and salts and sugars.

5 (21m 55s):
Yeah. And we were making just custom beauty products for our needs. The needs of friends,

0 (22m 3s):
Like skin creams, ma mainly

5 (22m 5s):
Actually haircare products mainly. And, and partly because I have naturally very curly, curly hair and the market for textured hair wasn't really established back then. So I found myself struggling with the products that were available and either needing to supplement them with other ingredients or just create my own products from scratch. Hmm.

0 (22m 33s):
I I read that at, at, there was a point where you thought, all right, I wanna do my own thing and I probably need to leave finance. And I guess your brother, he, he's an entrepreneur too, and he started like a digital media company and I guess at a certain point you called him and you're like, Hey, can I come work with you? Is that, did that happen?

5 (22m 53s):
Yeah, it did happen. And I'm just gonna be totally transparent with you. I was, while I was at Goldman, I was seeing a therapist and prior to my mom's passing, I was even thinking about, you know, what life beyond Goldman looked like. And she encouraged me to see if I could join my brother and his entrepreneurial ventures. And he said, you know, this is my thing. You should get your own thing. I was so disappointed and kind of offended and I felt stuck because at the time, my own thing, like, what was that? What was that gonna be? That was like this very nebulous, weird space that I just couldn't possibly think of.

5 (23m 40s):
What would I do? And it really wasn't until my, my soul searching journey after my mom's passing between these childhood memories of making my own products where my mom had gotten to in the development of her brand and then thinking, wow, I could create my own beauty product line.

0 (24m 5s):
When we come back in just a moment, Nancy starts leading kind of a double life. Goldman Sachs by day shampoos and conditioners by night. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This.

NetSuite (24m 30s):
Your business was humming, but now you're falling behind. Teams buried in manual work, taking forever to close the books. Getting one source of truth is like pulling teeth. If this is you, you should know these three numbers. 36,000, 25, 1 30 6,000. That's the number of businesses which have upgraded to NetSuite by Oracle 25. NetSuite turns 25 this year. That's 25 years of helping businesses do more with less close their books in days, not weeks. And drive down costs. One, because your business is one of a kind. So you get a customized solution for all of your KPIs in one efficient system with one source of truth, manage risk, get reliable forecasts and improve margins. Everything you need all in one place. Right now, download NetSuite's popular KPI checklist designed to give you consistently excellent performance absolutely free@netsuite.com slash built. That's netsuite.com slash built to get your own KPI checklist. Netsuite.com slash built

Squarespace (25m 41s):
Squarespace is the all-in-one platform for building your brand and growing your business online. Stand out with a beautiful website, engage with your customers and sell anything your products, content you create and even your time. of course, you can build a beautiful website for your business using Squarespace, but it's much more than that. Squarespace also makes booking and scheduling super easy. Clients can easily see your availability, taking the hassle out of coordinating calendars. You can also create professional quality videos effortlessly using the Squarespace video studio app. And with Squarespace email campaigns, you can build a community of email subscribers and customers. Start with an email template and customize it by applying your own brand ingredients like colors and logo. And once you send built-in analytics, measure your email's impact, check out squarespace.com slash built for a free trial. And when you are ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

0 (26m 56s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 2011 and Nancy Twine is working in banking but thinking about creating her own line of beauty products and specifically natural haircare products. So she starts to look into it.

5 (27m 12s):
Yeah. And I know this sounds so nerdy, but the New York Small Business Library was game changing for me because I got access to research databases and reports that I otherwise would've had to have spent thousands of dollars on. And I was typing in different search terms like natural personal care market, natural hair care, clean hair care. And one of the things that I noticed in these reports was that there were pretty meaningful sections on natural personal care for body for skincare, but there were really small kind of paragraphs dedicated to natural haircare.

5 (27m 54s):
And I thought that that was really interesting. And what it did tell me was that there were very few players in natural haircare at the time, relative to the other categories, but that it was also a budding space. And that's really when the light bulb went off. And I said, this is a huge white space potential. It makes sense because of my personal background of focus here. This has legs to run with.

0 (28m 21s):
I mean, so you're looking through just like doing research, right? You know, you wanna do something in natural haircare products. And by the way, what does that mean? Like, 'cause you see a lot of haircare products, let's say natural on them or you know, free of this or free of that. But what did, I mean this is 2010, what did that mean?

5 (28m 41s):
Yeah, it's a great question because the word natural is not regulated the way that organic is. So natural means different things to different people. And for me it meant utilizing a high, high percentage of naturally derived ingredients. And so basically what I mean by that is instead of, you know, pumping our products with silicones, which are synthetic polymers that give the illusion of shine on the hair, we actually used real natural oils to do that because not only is it natural, but the benefits, the vitamins, the nutrients, the minerals within natural oils actually serve a purpose in enhancing the hair's health that silicones do not.

5 (29m 27s):
So that's really the foundational goal of why we do use natural clean ingredients in our products.

0 (29m 35s):
Alright, so you are thinking, hey, maybe I can do something here. Well, what's the, the next step you take? I mean, you're a traitor at Goldman Sachs and obviously you're super smart and talented, but you're also pretty young and probably don't, I imagine you don't know a whole lot of people in the, in the beauty industry. So what, like what's the next step? Who do you call? Where do you go?

5 (29m 58s):
Yeah, so you know, after doing my research I realized one, there's a void for clean natural hair care, but there's also a void for effective clean natural hair care. So I had a premise that was compelling because I wasn't just kind of hopping on something that already existed. I was creating something that didn't exist. And so I had never created a business plan before and I knew it was something that I wanted to be thoughtful about. So I did what I always do, which is I consulted my friend Google and I googled how to create a business plan and I stumbled upon a website that offered a service where they would partner with you to understand your vision and then also give you some help on the financial side in terms of, you know, forecasting financial statements.

5 (30m 53s):
And that's how I went ar went about creating my, my first business plan.

0 (30m 58s):
Okay, so you are working on a business plan, but you don't actually have a product to, to sell yet. So what, what happens next?

5 (31m 8s):
Yeah, so after I had my business plan created, I told myself that I was gonna tell all of my friends about what it is I wanted to do because I knew if I went and told everyone that I wanted to start a clean, natural haircare product line, that they would ask me about it every time we went out and I didn't wanna disappoint them. So it was my way of holding myself accountable. And so once I felt really good about the viability of this business plan, I knew the next thing that I needed to do was to start formulating. And that's where I was a little bit stuck because without my mom and with advanced knowledge of chemistry, I didn't feel comfortable formulating the products on my own in a way in which, you know, I could sell them to a Sephora for example.

5 (32m 1s):
Sure. And at the time I had no idea that you could outsource r and d and manufacturing to an outside company. And I only learned about that because I had told a friend about my idea and she said, oh, let me put you in touch with a friend who created a deodorant line. And I said, oh, I would love that. And I spoke to this friend and I go, how are you making this deodorant at home? And he said, I'm not, I'm using a contract manufacturer. Hmm. So this was so fascinating for me. I said, this is cool. I can actually utilize the team and resources of another company to bring my idea to life.

5 (32m 42s):
And so I was very, very organized and I did a bunch of research on Google. I started attending some local trade shows and I figured out the who's who and Hair Care contract manufacturing.

0 (32m 55s):
But meantime you are still working at at Goldman Sachs, right?

5 (32m 59s):
I am. And so that was really, really tricky because this would've been 20 11, 20 12, I had just become a vice president. So I had gotten promoted, but I was also trying to allocate time to work on Briogeo. So,

0 (33m 15s):
And by the way, did you already call it Briogeo?

5 (33m 18s):
No, it did not. It did not have a name. Didn't have a name. A name, name. Yeah.

0 (33m 22s):
Yeah.

5 (33m 22s):
Basically the way that I worked it was that after work is when I did all of my email stuff. So a lot of people were getting emails from me at like nine, 10:00 PM at night. Yeah. And my calls, I would do those on my lunch break or some days I would take PTO when I just knew that I was gonna have a really hectic day of calls and research. 'cause I had a ton of PTO 'cause I never took time off. So I, I never really took vacation. It was just more so days to work on my business plan. So

0 (33m 53s):
You would call up or you'd connect with some of these potential factories and, and you would say, Hey, I wanna make hair care products like shampoos and conditioners and stuff, but with no sulfate, silicones, parabens, DEA, all dyes, all this stuff that's in pretty much 99% of hair care products. And I imagine most of the time they would be like, can't be done. That's not possible.

5 (34m 18s):
Yeah, you're absolutely right. And it was very disappointing. Pretty much every conversation I had made the idea seem very farfetched. And sometimes I would get close, sometimes manufacturers would say, oh, we just started developing shampoos without sulfates, but we need the silicone base in order for it to hydrate your hair. If you don't have the silicones, the clean surfactants are gonna dry out the hair. You can't have one or the other. But, you know, there was one contract manufacturer that came back to me and said, we've never done this before, but I think we can do it, especially if you're willing to dedicate the time to partner with our r and d team and to really work with us and give us some time.

0 (35m 3s):
And by the way, I think we just, let's just be clear. Yeah. We're not saying names or the name of this manufacturer 'cause it's a trade secret, right? That's right.

5 (35m 10s):
Okay.

0 (35m 11s):
Yes. So keep going.

5 (35m 12s):
Yeah. So there was a small contract manufacturer privately run and operated in the Midwest. I had an opportunity to meet with the CEO of the contract manufacturer. And I think he was kind of surprised that I was this finance girl who had this side project of Yeah. You know, starting a beauty product company. And I think he took note of my passion and I've been fortunate to work with people who have extended courtesies and opportunities to me because the passion became infectious. So even though I wasn't coming in with a big check size or you know, a big production run, I do think there are a lot of people that just have that heart inside of them that wanna see the underdog succeed.

5 (35m 59s):
And so luckily I was able to get the time and attention and the dedicated lab time with the chemist to help me really tackle this project. Yeah.

0 (36m 10s):
But you, I mean, you, you did not have a background in chemistry. So how did you e even know, like the words to use when you were talking to the lab chemist? Like even even to tell them what you wanted them to make? Like, like what would you say like, I want this to be like what, what Yeah. What, what would you say?

5 (36m 29s):
Yeah. So it's a little hard sometimes to describe these things. Yeah. So I, I had to kind of study up on haircare terminology specifically. I was working on a treatment mask and I wanted it to have a very luxurious, buttery rich texture. So it needed to have a higher viscosity. I also wanted the concentrations of what I called our Nova complex. And NOVA stands for natural oils, vitamins, and antioxidants. I wanted the NOVA complex and this mask to be, you know, three times more concentrated than our other formulas. This

0 (37m 7s):
Is a hair is a hair mask. This

5 (37m 8s):
Is a hair mask.

0 (37m 9s):
What is a hair mask? I'm, I just, I don't, I'm gonna use one. I'm just gonna be

5 (37m 12s):
Honest with

0 (37m 12s):
You. I, I've never, what is

5 (37m 14s):
It? So it is a concentrated conditioning treatment that helps to repair, moisturize, and enhance the vitality of the hair.

0 (37m 25s):
And all the while you're funding this, I mean you're, you're costs are not high at this point, it's just travel and stuff, but you're just funding it through your salary at Goldman Sachs, right?

5 (37m 32s):
Yes, I was funding it through my salary, but I was being really mindful of how much I was spending because things do really add up quickly and I didn't have products yet, so I didn't wanna get too far with spend before making sure that I could actually do this.

0 (37m 49s):
And what, what were you looking to make shampoo, conditioner? Like tell me the things that you wanted them to kind of like the prototypes you wanted them to make for you.

5 (37m 58s):
Yeah, so originally I wanted to create a 15 skew product line.

0 (38m 3s):
15. You wanted to be 15. Okay.

5 (38m 7s):
15 because I, I wanted to have something for every hair texture type and I didn't wanna leave anyone out. And I was speaking to a contact in the contract manufacturing space that really advised me against a 15 product Yeah. Skew line coming out the gate. And he goes, if you can do it with four products, it's your best bet.

0 (38m 29s):
Who, who was this person advising you? Just a friend or a mentor or, so

5 (38m 32s):
It was actually one of the contract manufacturers that I didn't end up going with, but gave me some really great advice,

0 (38m 38s):
Which is a good lesson in, in, you know, you might get rejected from somebody or you might reject them, but you can really get some good advice from them. Yep. So you decide you're gonna come up with four products and what were those products going to be? What what? Yeah,

5 (38m 51s):
So that was a big challenge for me. You know, how was I going to create a diverse assortment with only four SKUs? So what I decided to do was to create one shampoo for all hair types. Okay. And then I had three conditioners that were texture specific. So with four products I was able to hit a pretty diverse client base.

0 (39m 13s):
Alright. So you are, I think it took you about a year before you finally got this Right. And in that year, were you telling your coworkers that you were working on this?

5 (39m 27s):
No. So no one in my immediate team knew that I was working on this project. I had a couple of friends at Goldman that I confided in, but only a couple that I knew would not say anything because I was serious about my work and I didn't wanna compromise that. And Sure. I didn't want it to get out that I was doing both.

0 (39m 43s):
So how were you? So you like, were taking like a day here and a day there and flying to, to this manufacturer and, and like coming back to New York and is that what you were basically doing for a year?

5 (39m 55s):
Yeah, it was, it was pretty crazy. And there were points in which I did start hitting a wall because I was getting very little sleep, you know, being on the trading floor. I was also working with the London market, so I needed to be at the desk by 7:00 AM So I was getting to bed at like one, 2:00 AM and then waking up at 5:30 AM day over day over day. And it started to become unsustainable. Yeah.

0 (40m 24s):
Do you think, I imagine one of the reasons why you were just grinding away was a way to kind of cope with your, with the loss of your mom.

5 (40m 33s):
Yeah, I mean the project and process of building Briogeo really became a therapy for me. Hmm. I needed to take that energy and pour it into something positive and there were a lot of people who were very quote unquote proud of me that I didn't self-destruct or get into negative behavior like drinking or drugs and things like that. And for me, I really took the emotions of that experience and poured it into this project.

5 (41m 13s):
And I think that's why the hours that I was devoting, the lack of sleep, all of that stuff, I just kept going because it was my therapy.

0 (41m 25s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Nancy managed to convince a man with very little hair to invest in her hair care product company. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

Sonos (41m 50s):
Take your listening experience to the next level with Sonos five. Five is Sonos most powerful speaker experience. Vividly clear room filling sound thanks to three high excursion roofers within a sealed architecture that eliminates reverb and echo. Plus two precisely angled side tweeters create rich stereo sound while a center tweeter optimizes vocal playback. I have a Sonos five in my house and we just blasted Glenn Gould's Goldberg Variations and it's unbelievable. It feels like you're in the room with performers when you hear it. And. of course, Sonos works seamlessly with all your streaming devices, vinyl CDs and more. And with Sonos you can start with one speaker and expand your system over time. Every Sonos speaker connects wirelessly over wifi so you can group speakers in different rooms and play music throughout your home. So if you are ready for the best home listening experience, visit Sonos dot com to learn more and find gifts for every listener on your list.

MasterClass (42m 56s):
The cooking classes I've taken on masterclass with masters like Thomas Keller and Alice Waters have really upped my game in the kitchen. And in fact, I recently spent some time in a real restaurant's kitchen for a few days and Masterclass really helped my confidence. And if you know someone who wants to learn or improve a skill masterclass would be a meaningful gift this season because with Masterclass you can learn from the best to become your best memberships. Start at $120 a year for Unlimited access to one-on-one classes with over 180 masterclass instructors. Learn how to negotiate a raise with Chris Voss or manage your relationships with Esther Perel. If you know me then you know I absolutely love to cook, but I still have a lot to learn when it comes to desserts, for example. That's why I really loved Dominique and sells class. It's all about pastries, which has lessons on some of my favorite desserts. Like Croissants or Swiss Meringues Chocolate Mousse can go on this holiday season. Give one annual membership and get one free@masterclass.com slash built. Right now. You can get two memberships for the price of1@masterclass.com slash built masterclass.com slash built offer terms apply.

5 (44m 16s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz.

0 (44m 19s):
So by the end of 2012, Nancy Twine is about two years into launching her line of natural hair products and she still got a few daunting problems to solve. For instance, she doesn't have a name for her company yet and she needs to figure out how to convince retailers to sell her product. And at this point Nancy starts to realize that she'll probably need some more money than what she has in her savings account.

5 (44m 47s):
So by that point, the most money I spent was on the business plan, which was about 5,000. Some of the initial concepts for the packaging, which was, you know, north of 10 K and then you factor in everything else. I was probably close to 20 5K.

0 (45m 3s):
But you're bootstrapping this business. I mean, are you, I imagine you're thinking, all right, I gotta raise some money. Did you start to look around?

5 (45m 11s):
I did. So I was self-funding a lot of it, but I knew that if I was going to start to scale this at some point, I didn't wanna put myself in a position where I was completely maxed out because I also knew that it would be hard for me to focus on growing my business if I was thinking about, you know, how I was gonna pay my rent. So I did, I, I started dabbling in going to investor meetups and pitching sessions, which was quite the experience.

0 (45m 44s):
And you would go to these things and they were like, they're like speed dating but pitching your business. Right.

5 (45m 50s):
It's so funny because guy, I didn't even know it was a thing and I got invited to one of these things and that's exactly what it was. You know, there was a line at each of these booths and you would do your one minute elevator pitch and it was nutso.

0 (46m 6s):
And at this point you were going to these pitch meetings with investors, angel investors with bottles of your product.

5 (46m 12s):
No, not even. You

0 (46m 13s):
Were just, just describing this concept. Yeah,

5 (46m 16s):
And I had some artwork on a piece of paper. I would bring this thick piece of paper that had sketches of the packaging. It was really hard guy to sell a brand that existed on paper.

0 (46m 28s):
I would think so,

5 (46m 29s):
Yes. To tech investors. I mean it was kind of crazy.

0 (46m 32s):
It's like, what's your app? Yeah,

5 (46m 33s):
Right, exactly. Like

0 (46m 34s):
Is what this is a, this is shampoo, right? No, no, no. What's your app?

5 (46m 37s):
Which is why like going to these networking events was so discouraging because I was, no one really cared about what I was doing. And I even felt like the people in the room weren't consumers of what I was offering.

0 (46m 50s):
I imagine these were predominantly men. Yes. Probably white men who don't use hair masks and many, some of them probably don't have hair and also probably don't really understand your specific hair needs either.

5 (47m 4s):
That's right.

0 (47m 5s):
And, and by the way, how did you eventually settle on the name Briogeo?

5 (47m 9s):
I had so many like random names I can't even remember. But I just remember I got to the point of frustration and knew that I needed help. And a friend of mine ended up putting me in touch with a guy who was a consultant and for, you know, less than 500 bucks, he picked my brain on what I wanted this brand to be and gave me a ton of options and Briogeo stood out. So the word brio is an Italian word that means vibrant, colorful, full of life. That's like our DNA essence. And the word geo is Latin for of earth of nature. And that speaks to our clean ingredient methodology.

0 (47m 49s):
Alright, so you are looking for money and you keep grinding away going to these things and at one of these things you do meet somebody who actually says, yeah, you know what, I'll give you some money. Who was this person? How did that happen?

5 (48m 2s):
Yeah, so there was a investing network out in Long Island and I remember racing from work to try to make it there on time, which I did. And I,

0 (48m 14s):
And this is in 2013?

5 (48m 16s):
This was in 2012.

0 (48m 17s):
2012, okay.

5 (48m 18s):
Yeah. And so I walk into this auditorium and I look around and I'm like, here we go again. Exactly as you described, it was all white men, older men too that you know, filled the space. And then there were five of us who were going on stage to pitch our ideas. And the four other men who were presenting all had tech companies. And I just remember being like, oh my gosh, not again. Hmm. You know what's so hard about it guy too is that when you get onto a stage and you know that everyone there is probably not interested in what you have to offer and you kind of have to fake that sense of enthusiasm.

5 (48m 58s):
Yeah. It was painful.

0 (49m 1s):
So here you are, there are four other guys probably talking about their software as a service product and then you present and what, what happens.

5 (49m 10s):
So I presented with passion, I had a great presentation and then after the stage pitches, there was a breakout room in which the five of us each had a table where we could display our product concept or technology. And so for me it was that, you know, poster board with the sketches of the product and no one came to my table. It was so embarrassing, I was so upset. And at the very end as I was packing up my table, a guy named Phil came by and said, you gave the best presentation. And he said, as you can tell, I have very little hair, I know little about haircare, but he goes, I don't really invest in the products anyway.

5 (49m 59s):
I invest in the people. And he goes, you've got something and here's my number, let's be in touch.

0 (50m 5s):
And his name was Phil.

5 (50m 7s):
Phil Palmetto. What a great guy. Phil Palmetto. Yes.

0 (50m 10s):
So you, so Phil gives you a card and then I'm assuming you call him the next day or so

5 (50m 14s):
I didn't call him, he called me. Wow. I was on the trading desk and I got this missed call and I hopped off and it was Phil. Phil had called 'cause he wanted to follow up and he wanted to learn more and that's where the dialogue started. And ultimately a year later after I had gotten my first retail commitment, he made his first investment in Briogeo.

0 (50m 40s):
How did you get a retail commitment?

5 (50m 43s):
So after the lengthy process of formulating my first four products, I had now had a, a name for the company. I had the packaging design. I had done my first run of, you know, 400 pieces or whatever the minimum was. Yeah. And I was tasked with figuring out how I was gonna bring the products to market. It's funny guy because I just focused on one thing at a time. Sure. And so once the products were made, I had to figure out how I was going to get them in front of retailers and I had a business plan so I knew who my target retailers were. I was targeting the prestige retailers of the world, like Sephora and Nordstrom, et cetera.

0 (51m 24s):
But they weren't giving you the time of day 'cause you were comparative nobody to other people in the industry I guess

5 (51m 29s):
At that time. Right. So I knew I couldn't just cold email them like that just wasn't gonna work. So at the time I had started building up some mentors in the space that encouraged me to go to a trade show and to invest in getting a booth,

0 (51m 42s):
Which is not cheap. It's like two, 3000, 4,000 more.

5 (51m 46s):
It was more than that. Wow. Because I elected to be in this very special section of the cosmoprof Beauty trade show.

0 (51m 56s):
Where is that? Is that in New York? That's

5 (51m 57s):
In Las Vegas.

0 (51m 58s):
And how much does your booth cost?

5 (51m 60s):
Cost about $10,000 for that weekend.

0 (52m 3s):
And then that was just for the space. You had to like bring your stuff with you in like a signage and Right.

5 (52m 9s):
Yeah, there was travel. I had to design the space. I needed staffing. So I think when it was all said and done, it was probably closer to 15,000.

0 (52m 19s):
And meantime, no one at Goldman Sachs knows this. Like, you're like, okay, have a great weekend and you're flying to Las Vegas Yeah. To go have a booth at this, at this trade show.

5 (52m 28s):
Yeah. It was a little weird. And I did, I started feeling guilty. I'm like, ah, this isn't right. Like, you know, I'm kind of living this double life. But

0 (52m 36s):
Clearly by 2013 this is like, this train is left the station. Now you've got one foot really in this, this side the haircare product. Yes. And, and you get to this show and you're standing there, you've got your, your bottles all lined up and and people are passing by and people stop and start to talk to you.

5 (52m 55s):
Yeah. And it, it, if you've never been to a trade show, it is a very, very overwhelming series of days because you are talking nonstop and you have to be on and you have to be at that booth. 'cause you never know who's gonna come by.

0 (53m 10s):
You can't even go to the bathroom. Yeah.

5 (53m 11s):
Yeah. It's very hard. And I actually did step away to the bathroom and, and miss the buyer who I was there for. Luckily they came back, but that's how it happens. Okay.

0 (53m 21s):
Alright. So you're there presumably, hopefully to get some kind of deal, somebody to purchase to make a purchase order and what, who ends up ordering from you?

5 (53m 30s):
Yeah, so the first day I was handing out just lots of samples and buyers were very intrigued because they're always intrigued by newness and they had never seen the brand before. But the buyers that I gave samples to, most of them came back the next day and said, I used the products last night or this morning, like, tell me more. And so some of those buyers included, you know, urban Outfitters, Nordstrom. And then on the very last day, the Sephora team came by and that was what's really funny is that I didn't even know that they were the Sephora team until they left because there was a group of four of them and their badges were turned the other way because they don't wanna be kind of like smothered by everyone who's looking for the Sephora team.

5 (54m 21s):
So when they came by, I actually had no idea. And when they walked off another brand came up to my booth and said, oh my gosh, how did the conversation with Sephora go? And I was like, what do you mean? And she was like, oh, those four women were from Sephora,

0 (54m 37s):
But they didn't make an order. They didn't put an order, they

5 (54m 40s):
Didn't make an order. I got no contacts, I had no business cards. And I was actually very, very disappointed.

0 (54m 48s):
Did you leave with any orders?

5 (54m 50s):
I left with no orders, but I did leave with interest from Urban Outfitters.

0 (54m 55s):
So Urban Outfitters stopped by and, and by the way, were there people who assumed because you are an African American woman, that this, you were making products for, you know, quote unquote ethnic isle products, you know, you know what I mean? Like yeah. That, that this was specifically for women of color. I mean was there, did people make that assumption in initially?

5 (55m 16s):
You know, I figured that people would, which is why when I designed my booth, I was very intentional about having hair model imagery at my booth that really displayed the diversity of our intended consumer. So I think when people saw the breadth of ethnicities and skin tones and hair texture types, I think it helped to offset maybe that stereotype.

0 (55m 43s):
Yeah. I mean even when you go to your website now, I mean we're jumping ahead, but it's like every single hair type and and ethnicity is represented on your, on your website. Yeah.

5 (55m 53s):
And that's, that's been a day one mission of the Briogeo brand. And it really just kind of reflects, I think, my experience of growing up. And I've been so fortunate to have a diverse group of friends and I never wanted any of my friends to feel like they couldn't use Briogeo too.

0 (56m 10s):
Alright, so you come back from that trade show, and then I'm assuming you start to pick the phones on Urban Outfitters?

5 (56m 17s):
Oh yeah. So that, that moved pretty quickly. So they, they did eventually put an order in that fall and that was actually the milestone that Philip, who I spoke about a little earlier. Yeah. Philip was then ready to commit some capital to the, to the company.

0 (56m 35s):
'cause you needed cash to place that order. That's right. Mean if and by how many, do you remember how many bottles they bought or,

5 (56m 44s):
So they bought the stock, they pretty much bought all of the stock that I had. So that those few hundred units. Right.

0 (56m 50s):
Yeah. So it was was they were kind of dipping their toe into this. That's right. And so you didn't have to make extra product, but that was enough to get filled to say, all right, I'm in, I'll give you some money. Yes. And and what'd he give you?

5 (57m 2s):
So he gave me the first time about a hundred thousand dollars.

0 (57m 6s):
Which, and was that a game changer for you at this point? Oh

5 (57m 9s):
Yeah. I mean that, that was huge. I mean, I knew that I could, you know, scale the next production run. It was still me at the time. So I wasn't at a point where I needed to invest in, in staffing. But it was really all about being able to scale the inventory.

0 (57m 24s):
Alright. So you get into Urban Outfitters, but then the next challenge, and I love that like methodical way you do this, you're like, you kind of break it up into bite-sized chunks. Like let me tackle this problem and then I'll tackle the next problem. But the next problem was getting people to buy it at Urban Outfitters. Like getting people to be aware of it. Right.

5 (57m 41s):
That's right. So one of the other investments that I made early on was a PR agency. And that was really important because I had to get the story out there. One of the things that I did that was a little bit different is I made myself available to the editors and I told my PR agency that I didn't want them to just pitch editors over email because I wouldn't be able to really tell the full story. And because I was in New York, I asked them if they could set me up with desk side appointments where I would actually meet the editor and be able to have a face-to-face connection. Huh. And so I was able to create relationships with editors at a dozen of publications and I started getting press out of the gate Wow.

5 (58m 29s):
From even some of the bigger publications like, you know, allure and Marie Claire and Refinery 29.

0 (58m 37s):
Now knowing what I know about the beauty industry from the interviews we've done on the show, Sephora is like Val Halla, like you gotta be in Sephora. That's

5 (58m 48s):
Right.

0 (58m 48s):
Was Sephora like front and center in your mind? Like were you thinking I gotta get in there

5 (58m 53s):
Front and center? I mean, I needed to be in Sephora. I built this brand to be in Sephora.

0 (59m 0s):
Wow. Yeah.

5 (59m 1s):
Wow.

0 (59m 2s):
Yeah. So how did you, like, what do you, how do you find out who to contact at Sephora? Is it like info at Sephora dot com?

5 (59m 9s):
No, it was, it was definitely a bit of a puzzle. And I remember one of the woman in that group who was kind of like the leader of the group, she had a unique, memorable name. Her name was Margarita, and that's all I remembered. So I did some Google searching and I found out her full name and who she was. and there was this website, I can't remember the name of the website, but it would help you to determine what the format of email addresses. And I emailed her Okay. To send a little follow up email. I attached our brand book and told her that I would love the opportunity to come to San Francisco to meet with her in person to discuss the opportunity further.

5 (59m 49s):
And I never got a response. Hmm. So I waited a month and then I said, all right, I need something that's going to make it like a no-brainer to meet with me. So I decided to collect all of the press that I had gotten over the past couple of months, and I put together this really beautiful press book. And then I just decided to tell her that I was planning a trip to San Francisco, that I was gonna actually be there. And so I finally got a response, which was a forward to her junior buyer, and she asked her junior buyer to, to take over the conversation. Huh? She's like, yeah, let's meet up at Pete's Coffee and let's, let's chat.

0 (1h 0m 31s):
So this buyer says, yeah, come meet me at Pete's. So you literally get on a plane and go to San Francisco to have a coffee at Pete's? Yes.

5 (1h 0m 41s):
I know. It's insane. It's so crazy thinking back at it. But it was so well worth the investment of the time and money because I really connected with that merchant and she was also a person of color. She really took a particular liking to the fact that Briogeo really represented diversity. But she was very honest with me and said, you know, Nancy, we just aren't focused on building out our haircare category right now. You know, makeup is the thing, and yeah, that's where we're focused, but if things change, you know, would love to be in touch.

0 (1h 1m 19s):
Okay. So that's a start, but a little bit disappointing because you know, by this point it's 2014, you're, you're four years into this thing. Yeah. And how you gonna, how you gonna change your mind? It

5 (1h 1m 30s):
Was definitely a disappointing moment. And it was another moment in which I second guessed, you know, whether or not I had picked the right category because

0 (1h 1m 38s):
Wow. Yeah. Already four years in. Yeah. And you're starting to think, oh, did I make a mistake?

5 (1h 1m 43s):
I did. Because, you know, it was similar feedback that I had gotten from some of the other buyers. It was like, why haircare? Like it's not the most interesting or like booming category within Prestige beauty. I guess I was ahead of my time from that standpoint, but I also knew that like my time was running out in terms of putting the capital to work for my investors and also making that move to being a full-time entrepreneur. So I continued to stay in touch with the buyer just so that she knew that Briogeo was in demand and you know, things were going well. Yep. And then in February of 2014, I received an email that changed my life.

5 (1h 2m 28s):
I had sent the merchant buyer January's press summary and a couple of weeks later she responded and said, Nancy, it's so great to hear from you. The stars must have been aligned because we just got out of a town hall with our CEO and he wants to start building out our haircare category at Sephora in a more meaningful way. And we want to test Briogeo. Wow. I still have the email.

0 (1h 2m 58s):
Did you scream? Did you jump up and down? Oh

5 (1h 3m 0s):
My gosh. I just, it was the opportunity that I needed because I knew that I could do it. I just needed the opportunity.

0 (1h 3m 13s):
So they, they agreed to sell Briogeo in their stores or what?

5 (1h 3m 18s):
So it was a test and the test was online only. So if I hit my targets, the next step would be to launch Briogeo in 25 of the then 400 Sephora stores.

0 (1h 3m 33s):
By the way, you're still at Goldman Sachs at this point in in early 2014?

5 (1h 3m 39s):
Yes. So I was still at Goldman and, and once I received that email from Sephora, I knew that it was the opportunity of a lifetime and I knew that if I was gonna do it right, I could not continue working a full-time job. And I, I owed it to myself to really give this opportunity a real chance.

0 (1h 3m 57s):
You had to leave?

5 (1h 3m 58s):
I had to leave, but I was nervous. I mean, I was, I was 28 years old, I was a vice president at Goldman. I was making good money. Yeah.

0 (1h 4m 9s):
But even though you were nervous, you knew it was the right thing.

5 (1h 4m 12s):
I knew it was the right thing and I, I really knew it was the right thing when I had talked to my brother and a couple of other friends and family members and I was actually surprised by how supportive they were. I thought there was gonna be at least one person that said, are you sure this is the right thing? Do you really wanna do this? And not one person said that. They said, Nancy, we believe in you. Go for it.

0 (1h 4m 35s):
That's awesome. So you leave now you are, there is no safety net under you. This has got to work.

5 (1h 4m 42s):
It's gotta work. I mean, I put everything on the line. I resigned. I had no more income coming in. I wasn't paying myself. It was scary.

0 (1h 4m 54s):
Were you essentially funding the, the product by through the cash flow? Like Sephora would do an order and then that's how you funded the business? Or were you already starting to seek out more outside investors?

5 (1h 5m 6s):
Well, yeah, I mean I was using the little bit of cash that I had because the thing about retail is that you don't get the money until, you know, several days after you ship the product. And so I wasn't launching in Sephora until August of that same year and they didn't place the order until July. So I left Goldman in April and I was living on no income from the business. I mean I had some of the small orders from Urban Outfitters, but that, that wasn't enough.

0 (1h 5m 39s):
Alright, so you get this order from Sephora? Yes. I mean there's hundreds, I dunno, maybe thousands of products available on at Sephora dot com. So how are you gonna stand out? What did you do?

5 (1h 5m 51s):
So one of the most incredible investments I could have ever made at the time was partnering with a beauty sampling box called Ipsy that curates different beauty samples for, you know, hundreds of thousands of subscribers. Like

0 (1h 6m 7s):
A Birch box.

5 (1h 6m 8s):
Exactly. And our most universal product is our deep conditioning mask. And I thought it would be a good idea to sample that to a couple of hundred thousand people. And so that was a very difficult decision because I had to fund all of that inventory for that sampling program up front. But getting that product in the hands of about 200,000 people translated into incredible conversions at Sephora.

0 (1h 6m 41s):
So those sample boxes really kind of took off like people that that was all it took for people to start ordering it. Yep. And then how long before they decide to put you in in the stores?

5 (1h 6m 52s):
Yeah, so Sephora has a cadence of twice a year in which they roll out brands into stores in March and in September. So we launched on.com in August and we weren't yet ready to go into store just a month later in September. So once we hit March, we were ready for it. And it was such an incredible moment. And the idea of having Briogeo these four products I created sitting on a Sephora shelf was just the experience of a lifetime.

0 (1h 7m 25s):
How do you, just outta curiosity, is it harder to keep your product shelf stable because it's basically like things that degrade over time?

5 (1h 7m 34s):
Yeah, absolutely. That's a really good question. One of the things I'm very transparent about is that Briogeo products are not 100% natural. And where we cannot find a effective clean substitute, we will opt with a synthetic version so long as we really do our diligence to make sure that it's a safe synthetic. Right. And there is an organization in Europe called Eco Cert, which declares what synthetic ingredients are safe for use in natural products. And so we use a synthetic but eco cert preservative system that allows our products to have anywhere from a 24 to 30 month shelf life.

0 (1h 8m 17s):
And at this point now that now that he earn Sephora in the shops and they're making bigger and bigger orders, and presumably they're by far and away your biggest platform now, how were you able to fund making more product?

5 (1h 8m 32s):
Yeah, so by that time I had started to exhaust most of the money that I got from Phil. Yeah. But I knew that I was gonna need more money. So I reached out to Phil, put together a little deck of how I would use the funds to basically scale the growth of the business, which he was incentivized to do, given his equity position. He felt like it was a good business case I had, you know, pos to point to. So he loaned me another 150 K.

0 (1h 9m 3s):
So last year you got, you raised around from, from a private equity firm that took a, a ownership stake in your business. And I'm assuming they approached you at this point?

5 (1h 9m 14s):
That's exactly what happened. Yeah.

0 (1h 9m 16s):
It, it's, it's such an in incre, I love this story. 'cause before that you were going to these meetups and pitching your product to angel investors and nobody was interested except Phil. And then you launch and then people see how successful it is and then all these private equity firms come like knocking on your door.

5 (1h 9m 31s):
Yeah, I mean it was, it was, it was really, it was really funny to see, I mean, I get it. I guess, you know, having Sephora behind the brand and seeing that growth definitely creates a much more compelling story than having a sketch on a piece of paper. But yeah, it was really interesting because the dynamics had changed quite a bit.

0 (1h 9m 52s):
So you are moving along watching your sort of your business grow and which is amazing. I think the last I I saw, and I know your, your, your numbers are not public, but what was reported was you were doing about 10 million in annual revenue and presumably at least that if not more now.

5 (1h 10m 10s):
Yeah. So we will, you know, finish this year close to 40 million in gross sales, which is pretty awesome. Oh my God. Yeah.

0 (1h 10m 19s):
Alright, here we are, 2020. And you know this, 'cause you've heard this on the show, a lot of companies and businesses that have been on are in crisis. You know, retail is, is down. How is the business doing?

5 (1h 10m 35s):
I mean, I'm, I'm so fortunate guy in that our business is doing phenomenally well. We actually ended up revising up our pre covid budget.

0 (1h 10m 45s):
Wow.

5 (1h 10m 46s):
Yeah. And I think, you know, the, the way that we think about hair care is very much from a treatment perspective. So it's less styling, but it's more treatment focused. And I think people have a bit more time to really spend on their self-care.

0 (1h 11m 2s):
Yeah. Yeah. I mean I, I've, I've heard that from other companies that, that focus on personal care products, you know, that self-care has become obviously really important as people are shut in and, and then we have, gosh, so many crises, I don't even know where to begin. Then we have mass demonstrations, social justice movements, people demonstrating against racial injustice all around the country. You are a, a black entrepreneur. And I mean, on the one hand obviously, like what an incredible achievement as an entrepreneur, this thing you built. But on the other hand, I guess you were sort of expected to be kind of like an example of a, of a successful black woman who's who started her own business and everybody wanted to hear, hear from you.

0 (1h 11m 48s):
And that's gotta be exhausting.

5 (1h 11m 51s):
Yeah. It was really exhausting. And I kind of felt like, you know, there were so many people kind of coming outta the woodwork and like, I, I get it, but I don't believe that it is the responsibility of black people to fix the problem. Yeah. However, I do feel that it's important that black people have a seat at the table when certain decisions are being made about progress. So for me it was very much a fine balance of how do I allocate my time to the things that I think I can be most impactful knowing that I can't say yes to everything, but I have to say yes to some things because I can't just sit back and say, okay, it's your problem.

5 (1h 12m 31s):
Go figure it out. Like, I know I have to be a part of the conversation. I really believe that. Hmm.

0 (1h 12m 39s):
When you think about your whole story, it's just, you know, having that one random guy come up to you with a booth and say, here's my card. Or someone giving you a piece of advice to start with four products and do you think that what happened to you and your story happened because you got lucky or because you are really smart and you worked really hard and you have great skills.

5 (1h 13m 1s):
I think it's the latter plus something else you didn't mention. I don't, yeah. Luck sometimes happen, but luck is not what this is about because that means I would've struck luck over and over and over again. And luck is more of a random thing. Yeah. I think this is all about the hard work and the time that I've put in, as you mentioned, but there's also a mindset of believing in myself that I've established that I think is probably the biggest attribute towards succeeding in anything that you put your mind to.

0 (1h 13m 36s):
Nancy I'm gonna ask you a difficult question. It seems to me that so much of your confidence and your what you have learned to be and to become comes from your mom, from her. The lessons that you kind of, you absorbed by watching her and listening to her and, and I wonder what you think she would've thought about this thing you're doing now.

5 (1h 14m 2s):
She would be, I don't even know if there's a word for it, guy. Like, I don't even know if proud really justifies the feeling, but I I have always felt like my mom has been a part of this journey. There have been so many incredible things that have unfolded over the course of the past 10 years. And I am a spiritual person and I do feel her spirit has really helped to guide me down this path. And I just know that she is watching with eyes of joy and excitement and I'm just so grateful to have had the opportunity as a young child again, to see someone who looks like me, to defeat the Odds and to overcome the challenges and to create success.

0 (1h 14m 53s):
That's Nancy Twine, founder of Briogeo by the way, since we last spoke in 2020, the company was acquired by Wella Company and Sales revenue has more than doubled to roughly $100 million a year. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And as always, it's free. This episode was produced by Casey Herman, with music composed by rum Arablouei. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Daryth Gales. Our production staff also includes Carrie Thompson, JC Howard, Alex Chung, Malia ao, John Isabella, Sam Paulson, Chris Masini, Carla Estevez, and Catherine Cipher.

0 (1h 15m 38s):
I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. If you like How I Built This, you can listen early and ad free Right now by joining wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts. Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon Music. Before you go, tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at wondery.com/survey.

Winners (1h 16m 13s):
Winners Home Sense and Marshalls bring you save the holidays, a race to slay the season. Drama, romance deals with one gift card, three stores and more. Merry critics are calling it a last minute masterpiece. Christmas is coming and time is running out. Save your holiday with Winners Home Sense and Marshals.