2 (1s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor Adian the future-proof payments platform. Welcome all payments be on The Cutting Edge of customer experiences and grow your business with Adian. Visit a dyn.com NPR to learn more.

1 (15s):
Hey, really quick before we start the show the how I built this book is coming out in just a few weeks. But if you preorder before September 30th, I'll send you a signed book plate for free if you love this show and support what we do and want to Big book of inspiration ideas stories and insights pre-order your copy of how I built this by visiting guy Roz.com for more

2 (39s):
details. So I walk into this Auditorium and I look around and I'm like, here we go. Again. There were five of us who were going on stage to pitch our ideas and the four other men who were presenting all had tech companies and I just remember being like Oh my gosh, not again.

1 (1m 3s):
It's like what's your app? Yeah, right. This is what shampoo and no. No, where's your app? Exactly

2 (1m 10s):
it was a painful

1 (1m 15s):
From is he our is how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They go I'm guy Roz and on the show today how old family skincare recipes and a personal tragedy inspired Nancy twine to build a natural hair care line called Rio Co one of the fastest growing hair brands sold at the fora the easiest part about building a business is the day you imagine it in your head because everything that happens after it is really hard the research the business plan the pitch to investors finding the factory the distributor the shops to sell your products each one of these steps is an obstacle and for the most part each step creates a new problem too.

1 (2m 15s):
Many problems can become Overwhelming and soon enough. It can also become tempting to just ditch the whole idea entirely So to avoid that trap Nancy twine took each problem one at a time, which is good because her idea was pretty complicated to build a line of natural shampoos and conditioners without most of the synthetic ingredients you'd find in other hair care products. She also wanted to design a line of products for all hair types and textures and she one of those products on the shelves of Sephora one of the Premier Beauty retailers in the world all of these problems Nancy would eventually solve her brand Brio Gio is now carried by Sephora and is expected to do almost 40 million dollars in sales this year.

1 (3m 9s):
But to get there especially with zero experience in the beauty industry was going to pose a series of major challenges. Starting with finding a chemist who actually believed you could make this stuff without parabens or sulfates or phthalates or any of the other common chemicals. You need to make shelf-stable shampoo her biggest early challenge though was Having the courage to start the business at all. It was 2010 and Nancy was in her 20s on The Fast Track as a traitor for Goldman Sachs in New York and one day. Without any warning a tragedy completely upended her life and prompted Nancy to re-evaluate the way she was living

2 (3m 56s):
it which we'll get to

1 (3m 58s):
Nancy grew up on Long Island in New York her parents split up when she was a kid and his mother was a physician and the twins were one of the few black families in their neighborhood.

2 (4m 11s):
My mom was a family doctor and I don't even know if that term is quite used anymore and I do Member at a young age being at her doctor's office and it was always full. You know, a lot of people ask me where I got this very confident entrepreneurial experience from but I think that there was so much value and power of me seeing my mom running a successful practice really running a business. My mom was an entrepreneur and seeing that at a young age seeing her confidence seeing her Joy. Oy and the fact that being a female being a black female was not a hindrance to any of the dreams and goals that I would ultimately have in

1 (4m 57s):
life and I've read that like as a kid used to go to West Virginia a lot. But what's the connection to West Virginia?

2 (5m 3s):
Yeah. So my mom is from West Virginia. She's one of eight children and my grandmother is from there. And that's where she raised her tribe and a very small rural town called R and R & D.

1 (5m 18s):
What did you know about her upper in the any it's like I think to this day. It's one of the whitest states in the country. And obviously one of the poorest states in the country. Did she ever talk about what her childhood was like there?

2 (5m 29s):
Yeah. It was, you know, it was definitely a tough childhood. They didn't grow up with a lot and the fact that my mom grew up in that type of environment. Not only not having a lot but not being able to see what success and beyond that lifestyle could look like Like because so much of wanting to become better or becoming successful comes from seeing other people who look like you that have done it and when you don't even see the possibility but knowing within you that it exists and having that faith and belief in yourself, it's so so powerful and that was very much my mom story.

1 (6m 12s):
So I guess as a kid, right you used to go to West Virginia to visit your Ma who was from what I understand. They're like the local Beauty Guru like what? I mean? What did she she like gay people beauty

2 (6m 25s):
tips. It was a little bit different than that. I think you know, my grandmother again was really kind of faced with the challenge of providing for eight children with very very little and she was very Thrifty. I know one of the things that she used to do is she would stretch the little bits of product that she she would get her hands on so, you know, maybe she used some oils and extracts to stretch, you know, a quarter bottle of lotion to be able to fill it back up to a full bottle and she learned how to distill her own essential oils.

2 (7m 6s):
And this kind of natural chemistry created this unique situation that I think ultimately to inspired my mom to later become a chemist. And then a MD Ph.D.

1 (7m 20s):
So what do you remember what your grandmother used to

2 (7m 22s):
make? Yeah. So one of the things that was kind of interesting because it wasn't really a product that I used growing up. But these kind of thick kind of Butters that you could use for all different sorts of things really dry skin feet elbows knees and then, you know other sort of medicinal needs like Cuts or burn. Burns different types of sounds that would almost leave your skin glistening, but I just remember visiting that house and it was just like a lot of stuff lots of jars anything you needed you could find in that house and if you didn't find it precisely it could be made or derived from something and that was really kind of the attitude and spirit.

1 (8m 10s):
Yeah. So you you went on to went to college went to University, Virginia. Yes, first of all, How would what was your experience like at UVA?

2 (8m 22s):
I had a phenomenal experience at UVA. But I think one of the things that was so different starting out there. Was that a lot of the other black men and women didn't have the same type of diverse High School experience that I had so I know that there were a lot of people where it was the first time really ever in their life. They were around And white people, so there were elements of self-segregation that I witness during my early times at UVA that I didn't quite understand in terms of you know, black group separating themselves and the libraries are in the dining halls, and it was so new to me because it just was so different than my experience in high school where everyone sat with each other.

2 (9m 16s):
Yeah, but one of the things that Focused on or made emphasis of was that I really wanted to continue my experience of having a diverse group of friends, and I didn't want to self-segregate and I was able to really build a community of close friends that span all different sorts of ethnicities and backgrounds

1 (9m 39s):
and when you went to college, did you do like have any idea of what you wanted to like eventually do for a career?

2 (9m 47s):
So During UVA, I would have never thought that I would become a finance person. What I did know is that I loved music. I was in an acapella group and college. Wow.

1 (9m 59s):
Did you lose guys wear like a matching Blazers and now

2 (10m 3s):
we're actually a really cool hip acapella group. We were actually uva's first hip-hop acapella group. And so I had so much fun. And that stemmed from me really finding music and high. All and it created kind of this fantasy for me of one day being a pop star like a Mariah Carey. Hmm But when I went to UVA and got exposed to hundreds of talented singers both within my acapella group and outside of it. It was a Awakening that I

1 (10m 40s):
was just okay, but that's not gonna be what was gonna pay the bills and that's right. Exactly. No no music. Career, but instead you decide to study finance and what like what was the idea behind that? It's just kind of like seemed like a good way to get a well paying stable job.

2 (10m 59s):
So outside of wanting to be a you know, musical pop star. I also had this hobby of creating and selling things. I was very very entrepreneurial as a child in middle school. This is when the movie Clueless came out. And those cool like feather pens were so popular but no one like knew where they could get them because Etsy wasn't around and I went to Michael's my local craft store and got ribbon pens all sorts of stuff feathers and created replicas of those clueless feather pens and I would sell them at school.

2 (11m 40s):
Yeah. I have a lot of different stories of these like little mini entrepreneurial Ventures. I loved creating. NG and then the validation that came from people actually wanting to spend their money on my creations and so ultimately when I kind of gave up on the idea of becoming a famous pop star I started to think more about how I could translate the passion for entrepreneur is MM and to a career path and major and so that was really kind of the first part of my journey of even contemplating a career in finance.

1 (12m 18s):
And you did a summer internship at at Goldman Sachs I read and what did you do there?

2 (12m 24s):
Yes, I actually interned for two summers. I spent my first summer and legal and compliance and I quickly realized that that part of the firm was just not something I was interested and I was very very bored. And while I was in legal and compliance, I was actually sitting on the sales and trading floor and I was so intrigued by what was going on around me and I said I don't know what that is. But I want to do that that is where the action is at. I mean people are standing up and their seats. They're shouting across the room people were having fun. There were so much energy and I thought to myself I have another summer that I could spend at Goldman.

2 (13m 4s):
I want to spend it and sales and trading and so Wallah that next summer. I did a sales and trading internship and you come in each morning and you never know what you're going to get markets are. Constantly moving there. So Dynamic and not only that there's just a lot of camaraderie on that sales and trading floor, which is so incredible. So to me, it was one of the most exciting things that I could be doing in the finance

1 (13m 32s):
world. So right after that you graduate it's 2007 and that internship lands you a job working for Goldman Sachs that on the trading floor. Yep, and then a year later 2008. The financial crisis and obviously there must have been layoffs. You had managed to hang on to your job. But what are you or are you nervous ever nervous about getting fired about losing your job?

2 (13m 58s):
I was definitely nervous because so many of my friends in my internship class had gotten laid off in 2008. It was part of the reason why I knew I had to make myself invaluable. I knew that if I became invaluable, it would be very hard for my team to lay me off which is why I invested. Did the time and energy into being an incredible support not only for my team but teams around me that needed support.

1 (14m 27s):
I mean, we just working all the time. Did you hit even have time for friends or to do anything outside of work?

2 (14m 33s):
I was working a lot and I think that my goal of making myself indispensable to protect my career during a tumultuous time probably put Me in the position of being taken advantage of at times there were I'm sure some of my classmates who would never come in on a Sunday night randomly because their boss texted them. However, everyone knew that I would be the first person to say, yes and leave a dinner with my family to go into the office to work on a deck for my boss even with 15 minutes notice.

2 (15m 17s):
Is that so That

1 (15m 17s):
your mom would have would have expected you to do like your dinner with your mom and you get the call and you're like and she's a go. You gotta go. They need your help.

2 (15m 26s):
Yeah. She was the type to say, you know get there and get on it. You got to do what you've got to do. Yeah, I never was guilt-tripped. I was encouraged and so from that standpoint my family and my friends understood.

1 (15m 41s):
All right. See you are clearly working the crazy on Wall Street. You're in your mid-20s. You've got a good at a Lurie and your life takes a turn and tragically unexpected. Turn. Your mom is guilt. She is hit by car. And that's it. I mean what what a Just probably shocking thing to experience your life. I mean you were go go go and all of a sudden your mom's gone.

2 (16m 22s):
Yeah, it was a huge shock. I have friends who have lost their parents through battles with cancer Alzheimer's but it was a journey that they had mentally prepared themselves for I didn't have that opportunity. But not only that it was the first time that I truly realized that this life is not promised to anyone and we owe it to ourselves to find our happiness to pursue our passions and to make the most of this life because it's so so fragile and I feel like I had been so naive I never even fathomed my mom not being here.

2 (17m 12s):
Around to see her grandchildren any of

1 (17m 15s):
that. Yeah, none of us do

2 (17m 17s):
yeah, I will say that my brother and I have always been close but that experience, you know, brought us even closer and I couldn't have imagined going through that experience on my own and I did take some time

1 (17m 35s):
off. How much time do you remember how much time you took off?

2 (17m 40s):
I took off about two months, which doesn't seem like a lot of time and it probably wasn't but because I had been working so much that two months felt like a year. Yeah

1 (17m 53s):
and during that time. Did you start to kind of re-evaluate your own? Like I don't know what your life was about and what you wanted to do with it. And did your mom's death kind of force you to think about? Well, what is this all about? What am I

2 (18m 6s):
doing? It? Did, you know another thing that was really Sad for me as I remember, you know the weeks and even months leading up to my mom's passing so much of our conversations were just around the fact that I was working way too much and I was exhausted and even some nights. I would call her crying because I felt like I couldn't do it anymore. And I wish that our conversations would have been more substantive and you know after the experience of losing my mom so suddenly And realizing that this life isn't necessarily promise to me either. I knew that whatever I was going to do.

2 (18m 48s):
I wanted to wake up every day and be excited about going into the office. It's a

1 (18m 54s):
time of your mother's death was she was she still working as a physician full-time

2 (19m 0s):
know she was retired. She was retired.

1 (19m 4s):
So she was starting to enjoy retirement and and I guess she was thinking about That's it at that time, right?

2 (19m 12s):
Yeah. My mom was in the process of starting her own skincare line. It was called something like skincare RX, but it was all about kind of taking what she learned chemistry and even her medical career. I mean she was talking about, you know, infusing plasma into facial creams like really cool advanced stuff. And yeah, I remember she had like two or three formulas that were pretty Upped and there was some packaging. It was like these white jars with gold lettering and I was so kind of caught up in my finance life that I kind of forgot that my mom was working on this project in the background and it really wasn't only until you know, I had to start going through her stuff after the passing that I found, you know, the photos and was reminded of this project she was working on and so I think definitely At this lightbulb moment and also brought me back to some of the childhood memories that I had with my mom where we were making a lot of our own beauty products and the kitchen of our home fortunately we had access to a lot more than what my mom did Growing Up.

2 (20m 28s):
We had a local health food store where we could actually buy extracts and oils and Butters and salts and sugars and we were making just custom beauty products for are our needs the needs of friends,

1 (20m 43s):
like skin creams made mainly

2 (20m 45s):
actually hair care products mainly and and partly because I have naturally very curly curly hair and the market for textured hair wasn't really established back then so I found myself struggling with the products that were available and either needing to supplement them with other ingredients or just create Own products from scratch

1 (21m 13s):
I read that at there was a point where you thought all right. I want to do my own thing and I probably need to leave finance and I guess your brother. He's an entrepreneur to and he started like a digital media company and I guess at a certain point you call them like hey, can I come work with you? Is that did that happen?

2 (21m 34s):
Yeah, it did happen and I'm just going to be totally transparent with you. I was while I was. At Goldman I was seeing a therapist and prior to my mom's passing. I was even thinking about you know, what life beyond Goldman looked like and she encouraged me to see if I could join my brother and his entrepreneurial Ventures and he said, you know, this is my thing. You should get your own thing. I was so disappointed and kind of offended and I felt stuck because at the time my own Saying like what was that? What was that going to be that was like this very nebulous weird space that I just couldn't possibly think of what would I do and it really wasn't until my soul-searching journey after my mom's passing between these childhood memories of making my own products were my mom had gotten to in the development of her brand and then thinking wow.

2 (22m 40s):
Wow, I could create my own beauty product line.

1 (22m 46s):
I guess at a certain point you were in this is something a so cool about New York. I'd like the cool thing about living in New York is that they're all these resources and I guess that certain point you went to Like A Small Business Library like you you actually really thought okay. I better learn about what it means to start a small business if I'm going to do this is what happened there.

2 (23m 5s):
Yeah, and I know the sound so nerdy but the New York small business life. Mary was game-changing for me because I got access to research databases and reports that I otherwise would have had to have spent thousands of dollars on and I was typing in different Search terms like natural Personal Care Market natural hair care clean hair care and one of the things that I noticed in these reports was that there were pretty meaningful sections on natural personal care for body. For skin care but there were really small kind of paragraphs dedicated to natural hair care and I thought that was really interesting and what it did tell me was that there were very few players in natural hair care at the time relative to the other categories, but that it was also a budding space and that's really when the light bulb went off.

2 (24m 3s):
And I said this is a huge white space potential. It makes sense because of my personal background of Here this has legs to run with

1 (24m 14s):
I mean, so you're looking through just like doing research, right, you know you want to do something in natural hair care products. And by the way, what does that mean? Like because you see a lot of hair care products is a natural on them or you know free of this or free of that but what did mrs. 2010? What does that

2 (24m 33s):
mean? Yeah, it's a great question because the word natural is not regulated. The way that organic is so natural means different things to different people and for me it meant utilizing a high percentage of naturally derived ingredients. And so basically what I mean by that is instead of you know, pumping our products with silicones which are synthetic polymers that give the illusion of shine on the hair. We actually used real. Natural oils to do that because not only is it natural but the benefits the vitamins the nutrients the minerals within natural oils actually serve a purpose and enhancing the hairs Health that silicones do not so that's really the foundational goal of why we do use natural clean ingredients in our products.

2 (25m 28s):
All right, so you

1 (25m 29s):
are thinking hey, maybe I can do something here. Well What's the next step you take? I mean you're a Trader at Goldman Sachs. And obviously you're super smart and talented but you're also pretty young and probably don't imagine you don't know whole lot of people in the in the beauty industry. So what like what's the next step we who do you call? What? Where do you go?

2 (25m 51s):
Yeah, so, you know after doing my research, I realized one there's a void for clean natural hair care, but there's also a void for Effective clean natural hair care. So I had a premise that was compelling because I wasn't just kind of hopping on something that already existed. I was creating something that didn't exist. And so I had never created a business plan before and I knew it was something that I wanted to be thoughtful about. So I did what I always do which is I consulted my friend Google and I googled how to create a business plan and I stumbled upon a website that offered a service where they would partner with you to understand your vision.

2 (26m 38s):
And then also give you some help on the financial side in terms of you know, forecasting financial statements and that's how I went to went about creating my my first business plan.

1 (26m 51s):
Okay, so you're working on a business plan, but you don't actually have a product to sell yet. So what what happens next?

2 (27m 1s):
Yeah. So after I had my business plan created I told myself that I was going to tell all of my friends about what it is I wanted to do because I knew if I went and told everyone that I wanted to start a clean natural hair care product line that they would ask me about it. Time we went out and I didn't want to disappoint them. So it was my way of holding myself accountable and so once I felt really good about the viability of this business plan. I knew the next thing that I needed to do was to start formulating and that's where I was a little bit stuck because without my mom and without advanced knowledge of chemistry, I didn't feel comfortable formulating the products on my own and a way in which Which you know, I could sell them to a Sephora for example sure and at the time I had no idea that you could Outsource R&D and Manufacturing to an outside company and I only learned about that because I had told a friend about my idea and she said oh, let me put you in touch with a friend who created a deodorant line and I said, oh I would love that and I spoke to this friend and I go how are you making this deodorant at home?

2 (28m 21s):
I said I'm not I'm using a contract manufacturer. So this was so fascinating for me. I said this is cool. I can actually utilize the team and resources of another company to bring my idea to life. And so I was very very organized and I did a bunch of research on Google. I started attending some local trade shows and I figured out the Who's Who and Hair Care contract manufacturing,

1 (28m 48s):
but meantime, you are still working at It Go. Contacts

2 (28m 51s):
right I am and so that was really really tricky because this would have been 2011-2012. I had just become a vice president so I had gotten promoted but I was also trying to allocate time to work on brioche EOS.

1 (29m 8s):
Oh and by the way, did you already call it Breo

2 (29m 11s):
zo now it did not it did not have a name. Yeah, basically the way that I worked it was that after work is when I did all of my email stuff. A lot of people were getting emails from me at like 9:00 10:00 p.m. At night and my calls I would do those on my lunch break or some days. I would take PTO when I just knew that I was going to have a really hectic day of calls and research said a ton of PTO because I never took time off. So I never really took vacation. It was just more so days to work on my business plan.

1 (29m 46s):
So you would call up our you connect with some of these potential back. Factories and you would say hey I want to make hair care products like shampoos and conditioners and stuff. But with no sulfates silicones or parabens da dies all the stuff that's in pretty much 99% of hair care products. And I imagine most of the time they would be like can't be done. That's not possible.

2 (30m 11s):
Yeah, you're absolutely right. It was very disappointing pretty much every conversation. I had made the idea theme. Very far-fetched and sometimes I would get close sometimes manufacturers would say, oh, we just started developing shampoos without sulfates, but we need the silicone base in order for it to hydrate your hair. If you don't have the silicones the clean surfactants are going to dry out the hair. You can't have one or the other but you know, there was one contract manufacturer that came back to me and said we've never done this before but I think we can do it, especially if you're willing to dedicate the time.

2 (30m 51s):
Time to partner with our R&D team and to really work with us and give us some

1 (30m 55s):
time. And by the way, I think we're just let's just be clear. Yeah, we're not saying names or the name of this manufacturer because it's a trade secret, right? That's right. Okay. Yes. So keep going.

2 (31m 5s):
Yeah, so there was a small contract manufacturer privately run and operated in the midwest. I had an opportunity to meet with the CEO of the contract manufacturer and I think he was kind of surprised that I was this Finance girl who had Side project of you know, starting a beauty product company and I think he took note of my passion and I've been fortunate to work with people who have extended courtesies and opportunities to me because the passion became infectious. So even though I wasn't coming in with a big check size or you know, a big production run, I do think there are a lot of people that just have that heart inside of them that want to see The Underdogs seed and so luckily I was able to get the time and attention and the dedicated lab time with the chemist to help me really tackle this project.

1 (32m 2s):
Yeah, but you I mean you you did not have a background in chemistry. So how did you even know like the words to use when you were talking to the lab chemists like even even to tell them what you wanted them to make like like what would you say like, I want this to be like what? We'll hear what would you say?

2 (32m 22s):
Yeah, so it's a little hard sometimes to describe these things. So I had to kind of study up on haircare terminology specifically. I was working on a treatment mask and I wanted it to have a very luxurious buttery Rich texture. So it needed to have a higher viscosity. I also wanted the concentrations of what I called our Nova complex and Nova stands for natural oils. Is and antioxidants. I wanted the Nova complex in this Mass to be, you know, three times more concentrated than our other formulas. This

1 (32m 60s):
is a his a hair mask. This is a

2 (33m 1s):
hair mask. What is the

1 (33m 3s):
hair mask? And I don't under use one. I've been I've never what is

2 (33m 7s):
it. So it is a concentrated conditioning treatment that helps to repair moisturize and enhance the Vitality of the hair

1 (33m 18s):
and all the while your funding this I mean your Not high at this point this is travel and stuff. But you're just finding it through your salary at Goldman Sachs, right?

2 (33m 25s):
Yes. I was funding it through my salary, but I was being really mindful of how much I was spending because things do really add up quickly and I didn't have products yet. So I didn't want to get too far with spend before making sure that I could actually do

1 (33m 41s):
this. And what what were you looking to make shampoo conditioner? Like tell me the things that you wanted them to kind of like the prototypes you want them to make

2 (33m 50s):
for you? Yeah, so originally I wanted to create a 15 skew product line team you one of the yeah,

1 (33m 58s):
15, okay 15

2 (34m 0s):
because I wanted to have something for every hair texture type and I didn't want to leave anyone out and I was speaking to a contact in the contract manufacturing space that really advised me against a 15 products ask you. I'm coming out the gate and he goes if you can do it with four products. It's your best bet

1 (34m 22s):
who was this person advising you just a friend or

2 (34m 25s):
Mentor. It was actually one of the contract manufacturers that I didn't end up going with but gave me some really great

1 (34m 30s):
advice, which is a good lesson in you know, you might get rejected from somebody or you might reject them, but you can really get some good advice from them. Yep. So you decide you're going to come up with four products. And what were those products going to be? What

2 (34m 44s):
what? Yeah, so that was a big challenge for me. You know, how was I going to create a diverse assortment with only four? So what I decided to do was to create one champ poo for all hair types. Okay, and then I had three conditioners that were texture specific that was for products. I was able to hit a pretty diverse client base. All right, so you

1 (35m 7s):
are I think it took you about a year before you finally got this right and in that year. Were you telling your co-workers you're working on

2 (35m 18s):
this now? So now In my immediate team knew that I was working on this project. I had a couple of friends at Goldman that I confided in but only a couple that I knew would not say anything because I was serious about my work and I didn't want to compromise that and sure I didn't want it to get out that I was doing both.

1 (35m 36s):
So, how are you so you like we're taking like a day here and they there and flying to to this manufacturer and and like come back to New York. And is that what you were basically doing for a year?

2 (35m 48s):
Yeah. It was it was pretty crazy and her points in which I did start hitting a wall because I was getting very little sleep, you know being on the trading floor. I was also working with the London market. So I needed to be at the desk by 7:00 a.m. So I was getting to bed at like 1:00 2:00 a.m. And then waking up at 5:30 a.m. Day over day over day and it started to become unsustainable. Yeah,

1 (36m 17s):
do you think I imagine one of the reasons why you are just grinding away was where the kind of cope with you with the loss of your

2 (36m 25s):
mom. Yeah, I mean the project and process of building Brio's you really became a therapy for me. I needed to take that energy and pour it into something positive and there are a lot of people who were very quote-unquote proud of me. That I didn't self-destruct or get into negative behavior, like drinking or drugs and things like that. And for me, I really took the emotions of that experience and poured it into this project.

2 (37m 6s):
And I think that's why the hours that I was devoting the lack of sleep all of that stuff. I just kept going because it was my therapy.

1 (37m 21s):
When we come back in just a moment how Nancy managed to convince a man with very little hair to invest in her hair care product company stay with us guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a j WS dot org. Thanks. Also to Microsoft the world has changed and Microsoft teams is there to help us stay connected teams is the safe and secure way to chat meet call and collaborate to learn more visit microsoft.com.

1 (38m 15s):
teams The Americans with Disabilities Act was signed 30 years

2 (38m 22s):
ago. So why to this day is the disability Community still fighting for their

1 (38m 27s):
rights? Listen now to learn what they're fighting

2 (38m 30s):
on through line from NPR every

1 (38m 32s):
Thursday. And one more thing before we get back just a reminder. You can pre-order the how I built this book right now. And if you do I'll send you a free signed book play to go inside the book. The book is a collection of insights and wisdom from some of the most incredible and inspiring makers inventors Builders and dreamers on

2 (38m 54s):
Earth to preorder

1 (38m 56s):
and to get your free signed book plate while supplies last go to guy Roz.com Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So by the end of 2012 Nancy twine is about two years into launching her line of natural hair products, and she still got a few daunting problems to solve for instance. She doesn't have a name for her company yet, and she needs to figure

2 (39m 24s):
out how to convince

1 (39m 25s):
retailers to sell her product at this point Nancy starts to realize that she'll probably need some more. Nathan what she has in her savings account,

2 (39m 36s):
so by that point the most money I spent was on the business plan, which is about 5,000 some of the initial concepts for the packaging which was you know north of 10 K. And then you factor in everything else. I was probably close to 25

1 (39m 51s):
K. But your bootstrapping this business. I mean, are you imagine you're thinking? All right, I gotta raise some money. Did you start to look

2 (39m 59s):
around? I did so I was so funding a lot of it. But I knew that if I was going to start to scale this at some point, I didn't want to put myself in a position where I was completely maxed out because I also knew that it would be hard for me to focus on growing my business if I was thinking about you know, how I was going to pay my rent. So I did I started dabbling and going to investor meetups and pitching sessions which was quite the experience.

1 (40m 33s):
And and you would go to these things and they were like, they're like speed dating but pitching your

2 (40m 38s):
business, right? It's so funny because guy I didn't even know it was a thing and I got invited to one of these things and that's exactly what it was. You know, there was a line at each of these booths and you would do your one minute elevator pitch and it was nuts. Oh

1 (40m 55s):
and at this point you were going to these pitch meetings with investors Angel Investors with bottles of your

2 (41m 0s):
product. No, not

1 (41m 1s):
even you were just just describing this concept.

2 (41m 4s):
Yeah, and I had some artwork on a piece of paper. I would bring this thick piece of paper that had sketches of the packaging. It was really hard guy to sell a brand that exists. I don't think so. Yeah, he was Tech investors. I mean it was kind of crazy. It's like, what's your app? Yeah, right exactly.

1 (41m 23s):
What this is it this is shampoo.

2 (41m 25s):
Right? No. No. No, where's your at which is why I like going to these networking events was so discouraging because I was no one really cared. What I was doing and I even felt like the people in the room weren't consumers of what I was

1 (41m 38s):
offering. I imagine these were predominantly men. Yes, probably white men who don't use hair masks and Minis and some of them probably don't have hair and also probably don't really understand your specific hair needs

2 (41m 52s):
either. That's right.

1 (41m 54s):
And by the way, how did you eventually settled on the name breo's you

2 (41m 58s):
I had so many like random names. I can't even remember, but I just remember I got to the point of Frustration and knew that I needed help and a friend of mine ended up putting me in touch with a guy who was a consultant and for you know, less than 500 bucks. He picked my brain on what I wanted this brand to be and gave me a ton of options and Brio Geo stood out. So the word Brio is an Italian word. That means vibrant Colorful full of life. That's like our DNA Essence and the word Geo is Latin for Of Earth of Nature and that speaks to our clean ingredient methodology.

1 (42m 39s):
All right, so you are looking for money and you keep grinding away going to these things. And at one of these things you do meet somebody who actually says, yeah, I'll give you some money. Who was this person had that happen.

2 (42m 52s):
Yeah, so there was a investing Network out in Long Island, and I remember racing from work to try to make it there on time which I did and And I was in

1 (43m 4s):
2013. This was in 2012 2012 again. Yeah,

2 (43m 8s):
and so I walk into this Auditorium and I look around and I'm like here we go again exactly as you described. It was all white men older men to that, you know filled the space and then there were five of us who were going on stage to pitch our ideas and the four other men who were presenting all had tech companies and I just remember being Like oh my gosh, not again, you know what's so hard about it guy to is that when you get onto a stage and you know that everyone there is probably not interested in what you have to offer and you kind of have to fake that sense of enthusiasm. It was painful.

1 (43m 50s):
So here you are there for other guys practicing with their software as a service product and then you present and what what happens

2 (43m 59s):
so I presented with passion. I had a great presentation and then after Her the stage pitches there was a breakout room in which the five of us each had a table where we could display our product concept or technology. And so for me it was that, you know poster board with the sketches of the product and no one came to my table. It was so embarrassing I was so upset and at the very end as I was packing up my table a guy named Phil. Came by and said you gave the best presentation and he said as you can tell I have very little hair.

2 (44m 42s):
I know little about hair care, but he goes I don't really invest in the products. Anyway invest in the people and he goes you've got something and here's my number. Let's be in touch and his name is

1 (44m 55s):
Phil Phil Palmetto. What a great guy. Yes, so you so Phil gives you card and then I'm assuming you call him the next day or so.

2 (45m 3s):
I didn't call him. He called me. Wow. I was on the trading desk and I got this missed call and I hopped off and it was Phil Phil had called because he wanted to follow up and he wanted to learn more and that's where the dialogue started and ultimately a year later after I had gotten my first retail commitment. He made his first investment and brioche EO

1 (45m 29s):
how did you get a retail commitment?

2 (45m 32s):
So after the lengthy process of formulating my first four products I had now had a name for the company. I had the packaging design. I had done my first run of you know, 400 pieces or whatever the minimum was and I was tasked with figuring out how I was going to bring the products to Market. It's funny guy because I just focused on one thing at a time sure and so once the products were made I had to figure out how I was going to get them in front of Is and I had a business plan. So I knew who my target retailers were I was targeting The Prestige retailers of the world like Sephora and Nordstrom cetera,

1 (46m 13s):
but they weren't giving it a time of day because you were comparative nobody to other people in the industry. I

2 (46m 17s):
guess it's all right, so I knew I couldn't just cold email them. Like that just wasn't going to work. So at the time I had started building up some mentors in the space that encouraged me to go to a trade show and to invest in getting a

1 (46m 31s):
booth which is not cheap. It's like like to 3,000

2 (46m 34s):
4,000 more it was more than that because I elected to be in this very special section of the CosmoProf Beauty trade

1 (46m 44s):
show. Where is that? Is that New York? That's in Las Vegas and how much did your booth

2 (46m 48s):
cost cost about $10,000 for that weekend.

1 (46m 52s):
And then that was just for the space you had to like bring your stuff with you in like a signage and right. Yeah, there's

2 (46m 59s):
travel I had to design the space I needed staff. Bang, so I think when it was all said and done it was probably closer to 15,000

1 (47m 8s):
and meantime, no one at Goldman Sachs noses. Like you're like, okay have a great weekend your final Las Vegas to go have a booth at this at this

2 (47m 16s):
trade show. Yeah. It was a little weird and I did I started feeling guilty. I'm like this isn't right. I like, you know, I'm kind of living this double

1 (47m 24s):
life, but clearly by 2013. This is like this train has left the station. Now, you've got one foot really in this this side the hair care products and and and you get to this show and you standing there you've got your your bottles all lined up and and people are passing by and people stop and start talk to you.

2 (47m 44s):
Yeah, and it if you've never been to a trade show, it is a very very overwhelming series of days because you were talking nonstop and you have to be on and you have to be at that Booth because you never know who's going to come by you can't even go to the bathroom. Yeah. Yeah. It's very hard and I actually did. Double wave to the bathroom and and miss the buyer who I was there for luckily they came back but that's how it

1 (48m 9s):
happened. Okay. All right. So you're there presumably hopefully to get some kind of deal somebody the purchase to make a purchase order and what who ends up ordering from you.

2 (48m 19s):
Yeah. So the first day I was handing out just a lots of samples and buyers were very intrigued because they're always intrigued by newness and they had never seen the brand before but the buyers that I gave samples to most of them came back the next day and said I use the products last night or this morning like tell me more and so some of those buyers included, you know, Urban Outfitters Nordstrom and then on the very last day, the Sephora team came by and that was what's really funny is that I didn't even know that they were the Sephora team until they left because there was a group of four of them and their badges were turn the Way because they don't want to be kind of like smothered by everyone who's looking for the Sephora team.

2 (49m 10s):
So when they came by I actually had no idea and when they walked off another brand came up to my booth and said, oh my gosh, how did the conversation with Sephora go and I was like, what do you mean and she's like, oh those four women were from

1 (49m 25s):
Sephora, but they didn't make an order

2 (49m 28s):
they didn't put in or they didn't make an order. I got no contacts. I had no business cards and and I was actually very very disappointed because they were the people I came to see and I left without getting any information or inability to even contact any of them.

1 (49m 46s):
Did you leave with any orders?

2 (49m 48s):
I left with no orders, but I did leave with interest from Urban

1 (49m 52s):
Outfitters. Urban Outfitters stop by and by the way were there people who assumed because you are an African-American woman that this you were making Products for you know, quote-unquote ethnic aisle products, you know, you know what I mean like that this was specifically for women of color. I mean was there do people make that assumption initially,

2 (50m 14s):
you know, I figured that people would which is why when I design my booth, I was very intentional about having hair model imagery at my booth that really displayed the diversity of our intended consumer. So I think when people saw the breadth of Ethnicities and skin tones and hair texture types. I think it helped to offset. Maybe that stereotype

1 (50m 41s):
yummy even when you get your website now and we were jumping ahead but it's like, you know, there's just different skin tones and and different hairstyles and it's like every single hair type and an ethnicity is represented on your on your

2 (50m 55s):
website. Yeah, and that's that's been a day one mission of the Brio co-brand was to create You know problem-solution formulas, but that really speaks to a diverse spectrum of women and now men as well and it really just kind of reflects. I think my experience of growing up and I've been so fortunate to have a diverse group of friends and I never wanted any of my friends to feel like they couldn't use brioche CO2.

1 (51m 24s):
All right, so you come back from that trade show and then I'm assuming you start to pick the phones on Urban Outfitters.

2 (51m 30s):
Oh, yeah, so that that moves pretty quickly. Lee so they did eventually put an order in that fall and that was actually the Milestone that Philip who I spoke about a little earlier fill up was then ready to commit some Capital to the to the company because you

1 (51m 49s):
needed cash to place that order. I mean if if and by how many remember how many bottles of water

2 (51m 58s):
they bought the stock they pretty much bought all of the stock that I have so that goes few. Units, right?

1 (52m 4s):
Yeah, so who was proposed they were kind of Dipping their toe into this right and this even have to make extra product. But that was enough to get filled as they all right. I'm in I'll give you some money. Yes and what I give you

2 (52m 16s):
so he gave me the first time about

1 (52m 18s):
$100,000. Which end was that a game changer for you at this point? Yeah. I mean that that was huge.

2 (52m 25s):
I mean, I knew that I could, you know, scale the next production run it was still me at the time. So I wasn't at a point where I needed to invest in. And Staffing, but it was really all about being able to scale the

1 (52m 37s):
inventory. All right, so you get into Urban Outfitters, but then the next challenge and I love that look at methodical way. You do this. You're like you kind of break it up into bite-size chunks. Like let me tackle this problem and then I'll tackle the next problem. But the next problem was getting people to buy it at Urban Outfitters, like getting people to be aware of it,

2 (52m 55s):
right? That's right. So one of the other Investments that I made early on was a PR agency. And that was really important because I had to get the story out there. One of the things that I did that was a little bit different is I made myself available to the editors and I told my PR agency that I didn't want them to just pitch editors over email because I wouldn't be able to really tell the full story and because I was in New York. I asked them if they could set me up with deskside appointments where I would actually meet the editor and be able to have a face-to-face connection. And so I was able to create relationships with editors at a dozen of Publications and I started getting pressed out of the gate.

2 (53m 42s):
Wow from even some of the bigger Publications like, you know, Allure and Marie Claire and

1 (53m 48s):
refinery29 now knowing what I know about the beauty industry from the interviews we've done on the show Sephora is like Valhalla like you got to be in Sephora. That's right. What's up? Like front and center your mind like what do you think? I

2 (54m 6s):
got to get in there front and center. I mean I needed to be in Sephora. I built this brand to be in Sephora.

1 (54m 14s):
Wow. Yeah. So, how did you like? What do you how do you find out who to contact? The Sephora is it like info at sephora.com

2 (54m 22s):
knows it was definitely a bit of a puzzle and I remember one of the women in that group who was kind of like the leader of the group. She had a unique memorable name her. Name is Margarita. And that's all I remember. So I did some Google searching and I found out her full name and who she was and there was this website. I can't remember the name of the website, but it would help you to determine what the format of email addresses and I emailed her to send a little follow-up email. I attached our brand book and told her that I would love the opportunity to come to San Francisco to meet with her in person to discuss the opportunity further and I never got a response.

2 (55m 5s):
So I waited a month. And then I said, alright, I need something that's going to make it like a no-brainer to meet with me. So I decided to collect all of the press that I had gotten over the past couple of months and I put together this really beautiful press book and then I just decided to tell her that I was planning a trip to San Francisco that I was going to actually be there. And so I finally got a response which was They forward to her Junior buyer and she asked her Junior buyer to take over the conversation. She's like yeah, let's meet up at Pete's Coffee and let's let's chat.

1 (55m 45s):
So this buyer says yeah, come eat me a pizza. You literally get on a plane and go to San Francisco to have a coffee at peace.

2 (55m 54s):
I know it's insane. It's so crazy thinking back at it, but it was so well worth the investment of the time and money because I really connected with that merchants and she was also a person of color. She really took a particular liking to the fact that Brio Geo really represented diversity, but she was very honest with me and said, you know Nancy we just aren't focused on building out our hair care. R category right now, you know makeup is the thing and that's where we're focused. But if things

1 (56m 30s):
change, you know would love to be in touch. Okay, so this is start but it's a little bit disappointing because you know by this Points 2014 your four years into this thing and I get how you gonna change her mind.

2 (56m 44s):
It was definitely a disappointing moment and it was another moment in which I second-guessed, you know, whether or not I had picked the right category because

1 (56m 53s):
all ready for Is in history think oh they make a

2 (56m 55s):
mistake. I did because you know, it was similar feedback that I had gotten from some of the other buyers. It was like why hair care like it's not the most interesting or like booming category within Prestige Beauty. I guess I was ahead of my time from that standpoint. But I also knew that like my time was running out and terms of putting the capital to work from high investors and also making that move to being a full-time entrepreneur. So I continue to stay in touch with the buyer just so that she knew that brioche. EO was in demand and you know things were going well. Yep, and then in February of 2014, I received an email that changed my life.

2 (57m 42s):
I had sent the merchant buyer. January's press summary and a couple of weeks later. She responded and said Nancy. It's so great. To hear from you. The stars must have been aligned because we just got out of a town hall with our CEO and he wants to start building out our hair care category at Sephora in a more meaningful way and we want to test Brio Geo. Well, I still have the email.

1 (58m 11s):
Did you scream did you jump up and

2 (58m 13s):
down? Oh my gosh. I just it was the opportunity that I needed because I knew that I could Do it. I just needed the opportunity. So they they

1 (58m 27s):
agreed to sell Biagio in their stores or

2 (58m 32s):
what so it was a test and the test was online only. So if I hit my targets The Next Step would be to launch free oshio and 25 of the then 400 Sephora

1 (58m 46s):
stores. By the way, you're still at Goldman Sachs at this point in in early 2014.

2 (58m 52s):
Yes, so I'm still up. Man, and once I receive that email from Sephora, I knew that it was the opportunity of a lifetime and I knew that if I was going to do it, right I could not continue working a full-time job and I owed it to myself to really give this opportunity a

1 (59m 9s):
real chance. You had to leave

2 (59m 12s):
I had to leave but I was nervous. I mean I was I was 28 years old. I was a vice president at Goldman. I was making good money. Yeah, but even though you were nervous you knew was right thing. I knew it was the right thing and I really know it was the right thing when I talk to my brother and a couple of other friends and family members and I was actually surprised by how supportive they were I thought there was going to be at least one person that said are you sure this is the right thing do you really want to do this? And not one person said that they said Nancy we believe in you go for

1 (59m 49s):
it. That's awesome. So you leave now you are there is no Safety net underneath this has got to work.

2 (59m 56s):
It's gotta work. I mean I put everything on the line. I resigned I had no more income coming in. I wasn't paying myself. It was scary.

1 (1h 0m 8s):
Were you essentially funding the the product by through the cash flow like Sephora would do an order and then that's how you funded the business or were you already starting to seek out more outside

2 (1h 0m 19s):
investors. Well, yeah, I mean I was using the little A bit of cash that I had because the thing about retail is that you don't get the money and toll you know several days after you ship the product and so I wasn't launching in Sephora until August of that same year and they didn't place the order until July. So I left Goldman in April and I was living on no income from the business. I mean, I had some of the small orders from Urban Outfitters, but that wasn't enough.

1 (1h 0m 53s):
Right. So you get this order from Sephora? I mean there's hundreds and I thought maybe thousands of products available on at sephora.com. So, how are you going to stand out? What did you do?

2 (1h 1m 5s):
So one of the most incredible Investments I could have ever made at the time was partnering with a beauty sampling box called Ipsy that curates different Beauty samples for you know hundreds of thousands of subscribers

1 (1h 1m 21s):
like a Birchbox

2 (1h 1m 22s):
exactly. And our most universal product is our deep conditioning mask and I thought it would be a good idea to sample that to a couple of hundred thousand people. And so that was a very difficult decision because I had to fund all of that inventory for that sampling program upfront but getting that product in the hands of about 200,000 people translated into incredible.

1 (1h 1m 54s):
At Sephora, so those sample boxes really kind of took off like people that that was all it took for people to start ordering it. Yep. And then how long before they decide to put you in the stores?

2 (1h 2m 6s):
Yeah. So Sephora has a Cadence of twice a year in which they roll out Brands into stores and March and in September, so we launched on.com and August and we weren't yet ready to go into store just a month later in September. So once we hit March we were Ready for it. And it was such an incredible moment and the idea of having Brio CEO these four products. I created sitting on a Sephora shelf was just the experience of a lifetime.

1 (1h 2m 39s):
How do you just out of curiosity? Is it harder to keep your product shelf stable? Because it's basically like things that degrade over time.

2 (1h 2m 48s):
Yeah. Absolutely. That's a really good question. One of the things I'm very transparent. Out is that Brio co-products are not 100% natural and where we cannot find a effective clean substitute. We will opt with a synthetic version so long as we really do our diligence to make sure that it's a safe synthetic and there is an organization and Europe called Eco cert which declares What synthetic ingredients are safe for use in natural products. And so we use a synthetic but Eco sir. Preserved A system that allows our products to have anywhere from a 24 to 30 months shelf life.

1 (1h 3m 31s):
And at this point now that now that you're in Sephora in the shops, and they're making bigger and bigger orders and presumably they're by Far and Away our biggest platform now, how were you able to fund making more

2 (1h 3m 44s):
product? Yeah, so by that time I had started to exhaust most of the money that I got from Phil. Yeah, but I knew that I was going to need more money. So I reached out to Phil put together a little deck of how I would use the funds to basically scale the growth of the business, which she was incentivised to do given his Equity position. He felt like it was a good business case. I had you know pios 2.2 so he loaned me another hundred and Okay.

1 (1h 4m 17s):
So last year you got you raised around from from private Equity Firm that took a ownership stake in your business and I'm assuming they approached you at this point.

2 (1h 4m 27s):
That's exactly what happened.

1 (1h 4m 29s):
Yeah, it's such an incredible of the strikers before that. You were going to these meetups and pitching your product to Angel Investors and nobody was interested except Phil and then you launch and then people see a successful it is and then all these private Equity firms come like knocking on your

2 (1h 4m 44s):
door. Yeah. I'm Mean it was it was really it was really funny to see I mean I get it I guess, you know having Sephora behind the brand and seeing that growth definitely creates a much more compelling story than having a sketch on a piece of paper. But yeah, it was really interesting because the Dynamics had changed quite a

1 (1h 5m 3s):
bit. So you are moving along watching your sort of your business grow and which is amazing. I think the last I saw and I know your numbers are not Public but what was reported was you were doing about 10 million in annual revenue and presumably at least that if not more now.

2 (1h 5m 24s):
Yeah, so we will you know finish this year close to 40 million and gross sales, which is pretty awesome. Yeah.

1 (1h 5m 33s):
Alright here. We are 20 20 and you know this because you've heard this on the show a lot of companies and businesses that have been on are in crisis, you know retail is down. How is the business doing?

2 (1h 5m 49s):
I mean, I'm so fortunate guy and that our business is doing phenomenally. Well, we actually ended up revising up our Pre-K covid budget. Wow. Yeah, and I think you know the way that we think about Hair Care is very much from a treatment perspective. So it's less styling, but it's more treatment focused and I think people have a bit more time to really spend on their self-care.

1 (1h 6m 16s):
Yeah. Yeah. I mean I've heard that from other companies at that focus on personal care products, you know, that self-care is become obviously really important as people are shut in and and then we have so many crises. I don't even know where to begin. Then we have mass demonstrations social justice movements people demonstrating against racial Injustice all around the country. You are a black entrepreneur and And I noted some of you are an Instagram allow back back in June. You wrote. My bucket is nearing empty. I'm exhausted and emotionally drained. We all are when you wrote.

1 (1h 6m 57s):
My bucket is nearing empty. You were in New York City living in Union Square. You're running a business. What does it mean when you wrote my bucket is nearing

2 (1h 7m 7s):
empty. Yeah. I think it meant a lot of different things. It meant kind of this renewed fear for Especially black men and my life my brother family members. I mean I even recall telling my brother like, you know, be careful running in certain neighborhoods, you know living in Union Square. There were a lot of incredible peaceful protests many of which I actually participated in but from my window, I mean I saw violence erupt and protests a lot of which were, you know, captured on social media, but seeing it from your window is another thing and it's it's It's hurtful to see that.

2 (1h 7m 48s):
Yeah, and then obviously, you know, I've experienced my own family tragedy and you know thinking about the families of those who were brutally killed and attacked and what they must be going through. I mean, it was just it was a lot and then on top of that, you know, there was a lot of Outreach that I received and I know it was a good spirit, you know, people wanting me to do interviews or be on their panel or talk about this and that but it was all happening at once and it was just I was I was really drained.

1 (1h 8m 21s):
Yeah, I mean on the one hand obviously like what an incredible achievement as an entrepreneur this thing you built but on the other hand, I guess you should've expected to be kind of like an example of a successful black woman who's started her own business and everybody wanted to hear from you and that's got to be exhausting.

2 (1h 8m 40s):
Yeah. It was really exhausting and I kind of felt like, you know, there were so many people kind of coming out of the At work and like I get it but I don't believe that it is the responsibility of black people to fix the

1 (1h 8m 54s):
problem.

2 (1h 8m 56s):
However, I do feel that it's important that black people have a seat at the table when certain decisions are being made about progress because so often times were not so for me. It was very much a fine balance of how do I allocate my time to the things that I think I can be most impactful. Knowing that I can't say yes to everything but I have to say yes to some things because I can't just sit back and say okay, it's your problem. Go figure it out. Like I know I have to be a part of the conversation. I really believe that

1 (1h 9m 31s):
when you think about your whole story just you know, having that one random guy come up to you with a booth and say Here's my card or someone giving you a piece of advice to start with four products. And do you think that what happened to you and your story? Happened because you got lucky or because you are really smart and he worked really hard and you have great

2 (1h 9m 51s):
skills. I think it's the latter plus something else. You didn't mention. I don't ya luck sometimes happen but luck is not what this is about because that means I would have struck luck over and over and over again and luck is more of a random thing. Yeah, I think this is all about the hard work and the time that I've put in as you mentioned, but there's also a mindset of believing in myself that I've established that I think is probably the Biggest attribute towards succeeding in anything that you put your mind to

1 (1h 10m 28s):
pass Emma ask you a difficult question. It seems to me that so much of your confidence and your what you have learned to be and to become comes from your mom from her the lessons that you kind of absorbed by watching her and listening to her and I wonder what you think she would have thought about this thing. You're doing

2 (1h 10m 53s):
now. I know that she would be so proud. I mean she would be I don't even know if there's a word for IT guy. Like I don't even know if proud really justifies the feeling but I have always felt like my mom has been a part of this journey there have been so many incredible things that have unfolded over the course of the past 10 years and I am a spiritual person and I do feel her spirit has really hope to guide me down this path and I just know that she is watching with eyes of joy and excitement and I'm just so grateful to have had the opportunity as a young child again to see someone who looks like me defeat the odds and to overcome the challenges and to create success.

1 (1h 11m 47s):
That's Nancy twine founder and CEO of ryoji. Oh, by the way, remember how Nancy's brother who was also an entrepreneur once told her that she couldn't join his company that she had to start her own thing. Well today Nancy's

2 (1h 12m 3s):
brother actually works for

1 (1h 12m 5s):
her. He's in charge of Rio Gio's direct to Consumer business. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can write to us at HIV T at npr.org. And if you want to follow us on Twitter, we're at how I built this or add guy Roz. This episode was produced by Casey Herrmann with music composed by rum teen Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Candice limb. There are scales JC Howard, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. I'm guy Roz and you can listening to how I built this.

1 (1h 12m 46s):
This is NPR.

2 (1h 12m 51s):
We're only months away from election day and every week or even every few hours. There's a new twist that could affect who will win the White House to keep up with the latest tune into the NPR politics podcast every day to find out what happened and what it means for the election.