4 (0s):
Hey really quick before we start the show. You've probably been hearing me talk about our new live video series. We're doing on Facebook and you can see old ones. If you go to facebook.com slash how I built this anyway, all this week. We are focused entirely on food and every day starting Monday April 20th through Friday, April 24th. I'll be hosting a live video chat with a different Chef or restaurant owner

2 (24s):
each day to

4 (25s):
talk about how they're dealing with the current economic and Health crisis in

2 (29s):
our guest. This week our amazing will have Jose Andres Christina Tosi of Milk Bar. Alice

4 (35s):
Waters. Semi Nusrat and Michelin three-star Chef Daniel whom and Kyle connaughton and they'll all talk about how they're using the power of food to help solve big problems including the ones were facing right now. So join me live every single day this

2 (50s):
week from April 20th to the

4 (52s):
24th at noon Eastern Time on facebook.com how I built this This is like Amateur hour here like we had no barcodes on the boxes. So you didn't even know it was in there. No, we were just tear open boxes and hope it will check to see if the girls size and be climbing all over this whole room was filled essentially to the ceiling like packed to the gills with boxes and pallets and we're literally climbing on top of these mountains of boxes tearing them open and hoping that it's the right size and color in there. It was just a comedy of errors.

2 (1m 35s):
Robin PR it's how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They go I'm guy Roz and on today's

4 (1m 47s):
show how what happened in Vegas did not stay in Vegas when Rich and Vicki fulop got inspired to sell high-end sheets and brew that idea into Brooklyn in at 100 million dollar brand. So a not insignificant number of stories. We've told on the show started around the time of the Great Recession of

2 (2m 10s):
2008 and that's because

4 (2m 13s):
lots of people couldn't find jobs so they had to create their own and while the situation now is somewhat different. I have no doubt that in five years from now, we'll be featuring a lot of stories about ideas

2 (2m 25s):
that were hatched in the middle of the pandemic because think about it. When have you ever

4 (2m 30s):
spent so much time in your home for most of us never Normally we get up we do our morning routine we leave for work. We spend the day out. We come home evening routine and sleep. And so these days you might be

2 (2m 44s):
coming up with ideas for things around your house that could make your life better and some of those things might turn into the next great business story.

4 (2m 53s):
Now, it can take a pandemic for Rich and Vicki full up to try and figure out how to make their

2 (2m 58s):
bed more

4 (2m 59s):
comfortable. It actually took a trip to Las Vegas. They stayed at

2 (3m 3s):
the hotel. Hotel with

4 (3m 4s):
amazing bed linens, but turns out they couldn't afford to buy them. And even if they could have

2 (3m 10s):
afforded them they realize they had no idea why they were so expensive and we can

4 (3m 15s):
all probably relate to that right? Because if you're like me you go to Target or TJ Maxx or Marshals and browse the bed linen aisle for the best thread count at the

2 (3m 26s):
best price,

4 (3m 28s):
but does a super high thread count really matter actually, not

2 (3m 32s):
really and what's that?

4 (3m 34s):
Earth's a team percale flannel twill who knows? So after spending some time researching the industry rich and Vicki decided to launch their own brand of direct-to-consumer sheets as good as you'd find in a high-end hotel, but at a fraction of the price basically as ritual explain Warby Parker, but for

2 (3m 55s):
bed linens and that brand they launched in

4 (3m 57s):
2014 Brooklyn and initially

2 (4m 0s):
couldn't get a single investor

4 (4m 2s):
interested, but Last year rich and Vicky's told over a hundred million dollars worth of bed linens and they've expanded Way

2 (4m 10s):
Beyond sheets and pillowcases to

4 (4m 12s):
furniture and art and lots more but of course like everyone else like all of you listening. They're trying to figure out what the next few months could mean for their business and we sat down to talk. I was in my home studio in Oakland, California and Rich and Vicki set up some microphones. We sent out to them at their apartment in Manhattan. I am in our bedroom and I have this mic and Boom hooked up to our night table. And Vicki is in our living room my can be hooked up. Yeah, and and are you up high? Like when you look at the windows? What do you what do you see on the streets in New York?

4 (4m 53s):
We are 14 floors high, but to be honest you don't see much these days. It's kind of like a like a ghost

2 (4m 58s):
town. Yeah, it's dead silent.

4 (5m 1s):
Wow, but on a typical work day could be Allowed down here. There's just a lot of activity but not in this mountainous moment situation moment. I don't know what the with the correct word is. Yeah.

2 (5m 14s):
That's our dog.

4 (5m 18s):
Well, it's all right, he's done. So K he's done by the way. What's your what's the dog's name? Duke's dog's name is 60

2 (5m 27s):
after a

4 (5m 27s):
character. By the way. Miraculously Dukes only bark that one time during our entire. Fire interview anyway Rich grew up in northern New Jersey his dad ran a deli and convenience store and his mom ran a photo development shop and Vicki was born in the former Soviet Union in Belarus. Her parents were both doctors who eventually settle down and Rhode Island and both Vicki and Rich wound up going to college at the same time to the same school and why you but they didn't actually meet there. We actually never met at school believe it or not. So Same class same year actually had many common friends and we were kind of interconnected and very much in and around each other.

4 (6m 13s):
But we've never met until straight about six months after I graduated we found ourselves living in the same apartment building in Manhattan and we met there through a mutual friend that was actually visiting Vicki.

2 (6m 25s):
So friend of ours said to me - Bridge lives in the building his powers out, you know, can he come have dinner with us when we side? Yes, and then that was how we

4 (6m 35s):
met. I remember specifically my roommate at the time forgot. He was responsible for the power bill didn't pay it. I ordered some Chinese food delivery. Well after work and there I was eating my Chinese food in the dark in life are of it's got a sad story and yeah a mutual friend said hey, I'm in your building. Do you want to come join and clearly I was I was up for it. He was to say and and this is I guess what around 2007 since January 2008 All right. And and did you start dating right away? I mean did you did either of you call each other or text each other something and say hey you want to or was it this kind of a slow burn

2 (7m 15s):
since we started dating right away?

4 (7m 17s):
Yeah after that meeting in her apartment coincidentally, we shared the elevator of the next morning and are building. It was rather big building. So it was like an almost immediate reunions and I kind of took my my 20 seconds in the elevator to make my move with her. Yeah, and I would say It was the fastest dating experience you could possibly do because you know, it was like beat you in the lobby at 8:00 o'clock was kind of the uh, yeah, the planning process and things move quickly from there and at the time when you started dating, what were the two of you doing? I was working for an online over the counter currency and commodities broker called gain capital and Vicki.

4 (7m 58s):
What were you doing?

2 (7m 60s):
I believe I was a paralegal and I was studying for my LSAT. Or maybe I had just taken it and I was already applying to

4 (8m 7s):
schools got it. So your goal is to get a lot to be right. Okay, the two of you guess a couple years later we got not guess you did get married in 2010 and when you got married, I guess you were about to get your law degree Vicki and Rich you or you were sort of doing a bunch of different jobs a lot of jobs around I guess. Marketing related stuff sort of that moment. I actually just chose to restart my career and I was a sports fanatic and my dream was to be Jerry Maguire Growing Up So to be an agent. Yes, so I should got an opportunity through a mutual friend after I got laid off to work at creative artists agency CIA and there's Sports division.

4 (8m 55s):
Yep, and I was touring around the country with Manchester United and FC Barcelona doing wow. Yeah, so it was a joint venture between see Major League Soccer, okay for okay you guys should have so so I was where I had my dream job. The only problem was I wasn't making any money. It was an internship and I was 25 26 at the time. So I was making a few bucks an hour, but I really took that opportunity to reset my career and really follow my passion and and Vicki when you graduated from law school. Did you go and work for a law firm or apply for jobs at firms?

2 (9m 33s):
I don't so I would say probably by my secondary felt deeply that you really didn't want to practice law. I knew in my bones. I really didn't want to practice and it wasn't right for me and I wasn't going to work as hard at that as maybe I would doing something else. I really wanted to creative Outlet. So I started interning during my third year kind of and I landed an internship at Tory Burch and public relations while I was in school. That kind of was what open the door to me to work in public relations, which is what I ended up doing.

4 (10m 4s):
After law school, we do went on to get a job in at a PR

2 (10m 8s):
agency, right PR agency. That's correct. Got it. Rich, I guess at a

4 (10m 14s):
certain point you mm. You're doing work, you're involved with major league soccer and kind of pursuing this thing that you really passionate about and you decide to apply to business school. Why what? Why did you decide to do that? I mean I came from a family of entrepreneurs. I'll be at small businesses. So I very much had the itch to do that. I always was kind of in business. I remember in middle school and high school. I was buying and selling concert tickets and sporting event tickets. These are in early days of like eBay and and whatnot. I was always trying to try to make a little money always had a job, but I was just trying to find my path really and it just I thought I would take my GMAT and kind of see where I could land after that and it would be a worthwhile path to pursue.

4 (11m 3s):
It's interesting. As I grew up my parents had a jewelry store. There are small business entrepreneurs and I saw them struggle even though they've interested. Okay and work so hard on that actually either opposite reaction. I didn't want to do that because of all the struggle in the uncertainty that went along with it. But in your mind you always thought I think I want to do something

2 (11m 28s):
always always

4 (11m 30s):
my parents never had a boss. They were their own boss always so that's the structure that I am. Is was familiar with growing up and I really like that freedom of controlling their own destiny and that really inspired me and I learned a lot my father would leave at 4:00 in the morning every day to go to the deli because he had to wait for the newspaper deliveries. So they wouldn't get stolen. It was done at Newark New Jersey was where his daily was and he would close at 6 p.m. Be home by 6:30 7 o'clock. And to be honest. I'd be in bed by 8:00 and go. 8:30 so so it wasn't a lot of time to spend with him every day, but he worked hard and we weren't the richest people but that was a very very happy kid and you know, my parents definitely made it happen.

4 (12m 14s):
Yeah and Vicky your parents were doctors. Did you was there anything in your mind about entrepreneurship about doing something like your own thing or were you not quite really thinking about that at that point?

2 (12m 30s):
I think I've always had maybe a far off dream of making something out of Nothing, I can't say that even was fully fledged as I'm going to be an entrepreneur and always wanted to design things and kind of make things that might make people happy to make something out of nothing but I don't really think that it would become a reality. Also be honest.

4 (12m 49s):
She the to add to what we both just said, I hadn't found what my business is, but I'd always been kicking around so I had some really, you know in hindsight stupid ideas that the cheat she probably wisely talk me out of I had a Puppy portraits business that I was trying to pursue then I was also I was really passionate about these European style hot dogs that you eat vertically in like a baguette that I experienced when I traveled and I wanted to really start like the next, you know, McDonald's based on those those vertical hot dogs also did not go very far with that. But you know, I was always kicking around ideas. So you go off to business school at NYU.

4 (13m 31s):
So you're still in New York. Rich and Vicki you're working at the pr. Uncie, but I guess before you started business school, the two of you took a trip to Las Vegas for what for fun or for words not just just for fun. It was a it was about two weeks before it was August 2012. So it was a couple weeks Vegas and August. Yeah. Well I had this. Yeah, we had a small window and want to do Somethin fun. Yeah, probably not the wisest Choice like 110 degrees like going it's like The going to Winnipeg and fed. Yeah, we probably got some package deal. That was pretty cute. All right, so you're in Las Vegas in August.

4 (14m 13s):
Yep, probably just go walking through air conditioned tunnels and one casino to the next job and you stay where did you say we said the win and

2 (14m 23s):
from from what I

4 (14m 24s):
understand. This is the kind of beginning of what would become your business. Tell me what happens Yeah, so we check in we're tired. We just traveled we put our stuff down in the room and we both kind of just sat on the bed and we both had this weird moment where we were both had our hands on the bed and we're like, oh these sheets are really nice. It was is a very strange thing to like have a meeting of the minds about but we both kind of did at the same exact time.

2 (14m 52s):
Yeah, they were really cool and crisp and soft which seems contradictory, but it wasn't kind of like when you get Nice cheese for the first time you slip into bed and you like woo like this is a good this is nice. Yeah, that was is kind of that feeling.

4 (15m 9s):
Yep, and we were not textile people. We didn't know, you know anything about this we knew of something felt good or didn't feel good at the time and this definitely stood out to us and just curious. I guess

2 (15m 21s):
it did you have a conversation

4 (15m 23s):
pretty soon after and say we should maybe get these sheets for our apartment like we should find out what they are.

2 (15m 30s):
ER yes literally in the room. Okay, I guess we're like, let's get these

4 (15m 35s):
sheets and interestingly the win sells everything in the room. So they have a store in the lobby where you can buy the lamp you can bring you can get the carpeting from the wind. Wow that your house if you so choose so you go to the shop and and you find the sheet we found them and we are so excited that we found them going to bring them home and this is another important moment to note that I was unemployed at the time and She was the breadwinner working as a PR Society. So when we took a look at the sheets and the sheet set was $450. The duvet cover was about $350 in the pillowcases to match. We're about a hundred fifty bucks.

4 (16m 15s):
So we put that all together. We're just under a thousand dollars for that set of sheets. Wow. Shh. Yeah, we put them back on the shelf and was it like 500 thread count. Like what? Why were they so expensive? I mean, obviously there's a branding they thing there and but Normally, they must have been you know, well-made presumably but we didn't know anything. It just felt good to us. And to be honest at that time. We're like up the higher the thread count the better which you know, now we know is a bit of a fallacy. Yeah, but at that point, that's all we knew right? All right, so you have this experience. Lots of people have had this experience at hotels great sheets are great bedding or great pillow and you go back to New York.

4 (16m 57s):
And did you keep thinking about those sheets? I did. Yeah, I'm very persistent on that kind of thing. So I was digging deep to figure out who the manufacturer is where they come from. Why are they so great. I found myself in forums and on these old like internet chat rooms internet chat room type situations. What because you are looking to buy the sheets what like in a cheaper way up? Yeah kind of, you know, see if see if a set fell off the truck somewhere or something. I don't know. Yeah, just kind of trying to To work around, you know to get those thousand dollars sheets and to be honest, but the most surprising thing at the time was I found out I wasn't crazy there was dozens.

4 (17m 39s):
If not hundreds of people on these threads all talking about the same thing trying to do the same thing and chatting and strategizing about it about the sheets at the Wynn Hotel. Exactly.

2 (17m 50s):
Yeah. I remember that was part of why it eventually led to starting the business was in Rich's deep research. I was like, why can't you just get them from the manufacturer? And that's where you kind of we were like, why can't you just get sheets from the manufacturer that seems so much smarter. Why doesn't that exist

4 (18m 10s):
meantime, Rich you start business school and and you continue to think about sheets when you get to business school, or do you kind of hunker down and do the business school thing a little bit of both. Another thing happened at the time that that kind of got my gears turning as I Was preparing. For recruiting and interviews and business school. I got myself a new suit and someone referred me to this custom suit manufacturer in the city and it was a great experience you go up into the showroom. They show you all the Fabrics you choose what type of fabric the design and they custom fit it to you and I never had that experience before so then yeah, I circled back to the sheet idea and was thinking about a new sheet concept where you can customize your own bedding ensemble.

4 (19m 0s):
And I was like really where there I thought okay, maybe there's some sort of interesting business idea around them thought it was a good opportunity to kind of put pen to paper. Hmm But it's the turning point was January 2013 when I was on my winter break between my first and second semester. I was home with Vicki and I remember telling her that I was kicking around this idea for the first time actually like I'd heard for years. That's a stupid idea. That's a stupid idea this one. She was kind of like we should just go go for it. That's actually a really good idea. And what was the idea you were talking about custom sheet. Yes cut. Someone's eyes some sheets people could order the bed sheets that they want it, correct.

4 (19m 42s):
Okay, choose your fabric. Choose your designs made for you. Got it a key piece actually is also as was I wanted something that was gender neutral because I felt like every presentation and photography and marketing only spoke to a female customer and I felt very underserved. So I really Wanted to position this where it was accessible and appealing to men as well, which was something that was really not being done there and I was of those different component of it and and Vicki you thought you thought this was kind of a cool idea. Maybe. Yeah, maybe there's something to custom bed sheets.

2 (20m 17s):
Yeah. I thought it was a great idea. Yeah, I will say I also I think I was very supportive of the hotdog idea to even though it's a good idea

4 (20m 26s):
if I get hot dogs. Yeah, so you get this to the Sea Love approval from Vicki but what do you do? Like, what was your what was the next step that you took to actually learn more about this this this possibility? Well, we were at the time as far as what we were aware of in Terms like direct to Consumer and direct to Consumer brands that are born online. It was very very new. So I'd worn glasses my whole life and I just changed to Warby Parker and to I'd gone to LensCrafters at the mall prior to that but Warby Parker was a very very interesting focused offering. Yeah. It was a Cool brand that seems like we focused on this product made it better.

4 (21m 9s):
We don't care about the other stuff. We're just concentrating on this. So you were you were inspired by Warby Parker and those are direct to Consumer models thinking. Hey, here's a category where most people just go to Target and just buy like Ralph Lauren sheets or you know, Laura Ashley Brandon sheets or whatever and they're probably all made in the same. In China and they don't really people are really are really getting what they think they're getting and I can do a better job that was sort of your your mindset. Yeah, and I felt like those Brands and channels never stopped talking to my mom and never considered that I'm now a customer potentially and they need to appeal to me as a 20 something year old guy that and so I thought there was an opportunity for reinvention there that can speak to the to the more Millennial customer.

4 (22m 0s):
But ultimately cares about different things than my parents might have Mmm Yeah,

2 (22m 6s):
I cared a lot about that the quality I really wanted those nice designer sheets. So it was like if you can figure out the supply chain to make these nice sheets sheets that we can afford and people like us can afford that's a game changer. Yeah, but we just then it was researching. How do we back into it as customers and create this texture that we want so we digress but We went to Barnes & Noble. It was in Union Square and we kind of sat down there with textile books to kind of figure out how sheets were made to achieve the feel

4 (22m 41s):
that we wanted walked into a Barnes & Noble in Union Square New York, and you just got a bunch of books on textiles and and you just read them in the store. Yep. Yes. What were you learning about sheets that I don't know basic Common Sense wouldn't have already. And you I think the two findings that were most eye-opening was the misinformation around thread count because if I was going to call a factory I was going to say and I want a high-quality product. What I would have done is said what's the highest thread count you make and send me samples of that but that is just fundamentally wrong as it pertains to Sheets thread count is actually the number of threads vertical plus horizontal in a square inch of fabric.

4 (23m 28s):
So there's actually a fine. Night amount that you can have like it's a finite amount of space and that number actually with true single ply-yarns is about 4 500 or so in a square inch anything beyond that is just marketing essentially and tricks by manufacturers to really attract the consumer to some number that they could anchor them and think that a it's better because it's more but the funny part is is that as that goes higher and higher and higher than the number anything in excess of 5. Trade is essentially the inferior product. It's more dense as breathable. No idea. Yeah, so people think that they're getting this premium product, but they're actually just sweating their asses off at night and there they want to like it so badly because High thread count but it's actually not what they're looking for.

4 (24m 19s):
And that was when we first kind of realized actually what we're after is a lower thread count that's more lightweight and breathable and has that like crisp crinkly, you know freshly pressed to Yes shirt feel to it. All right, so you are doing all this research on cheats and thread counts and which I mean how it sounds really interesting actually because you know, we spend a third of Our Lives sleeping. So a third of our lives are going to be spent on bed sheets which when you think about it that way that's actually veggies are pretty significant part of our Lives definitely and everyone's a customer. Theoretically it's amazing. So, okay, so it

2 (24m 59s):
sounds like rich like this. Ideas, obviously

4 (25m 1s):
getting Traction in your head, right?

2 (25m 3s):
And so at this stage

4 (25m 6s):
do you like start calling around of to find manufacturers? Yeah. I started cold calling and so after I got a little Smarter on the Fabrics, I was calling factories all over the world. It's really just a to figure out and get samples and see who would deal with me and there was tons of obstacles and I remember one specific call. I called this guy and he laughed at me on the phone and he said I haven't spoken to anyone under the age of of 50 that wanted to get into this business these very nice. These are US based manufacturers know calling no no, no no combination of so I wanted us base but the textile industry is totally shifted overseas over the last call a hundred years or so.

4 (25m 48s):
So there's a few parties that remained are very expensive and they still do it. But I was just calling anyone and everyone that was willing to talk to me to get some samples in here for Vicki and I to look at it was really I used every When I could before after and in between classes to really pound the pavement so your business school and there's other smart people have business school like you and I guess you approach two of your classmates too kind of to join you David Fortune been Hyman tell me the story of what you went to them and said, hey, I've got this idea that you guys want to get involved. Yep. So first I approached Ben Ben had a background working in supply chain and Southeast Asia he'd lived in China and in Laos and and in Vietnam and so he knew languages and he knew how to supply chains work a night at this point.

4 (26m 35s):
I'd never been in a factory in my life. So I was like, oh you've been to a factory like help me out you're in is kind of see so if you're willing and I pitched him on the idea and he also kind of had an entrepreneurial bug and so he got in rooms with me and was calling and modeling and helping those early days and soon after another weak spot was Legal and accounting and David is a he's a jd/mba at Stern so he'd practice law and he was also an accountant in Prior career. So we had like the three of us plus Vicki's secret weapon of this public relations and pitching.

4 (27m 17s):
I thought we had all the ingredients to at least get the foundation of the company goes totally. This is like the X-Men here and access where Jose The Avengers exactly the pr you get the marketing. All right, so So you start really kind of I don't know. I mean, we're the with a sort of the four of you or just kind of meeting up and just kind of grinding through ideas like at night and on weekends. Yes, so we did a few things. So we would go to fabric stores around the city we'd cut fabric and send them out to factories to try and replicate but the most important thing we actually did was we went and we surveyed about 500 perspective customers, really.

4 (28m 0s):
Hands and lives that we went to first. We went to like the big box stores and department stores and we just nag people in the bedding section and say hey you have a second lesson. We learned is easy way to disarm somebody for a quick survey is let them know. It's a student project and it very much was at the time. So what were you asking? What are you shopping for? Why did you come here? Where'd you previously shop. What are you willing to spend? Why are you searching for this particular Fabric or What brands are you aware of it was it was like a rapid fire of called 10 questions or so along those lines just to prove that there we weren't crazy in there was some sort of Market here. And what kind of Trends did you find out of interviewing 500 people because you know, Jen Rubio and Steph Curry did a similar thing with away.

4 (28m 46s):
They went to hundreds of people and said what kind of suitcase do you want and and the answers they got if they took into account all the feedback would have been a suitcase that nobody wanted because it would have had everything on it and it would you know, all the bells and whistles and it would have looked like a Frankenstein. Case so how are you able to look at the data on the trends and say okay. This is actually looks like people really want this. What what was the this that you were seeing? So the feedback we got was I don't know. I need new sheets. I guess I would just come here. What brand do you love? I don't know. I don't know any Brands over here how much you're willing to pay? I don't know a hundred bucks or so people didn't really think about you know, where does the cotton come from? There's all different kinds of cotton whether it's Pima cotton Egyptian cotton Turkish cotton and so on leave They all feel differently all the different weaves that you have if it's a Jacquard weave or / Cal Weaver sateen weave, there's so many variables and nobody knew the information.

4 (29m 39s):
Yeah. I wish there was a better solution. It's kind of what build up to the top. Although here's my question, right? Because at the time I might have said to you guys, I don't see why this is a problem. I mean if I go to Target and

2 (29m 49s):
it says a thousand

4 (29m 50s):
thread count and it's on sale and it's you know, the price tag says 8999, but it's on sale for $49.99. I'm thinking I'm getting a great deal. Here it really had to do with The Branding guy. Like there was no brand that spoke to people and people are so brand obsessed in every category. And this was one that just was was there for the taking that nobody really could could hook into there was no Nike of sheets or there was no there's no Warby Parker of sheets. All right, there's no Warby Parker. There's no Nike there's no there's no brands that people can align with and say I like the look. I like the value. I like the price point that like it speaks to me. As a customer there was just nothing out there that did that

2 (30m 34s):
got it in for us personally also felt like shopping for them was I think kind of a chore. So we also thought the direct consumer model. It'd be nice to not have to go to Target or Bed Bath Beyond just make it a little bit easier and a little bit more frictionless.

4 (30m 51s):
So you've got some research under your belt. And so at this point you're not really using a whole lot of money, right? This is like the spring. Of 2013 you don't require a whole lot of money. I guess you are calling a factories and getting samples, but you're not really spending a lot at this point. Yeah, we're spending thousands of dollars. So it's at hundreds and thousands not hundreds of thousands. And how did you have even thousands we put I mean the four of us used our savings that we had honestly that we would tucked away and this was kind of what we put it towards if I remember correctly. We put in about four or five thousand dollars a person. To incorporate start the business and that was it.

4 (31m 32s):
We put it into into the pot. We did it in like legalzoom.com and we incorporated here in New York where where the taxes and everything are like the least favorable. We did everything wrong of course, but but we did the chief way. All right, so you so I guess in the summer of 2013 you and and David David Fortune you go off on a trip to try and find a factory that you can work with. That's correct. Yes. And where did you go? I think we went to France and Israel. So what we're looking for was a factory that kind of tick the boxes of what we wanted to deliver to our customers. So China was problematic for us to start as we called and got more familiar with how business is done there and Ben was familiar with this as well from having live there.

4 (32m 21s):
It's a very complicated place to do business. First is Mo cues or minimum order quantities. They're extremely high. So I remember getting on the phone with them and look how many containers do you want to order? Wow, right. So it was like it was kind of like click at that moment back where we got the wrong conversation. Yeah, we're talking and like how many fitted sheets and pillowcases not not containers is really that's interesting because I interviewed Sarah cows of swell, and she said that she could get a small run product run from a factory in China that with her bottles. It was actually pretty easy. So it made to be different in textiles. It's a textiles are totally different because I think about how big a leg uncut textile is.

4 (33m 5s):
Yeah, it's just not you have to run thousands of yards of fabric through illume to weave it in any different a cooler color or fabrication and then to cut and so you need to think about if you spread out a king size sheet. The cutting table is the facilities you need to do that one off basis. Yeah massive. So we you know, we built relationships along the way where they were willing to take a chance to factory ultimately went with Was willing to actually take a chance with us and wait, but you decide to go to France and Israel to look for a factory why those two countries it was kind of the results to leads after a whole lot of cold calling and sampling. We kind of just whittled it down to find our best contenders and then David and I had a connecting flight through France made a pit stop there and then went to continue on to Israel.

4 (33m 54s):
We we ultimately found our Factory. They're checked all the boxes. We're looking for a factory in. Israel and and what I mean, I think even know they have textile factories there. They have a few not many but I went there and I met the CEO and the team there and I had a little bit of advantage that I went to Jewish Day School when I was little so I understood Hebrew and I didn't tell them that but yeah, I was there they were so thorough and honest and informative if they were speaking. Amongst themselves that are left me a really good impression. They were just show him the dyes shown the sourcing of The Da Schon the Fowler show Miss Joan Joan the Machinery like they wanted me to see everything and they were so proud of work in the facilities of the team.

4 (34m 42s):
We knew that they had quality. So we kind of piggybacked on a few production runs to run. I don't know 10,000 15,000 dollars worth of betting that they actually fronted us time. And what would $15,000 of the bedding get you like how many sheets a couple? Come on, whether 201k hundred I would say flash. So that's not I mean, that's really small. Yeah, and by the do you still work with them today? We do. Yeah,

2 (35m 6s):
and we've grown our businesses together.

4 (35m 8s):
Wow. Yeah. Okay. This is the here's something that I read which is interesting. I think if it's true really smart, which is you actually deliberately looked at factories in countries that have free trade agreements with the us because you thought that would be a way to save on tariffs. Is that true? That is correct. So all those Is with exception of the European ones all have free trade agreements with the Uso Peru a lot of Central American countries, Japan Korea Israel, they all have so there's absolutely no tariffs or duties coming in on the goods Canada Canada as well who we spoke with and we make our down products all in Canada from Canadian inputs and down.

4 (35m 49s):
So that was a key piece of ultimately bringing that supremum value proposition to the customer because at the end of the day all those contribution costs the customer ends up paying for Them in in a multiple of that. So yeah, they don't see it. But every little thing that's done they end up footing the bill for it. So we thought we can give a great product at a pretty compelling price to the customer. We just whittled it down to the right meantime Vicki you are still working at the pr agency while Rich and his other partners are kind of getting the gears in motion, right?

2 (36m 22s):
That's right. I'm still plugging away in the bills helping to pay the rent exactly and feeling sheets at night. And working with Rich on the on the actual design and just kind of waiting for them to get all of these ducks in a row essentially

4 (36m 38s):
and when you finally Incorporated this company in August 2013, what was it called? It was called. I think at that point I was Brooklyn in which we are. So with the original working title was was Saban has which is sheets in Spanish believe it or not. So if honest that was going to be the name of your company Any yeah, it was a little too of generics. Yeah, but it's that didn't work out. How could you sell those in Spain or Mexico who just be called cheetah. That's kind of what we saw had also really work so well, but Vicki and I wet and we met somebody at a party at some point and you know, she was kind of like what do you guys do and we said, oh, you know, we have this business based in Brooklyn and we're making Linens and she's like, oh Brooklyn and that would be great and we're like Interesting, you know, that's you know, we're looking for something.

4 (37m 32s):
That's a unique word. We also thought you know, this is where we are. We were working at David's apartment in Brooklyn at the time for the most part. So there was something to who our customer was here and The Branding and our taste that could be useful to kind of hook the brand on to well she gets the name Brooklyn in which is great. I mean perfect you're in Brooklyn you live in Brooklyn and making linen. So, what did you what did you do next? Yeah, so Between August 2013 and April 2014 when we launched we were kind of just working on the idea and figure out how are we going to fund this how we're going to Market this where we you know, how do we get into production and so on what happened was in that timeframe is we couldn't raise a dollar everybody thought it was a pretty stupid idea you went to actually to investors and you started pitching us already at and in the in 2013.

4 (38m 27s):
Yep, our hardcore bundle, which is our Flagship product. It comes in like this briefcase box with a handle and up. The bundle is a flat sheet and fitted sheet and 2 pillowcases. And is that is that that's a it's seven pieces. It's like the whole bed. So it is a okay. They cover the duvet cover for pillowcases flat sheet fish. It's the whole shebang which is typically not how they're merchandised. Also. It's usually very piecemeal. So we want to incentivize people and make it Easy by but we had you had that factory in Israel make those samples. For you so you have them and you were cooking them at your apartment. Oh, yeah, that's right. So you go to investors you show them this stuff and you would say hey we're going to totally disrupt the bed linen industry and they would say awesome idea.

4 (39m 10s):
Here's a million dollars. Yeah. No, that's not at all how we heard know we heard stupid. Well, you know with with VCS, you don't really hear know which is the frustrating part you here you're too soon. You're too late. Let me think about it check back. Kin with me, you know, no one really wants to tell you. No, that's stupid. No, they don't ready. The person that you talked about on this show five years later, right? I have a mountain of chips on my shoulder though from these people could tell you because I heard it so many times. Yeah. So the only investor the only Institutional Investor that took a chance on us was the leader not the NYU Venture fund.

4 (39m 52s):
So here we are for NYU students at NYU was willing to write us a check at Point it wasn't pre-launch, but that was the only like institution that was willing to write us a check. That check was ultimately for I believe it was $100,000 or so. That was the biggest check we've ever seen but I'm assuming that even with that check like like that money is not going to go very far right that mean you weren't you guys. I don't like getting nervous this

2 (40m 18s):
point. Yeah, so we're all

4 (40m 21s):
in school and business school and we're all hedging while working on this. We're all interviewing their its Salting or different roles because you're taking out big loans to go to business school. Definitely and I guess at roughly the same time. I should mention here from what I understand they key and this is not to embarrass you because it turned out to be fortuitous. But you were fired from your job. Your PR job is is

2 (40m 45s):
that right? That is absolutely right. I mean extremely scary at the time because I was the only one of us working Health insurance was a big concern and we took I think a few more loans out to be able to support ourselves. So I was fired from my job, you know, no calls or anything. I was just like I just to cutbacks or whatever as far as I know and it was kind of a Crossroads of do I go all in on this business knowing that if it doesn't succeed we're not really sure what our future will hold or try to find a new job so that we can have a stable income.

2 (41m 26s):
And decided to at least roll the dice and see where we landed

4 (41m 30s):
after that. Yeah, and the clock was going to start running unless and we all knew this so after winter break January 2014 been decided to leave. So we were still in the development process. We hadn't launched yet. He he essentially got an offer. He couldn't refuse from Samsung in Korea and he was staring down the barrel of his student loans and really, you know take His chances on this idea that everyone seems to be telling us know about so he took the offer with Samsung and when his own way at that point it was down to me Vicky and David to get this thing launched.

4 (42m 12s):
Let me come back in just a moment and the first big shipment of Brooklyn and cheats got stuck at a shipping yard in New Jersey and why sending those sheets off the customers became a major pain in the butt stay with us. I'm gyro. Jaws, and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible first to Microsoft teams. We all know meetings struggling to pay attention file seemed impossible to find and if you're not in the room, you're not in the know welcome to the new way to work together Microsoft teams where you can contribute to meetings from anywhere

2 (42m 55s):
chat with coworkers, you're never out of the

4 (42m 57s):
loop and find all your files and even edit them and real. Time in one convenient place when you are ready to

2 (43m 4s):
unleash the power of your

4 (43m 5s):
team open teams, learn more at microsoft.com teams support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World learn more at a jws dot-org. In the United States black people as a whole have less access to Good Health Care education and job opportunities than other groups. But who do we even mean when we say black people who counts as black? It's a question. This country isn't trying to answer from the very beginning.

4 (43m 45s):
Listen on NPR's codes, which podcast Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's April 2014 and Vicki rich and their remaining partner David Fortune are trying to get Brooklyn in off the ground. They're low on money and the clock is running down. So they decide to launch a Kickstarter campaign. But first they want to generate some Buzz about the brand so they reach out to some influential Publications and writers.

2 (44m 17s):
The plan was okay. We're going to get you know a set of samples of Basically sheet sets that we are going to give away in hopes that these writers would actually like our product enough to then write about the fact that we were doing a Kickstarter to raise money to launch our business.

4 (44m 36s):
Yeah. I mean what people don't realize myself included and most people is that journalists writers aren't just discovering things on their own and yeah spinning their wheels to like figure out something to write about their pitched constantly and they they are self-select. You know, what they To write about yeah, it's funny. We talk about this like my mom to this day whenever you get a PR placement Vicki Works in our team work really hard to get those placements are like, how did the Wall Street Journal know to write about you guys. That's amazing. It's like that's not really how it works because we've been knocking on their door for 10 year five years of yeah. No, I'm right right. I think a piece that was skipped also was how we got in front of these people is pretty funny.

4 (45m 18s):
Oh, yeah, so I Cause yesterday where Vicky me David and David's girlfriend at the time Tina who is now his wife we're in the apartment and Vicki's writing these handwritten

2 (45m 30s):
notes 60 handwritten notes. Wow, the notes were key because otherwise it would just be some random, you know, like who's setting me this random

4 (45m 37s):
package. You see them. You notice them right? You notice a handwritten note. Yes. Yeah. So we're all packing and boxing we chose queen size for everybody was the whole production run because 65% of of bed. Or Queens, so we figured we'll we'll play the odds that this is what they need. So we box them all up in the apartment 60 sets and handwritten notes. We rented a U-Haul Van and we had like this beside inner area of all these addresses up Sixth Avenue and Avenue of where all the journalists are and for just pull up in front of the mailroom. We hustle in drop off the packages with the notes and then continuing on and cross our fingers. Okay, and you're doing all this right to generate Buzz for the kickstarter and what?

4 (46m 20s):
What was the goal you set by the way?

2 (46m 23s):
So our goal was 50,000 dollars on Kickstarter and the way we thought about that was we want to get a really aggressive number so that if we don't hit it, like we know there's no interest or we really have

4 (46m 36s):
something here. And how much did you end up raising? $237,000. Wow, you like yeah, exceeded your gold by times 5, I mean that's incredible there. We were there in like two or three days. So in all this traffic came in from those bloggers and people that you dropped off the samples to

2 (46m 56s):
yes,

4 (46m 56s):
I would say most of it right. So what was the offering like if you give you gave a hundred bucks, you got a sheet set something like that. Yeah, R7 p is with duvet cover with everything and free shipping. Yeah. I think we are offered it at about 50 bucks. And by the way, how much does that cost today that same product today cost to 2500 ask you got a good deal back in back in 2014. Yep, Yeah by some stupid entrepreneurs that didn't know what they were doing. Right? Exactly. So basically you you are this is going to be a big money loser. You didn't realize it at the time but you get $236,000 in obviously Kickstarter gets its cut but you're left with this money and now you've got the money to do a Legitimate production run right and how many by the way how many people did you have to send bed sheets to 1750?

4 (47m 47s):
Yeah. And and did you have a fulfillment center? You know? Like how are you going to actually get the sheets to the customers?

2 (47m 57s):
So we got space in Greenpoint, which is a neighborhood in Brooklyn. I believe is about a 2000 square-foot warehouse space. I don't know if I'd call it a warehouse kind of like a ride. No, no. Room, I'm not sure if it even had heat to be honest. Okay, and then

4 (48m 15s):
and then you put the order in what this Factory in Israel. Yep. So we and the kickstarter finished in May 22nd. We're on course to fulfill a 90 days which we promised on our Kickstarter page would have been August. But of course whatever can go wrong does go wrong. We were all set to go. But then all the goods came in and we didn't have our import Bonds in place wouldn't even know what that was. Was still legally be able to import Goods into the country. So all of our goods were seized at the ports. Oh in August what paperwork you have to do? So you need a trade bond in place. That's something that you have to register for every year on for the right to import Goods.

4 (48m 56s):
You did not know this no no idea all kinds of paperwork. I didn't know what a bill of lading was at that time or a commercial invoice, you know to declare. There's just a lot of like complications with Logistics. We just had no idea we're doing we told them Send us the paperwork and put it on the boat and we'll go collect it so we can really understand kind of the scale of what we ordered for these customers. So how did you get them and their seized at what I guess New Jersey is where the big shipping guards are right exactly. So I I got a Zipcar in the city. I went from to Jersey. I drove to the shipping yard, honestly, I don't know if anyone's ever seen on like the Jersey Turnpike. You see your past all those containers.

4 (49m 35s):
Yeah, I drove in there that complex is huge. And I was just banging on my door. I'm like somewhere in this yard of thousands of containers. I need to find mine and get it out of here. Like tell me what I need to do. Wow, ultimately found a way to get it released and it cost us probably two weeks, which was very frustrating from a customer relations standpoint because we promised we'd be fulfilling and we were late and that's the last thing you want to do with the consumer is have their money. You raise the money. Yeah, you raise the money in May of 2014. He promised delivered June of 2014. Yep. And at this point it's what what August's August. Okay our people writing in

2 (50m 15s):
like, where is it? So can't remember Richard might have even taken a picture at the shipping dock to at least share with customers and say like Hey, we're stuck in customs. We're trying people were appreciative that at least, you know, they knew where their stuff was even if they were really delayed in getting it. Yeah,

4 (50m 35s):
the worst thing you can do from a customer service standpoint. We learn this lesson very early is just say nothing honestly and just go dark and you know under communicate that just it frustrates people and always better to over Communicator. So all right, eventually the sheets and presumably get released. You got 1,700 to fulfill and are they all you just get like is it all prepackaged? You just have to like take them off the pallets and put a shipping label off and just send them out to people

2 (51m 2s):
know we were building the boxes ourselves putting the handle to the Box each box. We built a little assembly line. Me Rich David and David's girlfriend Tina who's helping us out very generously donating her time. And yeah, we're building each box packing the sheets into the box. We also really wanted to make tote bags to package the sheets in if we thought that you know is like an eco-friendly way to send people there sheets instead of sticking them into plastic. So we were taking the plastic covers off putting the sheets into these tote bags putting the tote bags into the box. Taping the box. How long

4 (51m 41s):
would it take you to assemble one order

2 (51m 43s):
like a 20 minutes 10 minutes. What a slow 10 minutes. Wait, why was it so

4 (51m 49s):
complicated

2 (51m 51s):
because you gotta build the

4 (51m 52s):
Box. Yeah. Well, we have to build every order custom. So everybody had a custom Ensemble of mixing and matching fabric. So wait also we had no Warehouse system. So you could get different colors and fabrics in your or we were, you know, we were on it's just please the customer so we had six patterns with with our Are we said mix-and-match do whatever you want kind of tell us what you think huge mistake you're saying people could do like like Pinstripes and whites and Gray's in the same box. Oh, yeah, and this is like Amateur hour here like we had no barcodes on the boxes. So you didn't even know what was in there. No, we just tear open boxes and hope it will check to see how the right size and be climbing all over this whole room was filled essentially to the ceiling like packed to the gills with boxes and pallets and we're literally climbing on top of these mountains of boxes tearing them open and hoping that it's the right size and color in there.

4 (52m 45s):
Like it was just a comedy of errors. How long did it take you to finally deliver the sheets to the backers. When did you finally do that?

2 (52m 53s):
Was it two months rebs

4 (52m 55s):
after you got themselves with this will be like September September. Yeah, and we're you still going out trying to raise money. Oh, yeah, it had to because we really wanted to launch the business and e-comm and you have a real sustainable business not just the kickstarter flash in the pan and we knew time was not on our side because F we had momentum at that point and we would be we would be kind of kind of out of it if we waited too long. So when did you launch your website October October? Yep, and and just out of curiosity you raised two hundred and thirty six thousand dollars from Kickstarter some of that one. Kickstarter the rest of it you had to pay to manufacture all this stuff.

4 (53m 38s):
How close were you to running out of money? We were we are out of money. We were over like we hit we didn't we had to make it work somehow and we kind of were constantly shuffling the deck. It took I got back on a plane alone to go back to the factory in Israel and talk to them and I said, hey we want to scale this thing up. And ultimately I convinced them to front us the inventory without paying and give us some sort of favorable terms, and I said, I promise you that the next order will be twice as big if you just give me time and the Ability to sell this down just take a chance on me because it's pretty small at this point and and they did they believed in me and they they sent it without us sending them a dollar.

4 (54m 21s):
That's amazing. What I'm wondering about is when you when you launched right I read that you actually sold out. It's seven months inventory and

2 (54m 32s):
four days. Like there was a clamor for

4 (54m 35s):
this. Yeah, we built up a lot of Buzz ahead of launch, you know, we're launching next week you're coming. A landing page with a countdown with a lot of stuff. We tried to just you know bottle up as much of what we could and then and then execute as soon as we went live and we spread the word and Vicki wrangled all the media and had them lined up to go live right when the site did and all in one concert and we just blasted through our inventory and it was it was a really funny moment because we were so excited that we had, you know, a few hundred orders and we are high-fiving and celebrating. And then we realized we had no more inventory to sell for the next month or two.

4 (55m 16s):
We nothing on order because we didn't realize how like replenishment works and forecasting. And yeah, so that's just I mean, it's it mean did how did you deal with that? Did your website crashes distant? Is this still the four of you right running this company? It's three of us at this time. It was it was me Vicki and David Wright and then actually we came out of the gates and we had a wildly successful. Launch and then that is when David resigned actually, he got up. He went through the lunch. Well his girlfriend of time wanted to move back to San Francisco where she had grown up and had roots and he had a difficult choice to make and he moved out to the West Coast with her to pursue a family life with her and it was one of those moments that was very very critical to the future of the business because Vicki was not pulling a salary at that point for us.

4 (56m 9s):
So I was very David and I were pulling very small salaries. We had prorated $50,000 or so we get to ourselves at that moment. So by him resigning she was able to take his salary and ultimately have us press on for at least a few more months to see what happens. Whoo, that must have been intense right then as you're starting to kind of get some traction, but it sounds like you hit cruising altitude really fast. I mean, I think 2015 Did three quarters of a million dollars in Revenue in that year? How are you managing? I mean at what point did you get like a fulfillment center and people that set of help out?

4 (56m 53s):
I mean, I'm assuming even with 750,000 Revenue can't hire lots of people because most of that money is going to make more product. But how are you dealing with the demand?

2 (57m 4s):
We did everything ourselves. Yeah, so rich went out and did find us a 3pl a third partner for warehouse and Logistics third-party third-party Logistics so that we weren't paying for our space in Greenpoint anymore. We are working out of our apartment. So that freed up our time to be a little bit more effective in getting the word out and

4 (57m 27s):
operating. Yeah. I mean, we it was really trial by fire at that moment. I had to learn really quickly. Chloe how to do the books a time and I'm self-taught on all of that stuff this day and never really got handled the business but it was actually another thing that kind of worked in our favor because we had very little money and very little skill on this front, but we just had to know how far every dollar went. We were not Venture backed or anything. So it's you know, every dollar count

2 (57m 51s):
it it made us work very efficiently and I think go as far as we could until we had to bring someone on the brought an intern on who was ended up being In the first employee at the company. He jumped in as a jack-of-all-trades. Also helping the customer service tickets for going out Facebook searching for a developer, but we were doing everything ourselves until we could find someone else.

4 (58m 19s):
Yeah in terms of the growth. So we did including the kickstarter in 2014. We did about four or five hundred thousand and 2015 was 2 million for the year. And then for the year of 2016 and jump to about 20 million or so. It's this crazy what explains that

2 (58m 41s):
at that point you really was Word of Mouth? Yeah, maybe just a few more placements a few more people to help turn it around a little bit. That's all it could have been because we weren't doing any advertising.

4 (58m 54s):
Here's what I'm wondering you did this all on your own. I mean bootstrap this thing and in March of NT 17 you actually went out and raised 10 million dollars from VC firms who I'm sure we're beating down your door, maybe some of the same firms who were kind of, you know, giving you the cold shoulder or just dismissing you just a few months before

2 (59m 19s):
why did you

4 (59m 20s):
decide to take outside money at that point and in March of 2017 we kind of had to we were a victim of our own success at that point with the demand Rising. We had to buy into more inventory. We are expanding our Mick so at that point we had multiple lines of sheets that we launched our Luck's line. We'd launched comforters and pillows and you got to buy into all these different Supply chains. We are also still six or seven people at that moment. So kind of doing whatever we could and everyone's wearing a lot of hats. I had one of those critical moments actually also that's been on my mind at a time when I had trouble fundraising until we kind of hit our stride I passed Neil Blumenthal from where we park away.

4 (1h 0m 1s):
Don't worry about Parker. Yeah, so So I passed him on the street walking by one day and I stopped him on the street because I recognized him pitch my idea and I told him in like literally a three minute convo. I asked him. I was like, hey, here's my situation. How did you get out of the gates and raise money so fast, and so I'm like, how'd you make them finances work? And he's like we did it. It was really really hard. We ended up going to New Jersey and other states and talking to Community Banks and whoever was willing to talk to us about loans and just figuring out a way. Like don't be attracted by the Chinese EC like there's other ways to get Capital. Yeah, that was one of like quick education. I got from Neil and literally five minutes on the street from somebody.

4 (1h 0m 42s):
I've never met before but respect his business a lot. You know, we got a bank loan that was not big but it was something to help us pump into inventory and we had a skeleton crew running. So we had to hire some people in our core team. They just kind of saw helped us build it from the beginning and super Nimble super lean the same values of just kind of make it work and you know roll up your sleeves. I mean so you are doing so much work with third-party Logistics teams, right? Because you couldn't afford to hire people you needed the capital and this is important because no bank is very I mean probably almost no Bank was going to say here's ten million dollars. Here's a 10-minute are alone.

4 (1h 1m 23s):
You just were not able to you know, no one can get that. That's almost impossible. Yeah. No that wasn't going to happen, especially with one year of financials behind us. So you needed to go out and raise money for for the big money. So you do that and I mean, I think that year I was like almost 50 million in revenue and you know, you went on to open a brick-and-mortar store in SoHo your now I think if you went on to raise another 50 million dollars just this past year in 2020. Let me ask you about that. I mean is it, you know when you're running a smaller?

4 (1h 2m 4s):
Enterprise right when you bring on a lot of capital that means a bigger marketing budget and a bigger just a bigger budget to do more stuff and it also means for a lot of companies you're going to spend more you're actually not going to be profitable. I mean you guys on your own we're making a profit because it was you know, your money you were sending it out money was coming back and you couldn't you couldn't waste money. You have to be really careful with it. Did you find yourself after you raised a lot of money that you are spending more? More than you were bringing in. Oh, yeah, we got on the drug really really quickly with that after we raised our series a and it was not a fatal mistake to the business, but it was certainly a point in time.

4 (1h 2m 48s):
That was not one that was was easy for me as the CEO. We dropped into the negative in terms of our ibadah at that moment and that was really anxious times because again, I came from a business where I was counting money at the end of the day with with my father. Right and singles, you know that was but sandwiches and lottery tickets of like but we had an advantage like in hindsight the fact that we were trained on a shoestring with no money to fund the business from the get-go the bones of the business in the unit economics in the margins and everything. We're really really good and built well because they had to be in the early days because we didn't have that extra money.

4 (1h 3m 28s):
So we had our hands on the dials at all times. You built this initially on bed sheets and now you offer up like different kinds of bed sheets and duvets and pillows and you got I don't wear loungewear and you've got this whole Spaces by Brooklyn and where you curate really cool. I've checked it out some really cool furniture and lighting that you also sell. I mean, it's smart right because a company that just sticks with the one thing that they make once a bunch of competitors. Man, it can be hard to compete. Is that the thinking like you want to kind of be more than just about sheets you want people to think of you as a home decor like a Lifestyle brand for sure.

4 (1h 4m 14s):
Yeah, I was gonna say, you know, we consider a category to be comfort and at home it's not necessarily bad. That's not necessarily betting or it's not necessarily A Peril. It's just kind of you and your home and everything around you we want to own that experience from when you get home from work and you change into your comfortable clothes. Close, you know you watch some TV go to bed. You wake up like that entire experience just being comfortable in your house. It's not really about like, oh, how do we make the next Buck? Let's launch this product. That's not how we think about it at all. We survey our customers. We see what they want from us and what they're looking for spaces for example was a product of our customers repeatedly asking us about props on our photo shoots that were like kind of secondary in the picture.

4 (1h 4m 56s):
Where's that cool bed frame from or that night? Yeah able or that or that VA is it like it's really like oh, You're interested in that we will figure out a way to bring it to you. Yeah, so last year 2019 your Revenue hit I think close to a hundred million dollars. It's just incredible. I mean you started this in 2014. It's just an insane. We are now in the in the beginning of a very different and uncertain period we don't know how long we're going to be inside. We don't know what's going to happen to our economy. We don't know. If this is going to be worse, we don't we all know are there ways.

4 (1h 5m 36s):
You can kind of build resiliency into your business now to mitigate some of the challenges because there is good. I mean there is going to be a slow down and for your business like with every other business

2 (1h 5m 49s):
there already is

4 (1h 5m 50s):
yeah. Yeah. I mean, we're fortunate that we've prepared for this a long time. We actually 2017 and half of 2018 were not profitable. And then we turned that ship in the second half of 2018 towards a focus on profitability kind of back to our roots and the goal was really to control our own destiny. So right now we're in a decent spot, but who knows how long

2 (1h 6m 16s):
it'll last yeah, and I'll add that. There are some areas. I think where it's you know Lounge where we had a couple launches things that we are going to come out with that. We're not going to be able to launch it. But we're just going to communicate with our customers and let them know what's going on, you know? That's all we can do and humanity is especially difficult time. I think generally really understanding and trying and trying to support each other as best they can and that's what we're trying to do to ya what if sales like

4 (1h 6m 47s):
really really dramatically declined for six months. Are you going to be okay, we're going to be fine. Thankfully, you know, we don't have a big part of our business that's exposed to our brick and mortar stores or to wholesale channels. We Sell in the big box stores or department stores, which are clearly suffering as a result of this with people not going out. So our business is mostly single Channel e-comm. And this is a lot of people are at home, you know and thinking about their home environments and you know, they're their comfort from their workspace or better ever it is so it's not like we're going to fall off the face of the Earth obviously as a CEO, I'm always thinking about the worst case scenario here and what if but it's not something that's like Newly keeping me up at night and light up the stuff.

4 (1h 7m 35s):
How much of your your journey in your success to you tribute to your both you your intelligence and hard work and how much do you think it's because of luck?

2 (1h 7m 46s):
There's a mix. I mean, I think it's lucky. There's some things that are crazy lucky like that rich ran into Neil Blumenthal and he's suggested that you know, he look at things like that's crazy luck, but a lot of it was It was working really hard and talking to people and trying to get the word out like day in day out pound the pavement. So that part I can't say this lucky was just just you know, just doing it.

4 (1h 8m 15s):
Yeah, I mean look we didn't we didn't raise a ton of money out of the gate. So I think to answer a question is probably 50/50 if if Dave didn't leave the business when he did then Vicki couldn't have come on and taking a salary which means we you know, we might not have been able to continue if that hadn't happened. Like she said if I hadn't had that quick conversation with Neil and a thousand other conversations that I've had with other entrepreneurs along the way to find out little tidbits.

2 (1h 8m 41s):
Yeah, but it's stopping that person in the street and emailing them I think part of it like and try to give that back also like I think Rich especially takes a lot of coffee meetings because he always talks about all the people that when he reached out to them gave him advice. So, you know, he and I both try to pay that forward.

4 (1h 9m 1s):
Miss Vicki and Rich follow-up cofounders of Brooklyn and by the way, do you do you have any I don't know any regrets about the hot dogs I get thing you could could do it. You could sell the hot dog guy gets in your brick-and-mortar store. And so it's not a bad idea bad idea. Actually, that's no fun. I don't know. I think I'll save that one for someone else again luck that I went for this one and not that one, you know, who knows one of those sliding doors moment. I guess it what could have happened, but you never know. You never know. Maybe there's another career. Thanks so much for listening to the show this week.

4 (1h 9m 42s):
You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or add guy Roz. This episode was produced by D. Bamaca Sharm with music composed by rum teen Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Canada slim Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers are in turn is rainy toll on guy Roz and even listening. to how I built this this is

2 (1h 10m 11s):
NPR.