0 (1s):
Reveal the economic patterns all around us while you swipe right and left, understand money better with the indicator. One of NPR, daily podcasts, more voices, all ears, NPR podcasts,

1 (15s):
No two people are alike. Every one is unique and your health and wellness care regimen should reflect that. But too often, it can feel like the healthcare system is unable to consider who you are holistically. And that's where thorn comes in. Thorn is a health and tech company. That's reframing the current approach to wellness. Thorn eliminates the guesswork from an overcrowded wellness industry by using at-home health tests that identify where you need the most care such as their gut tests that analyzes your gut microbiome or their stress test that measures your stress levels by analyzing your hormone fluctuations. My wife actually uses Thorn's collagen powder to keep her skin looking healthy.

1 (55s):
Dorn is the only supplement brand to collaborate with the Mayo clinic. They've even earned the trust of thousands of medical practitioners and more than a hundred professional and collegiate sports teams to start your personalized health and wellness journey. Visit thorn.com. That's T H O R N e.com. Ready to turn your small e-commerce business into the next big thing. Klaviyo can help. It's the easy to use email and SMS platform that gives you everything you need to build genuine relationships with your customers. And even if you're new to marketing Klaviyo can help you become an email expert with drag and drop design templates, simple insights, and made for e-commerce reports and recommendations.

1 (1m 36s):
Give it a try with a free account at klaviyo.com/built that's K L a V I Y o.com/built. So there are no shortages of dating apps out there ranging from free apps to members only to ones that are based on quiz shows and pet preferences. But today's show is the story of two dating apps, Tinder, and Bumble, and the woman who helped start them both. We first ran this episode with Whitney Wolf in October of 2017. Enjoy

3 (2m 14s):
I quite frankly thought I was at the very bottom of my barrel. I mean, there were days where I didn't want to live. I mean, the internet defined me, the article calling me the most ugly names in the world. The people on Twitter saying the ugliest things, but through all of this pain and struggle, I still had an itch to create. And so I kind of sat down and said, I can start something right now and I can change what I hate that I see in the world

1 (2m 54s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Ross and on today's show how Whitney Wolf's painful exit from Tinder, inspired her to build Bumble, a kinder, gentler dating app where women make the first move. There was a time, believe it or not. When internet dating meant you were desperate or awkward or both, and it wasn't something you talked about openly, but today it's the complete opposite because the internet and dating apps have made it so much easier and more efficient to meet lots and lots of people.

1 (3m 43s):
And it's more or less frictionless. There's no awkward phone calls or courtship rituals or face-to-face rejection. There's something almost transactional about the whole thing. And it's no exaggeration to say that even though they've only been around for like five years or so, dating apps have pretty much transformed dating. And if you love them, you can thank Whitney Wolf or you can blame her if you hate them. Because Whitney was part of the dating app revolution. She was one of the founders who helped create Tinder, which is now one of the biggest dating apps in the world. Whitney left Tinder under difficult circumstances, circumstances.

1 (4m 23s):
She can't legally discuss, but as you will hear, it was a time in her life where she came under intense online abuse, and that experience would inspire her to build Bumble, which is a different kind of dating app. And today, just three years since its launch, Bumble is one of the top dating apps in the U S but the story of how Whitney got into that world at all. Well, like many of our stories, it starts with a little bit of luck, right after she graduated from college at Southern Methodist university in Dallas,

3 (4m 58s):
I was just kind of going day by day, exploring and being okay with that. Right. So I think to my family, I almost was, I don't think they were super proud of like, oh, my daughter went on to do X, right. I was in this weird place. So I kind of moved in with my mom in California. And I went to LA one afternoon to visit a girlfriend of mine and ended up at a dinner where I met a couple people. One of which went on to be the CEO of Tinder.

1 (5m 34s):
This was Sean rad.

3 (5m 35s):
Yes. And he had told me how he was going to be the general manager of this incubator that would be launching all sorts of apps, all sorts of different apps. And they were looking at the time they were focused on one app, which was a consumer loyalty app called codified kind of like a digital punch card for your favorite coffee shop for your favorite, whatever is,

1 (5m 58s):
And he just told you about this at this dinner party. Yeah.

3 (6m 0s):
We were just at a restaurant having dinner, just a few of us. And I said, well, that sounds really interesting. And when he asked what I was doing, I said, you know, I'm really looking for a job. I think I could probably help you market your app. And he said, well, why don't you call me tomorrow and come in for an interview. So I called him at 8:00 AM the next day. I think he was alarmed and surprised that I actually called him. And I ended up going in for an interview. It worked out, started working from home right away. And then I moved to LA

1 (6m 26s):
For this, for this incubator.

3 (6m 28s):
Yes. For car to five was the app. There'd been really no talk of Tinder yet. And my job was very much focused on Carta Phi. So I started working full time and while we were getting <inaudible> off the ground, you know, I spent a lot of time going door to door, to door in LA to different restaurants and boutiques and so on and so forth and trying to sign them up. And I struggled with it because there was too many moving parts. Right. And so what,

1 (6m 56s):
What, what kind of moving parts?

3 (6m 58s):
I mean, you have to get the store on board and then once the store is on board, you have to hope that the customer has the app, right?

1 (7m 5s):
Yeah. What were the stores interested when you came in? But they like, or, I mean, was, it, was that,

3 (7m 10s):
To be honest, very few people were interested. I think it was really how you positioned it. And I learned, I learned a lot through, through that experience because, you know, one pitch would go one way and you'd say something a little different the next time it would go in a completely different way. And so I really realized that it's not so much about the, what, it's the, it's the, how or the, why you should do this. Right? Like, this is why you need this instead of what you, what you need. Right. And so it was really interesting, a crash course in, in marketing and sales,

1 (7m 43s):
But you were not a tech person necessarily. You're just really interested in tech, right?

3 (7m 48s):
Yeah. I wasn't even interested in tech. I was just interested in the way it had reached the way that tech could expand beyond the walls. Right. I went through college with no Instagram and so Instagram really became huge. Right. As I graduated and then you saw it sell for a billion dollars and I think everyone kind of went, whoa. Hmm. Yeah. And this was kind of like a, an eye-opening moment for my, my peers.

1 (8m 16s):
And so did it, I mean, did you, was there like a sense of excitement that you guys were onto something big or did you know pretty soon after you joined that this thing was not going to work?

3 (8m 26s):
No. You know, I think everyone was really excited and very hopeful and it was a beautiful app. I think everyone really wanted it to happen. And I remember we were all sitting around, like, we're going to be the next big thing. And, and then shortly thereafter, I think we started getting excited about this side project matchbox, which is what became Tinder. But at the time it was matchbox,

1 (8m 47s):
Which was supposed to be a dating app.

3 (8m 48s):
Yeah. It was like a flirting app. It was like connecting people to flirt. Right. And after we were really unable, get codified to gain significant traction, I think we all, you know, the first few of us were kind of like, maybe we need to shift gears. You know? And I was 22 years old. I had just come out of college. I was thinking very much like a college student still. And I was like, Hmm, this will work. And I think I was so excited about the fact that there was something that I, and my friends would use versus codified, which was something I personally would have never used. And again, it was not a new idea. You have to think about what existed already, dozens of dating apps, flirting apps, connecting apps.

3 (9m 31s):
I mean, there was already the behemoth which was match.com, right? Yeah. And we sat on the same floor as much.com in LA.

1 (9m 38s):
Wow. So, so it was, was building Tinder, like part of an idea to, to build like more of these dating type products or apps.

3 (9m 46s):
So Tinder was not my idea. I've never said it was my idea ever. I became a co-founder of Tinder via my marketing contributions and my early involvement in getting it launched and getting it out there. So I've heard about 30 conflicting stories of what the original idea was and who really cares at this point. I mean, it is what it is and it was to connect people around you, you know, if you see someone that you want to talk to across the room, how do you, how do you talk to them without, you know, feeling awkward? I think where we went in a very unique direction was marketing it to millennials. And I just don't think that had ever been done in a successful way.

1 (10m 26s):
And what was the actual product? What was the app? What did it look like at that point?

3 (10m 31s):
It was very similar to what it looks like now. It was just a very early version of it. So you would just swipe left or right on people. And actually when I first saw it, there was no swiping. It was like a tapping, like a card game originally.

1 (10m 43s):
And was it called Tinder by that point?

3 (10m 45s):
No, it was not. We played with so many different names. I mean, it was maybe going to be flirt and then it was maybe going to be, I mean, there were so many different things that it was going to be and Tinder ended up sticking.

1 (10m 56s):
So you're, so you're thinking I, this thing has legs. And so what did you do? How did you test it?

3 (11m 2s):
Yeah, I remember thinking to myself that it would work at SMU. And I remember I took the guys into a meeting and I gave them my little sorority fraternity rollout pitch and said, I'm going to show up on Monday. I'm going to go to all the chapter meetings. I'm going to run from the sororities, the fraternities, I'm going to get everybody on it. And then it's just going to take off

1 (11m 25s):
At SMU.

3 (11m 26s):
Yes. At SMU. And so I got the green light to go do this. And we had very, very, very, very minimal marketing materials. I think I had three or four t-shirts that we took that had Tinder on it. And then I had to get really crafty. So when I landed in SMU, it's funny, I was talking to my girlfriend about this the other day, my good girlfriend, who now does the weather in LA. She was a year younger than me, so she hadn't graduated yet. And I took a picture of her. And then I took a picture of one of my guy, friends on campus. And I, I dropped them into the match screen, like the Tinder screens. And I wrote a big thing on top of it saying, find out who likes you on campus?

3 (12m 6s):
And I saved the file and I took it to the FedEx across the street from SMU. And we printed, I think a thousand copies. And I offered a bunch of people around campus, $20 bills to help me put them everywhere. I mean, on people's windshields, under dorms, everywhere, everywhere, everywhere. And then Monday night I rallied all of my friends that were still in school. Cause again, I just graduated. I had a lot of friends that were younger and we'd made our rounds. We, we went to the sorority houses and gave a pitch, got up on chairs and told all the girls, you know, you have to download this app because college is all about meeting people. And right now you only have access to the people that you hang out with every weekend.

3 (12m 48s):
And it's a really closed-minded experience. And you guys need to meet all these great people on campus. And there's all these really cute guys waiting for you on the app. So we rushed and got all of these women to download the app. And then we ran as fast as we could to the fraternity row and went into the frat houses and said a different pitch and said, Hey guys, I bet you have no other way to access, you know, hundreds of sorority girls right now download the app because they're all waiting for you. They've all just downloaded this app and they're waiting for you to like them. And so, yeah, I know it's ridiculous. It's embarrassing at this point, but,

1 (13m 25s):
But you had to pitch it. You had to lift the, I was going to

3 (13m 27s):
Work out to do

1 (13m 28s):
You were hustling this thing. Yeah.

3 (13m 30s):
I think that it would be an accurate representation. And so the next day I remember, you know, we looked at the download numbers and hundreds of people had downloaded overnight and hundreds was bigger than the downloads we had gotten on Carta file over months. And so, you know, I'm looking at hundreds of downloads and I'm like, we made it like we're we're in the next Facebook. Right. Just being super, you know, a little disconnected from reality probably.

1 (13m 55s):
Well, but not that distant as we would eventually discover. So you go back to LA like what's the next step?

3 (14m 2s):
I can't remember if I went straight back to LA or if I went straight to Utah because I went and did the same thing at university of Utah,

1 (14m 9s):
Which seems weird like that, that would Tinder.

3 (14m 12s):
I knew people there, you know, and it's funny, I called this a long time ago. I said to everyone on the team, I said, guys, watch BYU will be one of our biggest markets one day, because in the BYU, it's an LDS college in Provo, Utah.

1 (14m 27s):
Yes.

3 (14m 28s):
And they're all expected to get married by, by the end of college. Like that is the expectation. And so I said, I promise, I think BYU will be one of our biggest markets. And I think half of Utah will end up getting married because of Tinder and Tinder became massive on the BYU campus. Oh yeah. Massive.

1 (14m 45s):
Wow. I mean, in that period, 2013, you know, was there a feeling like this is just so amazing? This is so exciting.

3 (14m 55s):
Are you kidding? Yes. I mean, I, I lived breathed dreamed. I was engulfed. I mean, my friends didn't want to talk to me anymore. They're like, oh gosh, she's going to call and talk about Tinder again. Oh no. It was such an exciting time. And again, it's worth noting. Tinder was group effort, right? It was not just me. It was not just one of the guys. It was not just one of the other guys. This was really teamwork.

1 (15m 23s):
So I'm going to do something Whitney that we don't often do on the show, which is, I am going to skip over over a few years when Tinder was growing and becoming this massive dating app and with millions and millions of users, because there are legal reasons why you can't talk about certain things. And I'm just going to say, I am going to explain this briefly, a Whitney, which is that you left Tinder in 2014, under pretty difficult circumstances. You had been in a relationship with one of the other co-founders that broke down. And so you left and there was a sexual harassment lawsuit and that was settled. And you can't talk about that, but all of a sudden, you, you were all over the tech press because people, people caught wind of this lawsuit.

1 (16m 9s):
And there were text messages that were sent to you that were abusive and they were published in blogs. And, and all of a sudden you were in the public eye and you were, I guess like 24, what? 24, 25 at the time

3 (16m 19s):
It was 24. I turned 25, just a few days later.

1 (16m 23s):
And, and you were the, the main target of, of a lot of the attention surrounding that story.

3 (16m 29s):
So real quick, I'm going to jump in and just say, I have absolutely no comment on anything from the lawsuit. And I have no comment on, you know, any of the allegations or anything, but the way the people online spoke about me, the way both reporters and complete strangers, you know, internet, the Twitter and the comment section, it was, it, it jolted me in such a way. It, it completely robbed me of every last ounce of confidence that I may have ever had. Listen, I was not, I was not a famous person in my life.

3 (17m 11s):
I come from salt lake city. I don't have famous parents. I'm quite frankly, just a normal professional, right? Like that's just who I was. And to have the New York times calling extended relatives and to have the daily mail knocking on the back window at your apartment when you're not even there and to have your personal emotions being turned into caricatures on tech blogs and mainstream media TV, TMZ, I mean, it was really, truly traumatic.

1 (17m 50s):
How did you just like get through the day?

3 (17m 52s):
I, I, quite frankly thought I was at the very bottom of my barrel. I mean, there were days where I didn't want to live. I didn't want to get out of bed. Yeah. I felt like it was stamped across my forehead. And when I say it was stamped across my forehead, that was 50 different things. That was the article calling me the most ugly names in the world. That was the people on Twitter saying the ugliest things. I mean, the internet defined me for a moment in time and I, I wanted to die Yet.

3 (18m 33s):
I had to make this bigger than myself. Right? Like this was bigger than me. Meaning I have people in my life that I have to be there for. I have parents, I have friends. I need to continue my career. I'm 24. That to be 25. I am not going to just call it a day at 25. I mean, am I, you know, like there was a lot of that. And after I was able to pick myself off the bathmat crying, I, I was able to through the fog, see the real problem. And the problem was not me or the media or the story or what happened.

3 (19m 17s):
The problem was the lack of online accountability that human beings are exposed to every single day. And what it made me realize was, you know, whatever I felt was going on online, this is what goes on on a 13 year olds phone all day, every

1 (19m 34s):
Day. Yeah.

3 (19m 36s):
And it scared me,

1 (19m 37s):
Was it impossible to ignore that stuff? I mean, could you have just shut that out?

3 (19m 41s):
No, it was impossible. It just became this obsession and it really messed with my psyche. I mean, it, it made me really not right for a while. I mean, I didn't really socialize. I kind of became a hermit for two years. And what I did during those two years was I worked my tail off. I mean, I worked so hard and what I had realized was you can't kill ambition. You can kill confidence, but you can't kill drive through all of this pain and struggle. I still had an itch inside of me to create, and I missed the feeling of creating all day and building and seeing something grow and engineering it to grow.

3 (20m 30s):
Right. You know, marketing it. And so I kind of sat down and said, I can start something right now and I can have an impact and I can change what I hate that I see in the world.

1 (20m 44s):
And we come back how Whitney took that idea and turned it into Bumble I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

5 (21m 4s):
Over 1 million people have turned to upstart for personal loans. Our online platform enables fast and easy access to the funds you need, whether it's for credit card consolidation or medical expenses, you can check your rate@upstart.com and as little as five minutes without affecting your credit score loan start at 1000 and go up to $50,000. And you may even get your funds in as fast as one business day, go to upstart.com to check your rate. That's upstart.com. It's that easy loan amounts will be determined based on your credit income and certain other information provided in your loan application.

6 (21m 41s):
Solar from Kurt co media, a fully immersive Sonic adventure with revolutionary sound from Dolby, apples, starring Stephanie Beatrice,

7 (21m 51s):
Jamal has given up, I'm going to find a way to save

6 (21m 54s):
Tony award winner. Alan Cumming leaders have to make sacrifices academy award winner, Helen And Jonathan Banks. Getting home

9 (22m 4s):
Is the only thing

10 (22m 4s):
I can do to get my life any worse,

6 (22m 7s):
Solar available, wherever you listen to podcasts.

1 (22m 19s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Raz. So by the time she was 24 years old, Whitney Wolf had already helped launch one of the world's biggest dating apps Tinder, but after she left the company and everything that went with it, the online bullying and the severe depression, when he wanted to get away from all that, she wants to get away from dating apps and build something new, something a little more kind.

3 (22m 44s):
So I started working on this concept called Marcy and what it was going to be was a female only social network where women could only use compliments. They would no longer be able to, you know, comment on appearance or hurt them, hurt each other's feelings or use social media to bully. Right? So it was the antidote to what I felt I experienced online. And I started working on this and had, you know, my marketing plan mapped out. And I, I was thinking about doing that. And I was approached by my now business partner, Andrea, Andrea, and he is an incredible talented entrepreneur based out of London.

3 (23m 32s):
He has built so a lot of very successful companies and his current very successful company is called Badu. And it is the world's largest dating platform. It is massive overseas. I mean, we're talking, I think they have something like 320 million registrations or something like they're part of that club of only LinkedIn and Facebook and Instagram, like those big, big, big, crazy numbers. And he said, sorry to connect, you know, the summer. I know that probably not the best time for you, but I'd really love to hear what you're up to next. And so his initial intent was to hire me as their CMO, their chief marketing officer at Vudu.

3 (24m 13s):
And I said, you know, I'm flattered. That's great. However, I'm, you know, essentially not for hire, I'm going to start my own business. And I want it to be mission driven and I don't want to work in dating. Like that's just not going to be my future. And he said, okay. So tell me about this vision of yours and what are you going to do? And how are you going to build this into a huge social platform? And I told him my vision

1 (24m 35s):
For this new app, Merci.

3 (24m 36s):
Yes. And he could hear and feel my passion for this platform. And he said, you know what? You need to build this, but you need to do it in dating. And I

1 (24m 48s):
Said,

3 (24m 50s):
Yeah. And I said, I don't think you understood me. I'm not going back into dating. Like that's not happening. And he said, no, no, no, this, this has to happen. What you're trying to do, needs to be done in dating. And I thought to myself, you know what, maybe, maybe he's got a point maybe dating is broken, right? Like maybe, maybe connecting is broken beyond just being a young woman, talking to a young woman in junior high. Maybe this is something that affects us at all ages. And so we kind of did a handshake deal and said, okay, we're going to build a company. And we formed an incredible partnership where I was founder and CEO. I could build my own team, my own vision, my own brand, but we would have access to his resources beyond just money.

3 (25m 35s):
And that was something that was never going to happen twice.

1 (25m 39s):
And you didn't know at this point you didn't know what that was going to be.

3 (25m 42s):
No. And so it really wasn't until a couple of weeks later, when we brought on, you know, I called Chris goes and scanned Sarah Mick, who had worked with that Tinder. They're really, really talented designers. And, you know, in order to build a great brand and, and product, you have to have a great team of designers. And so I brought them on board and they had their own app at the time. So they wanted to come on as consultants. And so once we were all kind of together, I think there was like 10 of us in the room or something. We were sitting outside and Andre said, okay, so what is this product going to be? And I said, I think I have it. And I said, I always wanted to text the guy first.

3 (26m 24s):
I always wanted to go after what I wanted in terms of, if I saw a cute guy in class, I always wanted to talk to a guy, but I was never allowed to because society and my friend said no. So I said, we're going to reverse engineer this. And this is how the product's going to work. You're going to mutually match with each other, but women have to send the first message. They have 24 hours to do it because it would give them a, you know, kind of incentive. And if they don't, the match disappears forever, and this will change the dynamics of how we connect. This will put the ball in her court for any same-sex matches.

3 (27m 4s):
You follow the same rules minus women making the first move, right? So if two women match, either women can reach out. If two men match, either man can reach out. However, they do still have to follow the Hugo first in 24 hours. And then you follow with them for 24 hours.

1 (27m 18s):
So, so this was like completely different from, from anything else that was out there at the time,

3 (27m 23s):
Completely different. And hadn't didn't exist.

1 (27m 26s):
Dating apps. I think, I imagine are most, mostly guys are signing up for, for dating apps. Right?

3 (27m 34s):
Well, my theory at that time was they hadn't built, been built for women yet. Let's just look at this from, from the basics. Men are raised from very early age to be the go getter in a, in a heterosexual relationship, go get her, go, go make the move. Right. And women on the flip side are trained to play hard to get. So here you're telling men to be overtly aggressive and here you're telling women to be the inverse of that. And so now you're, you're training two human beings to act in opposite directions of each other. And so what you do when you do that is you set both up for failure.

3 (28m 14s):
You set the men up to be constantly rejected and you set the women up to be at risk of aggression and abuse, right? And so here we have this world that behaves this way now at another element, which is a profile, right? A digital shield where you can hide behind a username or a profile photo, and you don't have to be accountable. And so when you, when you put women in control, you completely reversed the rules. So she now has the confidence to go after what she's interested in. And the man on the other end doesn't feel rejected. He feels flattered. And then all of a sudden you've balanced the behavior.

1 (28m 58s):
So what are the name? Bumble come from?

3 (29m 1s):
The name Bumble is actually really funny. So a woman who was a really, actually a great mentor to me for the first couple of years of Bumble, her name's Michelle Kennedy. She named it on a whim one day because it was such a struggle. I wanted Bumble to be Moxie Mox. I E like you've got Moxie, like you've got courage, right? Because you'd have Moxy, you made the first move Moxie. And unfortunately there is a really powerful company that exists somewhere in America that has trademarked every format of the word. So we couldn't get that. And then we were sitting there for weeks. Oh my gosh, it was a disaster. We had probably a thousand words in the running. And then one, she said, you know, I think she had funny enough.

3 (29m 45s):
I think she had called her husband a bumbling idiot. She's got this really adorable British accent. She said, what about Bumble? And I said, no way, like, that's like fumble. That's like Bumble and Bumble, the hair product. I hate it. And then Andre was like, Bumble, Bumble. I love Bumble. And he checked the domain and we could get the domain. It was a miracle like in what world could we get Bumble? But we couldn't get Moxie. We couldn't get all these other words. And so after that, I was talking to who, she ended up becoming one of my, she was my third hire, her, her and her family are really close friends of mine. And I was talking to her mom in the kitchen. I was like, Hey, what do you think about Bumble for an app? And she was like, oh, like be the queen bee of Bumble.

3 (30m 27s):
Find your honey on Bumble. And she started throwing out all these really cute slogans. And I was like done. I was like done perfect branding, opportunity, hives and bees, and building your, your hive and queen bee. The women make the first move. It was perfect then.

1 (30m 42s):
So you, so Andre contexts, you in July of 2014, if I'm, if my timing is right, you launched Bumble by the end of that year.

3 (30m 53s):
Correct. We worked really, really hard.

1 (30m 55s):
When you, when you first launched, it were most of the people signing up men initially? No,

3 (31m 1s):
No, no, no. Even even split. How

1 (31m 3s):
Did you, how did you get people to sign up? How did you get the word out about it? Cause there's, there's lots of competition in this space. There's tons and tons of dating apps. How did you, how were you able to tell people about it and get them to know what to do?

3 (31m 15s):
Well, I kind of had a little bit of a playbook. I had maybe done it once before. So I went right back to SMU this time decked out in yellow. And I went back into all those sororities and I, I spoke from the heart. Listen, I have lived through the pain points of male dominated relationships. I have felt it. I know what it feels like. And guess what every other woman in that sorority house chances are, she's felt it too. So, you know, I'm speaking from the heart and I'm speaking to them about how they can be empowered and they make the first move and they go after what they want. And me and my early team members, I mean, there's, the girls are at my office right now.

3 (31m 56s):
They're still with us. We went in there and we took pizza boxes with stickers on it and offered a piece of pizza to the fraternity boys that would get on it. We wrapped cookies and Bumble stickers. We took all sorts of goodies and we kind of growth hacked our way to a success.

1 (32m 14s):
So I, so let me just jump out of the story for a sec, because I want to ask you about this idea that, that dating apps, even, even Bumble with, you know, a mission or a purpose to empower women, even an app like Bumble, you know, does it contribute to, to, to just kind of like a culture of hookups?

3 (32m 32s):
Well, so here's, what's interesting if the hookup is taking place and the woman is empowered and feels comfortable and confident in that, then I say more power to that. You know, I don't care what you do on Bumble. If you want to, you know, spend the rest of your life with someone you meet on Bumble, phenomenal. If you want to hang out with them for only a night, but you're going to wake up the next day and you're not going to feel terrible about yourself. That's what this is all about. It's about reverse engineering, the dynamics of how men and women feel and Bumble is not just a hookup app. I mean, I can't tell you how many emails I get a day about Bumble weddings, bumbled babies, Bumble engagements.

3 (33m 13s):
Now we're launching Bumble biz. We have hundreds and hundreds of thousands, if not in the millions at this point of active BFF users, which are, you know, young women matching with other young women, kind of in that mercy capacity. I spoke about earlier, they're finding roommates, they're going on trips together. They're building social circles and new cities. It's really not a dating app anymore.

1 (33m 37s):
I read that, that, that you guys have zero there's zero tolerance for sexism on Bumble. But if two people are communicating on Bumble, how do you police that? How do you enforce that?

3 (33m 48s):
So that's a great question. And it's actually a very tricky one. So we have zero tolerance for bad behavior, but it requires a little bit of work from our users because we also want to respect your privacy. Right? However, if somebody is in a conversation and someone says something inappropriate, we have very easy reporting tools. And once something is reported, we do review it. And if there was bad behavior, that user is banned for life. There are no second chances. We really take it seriously. If you need us, like we're one-click way.

1 (34m 24s):
Do you ever run into any backlash from, from, you know, people who say, you know, who, who are offended in some ways that this empowers women? I mean, does it, does it make some people angry? Yeah.

3 (34m 37s):
Bumble gets a lot of that. You know, just last week we became under attack from this website called the daily Stormer. It's a neo-Nazi site. And we had upwards of a hundred men sending us threats. We actually had to have police at our office all week. Wow. They were emailing my employees, calling my employees, calling me leaving the most vulgar messages

1 (34m 59s):
Because you're your self-proclaimed feminist organization. Yeah.

3 (35m 2s):
Female empowerment is not something that they, they believe in. Unfortunately. So, you know, we get this to the bullying now. I don't let that doesn't hurt my feelings anymore because I know these people are just atrocious, but it fuels me, the anger fuels me to try harder at work and try and, and, and, you know, change this misogynistic mindset that exists. Yeah. And so now we're putting such an emphasis to get all these people off of our app. If there are any, we're hoping there's not, we now have a whole new set of moderators looking for hate symbols and hate speech on our platform. We're really just trying our best to build a clean, safe community. Yeah.

1 (35m 42s):
It's been two and a half years since you launched this company, I think. Correct. And you have how many active users now?

3 (35m 49s):
20 million registrations nearly

1 (35m 51s):
So 20 mil that's, I mean, that's pretty amazing 20 million downloads of the app since you launched. And when will you know that you have really created this hugely powerful thing when you've got a hundred million a billion,

3 (36m 8s):
I'll never feel like we've made it. And we, we gotta just keep going. I mean, it's funny. I used to say to myself, oh, when we have 1 million, when we have 5 million, when we have 10 million, oh, imagine if we had 20 million and now we're here. And I'm like, you know what? We always need to evolve and be better and try harder and have bigger reach and better reach. And once we have that reach, we need to start over and do it in a different vertical.

1 (36m 29s):
How much of, of your, you know, of your story through Tinder and Bumble now is luck and how much of it was because of your skill and talent hard work?

3 (36m 43s):
You know, luck is a funny word. I don't, I don't know if I'd call any of this lucky, cause I don't feel, you know, I think luck is probably a certain element, but if people think I just, you know, was at the right place at the right time and just snapped my fingers and twirled a couple of times and here's Bumble. I mean, they're really wrong. This has been, we're talking all day, every day, ups, downs, highs, lows, and, and laser focus.

1 (37m 14s):
So you guys are still a really young company. Do you, do you like stay up at night, worrying about a competitor or somebody else coming in and just, you know, totally replacing you.

3 (37m 28s):
We really, truly, aren't super worried about competition for one reason. I really believe anybody can copy a product. Anyone I'm at the UT campus speaking to you right now, I could go to the engineering school, probably find five, really talented young engineers. And they could build Bumble with the right support. Somebody could rebuild any piece of technology it's it's engineering. However, you cannot just copy someone's brand and become them. There has to be authenticity when you build a brand and there has to be true purpose. And so, yes, you're right. Anybody could go and build a competitor version of Bumble, but where I don't think they can just come in and, and sweep us off our feet is, I don't know if there's another group of people with the exact same story or the exact same mission and motive.

3 (38m 22s):
And that goes back to what I lived through that summer of 2014 and what landed on my phone every morning. And it was, I almost built my remedy to the hardships that I personally was going through. And Bumble saved me.

1 (38m 43s):
That's Whitney Wolf, founder of the dating app Bumble. And by the way, Whitney now goes by the name Whitney Wolfe herd, because she got married last year. And guess how she met her husband

4 (38m 54s):
Through

1 (38m 56s):
No, not through Bumble. They actually met through friends on a ski trip. Bumble has not yet gone public, but a few months ago after reports of a possible IPO, Bloomberg intelligence valued the company at $1.1 billion. And please do stick around because in just a moment, we're going to hear from you about the things your building,

11 (39m 29s):
The best weddings are always filled with unforgettable moments and personal thoughtful touches. Like my friend's Sicily's wedding, where the groom toss the bouquet for any kind of wedding you want. There's one place to start. Zola. Zola has everything you need all in one place. They've thought of everything. Venues, invites, registry and more, and they'll be with you every step of your wedding planning journey, whatever your style or budget Sola has you covered with venues, photographers, florists, and more to make your wedding happen. Once you've set the date, you can send your, save the dates and invitations right on Zola too. There's so many great designs to choose from, and you can get a matching wedding website for free wedding planning. Shouldn't take over your life.

11 (40m 10s):
And Zola has thought of everything. So you can plan the celebration. That's right. For the two of you start planning the wedding you want@zola.com. That's Z O L a.com.

12 (40m 20s):
Lady Mary has had to juggle a lot in her time at Downton Abbey, death, war heartbreak, scandal love, and now as acting a state manager, she's adding something a little more modern to her plate, overseeing a silent film shoot at the Abbey, Hugh dancy stars as the silent films director alongside Dominic west, as the movie star, as the actors and crew takeover, the manner inviting mixed opinions from the staff and family, a mystery is brewing oversees. The dowager Countess has inherited a Villa in the south of France from award-winning creator. Julian fellows comes the motion picture event, Downton Abbey, a new era joined the Crawley family, their staff, and intriguing new faces as they embark on new chapters at home and abroad that could change the future of Downton Abbey forever.

12 (41m 8s):
Uncover the mystery and the grandest escape of the year. Downton Abbey. A new era is only in theaters. May the 20th visit Downton Abbey tickets.com to get your tickets now,

1 (41m 22s):
Hey, thanks so much for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that. And today we're updating a story from about a year ago, and you may want to turn up the volume for a second because I've got the sound that I want to play for you. It's kind of subtle, but I think you'll know what it is. Okay. A Neil scratching on vinyl, which is kind of a cool sound right full of romance and anticipation, especially if you grew up with it. And even if you didn't,

14 (41m 55s):
I started being really interested in records. When I was a kid, I would go through my parents' record collections and play her about murder Creedence, Clearwater revival.

1 (42m 4s):
And this was in the late 1980s when Mike Dickson was growing up in Wichita falls, Texas.

14 (42m 9s):
And I just was always fascinated with the fact that you had to really interact with the music in a physical way to pull the record out of the sleeve, put it on the turntable and play it.

1 (42m 19s):
As Mike got older, he started hanging out in clubs and recording some of his friends bands. And a lot of them wanted to put their songs on vinyl because as we've already established, finals is kind of cool. But to cut a vinyl record at a legitimate pressing plant is expensive.

14 (42m 37s):
Your general investment was about $2,000. And if you couldn't sell 500 copies, you were definitely not going to break even.

1 (42m 46s):
But around this time, Mike discovered that if you just want to do a really limited run of records, like say 20 or 30, you can learn to do it yourself with something called a record lave

14 (42m 59s):
Record lay is basically, it looks like a large turntable and the needle is vibrating as the disc turns underneath it. And the sound wave is etched into the disc.

1 (43m 8s):
And you would have seen these old record lanes in recording studios or radio stations in the 1940s and fifties. And you can still find them usually in a dusty attic, or of course on eBay.

14 (43m 20s):
I got really obsessed with the machines I bought every one that I could find. And eventually I had so many machines. I was having bands from out of town, come over to my kitchen and cut records straight to the lays and the other room, The drummer would be right next to the sink. The guitar player and bass player would be next to the refrigerator. And I would be cutting the records while they played the song.

1 (43m 48s):
Anyway, this is all happening in Olympia, Washington in 2010, 2011. And I should mention that in real life, Mike was teaching high school, but he's also got this final record label going. And eventually he moves out of the kitchen and into a studio and then into the world to small events and pop-up festivals where he uses his portable record blades to cut vinyl on the spot. And then in 2012, Mike and his partner got a phone call.

14 (44m 19s):
We got a call from converse about cutting records for a band called the execs at their Coachella VIP party,

1 (44m 27s):
Right? So Coachella huge XX also pretty and suddenly Mike and his partner, Chris are at this big party with two record lades, making vinyl dubs of Jamie XX for like 200 people.

14 (44m 42s):
The attendees would go and listen to some samples. And they'd say, I want this song on the side. I want this song on the B side. And then we would cut it for them right there. And then they walk away with a disc that they can take home and play and show their friends.

1 (44m 55s):
And after that event,

14 (44m 57s):
We had a ton of people that said, Hey, I want this in my party. I need this at my activation or at my festival.

1 (45m 3s):
After launching his company, Mike quit his teaching job, moved to Tucson, Arizona. He and Chris had been making vinyl records and traveling around the world to places like Paris, Canada, and New York, and basically have the coolest job ever.

14 (45m 18s):
It's something that I fell into. And yeah, I can't imagine having a cooler job either.

1 (45m 24s):
Mike Dixon is the co-founder of mobile vinyl recorders. If you want to find out more about Mike or hear previous episodes, head to our podcast page, how I built this.npr.org. And of course, if you want to tell us your story, go to build.npr.org. And thanks so much for listening to the show this week, you can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts and why you're there. Please do give us a review. You can also write to us@hivtatnpr.org. And if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this. Our show is produced this week by Rachel Faulkner with music composed by rum team Arab Louis. Thanks also to Juliet Carney, JC Howard, nor Cuzzi Neeva grant Alyssa gray Sanaz Meshkinpour and Jeff Rogers.

1 (46m 7s):
Our intern is Candace limb I'm guy Ross, and you've been listening to how I built this In business competition is the key to success. Every product you own from your shoes on your feet, to your phone in your hands got there because of cutthroat business decisions and wonder is podcast.

1 (46m 47s):
Business wars brings you stories about the most well-known companies in the world and how the decisions they make shape, what you buy and how you live with over 50 seasons to choose from. You'll hear about the fight for your feet with Nike versus Adidas, the battle to control the smartphone market with iPhone versus Blackberry or the game changing company that is Tesla and Elon Musk's bid to take on the entire auto industry. Business wars covers every sector from fashion to food tech, to travel sports, to pop culture, and more these stories are entertaining, fun. Eye-opening and will help you understand a little bit more about the world around you. Listen to business wars on Amazon music, apple podcasts, or wherever you get your podcasts.

1 (47m 31s):
Listen, one week early and add free by joining Wondery plus in apple podcasts or on the wondering.