0 (41s):
And we're going to be putting that episode into your feed this Thursday for today's show, we're going to reach back into the archives to bring you my conversation with Roxanne Quimby of bird species, which first ran back in 2019. Here you go.

1 (1m 0s):
We had a great artist and he did a woodcut portrait of Bert. And we started putting that on the package and there was a very conscious decision to use Burt's face. He had a long gray beard and long gray curly hair, you know, and as a woman who could never measure up to this glamorous image in mainstream cosmetics and beauty products, you know, I felt like we're going to put a picture of a guy that everybody is going to feel more beautiful than

0 (1m 42s):
Then PR that's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. I'm guy rosin on today's show how Roxanne Quimby took a roadside honey, stand in rural Maine and turned it into Burt's bees. One of the biggest natural personal care brands in America, every Sunday at my local farmer's market, there are people who sell homemade hot sauce and handcrafted wallets. There's there's even a woman who sells mohair scarves using the mohair from her Angora goats.

0 (2m 26s):
Now imagine going to your local farmer's market in say Maine back in the mid 1980s. And if you happen to be near Bangor, you might've come across Roxanne, Quimby and bird. Shabbat's selling jars of honey, honey from Burt's own beehives charming, right? Maybe you'd buy a jar and move on Bergen and Roxanne would keep on doing what they were doing. You'd do it. You were doing except Roxanne thought, Hey, could we make and sell candles from all the beeswax we have? Or could we use the beeswax to make other stuff? Okay. So you can kind of figure out where this is headed because that of course is what happened.

0 (3m 6s):
And even though Roxanne and Bert never intended to build a billion dollar brand or even a million dollar brand, it just happened. Of course, a lot of that had to do with Roxanne's passion and drive, but the idea was never to build something massive. And it was a farmer's market product today, walk into any drugstore in the U S or even overseas. And you will find an impressive display of Burt's bees products. The likelihood that Roxanne Quimby would build a massive company or any company at all was so implausible back in the early 1980s, when she was a single mom waiting tables at a diner and a decade before that, she drove across the country from Massachusetts, where she was from to San Francisco, seeking out a simpler life, a life without lots of material needs.

1 (3m 58s):
It was a adventure to go all the way to the west coast. From new England and New York, it was a great unknown. And I had always wanted to be an artist from the time I was five. So it seemed like a natural place to go to art school. Hmm.

0 (4m 18s):
I guess you got there and what like 1970 around then? Yeah,

1 (4m 22s):
I crossed a great cultural bridge while I was out there. What, what do you mean by that? I learned to think differently and to probe more deeply. And I think that the material world was too important and really it's not as important as I was taught that it was, we were encouraged to make a good living. Both of my sisters had MBAs like my dad did and one's achievements were emphasized. And I took a turn to the extreme left when I went to art school and rejected the pursuit of material comforts.

1 (5m 15s):
It was really quite wonderful. And

0 (5m 17s):
What did you think, did you think I don't need that life. I want a different life. What was, what did you start to think about the life you wanted to have?

1 (5m 24s):
Well, I, I wanted meaning and I wanted to live deeply. I was very influenced by throw who wrote about it

3 (5m 35s):
Quite beautifully. I was looking for transcendence. I just, my world just got bigger and I felt my relationship with it expanded. I guess you had a boyfriend in San Francisco at the time and the two of you decided to like go off around the country to find a place to yep. And this is George St. Claire, your boyfriend at the time. And so what'd you guys, do you just, you took off, you left San Francisco. Yup. Got it. Got a van. Fixed it up. We had $3,000. We went to Vermont and the Vermont realtor that we spoke with said that you couldn't buy any land in Vermont for $3,000, but try Maine.

3 (6m 24s):
So we went to Maine. So

0 (6m 27s):
Your intention was to go somewhere in the country with $3,000 and see what kind of land, like how much land you could buy. Yes. And why did you want to do that? What were you going to do on the land?

1 (6m 39s):
There was a movement at the time, the back to the land movement. And those were people that had left city life and were just like us. Huh? I was doing it to kind of strip away everything that civilization had layered on me and see what was really important. Huh? So the land that we bought, we built a little cabin on it and had no running water, no electricity. And so it quickly became more aware of how those things affected your life. When you didn't have them,

0 (7m 17s):
You get 3000 bucks. And how much land did that buy you? Like how many acres? 30 that's a lot. Yeah. And how did you know what to do?

1 (7m 26s):
Well, there were a few books that you could read about how to build a simple house. And we would pick people's brains who knew more than we did. They were glad to see some young people moving to Maine because we've had quite an Exodus of young people. So they were very friendly and helpful. Did you build a

0 (7m 49s):
Cabin? Did you build like a house on this land? Yes. How long did it take? So I'm assuming this is you get there in the summer. This is like 70, 19 75 or so something like that. Yep. And then how long before you're actually living in a, a place with a roof over your heads?

1 (8m 6s):
Oh, it was way too long. We had built a little screen house where we were sleeping, which was a little ways away from the house we were building. It was getting into December and we were still sleeping outside. Basically. It was outside. It was so hard to get out of bed in the morning, out of the sleeping bag. But you know, everything that could go wrong did go wrong. Did you heat? We had a wood stove. Yeah. And

0 (8m 37s):
This is like, this is like pre global warming Maine in December. This is

1 (8m 42s):
Cold. Yeah. It's extreme. But there were others, you know, we weren't the only ones. So you,

0 (8m 50s):
You build a house and you like still no running water or electricity or any of that, but you do have to eat. So how are you making a living?

1 (8m 58s):
Well, the good thing about not having all the amenities is that it doesn't take a lot of money to live. Yeah. We had no bills, basically. Other than food, we cut our own firewood and had a source of water, which was the spring out and back. I waitressed a day or two a week. And George worked at the local radio station for a day, a week. We were living on about $4,000 a year, year. Wow.

0 (9m 31s):
You, how long? I mean, you do this for a couple of years, right? You guys are living like this for several years.

1 (9m 37s):
Yeah. Yeah. I think we probably lived out there like that for maybe seven years or so. Wow.

0 (9m 43s):
And I guess around like in the first few years, you, you actually had children there too. Right. Children who are still grown, they're grown now, but they, they were born in this like homesteader kind of house them out in the middle of nowhere.

1 (9m 57s):
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. They have very fond memories of it. We never had to argue about TV shows. Yeah.

0 (10m 6s):
So I'm just trying to get into your head at that time. Was that your vision for life that you were going? Cause it's kind of it, there is something I did like about it. I mean, you're out there. You're far away from the rough and tumble of civilization and cities. Was that your vision for the way you were going to live your life?

1 (10m 23s):
I think it was a very idyllic kind of dream. Yeah. But ultimately it didn't provide enough stimulation for my personality. Hmm. Why, what was your personality needs? Well, I think I'm kind of a restless person, pretty curious and interested in the way the world works, how it's all put together. So we were pretty cut off out there.

0 (10m 57s):
So you guys are out there and sure. Your marriage or partnership with George kind of, not in great shape because you guys, you did separate at a certain point,

1 (11m 8s):
Right? We did. Yup. Hannah and Lucas were six years old and I moved out and I moved into another cabin. Oh wow. Even further off the road. Wow.

0 (11m 23s):
This is like 80, 82 or

1 (11m 25s):
Something right in there. Maybe 83. Yeah. So you were a single mom, two kids on your own. That's that's tough going. Well, although I was a single mom, their dad was a single dad and he definitely took a lot of responsibility for their care. And so every other week I had the opportunity to go out and do what I needed to do or, or whatever. Sure. And where are you happy at that time? Probably not.

1 (12m 6s):
No. I don't think about being happy that much. I feel, I think more about being fulfilled. Yeah. And were you, did you feel fulfilled at that time? I did. Yeah. I felt like I was making it on my own by, you know, living by my wits, so to speak. Yeah. And I liked that and I liked the unknown. It was an adventure. It was sort of like fishing. You never knew what you were going to come up with. And that was always fun. Yeah.

0 (12m 36s):
So who you are in Northern sort of Northern central Maine. And how did you come across Burt? Shavitz

1 (12m 45s):
Well, he was, he was well-known in the neighborhood because he was so unusual. But do you mean, well,

0 (12m 55s):
I mean, you were unusual at the time too,

1 (12m 57s):
Right? Yes. But he was probably more unusual.

0 (13m 0s):
Yeah. So to what do you mean? Like, what do you mean when you say unusual? Well,

1 (13m 4s):
He, he looked like an old rabbi in a way. He had a long gray beard and long gray curly hair. And he was a bachelor and sold honey on the side of the road, off the back of his pickup truck. Huh.

0 (13m 21s):
And you just knew Burt through the community you weren't or, or did, or did you meet him on one particular day?

1 (13m 29s):
Well, I did meet him personally when he picked me up hitchhiking. Cause I didn't have a car at the time. Yeah. So I got to meet him, but I think I was vaguely aware of him just because he was one of the fixtures in the area.

0 (13m 43s):
And he would sell honey from bees that he raised. Right. That he would keep

1 (13m 48s):
And he lived the same way, no phone, no electricity in a little tiny cabin that he had hauled over to his property. It was a Turkey coop. He was quite proud of being very, very eccentric hermit type fellow. But there

0 (14m 13s):
Must've been some kind of connection that

1 (14m 16s):
You forged because you, I guess you decided to, I don't work with him. Yeah. Oh, I was very attracted to him. He was kind of a inspiration for how one could live very independently and I was very inspired by his lifestyle. So how did you broach the idea of, of working with him? I asked him if he wanted any help with the bees selling honey or no, actually tending to the bees. So I followed him around for a summer as an apprentice and did a lot of the heavy work hauling supers of honey around extracting.

1 (15m 4s):
I learned all about the bees and I got to work with Bert. What was, what was he like? Was he talkative? Was he quiet? Yeah. He didn't say much.

0 (15m 18s):
He was pretty quiet. And he was about 15 years older than you, I guess at that point. Yeah.

1 (15m 23s):
He was about 50 at the time.

0 (15m 25s):
And you just, this guy was just fascinating. Like he was living this life that you wanted to kind of model your own life on.

1 (15m 33s):
Yeah. He was very inspiring to me and it, you know, it was all kind of mixed up with the bees and nature as well. It was all inseparable. Huh.

0 (15m 46s):
But I'm trying to understand, like when you were, you were just really curious about bees, about his lifestyle and him, you liked him. He was interesting, but there was no spark in your mind of, Hey, maybe we can turn this into a business.

1 (16m 1s):
Yeah. After the summer where I apprenticed with him, I suggested that we could package the honey in nicer containers and sell it at craft fairs, put late little labels on them. How was he selling the honey? Well, he was selling them in used gallon jars, you know, who is going to buy a gallon of honey. I know that pickles and relish come in the restaurant business. Yeah.

0 (16m 35s):
So you're, you're saying to him, Bert, let's put this, put it in smaller, nicer jars and see if we can sell it at like farmer's market.

1 (16m 43s):
Exactly. Yep. Yep. And he liked that idea. Yeah. He, he was fine with it. So I ordered some little plastic honey bears, a little squeezy bearers. Yeah. And we filled those up. Those were 12 ounces of honey instead of 12 pounds, which is how he sold it.

0 (17m 4s):
And did you have a, like put a label on it and stuff?

1 (17m 7s):
Yeah. You know, we use pictures of bees and tried to make all these products giftable.

0 (17m 14s):
This was, I guess in like around 86, 85, 86. Yeah. And did you market it like today? You can imagine going to a craft fair and saying, this is artisinal handmade, organic, non GMO, gluten free, free range, fair trade honey. From, you know, that Bert takes like with his hands, like where you marketing it that, or was just like a bear with honey in it. It was like, honey for sale.

1 (17m 41s):
Well, we did our best. I would say we tried to make the packaging really cute that people would want to buy it. And you know, honey is a pretty pure product. You shouldn't have to sell that too much. I think we called it pure main, honey.

0 (17m 58s):
Yeah. And so you would start to sell it where,

1 (18m 2s):
Oh, we would do Christmas craft fairs at the local high schools and junior highs and right around the area. You

0 (18m 10s):
Were just selling it at these little and for people buying the honey, how were sales? Good, good. Like thousands, tens of thousands. A few hundred.

1 (18m 21s):
Not that good. I remember a really good show at the local junior high where it was $200 was the take of the day. That was a lot of money to me.

0 (18m 38s):
How did you guys then go from selling honey to,

1 (18m 43s):
To making candles? Well, when you extract the honey out of the honeycomb, it's capped over with beeswax, the bees kind of cap it, so it doesn't drain out. So you have to uncap it and you're cutting off the bees wax cappings. So that's your bees wax.

0 (19m 1s):
Can I ask you a question about beeswax it's wax? It's like really waxy, soft stuff that you can put a wick in and burn it. How do bees, I'm just curious, how do they, how do they produce it?

1 (19m 13s):
They have glands on their abdomen, just like we have saliva glands. Sure. So their glands produce flat disks of beeswax, which they then build into their honeycomb. So

0 (19m 28s):
When you pull out like one of those sheets of, of a, in a, in a hive of honeycomb, how do you get the wax off?

1 (19m 35s):
You have a hot knife and you uncap it with the hot knife and the beeswax that was capping, the honeycomb becomes available to do whatever you want with it.

0 (19m 51s):
So you had all this wax and is it pretty easy to just melt it down and turn it into candles?

1 (19m 57s):
It's simple. I don't know if it's easy. We have many disasters, but it is a simple process. You just heat it up. And the bees wax separates from the honey and floats on top

0 (20m 11s):
You, so you start making candles and then, and then doing the same thing, bringing them to craft shows and selling them. Yeah. And at this point, did you think, I dunno if, if, if a friend asked you so Roxanne, what are you up to? Would you have said, yes, I'm really getting into this bee thing. Like we were still in honey and now we're selling candles and it's it's I think this is something there.

1 (20m 34s):
Yeah. I think I would say that it was pretty exciting because I was maintaining my independence, using my sense of aesthetics and making enough money to live on. Yeah, roughly,

0 (20m 52s):
You know, by like 1988 or 89, like how many candles a year were you selling a year?

1 (20m 58s):
Well, I, I don't remember exactly how our sales went in the eighties, but we were growing every year. My original goal was $20,000 in sales. And then when that goal was achieved, then I set another goal of a million dollars in sales. By the time my kids graduated from high school,

0 (21m 25s):
I read that you guys got a pretty big break in 1989. There was a boutique in New York called zona. And they came across your candles at a trade show and then ordered hundreds of them. Yeah. Yeah. How did they find out about you guys? The owner

1 (21m 43s):
Or one of his buying team must have come across us at a show somewhere. And he ordered our little Teddy bear candle. It was a little molded candle in the shape of a Teddy bear with a plaid bow tie under his chin. And he sold hundreds of them.

0 (22m 1s):
You fulfill those orders. It was you and burden. Like how did you what'd

1 (22m 5s):
You do just worked all the time. And we started to hire people slowly. Some of the local ladies would come in and give us a hand, but we were still in a building that was not really a place you'd want to have employees work.

0 (22m 25s):
You were not doing this in Burt's Turkey, coop. You were actually yes. You rented out a building to make the candles.

1 (22m 31s):
Yeah, it was an old one room school house. Right. And what'd you guys call the business? Well, he had kind of a stensul that he had painted on to every beehive that said Burt's bees because the bees were all over the countryside. You know, you couldn't keep them too close together. So we would have maybe 10 hives in a bee yard and maybe 10, 5, 10 miles away. There would be another bee yard with five or 10 hives of bees. And on the hives, he would stencil his name. So eventually it became Burt's bees.

0 (23m 7s):
By the way, you have a so much wax, did you have to add beehives or a certain point? Did you have to buy whack?

1 (23m 14s):
Yeah, we had to start buying it. We had 50 hives, which was fine for a few years and then we didn't produce enough ourselves. So we ended up buying other people's bees wax

0 (23m 27s):
Around 1989. When you got this big order from this New York boutique, you had to hire an accountant and it was a 14 year old high school. Boy who became your accountant?

1 (23m 39s):
Is that, is that true? Yeah, we called the school and we told them we needed someone in math. And so they said, oh, we have just the fellow he's on the math team. So he came over after school, you know, he would pay the bills and he would do the payroll and he would make the deposit. And the day that he had to make the deposit, walk up to the bank, he would wear a suit. It was very important to maintain our dignity at the bank. So he was our accountant. I would say he was more of a bookkeeper, but it's very serious and focused and responsible.

0 (24m 23s):
Yeah. I mean, it sounds like you were actually pretty serious and focused about this, that, that actually you and Bert, didn't just stumble into this company, but as you saw it take off and as you saw people show interest in what you were selling, you were making strategic decisions to kind of lay the foundation for what would become a business.

1 (24m 47s):
Yeah, it was, we were learning a lot. Neither one of us had been involved in running and managing a business. So everything was trial and error. A lot of experimentation, a lot of fails. We went to the school of hard knocks. Yeah. What,

0 (25m 7s):
What was, what was the biggest disaster that you can remember early on?

1 (25m 11s):
Well, I remember five gallons of a product. We called boot food, which was a liquid combination of melted beeswax needs, full oil and bear grease. Wait, what's bear grease. Just the fat, the rendered fat of a bear. Wow.

0 (25m 31s):
What do you do with that, that product that you just described? You

1 (25m 35s):
Rub it into your leather boots to waterproof them. Keep the leather supple. Okay. And you were selling this

0 (25m 43s):
Well, okay. Yeah.

1 (25m 45s):
Smelled horrible. Oh my God. I know it was just so bad.

0 (25m 50s):
Yeah. And what happened to this? It

1 (25m 52s):
Spilled all over the floor. Five gallons of the greasiest. Smelliest most horrible stuff all over the floor. That was a pretty big plus the waste. I mean, we were selling it. Couldn't have been

0 (26m 9s):
Given your characterization of Bert, has this kind of really independent back to the land kind of guy. What did he think about this growing enterprise? I mean, all of a sudden it's starting to look like a business. I mean, and, and not just Burton, Roxanne, selling jars of honey and wax candles, but like New York boutiques ordering this stuff.

1 (26m 32s):
I think that he probably wasn't as happy about it as I was, he had no use for any changes to his lifestyle. He didn't have children for one thing. Right. And I'm far more ambitious than he

4 (26m 46s):
Was. Yeah. But he went along

1 (26m 49s):
With it because he could see how important it was to me. Hmm.

0 (26m 53s):
Was Bert fairly easy to work with? Or was he like, you know, stubborn and difficult? He was a

1 (26m 59s):
Prickly kind of guy in, he wasn't all warm and fuzzy. Yeah. So people including myself gave him kind of a wide berth. We divided up the work, he would collect all the overdue bills, you know, overdue accounts, receivables. And he was a fixer when things broke down or needed maintenance, he was always willing to do that. And I was a very hands-on with the product development and getting the product made and shipped. So he had different roles. Yeah.

0 (27m 38s):
1991 Burt's bees hits a million and a half dollars in sales revenue. Do you remember that? Do you remember thinking, oh my God, we are doing a million and a half dollars of revenue. Well, I should have remembered it, but, but I guess it was just moving too fast.

1 (27m 56s):
Yeah. It was moving pretty quickly. And we were every day was another problem that just had to be solved on the fly without enough resources or time, because we were in a hurry trying to fill orders. So I didn't have a lot of time to, to think that I wasn't expecting this or we just kind of had a tiger by the tail. Yeah. And I was hanging on for dear life

0 (28m 25s):
When we come back at Roxanne and Bert's personal relationships started to unravel just as the company started to take off, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR support for this podcast. And the following message come from ZipRecruiter. According to Forbes, Jim's mom and pop stores, and more are set to go on a hiring spree to meet the pent up demand. As businesses reopened, millions of jobs will need to be filled to fill these roles fast, turn to ZipRecruiter.

0 (29m 7s):
Their matching technology allows you to find qualified candidates and invite your top choices. To apply four out of five employers, find a quality candidate within the first day. Try ZipRecruiter for free at ziprecruiter.com/built. This message comes from NPR sponsor, American express business. American express business offers a line of cards, packed with features and benefits like membership rewards points, flexible payment options, employee cards, and much more to help take your business further because with needs like yours, you need a car designed for business built for business by American express.

0 (29m 48s):
Don't do business without it terms apply. Learn more@americanexpress.com slash business cards. This message comes from NPR sponsor, click up, meet a productivity solution. That's guaranteed to save you one day every week. Click up brings all of your work into one place, tasks, docs, chat, and goals. So you can focus on work without switching apps. It's how companies like Uber, Google and Webflow save time with 10,005 star reviews and used by 200,000 plus teams click up is one place for all your work and it's free forever.

0 (30m 29s):
So try click up today at <inaudible> dot com slash NPR, Maddie. SIFY here host of shortwave, the daily science podcast from NPR, listen for new discoveries, everyday mysteries and the science behind the headlines all in about 10 minutes, every weekday. It's a great addition to your daily listening, whether you're a science nerd or, you know, just a little science curious subscribe now to short wave from NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's the early 1990s and Burt's bees has just hit a million and a half dollars in revenue.

0 (31m 14s):
And one thing we did not mention in part one, which you may have figured out already, but Roxanne and bird, they were kind of a thing. They weren't just business partners, but romantic partners as well. Now at this time, 1990 Burt's bees was selling mostly candles and other things made with beeswax and they sold those things mainly at boutiques in and around new England and New York. But in 1991, Roxanne had an idea that would take the company in a brand new direction. You introduced a product that would go on to become one of your best selling, not your most famous products, your Burt's bees lip balm, how'd you come up with that idea?

1 (31m 55s):
Well, we were making other products that were basically the same formula. We were making a furniture Polish, which was wax and oil. And the boot food basically was wax and oil and lip balm is basically wax and oil. And we put a couple of amenities in it, like vitamin E and peppermint oil, but it was very clear that people were more interested in buying products for their skin and their lips and their face than they were buying products for their furniture and their shoes.

1 (32m 36s):
So once that became clear, we phased out of all of the other polishes that we were trying to sell and started focusing on, on skin. And we eventually stopped making candles as well. You

0 (32m 52s):
Started making candles because it wasn't profitable or was it make sense? I think

1 (32m 58s):
Because it wasn't scalable. And the skincare products, which were basically blending and filling, it was a very simple manufacturing process that could easily be scaled. And we were making handmade candles. So to go to an automated system, just required a lot more time, machinery and space and investment that I didn't feel would have the same return. So we dropped the candles. So we're now

0 (33m 32s):
Like in 1991, bird species is growing. You hit a million and a half dollars and you're going in one direction and that's up, you were this counter-culture art student, you were a homesteader living in a, you know, like intense and stuff, but you were kind of starting to become this thing that maybe you kind of rejected. I'm not criticizing you at all. I'm just, it's just interesting, right. That you kind of had rejected, he did this whole world, but you had a knack for

1 (34m 1s):
It. I know it's ironic. I've thought about that.

0 (34m 5s):
Did you ever reflect on it at that time? I think

1 (34m 7s):
I did. Yeah. Suddenly money became so important. Not for what it would buy, but just because it was critical to the operation of the business. Yeah. Keeping track of it. And there, I was keeping track of the cash flow money in money, out paying bills, sending bills. It was sort of a simple version of capitalism, which I had rejected years

0 (34m 35s):
Ago. Yeah. But you were not a trained MBA or business person, but obviously you have some intrinsic talent. I mean, you, you understood this in a way that you could see what Burt's bees could be and you were just doing it.

1 (34m 52s):
Well, I had roles, models. I had selected out companies that, you know, I kept them in my mind as an ideal. So I had examples, like what, I had a big sign over the production floor that said, look out Elizabeth Arden. Wow. And you know, I really felt like if, if Elizabeth could do it, so could we, yeah.

0 (35m 18s):
So you guys are growing, you're hiring. Are you overwhelmed? I mean, how many people did you have to hire in Maine to just keep the engines going?

1 (35m 29s):
We had about 45. It's a lot

0 (35m 32s):
Of people to sort of oversee. Was that hard? Did you, I mean, cause at this point I'm guess you're a CEO or a defacto CEO. If not the official CEO, I would

1 (35m 41s):
Say that was the most challenging part of the job was managing people. Are

0 (35m 47s):
You, do you see yourself as a people person?

1 (35m 50s):
No, not that much. No I can be. Yeah. If I have to be, but again, just going back to my artist, true self artists usually work alone. They're very comfortable, you know, writers and painters. And I like that myself. I mean, would you

0 (36m 8s):
Consider yourself an introvert?

1 (36m 10s):
I would say I was pretty introverted. Yeah. Yeah. I'm very happy having a very quiet lifestyle. Yeah.

0 (36m 18s):
In 1994, you guys made a decision to leave Maine and to relocate to North Carolina. Why? I mean, you're such a main person and it was such a main kind of product. What, what prompted the move?

1 (36m 30s):
The location was very difficult working in the extreme Northeast corner of the country. Getting more centralized was important for bringing raw materials in and getting finished goods out. So North Carolina was much better situated in terms of being halfway between Maine and Florida and a direct shot out to the west coast. On I 40, there were other cosmetic companies in the area, Revlon was about 15 miles away. The body shop was about 30 or 40 miles away. And there were a lot of pharmaceutical companies that use a lot of the same glass jars and caps and that sort of thing.

1 (37m 14s):
So our expenses went way down. We were able to hire people who had experience in that industry to come in and help ramp up production and computerize our office billings. There were just a lot more people down there that were trained to do those kinds of things. Yeah.

0 (37m 34s):
And so you have this new location and then presumably you have to buy equipment and supplies and, and you're like running a factory. Yeah. You

1 (37m 44s):
Know, it certainly, wasn't a very sophisticated operation and it wasn't a state-of-the-art factory. Right. But it was doable. We used a lot of used equipment. We were making one of our products in a big mixer that duke had in its cafeteria for mashed potatoes. And we, we had a bath salt that we were making in a cement mixer. So, you know, we hobbled it together. So

0 (38m 12s):
In the mid nineties, cause I don't remember Burt's bees in the mid nineties. Right. Where would you have seen a Burt's bees, lip, balm or lotion or soap, you

1 (38m 22s):
Would have found it in a independent gift shop, little small gift shops, dotted all over the country and remarketing. We were doing a kind of a grassroots marketing. We would make little sample products and we were giving those away to people. We also had catalogs that were almost like a current day blog. It would be our products, but it would also talk a little bit about the company. And I told stories about Burt and his dog.

5 (38m 55s):
Huh? When

0 (38m 57s):
Did you design that? Like now I conic logo of Bert's face on the packaging was that there from the beginning

1 (39m 6s):
We had a great artist. He lives up here in Maine and he did a woodcut portrait of Bert. And we started putting that on the package a few years into the program. And that was a very conscious decision to use Burt's face because I was, I guess, a little resentful of the way women were

4 (39m 31s):
Used

1 (39m 33s):
To market products. And I saw some of the big cosmetics lines really exploiting the image of women. Yeah. So it was important for me not to follow that.

0 (39m 50s):
It's so interesting because I would have thought that you would have P Burt's face on there because you know of the authenticity of this guy who was really the real deal, he was a beekeeper and a hermit and you know, the consumer was connecting with this authenticity. Like that's why I would have thought you would his face on it. But it was, it was about sexism.

1 (40m 9s):
I think that it, you know, it had to do with authenticity and, and Burt, but it also had to do with gender exploitation that the beauty products were, I think they were known for, you know, and as a woman who could never measure up to this glamorous image, that one found in mainstream cosmetics and beauty products that, you know, I felt like I'm not, I don't want to do that to women. So we're going to put a picture of a guy that everybody is going to feel more beautiful then. Yeah.

0 (40m 47s):
So, all right. So you guys are in North Carolina, you're running this company, it's a late nineties, 1999, Burt exits you, you buy him out when you incorporated you a two thirds, he had a third, you buy him out and he kind of

4 (41m 2s):
Retires. Yeah.

1 (41m 5s):
I think enjoyed going out on the road and being Burt. Yeah. And signing t-shirts and, and kind of being the mascot. Yeah. Yeah.

0 (41m 16s):
When he sort of was out of the picture, what was your personal relationship with him damage? Were you not getting along from your perspective? Yeah,

1 (41m 26s):
That was pretty much what it was. Huh? Our relationship had gone south. And what happened if you don't mind? Well, it was sort of a personal transgression that was very hurtful to me and it kind of popped the bubble in a way. I took a lot of inspiration from Bert and his lifestyle and his authenticity and his independence and I found him to be quite admirable. Yeah. So after the breakup, I lost a lot of inspiration. He had disappointed you basically.

1 (42m 7s):
Yeah. Yeah. You know, I think that I was starting to feel like it was time to wind this thing up. Yeah.

0 (42m 15s):
So he's sort of, he's kind of out of, out of the day-to-day running, but really had been for a long time. Yep. Meantime. Yeah. You were really, if this sort of movie rucks tends to be the point in the movie where like you would just go through the, you know, year it'd be 99, 13 0.8 million, 2,030 billion, 2001 60 million and you'd have the music and you'd got to have these guys counting big stacks of cash and you know, smoking cigars, but it is phenomenal. Like how do you go from 30 million to 60 million in one year it was just phenomenal salespeople. Was it luck? What was going on?

1 (42m 54s):
Well, it was scalable. It, every, every part of it was scalable. Once we automated filling

0 (43m 1s):
It, just make more product. Yeah. Just turn it to 11. Yeah.

1 (43m 6s):
It was fabulous. And just more and more stores were asking for these products. Yep. We spent a lot of time focused on the consumer, so they would try the product. Then they would want to go to the store and get a full size product and they would ask for it. And if a customer asks for a product, that's a great sign. Yeah. If your store ran out, the customer came back for more. It wasn't there. They would ask, Hey, where's the Burt's bees. So that kind of a pulling strategy from the, from the consumer really helped a lot with growth. And there was a tipping point where it seemed that everybody knew about it.

1 (43m 45s):
Yeah. You know, went from nobody knowing about it to everybody knowing about it. And I'm not exactly sure what that tipping point was, but it took on a life of its own.

0 (43m 57s):
You sell 80% of your shares of the company in 2003 to I'm an investment firm, not clear how much money, but a lot of money in the tens of millions of dollars. Was there something unsettling about all of a sudden coming into, you know, more money than you could ever have imagined?

1 (44m 19s):
Not really. No, I wasn't unsettled by it. I was thinking about the exit strategy very early on. Is

0 (44m 26s):
That okay? Because you just didn't want to deal with the hassle of running a company anymore.

1 (44m 30s):
Yeah. It was something became somewhat routine after a while going to big box and drug store chains didn't seem very exciting or creative to me, but it was clearly the next step. So I felt like it was time to turn it over to the professionals. And I just felt very constrained, very disconnected from what originally was an inspiration for me.

0 (44m 59s):
I imagine. So you go, you're gone. You're at this 200 three, you really leave the company. You became very wealthy from this tiny little B company that you just like started accidentally. I mean, it's pretty remarkable, right?

4 (45m 17s):
Yeah, I guess so. I mean, I don't

1 (45m 19s):
Live too differently. I have more freedom now than I did when I had no money. But in a certain sense, I had a lot of freedom then also because I had nothing to lose. Yeah. That whole theme of freedom is important to me. Always has been

0 (45m 36s):
Meantime, you were really starting to become passionate about conserving and preserving land starting in Maine. And you have given away a huge amount of your money by buying land in Maine and all over the country and giving it to the federal government, to Maine and other state agencies to develop.

1 (45m 58s):
Yep. I had been living on the land up there for years, so I knew it. And with most beauty care companies, a lot of money that they generate goes into advertising. Yeah. I've heard even that 25 cents of every dollar goes into advertising. So we didn't have that expense because we weren't advertising gorilla marketing and grassroots marketing is not very expensive. And we had put all the money we needed to, into growing the business. It still had excess cash. And I felt like we needed to find a very solid investment.

1 (46m 39s):
And so land seemed to be rock solid to me. Yeah.

0 (46m 43s):
But, and president Obama named a new national monument in Maine, largely around that land that you, you donated to the national park service

1 (46m 52s):
Katahdin woods and waters to Todd in is our mountain in Maine.

0 (46m 59s):
In 2015, Burt Shavitz passed away. He was 80 a remarkable guy, a really fascinating person. There was a film about him, which was really interesting. And that was a point where he said something that probably was a little bit hurtful. He said, I'd never want to see her again. But have you kind of made peace with him and in his memory and your relationship?

1 (47m 22s):
Oh yeah, I have. I was in love with Bert. Yeah. And we went through a lot of changes together. Had this child Burt's bees together, raised it up, off. It went. I still feel very, very close to Bert. I think about him a lot. He was quite an inspiration to me. Amuse. Yeah. Did you have a chance to talk to Bert before he died in a certain way? Yes. I was about to visit him and my girlfriend went up to visit him the afternoon before I was planning to go. And she called me to let me know that she didn't think he was going to last much longer.

1 (48m 7s):
So we sort of had a phone correspondence and he did actually pass away later that day. So I did miss seeing him in person, but I just remember him, you know, at his prime. Yeah.

0 (48m 26s):
Some people have criticized you because they say, well, you've got most of the money out of the company and Bert, you know, he didn't get as much. What's your feeling about, about that criticism?

1 (48m 37s):
I feel that I was the more responsible party for managing wealth. I could do the right thing with it. And I don't know whether Bert would have really used it very productively. He came from a family that had some wealth and he chose not to use it. Right. He didn't do anything to help the community with the wealth that he did have. And I felt like that was something that I could do and have been doing.

0 (49m 13s):
Do you plan to give away most of your wealth before you die? That's hard. That's a lot of work. Isn't it figuring out where we should go and dealing with all the incoming pitches and all the people that want some of your money. I mean, is it, does it ever get tiresome?

1 (49m 27s):
Well, I have both of my children, each are working, so they have responsibility for distributing funds every year to grantees, according to the mission that makes sense to them. So I do have help and I'm pretty spontaneous about the way I distribute grants. I don't have a real formal system. I just, you know, either it rings true to me or it doesn't

0 (49m 59s):
When you see Burt's bees today, it's going boom, by Clorox eventually purchased by clerks for almost a billion dollars in 2007, which is unbelievable. You see it everywhere. It's a CVS. It's at Walmart at seven 11. Is it, do you beam with pride? Is it wonderful to see that

1 (50m 15s):
Pay that much attention to it? I guess, you know, I mean, I certainly notice it when I'm at whole foods and I walked by the Burt's bees display always catches my eye, but I think I've let it go. You know, in many ways I just it's something apart from me now. So

0 (50m 35s):
The question I ask everybody, who's been on the show, Roxanne, I'm going to ask you, which is how much of your story and the success of this do you think is because of your skill and your intelligence and your hard work and how much of it, because of just luck?

1 (50m 47s):
Well, I was born on July 11th, which is seven 11 hot. So I have felt lucky for a long time. I mean, you certainly have to work hard, but when I look back at some of the critical events that were part of the destiny of this adventure, I certainly couldn't have pulled those off that had to be luck or divine intervention. And there's been so many of those, the right people came to me at the right time. So that has got to be luck.

0 (51m 26s):
That's Roxanne Quimby co-founder of Burt's bees. Do you use any of the products?

1 (51m 33s):
Well, the one product that I was using has been discontinued,

0 (51m 37s):
So I just got some lip balm, lip balm, like that. That's your recipe, right? I hope so. Yeah. Pretty good. Thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you are not yet a subscriber, please do subscribe or follow wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us our email addresses H ibt@npr.org to find us on Twitter. It's at how I built this or at guy Roz and on Instagram, it's at how I built this NPR or at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by REM team Arab, Louie. It was edited by Jeff Rogers with research help from Nora Cuzzi.

0 (52m 19s):
Our production staff includes Neeva grant, Casey Herman, Rachel Faulkner James DeLuise, Julia Carney, Elaine coats, Farrah safari, Liz Metzger, and Annalise Ober. Our intern is Harrison BJ Choi and Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Ross. And you've been listening to how I built this.

6 (52m 42s):
This is NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Charles Schwab last year taught us. We don't know what tomorrow holds, but Schwab knows that successful financial planning can help propel net worth by 2.5 times find easy flexible planning options and more at schwab.com/plan.