Athena Club (0s):
Time is our most precious resource at Athena. Their mission is to power a possibility in support of ambitious people through the power of delegation. Athena believes that delegation is the superpower of all highly successful people. And working with an Athena executive assistant will realize that superpower their elite executive assistance will build a one-on-one long-term partnership to help achieve all of your personal and professional goals. Athena EA are best in class, receiving ongoing training and support, so they evolve with your needs. Delegation will transform your life, and you'll have more time for what matters most to you. Invest in the corporation of you. Join the wait list@athenago.com. That's Athena go.com.

Peloton (52s):
Peloton isn't just about bikes and treadmills, it's a team of instructors ready to motivate you 24 7. With Peloton, there are literally thousands of classes ranging from strength training and yoga to running and boxing, which means Peloton is the perfect non-judgmental space to experiment with new types of movement at a level in pace that feel good for you. Super busy. It doesn't matter if you have five minutes or an hour. If you're an early riser or a fan of the evening burn, there's a Peloton class that fits into your day. Peloton is where you'll find what works for you on your schedule, wherever you happen to be at home, at the gym, or even outdoors motivation that moves you. Anytime, anywhere, try the Peloton bike or tread risk free for 30 days. Learn more@onepeloton.com. New members only terms apply.

3 (1m 39s):
Gave that thing, and it, it's hard when you're in failure to not take it personally, to not be like, This is my fault, like I'm doing something wrong here. Yeah. But so often it's really the business itself is like, does the business want to be a business or not be a business? And like so often it's not up to us. Hm. And if I could talk to my scared self back then, you know, it would just be like a failed venture is not a failed entrepreneur.

0 (2m 18s):
Welcome to How I Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz, and on the show today how Mike Saul walked away from a failed business, figured out how to source and ship grass fed beef across the country, and built Butcher Box into a 500 million brand. When I sat down to write this introduction, I needed to check on how many subscriptions I have, and I was kind of shocked.

0 (2m 58s):
There's Apple tv, New York Times cooking, Amazon Prime, Pandora Audible, Wondery Plus, Spotify, Netflix, Disney, Hulu, YouTube, Sirius xm, The New York Times, several wine clubs. And that doesn't even include my phone bill or the fact that I still pay an annual fee to use Microsoft products. And I'm just scratching the surface. According to one survey from 2021, the average American household spends almost $240 a month on subscriptions. And businesses love this model because it essentially allows them to predict recurring revenue.

0 (3m 38s):
And it means that if they do it right, if they offer a great product and great service, their subscribers stay and there's less volatility for the business. And sure, from time to time you hear talk about subscription fatigue. But the business model, according to an analysis by McKinsey, is still in its early stage of growth between 2012 and 2020. Subscription businesses grew more than 500%, or about five times faster than the revenue of s and p 500 companies. But like anything out there, podcasts, YouTube channels, coffee shops, burger joints, to really stand out, well, you have to stand out.

0 (4m 24s):
And the obvious way to do that is by finding something people want and making it easy for them to get it. One of those things is grass fed beef. And in 2015, when Mike Salguero came up with the idea for what would become ButcherBox, he was really thinking about serving people like his wife, Carlene. Her thyroid condition led both of them to seek out an anti-inflammatory diet with foods that included grass fed meat. Now, at that point, Mike had walked away from a failed startup, a marketplace for custom woodwork. He had spent six years of his life on it and was left with very little money.

0 (5m 6s):
When he launched his new venture, he had no experience in food. He also didn't know how to source meat or where to slaughter it or how to pack it, let alone ship it across the country. But he knew one thing, something he learned from his previous experience, Mike didn't wanna deal with investors ever again. So he went to Kickstarter and with the money he raised, he launched Butcher Box. And it turns out there were lots of people looking for an easy way to get grass fed meat, including CrossFitters and people on keto diets. And this year, Butcher Box is expected to reach nearly 600 million in revenue.

0 (5m 46s):
Mike Serro was born in Paraguay. Both of his parents were South American. They divorced when he was a baby. And Mike's mom moved him and his siblings to Massachusetts to be closer to the grandparents. And by the time Mike finished high school, he had a pretty clear sense of what he wanted to do.

3 (6m 4s):
I knew I wanted to be in business. Hmm. I didn't know what that meant, but I knew I wanted to be in business. And so I started Boston University in the business school. And when I got to Boston University, one of the things that I realized pretty quickly was that the academics were not gonna be very challenging for me. And I didn't really care that much about excelling in academics. And I, I decided to make the city my education.

0 (6m 31s):
What does it mean? What, how so,

3 (6m 33s):
So essentially I, I worked almost starting by my freshman winter. I was working as much as possible, had a lot of really interesting odd jobs.

0 (6m 45s):
What would you do?

3 (6m 46s):
Well, I would say the, the two most interesting jobs my freshman year. One was I worked behind the counter at a magic shop. So I, you know, would, would show people different magic tricks. And the second was I started working at the stadiums in Boston. So I worked at the Boston Garden, which was then called the Fleet Center. I worked at Fenway Park and I was one of these people that walk up and down, you know, screaming peanuts and throwing peanut bags at people.

0 (7m 12s):
And you get a commission on every sale, right?

3 (7m 14s):
Yes. You get a commission on every sale, and then you also get tips on top of it, and people pay more for you to be a little more lively. It's a great way to learn how to sell because if you stare at someone long enough, they usually buy. And really helped me realize that I loved sales and I did that. I mean, there's 80 games a year for, for baseball, so I did that a lot.

0 (7m 39s):
That's a lot. I mean, that's a lot of games. So you were, I mean, you were kind of, it's, I I would imagine not really focused on schooling that much at all. Cuz if you're gonna the Boston Garden or Fenway, you know, a couple times a week, like that's a, that's a commitment.

3 (7m 53s):
That's right. Yeah. Yeah. No, I mean, I, I graduated with a stellar GPA of a 2.9.

0 (8m 1s):
Acceptable. Reasonable. Barely. So you graduate from Boston University, I think in 2003. That's right. I read a story, an interview you gave, where you talked about at one point, like you were kind of an activist, like you were protesting, like globalization, Like this was a big thing in like the late nineties and early two thousands. Yeah. Still is in some places, but in the US it was, it was a lot of like anti globalization and you kind of took part in some of this stuff

3 (8m 30s):
I did.

0 (8m 31s):
Like anti-capitalism, anti corporate stuff.

3 (8m 35s):
Corporations are gonna ruin the world and

0 (8m 37s):
Yep. Tell me about that.

3 (8m 39s):
Yeah, so the protest that I went to was in 2002 in New York City, and it was the World Economic Forum protest. Well, the World Economic Forum was in New York City and there was a big protest against

0 (8m 54s):
It. And what, why did you, What, what was interesting to you about joining? What, what attracted you to that?

3 (8m 59s):
I just felt like the world was not going to be in a better place if we just let corporations do whatever they want. Hmm. And I remember reading a book when corporations rule the world, and I remember being very scared about corporations being allowed to do whatever they want to do. And so I go to this protest and I'm holding a sign, I believe I was outside the Waldorf Astoria Hotel. I was outside some hotel in New York City, and I'm sitting there with my sign being like, Hey, hey, ho ho, you know, corporations have to go. And I just got this, this, this voice almost in my head that said, You won't change the world from this side of the fence.

3 (9m 40s):
And that was a turning point in my life where I decided to dedicate my life to being on the other side of the fence to to running companies and to try to prove that you can do well by doing good.

0 (9m 54s):
Yeah. I mean, if I was standing next to the protest in 2002 and you're like, you know what guy, I think I'm inspired to join the other side. I've been like, Mike, you're sellout. What do you mean stay on this side of the fence? Don't be a, don't join those corporate pigs.

3 (10m 9s):
That's right, that's right. Yeah. I think it, unfortunately, capitalism is, are the rules of the game. And in my opinion, if you wanna make a change to the system, you need to know how to play in the system. Hmm. You know, I, I I spent school Yes. Saying, Oh, there needs to be a different way. Hmm. And when I got outta school, I, I really got focused on how can I build myself up to be one of these suits and actually have a seat at the table and be able to make a difference.

0 (10m 43s):
All right. So now let's find out how you sold out for the next hour and a half. I know you, you, you mentioned you kind of were interested in, in maybe getting into business somehow, but, but you didn't, you went into to, you went to work for like a real estate company at first.

3 (11m 3s):
That's

0 (11m 4s):
Right. And what was the company, what It was just a, a standard real estate agents or realtor?

3 (11m 9s):
Yeah, so it was a rental office in Allston, which was the place where BU students went to get housing. Okay. And so I graduated early, I graduated in January, so three and a half years. And I was looking around for a job, and what I really wanted was something that would help me hone my sales skills. Like, I wanted to get a little bit more professional in my sales skills. And I, I saw an ad in the paper and it said East Coast Realty, and it was like two blocks from my apartment. And so I went into East Coast Realty and the owner John was there and they was, they were playing Grateful Dead. And

0 (11m 43s):
You were like, Oh my God. It's like, I found my keep, They're, they're capitalist, but they're playing Grateful Dead. All right, I'm in. Yep.

3 (11m 51s):
Exactly. And so, you know, he is like, Well, if you wanna work here, you have to go get a license, you have to get a real estate license. And I was like, Okay. Took the 15 hours of class and took the test on Monday. And by Tuesday I was working there. If you

0 (12m 5s):
Could, you were certified realtor, like you could sell homes,

3 (12m 9s):
I could sell homes, but I didn't sell homes. I rented apartments.

0 (12m 12s):
It was rented. Okay. And it's interesting that you say you wanted to get experience in sales because a lot of people graduating college who wanna get into business don't think about, you know, about sales, but sales is like the fundamental building block of how to start a business. And you thought to yourself, I don't know what to I'm gonna do, but I need to learn how to sell stuff.

3 (12m 32s):
Yeah. I believe dealing with the rejection of not being able to sell is really important. And those lessons that I learned either at Fway Park or as a realtor have stayed with me because when you're running a company, everything is sales. Whether you're trying to sell another client or you're trying to sell your company on what you're doing. And the other thing that I love about sales is it's one of the best ways to tie how hard you work to how much you can make. And that doesn't really exist in a lot of places. Like, there's a lot of jobs where you can just work harder and harder and harder and you just make your salary. Yeah. Sales, if you're working harder and you're lucky and you work smarter, you can actually make a lot more money.

3 (13m 17s):
Yeah. And so when I started in this real estate office, I was really good at renting apartments.

0 (13m 21s):
You would, you would basically rent apartments of students and you were good at convincing them that this was the right apartment for them. I mean, how, how is that basically what you were doing? Yeah.

3 (13m 34s):
My perspective was that I was never gonna try to sell somebody on a house or an apartment. I was just gonna find them the best place and I would just keep looking until I found 'em the best place. And apparently that was a refreshing perspective. Most people didn't take that approach.

0 (13m 51s):
Hmm. And, and from what I understand, that job turned out to be really important because of some of the people you met there.

3 (13m 59s):
Yeah. The manager, the kind of office manager is this guy Seth. Seth becomes my co-founder, my first company custom made.

0 (14m 7s):
So Seth Rosen?

3 (14m 8s):
Seth Rosen, Yeah. He's also working there. Okay. So we become best friends. Also, my second or third client I ever had was my wife Carlene. Wow. Who was a freshman looking to move off campus and, you know, sparks flu. And we didn't start dating for years later, but it is just amazing how this, like, saw had in a newspaper was like, Okay, this feels like the right spot for me. How much that one decision set up. I found my wife and I found my co-founder.

0 (14m 41s):
Wow. All right. How, and, and, and so you're there and how long did you end up staying there at that company?

3 (14m 47s):
So the, the real estate season in Boston is essentially from January until September. Okay. So I worked that season and then I actually went to live with my father in South America.

0 (14m 59s):
Wow.

3 (14m 60s):
Yeah. So I had reached out to him and had said like, you're half of me and I don't even know you, and I want to get to know you. So between the middle of September and Christmas of 2003, I lived in South America and spent a ton of time learning who this man was, who I didn't know.

0 (15m 20s):
And what was that like, that experience of living with this person? Who is half of you that you didn't know?

3 (15m 28s):
It was fascinating. The, the, the most interesting thing was just how nice and caring he was and how genuine he was. And then I would see these like faces he would make, or these gestures he would do that reminded me like, Oh, that's, that's my brother Andy, or, Oh, that, that, that reminds me of my sister. And, and it, it was just a real mind bender. I didn't have the conversation with him like, Hey dad, why did you leave me? Yeah. I, I just didn't, I just wanted it to be good. Like, I just want, I just wanted to like get to know him better. And it's a really, it's a really fascinating time.

0 (16m 6s):
All right. So you spend that time with him, You come back to Boston in 2004?

3 (16m 12s):
Yep. Back to real estate. Okay. And I, I run another season in real estate, although in June I went with my friend to Israel and I had made this t-shirt kind of as a joke. This is when Fahrenheit nine 11 came out and the T-shirt said Buck Bush on it

0 (16m 35s):
Instead of F Bush. Correct. As in George W. Bush

3 (16m 40s):
As in George W. Bush.

0 (16m 42s):
Okay. Said Buck Bush. Buck Bush in the logo of George Bush.

3 (16m 46s):
Yeah. It was a, it was a blue T-shirt with white writing buck Bush.

0 (16m 51s):
And you made this on a trip to Israel?

3 (16m 54s):
I was, no, I, I made it before I got on the plane to Israel. Got it. And my friends wore these t-shirts to the movie Fahrenheit nine 11. So I get this call or an email while I'm in Israel and they're like, We sold all the t-shirts cuz I, I'd bought like 50, we need more. And so here I am in Israel and I'm deciding to make a lot more Buck Bush t-shirts.

0 (17m 21s):
You were gonna get into the T-shirt business. That's

3 (17m 24s):
Right. That's right. And I, you know, I was not a George W. Bush fan and I thought other people in Boston weren't George W. Bush fans either. So I thought it could be an interesting, an interesting shirt. Hmm. And so we set up booths at the Democratic National Convention and I found salespeople. And so I had people coming to my house who would buy the shirts for like $7 and then sell 'em for $10. And I also got into a few stores. So I had a few stores that would, you know, buy 30 shirts and then they would sell them for whatever they sold them for. And so, you know, things were starting to move.

0 (18m 0s):
How many, how many of these t-shirts did you sell

3 (18m 4s):
By the end of it? I sold 17,000 t-shirts.

0 (18m 7s):
17,000 T-shirts.

3 (18m 9s):
Yeah.

0 (18m 9s):
That said buck push. And, and, and did you, it's, I mean, I have to assume you made a quite a decent amount of cash on that.

3 (18m 19s):
I actually ended up with no cash whatsoever.

0 (18m 22s):
You made no money off of that. How was it possible you made no money off of that?

3 (18m 27s):
I was asking myself the exact same thing, How is this possible? And you know, really what was clear to me was I didn't know what I was doing. I, I didn't know how to account for it. I didn't, I just didn't know what I was doing.

0 (18m 41s):
Hmm. Alright. So I think this is around like 2004 or 2005 ish. And, and I guess you decide to, to go back to the Boston area and sort of get like a stable job. Yep. And you eventually do get hired by a commercial real estate company outside Boston. I mean, it must have been okay, right? Because you, you had, I think you wind up staying there for like three years or so. Is that right?

3 (19m 6s):
Yeah, I, well I ended up getting my MBA at night. They paid for me to get an mba. So one of the reasons why I stayed for as long as I did was because they were paying for me to go to school. But I also, me and my, my buddy Seth were best friends at that time. We were looking for something to do

0 (19m 27s):
Like a business idea. That's

3 (19m 29s):
Right. We were looking for something to buy. We were looking for a business to start like anything. I mean, we tried. Yeah. We looked at a number of different things and nothing panned out until we stumbled across custom made.com.

0 (19m 41s):
What, tell me the story of about what was custom made.

3 (19m 46s):
Sure. So yeah, this is 2007, Seth is, has moved into an apartment and decides that he wants to get a fancy coffee table and he wants to custom make his coffee table. And so he's doing his research and he's on this website custom made.com. And that ends up getting this beautiful coffee table from a woodworker in Maryland. And he's talking to the woodworker and the woodworker's. Like, I get all my business from this website custom made, it's amazing. And I pay $35 a year for my membership and a light bulb goes off in Seth's head and Seth calls me and he says, Hey, we should buy this, this website custom made.com.

3 (20m 26s):
You know, this, this guy gets all of his business and he is paying $35 a

0 (20m 29s):
Year. It was a guy who was a, a Woodward. Oh, like a carpenter?

3 (20m 33s):
Yes. So custommade.com when we purchased it started in 1996 by a woodworker, Ted Wheaton Krause. And it was a listing service for other woodworker. But this is built in 1996. And so the website actually, if you as a woodworker wanted to update your content, you had to email Ted who was the webmaster to put up photos for you or to like help you manage your profile.

0 (20m 60s):
So it was like an old school directory.

3 (21m 2s):
That's right. With an amazing SEO footprint. Just tons and tons of customers going to the website because when you would type in custom bookshelf into Google custom a.com came up first. Wow. And so the investment thesis was actually like a real estate investment thesis. We called it a shack in Manhattan. It's like this place gets tons of foot traffic and well, all we need to do is rehab the shack and jack up the rents and we'll have a nice little cash flowing business on our hands.

0 (21m 31s):
In other words, you take this like Geo Citys quality website, you update it into something that looks a little nicer, you charge people more to advertiser services and you got a nice cash flow business.

3 (21m 45s):
That was the idea. The number one thing was people need to be able to manage their own profiles. It's, I mean, it's 2008 for god's sakes. Like people can, should be able to log in and manage their own content without having to like email a, a webmaster. Yeah.

0 (21m 59s):
How many people were listed on this, on this site?

3 (22m 1s):
There was about 350.

0 (22m 3s):
Three 50. That was it? Yep. Okay.

3 (22m 6s):
So the, the, the business had a top line revenue of $34,000.

0 (22m 11s):
And, and so you thought, wow, this, there's just opportunity here. All we need to do is just get more people listing their services and we can actually make a lot more money. That's

3 (22m 24s):
Right.

0 (22m 25s):
So that's right. Alright, so, so you presumably approached the guy who owns the site and what, what'd you say?

3 (22m 33s):
I reached out to this guy Ted, and I said, Hey, if you're ever interested in selling, we'd be interested, interested in buying. I didn't hear anything from him. Meanwhile, this is 2008 and the real estate market has

0 (22m 46s):
Crashed. Yes. Really? Beginning to 2009. Everything's un even worse. But yeah.

3 (22m 53s):
And so I ended up getting laid off at the real estate office and must have been a week later, this guy Ted, actually wrote me back and said I'd be interested, let's talk.

0 (23m 6s):
Hmm.

3 (23m 6s):
And so Seth and I put our heads together and we send him an offer for $140,000 was four times revenues. That's

0 (23m 15s):
Pretty good. Yep.

3 (23m 16s):
And we put down a $5,000 deposit and we wanted 90 days of due diligence. Right. And the 90 days of due diligence was really to go find the money cuz we didn't have enough money to actually buy that website.

0 (23m 30s):
And, and he agreed to that price basically.

3 (23m 32s):
He did. Okay. Meanwhile, the, the economy is collapsing and Seth and I are running around Boston with a logo on a Blackberry trying to raise money for this idea of a woodworker listing service. You know, 5,000, 10,000, $25,000 slugs at a time.

0 (23m 54s):
This was not an easy time to raise money 2008, 2009. Right. Because lots of people lost a lot of money and we're losing money.

3 (24m 2s):
Yeah. Literally our investment thesis was like, well you could give it to us and maybe we'll make you money or you can leave it in the market and lose 30%. Yeah.

0 (24m 10s):
But you did manage to raise the money.

3 (24m 12s):
We did. We raised $500,000.

0 (24m 15s):
Okay. So the two of you are like, all right, you get the money, you buy this site, 2000, let's do this custom made.com. And the, the plan was still to be just a better listing service.

3 (24m 29s):
Right. Allow people to list their own products and then slowly increase the prices.

0 (24m 33s):
Okay. So first of all, 350 listings is not enough to, to create a business that's gonna make you some significant cash. So what did you, how did you get more wood workers to join?

3 (24m 45s):
Yeah, so we, our list or our forecast was we could get about 45. There were 45,000 custom wood workers in the United States. And then we knew with a domain name like custom made, we could move into other verticals, whether that's jewelry or glass or ceramics or other things. And so the first thing we did is we built a website. And while I've been a tech entrepreneur now for 15 or 16 years, I, I knew nothing about building a website.

0 (25m 16s):
And you and you presumably you, you had, you had some money to hire a few people with that $500,000.

3 (25m 21s):
Yeah, we, we exactly. We, we brought on a, the original team we brought on was mostly paid in equity and then we had a couple people who kind of helped us, helped us build. Okay.

0 (25m 34s):
But

3 (25m 35s):
What we launched was a total disaster. Total

0 (25m 41s):
Disaster. Well, why, what was it? I mean, I mean the plan seems pretty straightforward. You gonna make the site better, you're gonna raise rents and you're gonna go after more wood workers to, to advertise.

3 (25m 51s):
Yeah. So the first thing that happened is we just completely destroyed the search engine optimization, the seo

0 (25m 57s):
By doing what

3 (25m 58s):
We, we didn't tile the pages to each other like they were in the original site. And so over the course of a few months, these makers are calling in. They're being like, first of all, I can't use this site. I can't upload photos in the back end. I can't log in, blah, blah, blah. And all the business has dried up. I'm not making any more money. And so we, we are frantically trying to fix the website while at the same time working to sign up more and more people onto the website. That was in dire need of fixing.

0 (26m 32s):
But you, I mean, you eventually do wind up fixing the SEO and, and revamping the website and I mean, cuz you also managed to raise another round of funding, I think in, in 2010. So I mean, at that point, how was the business actually doing? Were you actually, I mean was there a cash flow coming in based around this model?

3 (26m 51s):
There wasn't cash flow, but we got it up to about $20,000 a month in, it's not bad in subscription revenue. And yeah, we, we needed more money. So we, we went out to a couple of venture places, but nobody was interested in talking with us. And so we did another round and raised an additional 600,000.

0 (27m 16s):
But really still at this point, the model was purely like the, the idea was we're just gonna make money off people paying to list on this site. That's

3 (27m 26s):
Right. Shack in Manhattan,

0 (27m 27s):
We're not gonna take a cut of a sale or anything. Correct. Okay.

3 (27m 32s):
Yep.

0 (27m 33s):
So I can understand why, why it might have been challenging.

3 (27m 38s):
Yeah,

0 (27m 38s):
I mean that mean that's a disparage the model, but I mean it's, it's kind limited, Right.

3 (27m 43s):
Especially when you're going to venture capitalists who are like, you know, they just want bigger bets than like a woodworker listing service. Yeah. So we were just on the road trying to sell and everybody said no. I mean, it was like, no, no, no. Like listing service. No way.

0 (28m 0s):
I mean, but you, I mean I know that at some point you, you broke through because I mean you were finally able to raise some money for custom made. So how did you do that? How did things turn around?

3 (28m 12s):
Yeah, so, and there was a moment we were in Polaris, Polaris Ventures and we had launched this feature called the job board. And the way the job board worked was we, we actually launched it so that we could sell members. Cuz one of the questions we would get when we're calling these potential woodworkers is like, well, how do I know that there are any jobs on there? And we created this thing called the job board where somebody could say like, Oh, I'm looking for this in this area.

0 (28m 37s):
I'm looking for like a chest of drawers in the al in the Albany, New York area. Correct.

3 (28m 44s):
And so we would say, Hey, let's go to the job board and like, look at Albany, look at these jobs. You, if you, if you had a membership, you could bid on these, on these jobs.

0 (28m 51s):
I see. Okay.

3 (28m 53s):
And so I'm in this meeting and I'm like, pull up the job board and we pull up the job board. I'm like, all we need to do is stand in between these transactions and we can be the largest marketplace for custom stuff. Hmm. As soon as I said the word marketplace, everything changed. This is 2011, Airbnb had just kind of started and people got excited about the concept of being a marketplace for custom stuff. And the venture capital came fast.

0 (29m 20s):
Right. Because once you are the sort of the middle man and you are controlling the relationship between the artisan and the end user, there's all kinds of things that could happen. You could take a cut, you could Right. You could, you're basically the platform to get, and of course that model would would be huge. Airbnb, Uber, et cetera, et cetera.

3 (29m 40s):
Right. And so we attracted First Round Capital into the round and then first Round Capital and Google Ventures led our first institutional VC backed 1.9 million. My co-founder Seth, announced that we closed it at my rehearsal dinner for my wedding. Wow. And it was very exciting. It was, it was, it was an amazing,

0 (30m 4s):
You were now a venture backed business having raised a million dollars, but presumably your business model had to change because you couldn't just charge an annual subscription fee, even if it was 50 bucks or, or 80 bucks. Like now you had to figure out other ways of, of making money. So what, what did you start to think about doing?

3 (30m 24s):
That's right. So the charter of that money was to build out a marketplace where we were going to no longer worry about subscription fees free to join, and then we were going to take a 10% cut of the transaction.

0 (30m 42s):
Okay, that

3 (30m 42s):
Makes sense from the maker. Yep. But the reality is that the model didn't work. Hmm. And you know, I I used to call this like the trade show phenomenon. Like if you go to a furniture show or a trade show and there's like all these booths, most of the makers are like sitting in the back like doing something or they're not out there selling. And you know, you think about the psyche of a woodworker, oftentimes these are people who were maybe a bit of a loner, not necessarily super sociable, didn't necessarily like writing, like obviously this is generalizations, but the written word is not necessarily like their strong suit.

3 (31m 22s):
Yeah. And now we're asking them to put themselves out there to like sell their expertise

0 (31m 29s):
And to bid on projects

3 (31m 30s):
And to bid on projects and to get rejected a lot. Yeah. And to put a lot of work into like, here's a sketch and I can do this for $2,000 and then the customer just doesn't go anywhere. Yeah. Getting something custom is an incredibly intimate back and forth conversation that can be, you know, dozens of back and forth communications before anything actually happens. And we tried to like, put ourselves into the middle of that and it didn't, it just didn't work. And you know, despite that we're out like, well, let's just raise more money, maybe we can make it work. Yeah. And we tried a number of different things. Like we, we built a whole concierge team, so like kind of take the pressure off the maker and, and we would do the back and forth, try a number of different things to make it work.

3 (32m 13s):
I mean, we, we pushed that boulder up the hill for years trying to make it work. But the reality is that the whole premise was wrong. It, we just went on that premise because that's the only way we could get funded.

0 (32m 27s):
But what was the, I mean, what was the, I mean, if you had 12,000 makers on this site, there's a lot of makers and you had, you know, tens of thousands, maybe hundreds of thousands of people coming to the site every month. And by the way, did you

3 (32m 41s):
Yes.

0 (32m 42s):
And let's say 5% of of those site visits resulted in a transaction. Why didn't you make money? What, what was the problem?

3 (32m 51s):
The big issue with the model was very few of the people who posted a project to something they wanted would actually transact on that project. And what you're doing is you're essentially taxing all of these makers who have to like say, Hey, I'm Joe and I would love to work on this and put themselves out there. And they only have the capacity to do that a little bit. So there were a number of people who were quite successful. We have lots of maker stories of people who did incredibly well,

0 (33m 18s):
But they had to hustle. They

3 (33m 20s):
Had to hustle.

0 (33m 21s):
Yeah.

3 (33m 23s):
Actually, most of the people who did incredibly well were not necessarily the best artisan, just amazing at sales.

0 (33m 30s):
So you were the CEO and you were running this company and was getting, you were getting more and more cash coming into the business, but you were burning through the cash? Yeah,

3 (33m 43s):
We were burning it at about $600,000 a month at our

0 (33m 46s):
Height. And that was mainly on hiring software engineers?

3 (33m 50s):
Yes. It was mainly on staff. So designers, product people, engineers, marketing people.

0 (33m 58s):
And how much was coming into the, in, in, into the business every month?

3 (34m 2s):
Oh, like 30 grand.

0 (34m 7s):
Wow.

3 (34m 8s):
Yeah.

0 (34m 9s):
Wow. Yeah. And, and as your, I mean, having Google Ventures and Schor Capital and some of these big, you know, first round involved, were they getting in your business? Were they like, Okay, you just gotta do this, you gotta do that? Or were they kinda leaving you to just run it?

3 (34m 25s):
No, they, they were definitely getting into our business. I mean, so Google was like, Hey, if you want, we can bring our technologist over and he can talk with your technology team. Or hey, if you want, we can ever user experience person come over

0 (34m 39s):
Of. And you're like, Are you kidding me? Love

3 (34m 41s):
That. We're great. That's amazing. Yeah. Come on in, see everything. And you know, right after we raised this money, Google's position was that our team was not good.

0 (34m 54s):
Who on your team? Your, your, your technol your technical team?

3 (34m 58s):
Essentially everybody. Because you know, like from the VC's perspective, there wasn't a question about whether the marketplace was the right concept. Like that's what they invested in. It was really a question of like, well, we must have the wrong team to go activate that. So like, let's go figure out who that person is. Hmm. And so we, we believed that, Right. We, we were like, well, if Google says that's true, that's gotta be true.

0 (35m 23s):
Yeah.

3 (35m 24s):
And you know, I have this analogy of, I I heard it somewhere, it's not mine, but when you start a company, it's like you're hacking through the jungle with machetes. Hmm. And you're just like, you just need people who are willing to stay up and hack and try to find a path.

0 (35m 41s):
Yep.

3 (35m 42s):
And eventually you find a path and that path leads you to a dirt road and there's a bus on the road. Yeah. At custom made. That bus was funded by Google and funded by First Round Capital. And what we did is we hopped on that bus and we looked at a great deal of the hackers who helped us get on that bus. And we said, You guys don't know how to drive. Hmm. And we left them in the jungle.

0 (36m 11s):
Hmm. They were saying, your team isn't good enough, you've gotta replace them. Which, I mean, setting aside the, the, the kind of the interpersonal challenges of doing that with people, you know, let's say they were right. Did you, were you able to get good engineers?

3 (36m 31s):
So we, we started hiring not for culture, but for experience, for resume. And over the course of the next two or three years, we went from overhauling our technology team, our design team, our product team, our marketing team. And then, and when there was no one left, it was like, yeah, it must be a leadership problem. We gotta do something about Mike and Seth

0 (37m 3s):
When we come back in just a moment.

3 (37m 5s):
How Mike emerges from a failed business and pivots to something that seems even harder. A subscription service for grass fed beef. Stay with us. I'm Guy Ross and you're listening to How I Built This.

Shopify (37m 35s):
Can we talk about notifications for a second? Who actually leaves those sounds on anymore? Well, besides that kind, that's another sale on Shopify. The all in one commerce platform to start, run and grow your business. Shopify makes it simple to sell to anyone from anywhere with Shopify, you'll create an online store in your vibe, discover new customers and grow the following that keeps them coming back. Shopify has all the sales channels sorted so your business keeps growing from an in-person POS system to an all-in-one e-commerce platform. Even across social media platforms like TikTok, Facebook, and Instagram. Sign up for a free trial at shopify.com/built. Go to shopify.com/built to start selling online today. shopify.com/built.

Will Be Wild (38m 29s):
Every day it seems like there's a new story about the January 6th house committee hearings, someone getting subpoenaed or even rated by the fbi. So it's hard to parse all the information and really understand how things happened, how they've come together, and what's coming next from Pineapple Street. And Wondery will be wild as a podcast that explains all of that. Exploring the human stories left out of the intruction headlines, stories about the people who took part that day, the people who saw it coming, and the people who feared it was just the beginning. There's even a new bonus episode focusing on what we've learned from the hearings, the shocking moments and the deeper takeaways. And a look ahead at what's coming up as a hearings wrap and the midterms reshape Congress to listen to this new episode and all the rest. Be sure to follow will be wild on Amazon Music or anywhere you get your podcasts.

0 (39m 24s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built this. I'm Guy Raz, so it's 2014 and Mike is still the CEO of CustomMade, a woodworking marketplace that's slowly running out of steam. And Mike and his co-founder, Seth, they're under a lot of scrutiny from the company's board.

3 (39m 44s):
The board said, We think we need to get like a c a real CEO in here. I was like, Okay. And Seth called me one night and he said, I feel like it's the fourth quarter and I haven't been the starting quarterback and I want to be the starting quarterback. And I I, I had just my daughter Marley was just born. Obviously things weren't working out with the board and I didn't, I wasn't like I had any great ideas, so I was like, Yeah, go for it.

0 (40m 13s):
Yeah.

3 (40m 14s):
And so Seth took over as the ceo,

0 (40m 18s):
How did you, how were you managing your own anxiety and stress at the time?

3 (40m 23s):
Poorly.

0 (40m 24s):
Cause you were sitting on top of 20, 29 million that, that you'd raised and that, and essentially this message that you're getting back from your investor saying you're not doing a good enough job.

3 (40m 34s):
Yeah. But

0 (40m 35s):
You knew that no matter what you did, the people you were serving, the artisans, it just wasn't, it wasn't the right fit.

3 (40m 43s):
I'm, by my nature a very hopeful person and so I was definitely able to remain hopeful that the next change we were gonna make was gonna work. Right. The hardest part for me was actually losing the culture. I remember around that time basically sitting in my car, not being able to walk into the office

0 (41m 6s):
Because you were so,

3 (41m 9s):
The people were so foreign to me. It was like, it just felt so hostile and it felt so, because I had left all the people who helped me get, get there in the jungle, there was no one left. It just became a place that I felt very unwelcome. And that feeling is just a horrendous feeling. I, I gave that thing everything. I mean, I sacrificed my health, I sacrificed my time. I would work there almost every Saturday and it, it just didn't work. And it's hard when you're in failure to not take it personally, to not be like, this is my fault, like I'm doing something wrong here.

3 (41m 49s):
Yeah. But so often it's really the business itself is like, does the business want to be a business or not be a business? And like so often it's not up to us. And if I could talk to my scared self back then, you know, just be like a failed venture is not a failed entrepreneur. Just keep trying to do the best thing possible. And if this doesn't work, you're, you're okay.

0 (42m 18s):
Yeah. While your, while custom made was sort of, let's say imploding, how, what was your relationship like with Seth, your co-founder? Who was your friend?

3 (42m 29s):
It was good. I'm really proud of the fact that we were able to remain best friends through all the ups and downs. We had a good, I mean, we would get on the phone and scream at each other and, you know, it was obviously very tense, but we both just maintained a huge amount of respect for each other and a huge amount of love for each other.

0 (42m 48s):
So eventually you, you leave the business and it, it sort of starts to wind down. And I, I read that, that you were able to find new jobs for most of your employees, which is, which is pretty great. Yep. But what about the, about custom made with the website and stuff? What, what happened to it once, once you left?

3 (43m 8s):
So the website remained, so what ended up happening is Seth and four other people remained at custom made and essentially bought it out of bankruptcy. And he has done the miraculous job of pivoting it to a jewelry site. So it's custom made.com, it's a custom jewelry and they do everything themselves. So there's no back and forth with a maker. You're going back and forth with a designer who is an employee of Custom Made. And it, the, the, the model actually works amazingly well. You, you can get, you can get a custom engagement ring for cheaper than you can get it in a store and you get to actually say exactly what you want, what you want done.

3 (43m 50s):
So the dream that we always had is actually starting to come to fruition. But

0 (43m 57s):
You were, you'd put seven years of your life into this thing,

3 (43m 60s):
Seven hard years. Yep.

0 (44m 1s):
And did you think in your mind, I'm never gonna be able to raise money again?

3 (44m 5s):
I thought in my mind I'd never want to raise money again. Right.

0 (44m 10s):
How was your confidence as a, as a leader? I mean, were you thinking, Yeah, okay, this didn't work, I'm gonna start my next thing? Or were you thinking, God, I maybe I'm not cut out for this, this entrepreneurial stuff.

3 (44m 23s):
My, I knew I wanted to remain an entrepreneur. I knew I didn't want to go get a job, but I also was deeply insecure about that failure and about how was I gonna pick up the pieces and start over. But fortunately I didn't have much time to think about it because what ended up happening was, while I was at Custom made, my wife and I were trying a whole bunch of different diets. She has a autoimmune disease, Hashimotos, which is a thyroid condition. And a lot of the stuff we were reading online was suggesting, Hey, if you eat like a anti-inflammatory diet that can help with your autoimmune disease,

0 (45m 8s):
Tom Brady diet.

3 (45m 9s):
Exactly. So a lot of these elimination diets would say, don't eat conventional meat. Go eat grass fed beef.

0 (45m 18s):
And I think, by the way, I think they said this because, and again, I'm not a doctor here, but, but the, the, the idea is that meat or beef that is raised with an, with antibiotics and steroids and stuff, that, that has an impact on our bodies when we eat it. That's the, that that was a lot of what people were writing.

3 (45m 36s):
That's right. So we're following these elimination diets. We're online, you know, going to Danielle Walker's website or Whole 30 or Mark's Daily Apple or any of these other ones. And so the first thing that happened was I realized it was remarkably hard to find grass fed beef or it was prohibitively expensive. Yeah. And so the idea behind the company, I had a very modest plan. My, my plan was to start a hobby business while I went and figured out what was next. And the idea behind the company was, I wonder if there's a lot of other people who want grass fed beef and can't find it, I should try to like bring grass fed beef, like to the masses, try to get people to have, have a good, reliable source of grass fed beef.

0 (46m 22s):
Right. The only, the only challenge is that with grass fed beef, it's less fatty. Right. So, so the argument that people who love beef made and continue to make is that the fat in meat is what gives it flavor. And that's why I like coba beef or Wagu beef is so delicious cuz they eat a lot of, they're given a lot of corn.

3 (46m 42s):
Yeah. So in this country, if you think about the, the raving system for beef, it's choice prime select, those are like the, the three types of beef you get. And all that is, is when you cut open the, the carcass and you look at the ribeye, it's how much marbling is in the ribeye. Yeah. Yeah. And so, like the entire rating system in this country is based on how much fat could you put into that animal? Yes. I don't believe that is the right way to rate the quality. And if you look at other places in the world, that's not how quality is rated.

0 (47m 19s):
But this idea was in your head as like a kind of a hobby, a side project to figure out your next move.

3 (47m 27s):
Yeah. This was like the Tim Ferris four hour work week. Right. I'm gonna like live in Argentina and look at my laptop, see my numbers,

0 (47m 36s):
Take tango classes,

3 (47m 37s):
Take tango classes, call it a day. Yep. And so we were doing these elimination diets, then I started buying meat from farmers and I I I meet a farmer in a parking lot and he gives me like a trash bag full of

0 (47m 50s):
Meat. And, and I guess at this point, 2015, it sounds like we're talking about the ancient history, but you could buy, and you can still buy this in some places, like a, a share of the cow, like a quarter or a half it used That's right. Basically you gotta buy a lot of that meat. That's right. And, and, and this was, so you guys, you and your wife could consume it.

3 (48m 8s):
Right. And it, but we ended up, because you know, these, these farmers were like, Oh, I need to sell you half a half a cow. We ended up needing to like sell it to friends because, or sell, I actually up bringing it to custom made and selling it to people at custom made because it was just like too much meat for our freezer. And I remember distinctly where at custom made and I sold someone some meat and he's like, This would just be so much easier if it was delivered to my house.

0 (48m 34s):
Yeah.

3 (48m 35s):
I was like, Yeah, that would be easier, wouldn't it? And I just got obsessed with like, okay, let's, let's say, how would I do that? And I called the project Meet with a name, which would've been a really bad name to, to lead with. And the idea was, Hey, why don't we try to ship you your monthly allotment of grass food, beef. And I couldn't figure out how to make the business work. I couldn't figure out how to ship a box frozen in the mail, how to buy grass, food, beef, where to buy grass

0 (49m 10s):
Fed beef. Like Yeah. I mean you were a real estate. And then the woodworking guy, I mean this was, you're not a food, this is not your area

3 (49m 17s):
Of expertise, not my area of expertise at all. And I ended up hunting down the former head of operations of Omaha Steaks.

0 (49m 26s):
Omaha Steaks, which, which for I think a lot of people know that they advertise in magazine stuff. You can get stakes from oak cows and I guess Omaha, Nebraska. And they've shipped them to Frozen. Right. And they've been doing this for a long time. Like 50 years or maybe longer.

3 (49m 41s):
Yeah. Omaha Stakes have been around for a hundred years. A hundred plus years. And they were really the only big direct to consumer steak shipper.

0 (49m 53s):
Yeah. And it was like, kinda like Harry and David pairs like getting an Omaha steak was a special thing that somebody would send you for a gift or something.

3 (50m 1s):
That's right. It's a largely gift giving business, largely large in the holiday time frame. So I, you know, I read an article, he was quoted in it, I hunted him down on LinkedIn, I reached out to him and he was like, Oh actually I've been out of Omaha for over two years and I don't have an on compete anymore and I'd be glad to help you. Huh.

0 (50m 23s):
Wow. This is the guy you gotta talk to. He's the guy. You're like, where'd you get the meet from? Where do you get the, how do you ship it? How do you package it? How do you, like what And slaughter houses are so complex in the US there's U S D A and then there's like, it's just really comp And a lot of these farmers don't slaughter their own meat because they don't own the slaughterhouse.

3 (50m 42s):
Right. There's

0 (50m 44s):
A lot, there's a lot of complexity

3 (50m 46s):
There. Multiple steps, there's a slaughterhouse and then generally that goes to like a cutting facility where they may cut it into steaks and then that has to be packaged and frozen and then that has to go to fulfillment center and then the fulfillment center ships it and it has to have like a certain amount of dry ice in it and has to be in the right box. And like yeah. All of those details, I had no idea how to deal.

0 (51m 6s):
And by the way, like at this point, 2015, how much grass fed meat is being raised in the US at all? Probably not that much.

3 (51m 12s):
Not much to date. There's not a lot of beef raising the United States that's grass fed. It's about 2% of the overall beef and also beef at that point, grass fed was like, nobody was really worried about the quality and the taste. And so a lot of the grassfed that came out early was actually dairy cows or was older and it, it wasn't like high quality stuff. And so the perception that a lot of people had about grassfed was like, Oh, I tried it is like really chewy and gross gaming.

0 (51m 43s):
Yeah. And, and and dairy cows, I should mention cuz I they are grass fed by, by and large I think.

3 (51m 50s):
Yeah. Some are not, not all of them, but, but some are. And that was what people had brought to market as like the first grass fed Right. Rather than a product where they were really thinking about what the animals eating and like how that's gonna taste. And grass fed has, has changed dramatically over the past five years.

0 (52m 7s):
All right. So you, you seek this guy out who worked for Omaha Stakes and is, and you contact him and say, Hey, can I ask you some questions? What does he say?

3 (52m 17s):
He was like, Sure, fly me to Boston, I'm happy to meet with you and I'm tell you everything I know. So he flew to Boston, we met, and I ended up giving him equity in the company rather than paying him. And he, I I would not have been able to start this business without, without this guy.

0 (52m 37s):
What, what's his name again?

3 (52m 38s):
His name is Ron Ike.

0 (52m 40s):
Ron Ike. Okay. And so, but, but you didn't yet have a business, but you said, here, I'm gonna give you equity in this business, but you knew that you were gonna start something, Right?

3 (52m 48s):
Well, I, I knew at that point I knew I was gonna start an LLC and, you know, was gonna give him stock in the llc. Yeah. And once I met with him and he's like, Oh, this is totally possible. Like I can do this, this, and this and set, set this up. Then it was like, okay, there, let's go. There's a, there's a business here.

0 (53m 9s):
All right. I'm curious at this time, how much money did you have in the bank? Did you have like over a million dollars to put to maybe start this?

3 (53m 17s):
No, maybe like 500.

0 (53m 20s):
So basically that was all the money you made over a period of seven years. Yeah. So you did not have a whole lot of money to start this thing. No. But you had this and, and, and he comes out and, and this guy, presumably Ron is, he's a wellspring of information, right? Cuz he's done this before. Absolutely. So you, you sort of, what, what do you lay out to him? You lay out, what's the vision you kinda lay out to him?

3 (53m 46s):
I laid out a, a vision for an Omaha steaks but focused on grass fed beef and a monthly subscription. All

0 (53m 56s):
Right. Now the question is how do you do that?

3 (53m 58s):
Right. And the reason for the monthly subscription was when we were at custom made and we had these makers who were at the very beginning who were this listing service monthly subscription's amazing if you keep the person right. Yeah. And so I just thought, well, people buy meat all the time. I imagine they would just prefer to have a monthly subscription. And so, and, and I was looking for a hobby business and I felt like it would be much easier to just sell someone once and then, you know, kind of dial in there meat subscription. Yeah. And so Ron comes in and he says, first of all, he's like, it's too much beef. You need to move into other things as well. He's like, you know, people are gonna want chicken and they're gonna want pork. And by the way, those two species have the same issues in terms of being able to get a high quality product.

3 (54m 42s):
Hmm. And so it became, rather than just like grass fed beef, it became a beef chicken pork. That was kind of what we were, what we were looking at. And Ron had all these connections. He had a connection with a company in Wisconsin called NS VGs. And NS VGs had meat cutting next to a frozen fulfillment distribution center. So it really solved all of our problems. All, all the

0 (55m 6s):
Same. Wow. So Ron has these connections and he has the knowhow of like how to do this, but where do you, like, where do you start to forget about getting customers that's gonna come later? Cause you have this intuition that people want this food, but where are you gonna, where are you gonna source this stuff from? I mean, does Ron have the answers? Where, where do you find the meat?

3 (55m 31s):
Ron did have the answers. Yes.

0 (55m 33s):
He was like unlocking this just world of, of knowledge.

3 (55m 37s):
Yeah. Literally unlock, unlock the business for me, I would not have been able to do this. But he had some contacts of people in Iowa and he believed that they could provide what we were looking for.

0 (55m 53s):
All right. So just curious, like how do you, in terms of shipping beef, right, how do you make that? Like how did you make that economical cuz ice and dry ice, which you have to use is is heavy right? Until, I guess, until it evaporates.

3 (56m 11s):
It is, It's about five pounds of dry ice per day in transit.

0 (56m 15s):
Five pounds per day. Meaning that every day five pounds evaporates.

3 (56m 18s):
That's right. Okay. So if you were gonna ship a box from Wisconsin to California, which was a five day ship, you were putting 25 pounds of dry in that

0 (56m 26s):
Thing. Oh, okay. So 25 pounds of that has, cuz by the time it gets to my front door five days later, that's gotta still be pretty much frozen meat.

3 (56m 34s):
That's right.

0 (56m 35s):
But there's gonna be no dry ice left.

3 (56m 37s):
Ideally there is like a little sliver or no dry ice left. Yes. Yeah.

0 (56m 41s):
All right. So you have this idea to, to do a meat box and you come up with a name butcher box and which is a very good name. Yep. And you knew that from your previous experience that you did not wanna seek out outside investors.

3 (56m 57s):
Right? At the, at the beginning it was that I didn't think the opportunity was big enough to have outside investors. Right. I thought this was gonna be a very small company. Right. So I had this, I had this goal that I was gonna start the company for less than $10,000. That was because I, I didn't think that if it's a hobby, like I wasn't really willing to spend more than $10,000 to get this thing off the ground. Hmm. And then as I got going, I didn't want outside influence on how to build this company cuz I, I thought that my first company, some of the outside influence didn't help and I didn't want to have to deal with that again.

0 (57m 37s):
But even to get it off the ground, Right. How are you gonna do that? Because I have to assume this packaging company in Wisconsin as a minimum order size and, you know, you've gotta buy meat and Right. And these processor producers are, they don't wanna just sell you $500 of the meat so you, you know, $10,000 you had of your own money, how are you gonna get the cash to launch this thing?

3 (58m 1s):
Right. And it's amazing how these like constraints can actually shape the business that you're in. So we launched with a Kickstarter campaign and the idea behind the Kickstarter campaign was that we were going to be able to get a whole bunch of pre-orders and then we were gonna be able to order the meat from NS vs. And ship it to customers. And the the other thing that we did, which was like very unique and had really never been done before, and again it was because we wanted to like save money, was we said, You're just gonna choose, do you want beef? Do you want beef and chicken, or do you want beef, chicken, and pork? And then we're just gonna send you whatever we want. Like we're gonna surprise you.

3 (58m 42s):
Yeah. And the reason why we did that is cuz I didn't want to carry a lot of inventory. Yeah. And, and so the idea was, hey, we're gonna know we get 500 orders, we're gonna know what that box looks like, box one, and we're gonna ship it out to everybody and like, we're not gonna have to worry about inventory. Cause where you get into trouble is if you have a bunch of different SKUs and you're trying to like, you know, carry them all in case the customer wants that versus

0 (59m 6s):
That. Yeah. Everybody wants breast, chicken breast.

3 (59m 8s):
Right. So we just went for kind of center of the plate stuff that we knew people would like. We added recipes to help people learn how to cook. And everyone got this box curated by the butcher by us. Got it delivered to their door.

0 (59m 23s):
All right. So you decide to do a Kickstarter campaign and, and did you, I mean, did you make like a cool video and, and tell me how you Yeah. Tell me what you did and what, what'd the video say?

3 (59m 35s):
So the video, the video was all about the nostalgia of how people used to go to a butcher shop and talk to a butcher and really be connected to the meat that they're eating and that we're trying to bring things, what we said back to nature. Yeah.

0 (59m 51s):
Are you, is it like you in a field that like a grassfield

3 (59m 53s):
Pring around with with with cows? Yeah. Yeah. You, you can still find that Kickstarter Butcher Box kickstart a video. And so we did a 30 day campaign. We went out to raise $25,000 and we ended up raising $210,000

0 (1h 0m 14s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Mike begins to grow the business by using a Trojan horse strategy, reaching out to food influencers and putting their recipes in his boxes. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This. Hey everyone, it's me and I've got a really exciting announcement. I have a brand new podcast, it's called The Great Creators. And don't worry, I'll still be talking to founders of some of the world's best known brands on how I built this.

0 (1h 0m 57s):
But on the great creators I'm interviewing your favorite actors and musicians, filmmakers and other artists and talking about where their creativity comes from In our conversations, you'll hear a side of people you've never heard before, People like world renowned comedian, Stephen Colbert and Nick Kroll. Chart topping musicians like the Chainsmokers and Bjork and revered actors like Adra McDonald, Andy Garcia and Zoe DA Chanel. Follow the great creators with Guy Raz on Amazon Music, Apple Podcasts, or wherever you are listening right now. You can listen to new episodes of the great creators one week early on Amazon Music or early and add free by subscribing to Wonder Plus in Apple Podcasts or the Wondery app.

0 (1h 1m 50s):
Hey, welcome back to how I Built This. I'm Guy Raz, so it's 2015 and Mike has just done a Kickstarter campaign for Butcher Box where he's raised a lot more than he expected over $200,000. And now he has to fulfill all of those orders.

3 (1h 2m 9s):
I was in Rush because I wanted to not only get the boxes for people, but then to get them to sign up for as subscribers. Ah yeah. And so we were shipping our Kickstarter boxes within two weeks of the campaign being over. Hmm. And then what we did is we, so we launched our website, but with the Kickstarter people, we shipped them all a box and we started calling them and saying like, Hey, do you like your box? Do you wanna sign up as a subscriber? Can we take your credit card? I believe we sent about 1100 boxes to different customers and we got like 60% of them to sign up. So right away we had 600, 700 subscribers.

0 (1h 2m 51s):
So alright, you launch, you get the boxes out to people and I have to assume, even though you raise all this money, that's not enough for a big marketing campaign, Right? Like you need to get the word out. That's right. And so from what I gather, your strategy was like, let's just go to any paleo influencer and see if we can get them to promote our product.

3 (1h 3m 13s):
That's right. The first thing we did is we, because we had this curated box of like mystery meat, people didn't know what was gonna, what was gonna show up. We wanted to like include recipes in the box to help people like cook it but not ship any of the ingredients. Just like, you know, just the meat. But then here's a recipe for teriyaki chicken or short ribs or whatever. So what we did is we reached out to these influencers and we're like, hey, we started this company and we started it because like we followed this diet and you know, we used your website and we really love this recipe for squash and ground beef and we were wondering if we could include it in our box.

3 (1h 3m 55s):
And we'll put something on there that says like, your name and your website and stuff like that. Like, would that be okay with you? We call it like a Trojan horse. These influencers are like, Yeah that sounds awesome. Like of course you can use my recipe. Yeah. Like make sure you have my website on there. One on, oh by the way, what do you guys do? We're like, Oh, this is what we do and by the way, we're launching a referral program. So if you, if you wanna become an influencer for us, we'd love to have

0 (1h 4m 20s):
You. And how did the referral program work? I mean, you would give them like a special link and when people click on that link they would get a a they would get some money.

3 (1h 4m 29s):
Yeah. So they would each get a unique link and then when people click on it, it drops a cookie onto their browser. And so if they were to order over the next 30 days, that influencer would get money. But because we didn't have a lot of money, what we told these people is like, we can't pay you a lot of money because we needed to make sure that we were what we called box one profitable. Like we made money on the first box. Right. And so what we offered them was a residual, it was like, yeah, we can't pay you like $50 upfront. What we can do is we can pay you $10 every month for the life of that subscriber.

0 (1h 5m 8s):
So if, if, if, if your link gets somebody to subscribe every month that they pay the subscription fee and it's anywhere from like 99 to now almost 300 bucks. Right. Depending on the box, that influencer would get 10 bucks a month. Yeah.

3 (1h 5m 22s):
At the time we had one box it was $129. Okay. And so they would get anywhere from 10 to $15 per month and they loved it. You know, I, I often joke that I think the American dream is to sit on your ass and collect checks and that was essentially what was happening. I mean, people were able to send an email a quarter to their email list and say, Hey Butcher box is great, you should sign up and then just on a monthly basis just get pretty sizable checks. And so we reached out to anybody in paleo, in CrossFit in keto. Keto was just kind of starting, but yeah, in that world we reached out to all of them to try to get them to promote ButcherBox.

0 (1h 6m 6s):
Right. Grass fed meat was a big part of that and is a big part of that culture and it's kind of a, an important subculture and it, we've talked about this cuz it's fueled brands like RX Bar for example, like that really kind of fueled that company. And I know that grass fed beef is really important, but obviously pigs, dony grass and either do chickens, they corn and feed and that's okay I guess. Right?

3 (1h 6m 29s):
Yeah. Their, their bodies are better adapted to that type of diet. But with them, one of, one of the big issues, first of all, you've got antibiotic use Yeah. In both Right. And humane treatment is a really important part as well. So, you know, essentially we're looking for the grass fed equivalent, but that doesn't mean that they just eat grass. It's like what are those claims that then transfer over to other species?

0 (1h 6m 54s):
I wonder also if at the time like the, the hot boxes at the time were like those ready made. That's right. Things or or or like ingredients that were already pre proportioned like Blue Apron, which Yep. These days isn't isn't doing as well as it as once did it's public, public trade company. But like that was a thing too. People were like, Oh man, what am I gonna do with these steaks? How am I gonna make this food?

3 (1h 7m 19s):
I actually, I think we stumbled into this, but right from the beginning we were attracting a customer who like didn't want to be told what to do with their meat.

0 (1h 7m 29s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 7m 30s):
We were attracting a customer who might be a little more adventurous in the kitchen or might have some knowledge already who wanted to be able to do what they wanted to do. Yeah. And so that's like categorically different than the blue aprons or hella Freshs of the world where it's like, here's your spice packet and here's your potatoes you're gonna saute this with, And we kind of took like the most important element of one of those boxes, the meat and just made it all about the meat and people, people really loved that approach.

0 (1h 7m 58s):
Hmm. Your goal was to get I think a thousand subscribers by the end of 2016, but you got 10,000 subscribers by the end of that first full year in business.

3 (1h 8m 11s):
Yeah. Pretty remarkable.

0 (1h 8m 13s):
And that was purely because of this influencer marketing strategy

3 (1h 8m 17s):
That was the largest part of it. We also tried to do, you know, email sends and just anything we could do.

0 (1h 8m 24s):
No paid advertising.

3 (1h 8m 26s):
No, we didn't really start paying for advertising until 2017 I believe. But

0 (1h 8m 31s):
Were you profitable from day one?

3 (1h 8m 33s):
Yeah, we had to be, you know, people oftentimes ask like, well how did you build a company with like no outside capital and no bank debt And you know, and one of the things that really worked to our advantage is that company in Wisconsin that cut all of our meat for us and shipped all of our boxes, they were pretty bad at billing us. So, you know, it turned out that they would like, it would, there'd be like five weeks of, of float in between like them shipping out boxes and them and them and them charging us. And then it was 30 day terms. So like they kind of helped us finance it at the very beginning. But yeah, no, we, we, we always had to be profitable and so we were always, we were always looking at the cost of the box and what can we do and how can we increase the gross margin and all of the, all of the, you know, the things that I didn't have to worry about my last company cuz we were incredibly funded.

0 (1h 9m 29s):
Really it was a, a super efficient model that didn't require a lot of manpower, a lot of humans. Right. Because it was, you were doing, you were handling sort of the technical logistics, sort of the the the relationship with the customer but then everything else was handled by these other That's right. Companies.

3 (1h 9m 47s):
Yeah. And because I started this business as a hobby, our backbone, like the farms, the processing facilities, pick, pack and ship, customer service, all of that was third party. Hmm. And we do that to this day as one of the ways that we've been able to be very capital efficient.

0 (1h 10m 6s):
By the end of 2016, you had done 5 million in revenue and you were profitable and were you significantly profitable?

3 (1h 10m 13s):
No, I mean at that point we didn't really even know because our, we had like our, our accounting systems or books. It was just like really hard to actually know how much money we were making. But no, we were not dramatically profitable by any means, but we were profitable.

0 (1h 10m 28s):
Alright, let's talk about B for a moment cuz we have to talk about some of the downsides here. Okay. And I say this as a meat, did everything I eat unfortunately too much meat, but, and, and we've had Pat Brown on the show, you know, the founder of Impossible Foods. We've had Lauren Poncho who has Temple Creek, an amazing grass fed farm and ranch in California that produces some of the most awesome grass fed meat. But we also know that livestock production, not just beef but you know, all animals, it creates devastating carbon emissions cows especially cuz of methane. And we know that it's a fact that livestock, whether it's grass fed or feed lot produced is not great for the world.

3 (1h 11m 16s):
Yeah. So there's a lot to unpack there. I don't wanna build a product that is just causing, going back to my roots of wanting to do well by doing good. I don't wanna build a product that's causing like a bigger problem in the world. I believe that meat is here to stay. Yeah. It's a question of how do you make it work and how do we make it sustainable. When people look at the beef industry, I think it's important for people to recognize that what we are talking about is a very small percentage of the beef industry. So grass food beef in this country is about 2% of the overall beef consumed. So, you know, generally the large confined feeding operations are the places where some of the research has been done on environmental impacts.

3 (1h 12m 2s):
And we agree that there needs to be a better way. What we're trying to do as a company is to find a third way to raise animals. I don't think that the solution is let's move to impossible burgers. And on the other side you've got kind of the beef enthusiast who are like, Yeah, well this is American made beef and like we're just gonna do it. We wanna honor that. Like what's happening in the industry right now is not necessarily good for the environment, but we believe, I believe that there's a way to raise animals that regenerates the soil. There's a lot of really interesting research on

0 (1h 12m 44s):
Yeah. A savory and he has done this work as he's gonna, Ted talk wants to see it Yeah. That you, you you sort of move the animals around naturally as they would on the savannas and, and they trampled the dirt and then they fertilize it and then it grows flowers and Yeah.

3 (1h 12m 58s):
And, and that dirt sucks out the carbon. It decarbonize

0 (1h 13m 4s):
If you don't turn it up. If

3 (1h 13m 5s):
You don't turn it up. Right. If you don't tell it. Yeah.

0 (1h 13m 7s):
So let me ask you this question, and I know this is a crazy question to ask somebody who's business is built on, on animal products, but is it, could you make the argument that we should eat less of it, We should eat meat as a side dish rather than a main dish or as much of it as we consume?

3 (1h 13m 21s):
Yes. I don't have the courage to, but would love to do a marketing campaign that is eat less meat but make sure it's, it's raised the proper way. What we'd love to do is to build out a program that is actually carbon negative and that we can prove it from like the ground up. That is, if you talk to me in 10 years, my hope is that I have helped to transform meat by creating a, you know, a carbon negative beef in the United States that honors the farmer cuz the, the farmer is not honored in the system today honors the animal, treats the animal with humane respect, honors the environment.

3 (1h 14m 5s):
And the belief is that all of that is better at the end of the day for the customer.

0 (1h 14m 9s):
Yeah. So is there a world where you could create a system in the US where a small farmer with a hundred head of cattle certifiably raises tho those cattle on grass and then sells them to you and then you guys continue to raise them on grass and then you actually take over the process of slaughtering and I mean, is that efficient? Could, could you imagine getting into that business?

3 (1h 14m 36s):
Yes, absolutely. I'm gonna take a detour and answer your question, but I read somewhere that CEOs have a seven year shelf life and at, at the end of seven years you need to either replace yourself or reinvent yourself. And my seven year mark was Memorial Day weekend of 2022. Hmm. And I thought long and hard about whether I wanted to replace myself or reinvent myself. And I don't wanna replace myself, but I do wanna reinvent myself. And if I look at the last seven years, what did I do? I'd spend a lot of time with my hands in the business and my head down and now I want to have my head up and to be really, to be working on what I call the transformation.

3 (1h 15m 20s):
You know, we've said as a company that our mission is to transform meat. That's a big mission. Yeah. And what I want to work on, what I wanna spend every waking day and moment working on is how do I transform meat and starting with grass fed beef. And so we're looking at all options. We're looking at like, do we need our own processing facilities? Do we need to own the last stage? Do we need to do be the financing vehicle? Do we need to do the technology layer? You know, there's interesting stuff with carbon credits and there's like all sorts of ways in which we can approach like cracking grass fed beef in this country. It's a big, big, big challenge though cuz it, it's like an entrenched massive industry.

3 (1h 15m 60s):
So it's, you know, in some ways I, I look at us now as a business and here we are seven years in, we've grown to be a decently large company. We haven't taken any outside funding. I've decided that this is my life's work and I kind of feel like it's, it's, it's almost our obligation to take a crack at transforming this industry cause it's so rife for disruption. It needs it so badly.

0 (1h 16m 28s):
I mean, what's what's remarkable, I, we didn't mention this and it's a good place to mention it, is that in 2021 your revenue surpassed half a billion dollars. That's a lot of subscribers. And I have to imagine that a lot of that came from people stuck at home during the pandemic and, and really kind of maybe discovering it, but also just not wanting to go to the grocery store.

3 (1h 16m 51s):
Yeah, that's right. I mean, we had grown quickly for the many years before that going into the pandemic. I think we did 225 million in coming out of the pandemic. We did four 50 and then five 50. So yeah, we've, we've grown very quickly, clearly struck a nerve in terms of delivering a product that people are really looking for and we've done it our way. And I think that's like validating for, I don't know, like my first company, I failed miserably and this is at least I felt like a miserable failure. And so yeah, I think we, we are now seeing that we have a much bigger role to play than just being a hobby business.

0 (1h 17m 36s):
Yeah. Did you, as you, as you sort of like, as the company grew and, you know, 20, 30, 40, a hundred percent growth year, year over year, whatever, you must have attracted institutional investors who are like, can we get in, can we invest, can we scale? Can we help you grow this? And, and, and you, you clearly were like, Nope, we don't need it.

3 (1h 17m 57s):
Yeah. I I I was tempted twice one time we almost got documents but have said no, have, have continued to say no. But one of the things that happened while we grew this company is Blue Apron went public and immediately started trading well below their last private,

0 (1h 18m 18s):
Well below. I mean their, their last, they raised who knows what, and their last investors lost their shirts.

3 (1h 18m 24s):
Yeah. There were like a $2 billion valuation and now they're trading today at like a hundred million. A hundred million. And so what happened was all of the venture capital for box subscription companies, it just dried up in an instant. Right. And what you saw was a lot of them sold, so like Plated sold to Albertsons and Green Chef sold to Hell Fresh and like, oh, they all sold. And you know, like I look back at the decision not to raise money if we had gone and raised money, we would not have a business right now because if we had built a model that was like, Oh, we're just gonna like buy a bunch of customers and hope for the best we would've like, you know, it's a game of musical chairs and when the music runs out, Yeah.

3 (1h 19m 4s):
There's no more money.

0 (1h 19m 6s):
All right. You have this company now that is, you know, could be a billion dollar company is if the, if the trends continue and billion revenue should say, and you wanna transform, you clearly have this idea of like, how do we, how do we have a bigger role in changing how cattle is raised in the us but at some point, right? I mean there is usually an end point, right? There is usually a sale or I mean, could you, you can't rule that possibility out that one day, you know, you know, you sell your company to a, I don't know, Costco or, or or meat producer some somebody.

3 (1h 19m 49s):
Yeah. I always caveat my, my feelings on selling the company with the statement that there's no like letter sitting on my desk. Right? Like, it's easy to say I'll never sell. It's, it's a lot harder when there's a letter on your desk saying we wanna buy and here's the price. But when I look at, at, when you look at iconic food brands in this country, you look at brands that have been around or like that are well known, they all have a similar dna. They have been around for a hundred plus years. A lot of them are family controlled and they're multi-generational place. And so if we are trying to build an iconic brand in meat, it just might take, you know, 25, 50, a hundred years.

3 (1h 20m 35s):
And so yes. Is there a possibility that someone sweeps in and says, Hey, let's buy Butcher Box and here's a price. And I'm like, okay. You know, like, great, let's do it. That's possible. But the future I'm planning for is one in which I have to plan on like my succession and the, and the company continuing.

0 (1h 20m 56s):
I mean it's really, it is kind of remarkable. I mean that this was supposed to be a side project, but you really kind of caught a wave, Right. You know, this kind of move towards thinking about, you know, where food comes from. And I mean, it, it's almost kinda like a dumb question, but it is. I do you ever sit back and think, God, seven years ago as a Kickstarter? Yeah,

3 (1h 21m 21s):
Yeah. And how freaking lucky I was, you know, as a very novice surfer. I feel like my time at Custom Made was just paddling against waves that were just knocking me over, over and over and over and never waiting for a break in the waves. Just like keep paddling, keep paddling, keep paddling and this business, I mean really it started snowballing from the first day we launched Kickstarter. But I, I mean, I can say unequivocally that like we got really lucky. Like our timing was really good. I'm not sure if we had started a year before or a year after if things would've been the same, but the timing was right and it's just been a remarkable shift in like seeing the difference between a boulder being pushed up the hill and a boulder rolling down the hill.

3 (1h 22m 12s):
Hmm. And you know, I worked way harder at my first company and it didn't work. Like I, I always thought that I would run a big company, but I did not think that this was gonna be the big company.

0 (1h 22m 30s):
That's Mike Salgar, founder and CEO of Butcher Box. By the way, if you've ever wondered how much ice it takes to ship thousands of boxes of beef, pork, chicken, and seafood across the country, Butcher Box uses about 26 million pounds of dry ice each year. The company will soon have two dedicated dry ice making facilities and it even has a management position that you do not see in most workplaces. Senior director of Dry ice. Hey, thanks so, so much for listening to the show this week. If you enjoyed it, please help us spread the word, tell someone about how I built this or post about it on social media.

0 (1h 23m 13s):
And thanks. If you wanna contact the team, our email address is h i bt id.wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at How I built this in Mine is at Guy Roz on Instagram or at How I built this. And I am at Guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music, composed by Ramera Louey. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Katherine Cipher. Our production staff also includes Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Liz Metzger, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung, Sam Paulson Cini, Carla Estevez, and Josh Lash. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This.

0 (1h 24m 3s):
Hey everyone. So I wanted to make sure you knew of all the different ways you can listen to how I built this. The show is always free and available wherever you listen to podcasts, whether it's Amazon Music, Apple Podcasts, or wherever you're listening right now. But if you wanna listen to the next episode of How I Built This Today, one Week Early, you can do that on Amazon Music or you can listen to it early and add free by subscribing to Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts or on the Wondery app. So please do follow us on your podcast app so you always have the latest episode downloaded and get your How I Built This merch and gear@wonderyshop.com.

0 (1h 24m 47s):
Another way to support the show is by filling out a survey at wondery.com/survey. And thanks.