0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor bank of America and their original podcast that made all the difference. What if comedy brought communities together? Host Alicia Burke speaks with Yvonne orgy from HBO's insecure. Listen, wherever you get your podcasts.

1 (19s):
I never expected to see so many competitors come at us from so many different angles and that so many of them would just try to copy what we were doing and be fast followers, and really just take everything we were trying to be innovative with. And immediately buying a mattress online became even more overwhelming and confusing than buying a mattress offline.

2 (48s):
How I built this show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz and on the show today, how Philip Krim helped transform the way we buy our beds by building Casper, a brand that makes it easier to choose a mattress. More fun to take it out of the box. Venture capital has had a love affair with direct to consumer startups over the past decade, even though the vast majority of products you buy are sold through third parties, the direct to consumer brand model has gotten a lot of attention.

2 (1m 31s):
I'm talking about Peloton and Allbirds and Warby Parker and Bonobos, even Tesla. These are all more or less brands that were designed to be sold directly to you, either through the internet or a brick and mortar shop owned by the brand. The idea behind DTC brands is simple and elegant. Sell a product directly to the consumer at a price higher than wholesale, but lower than retail. And then use the profits to aggressively advertise your product to acquire more consumers over time you scale. And then soon enough, your brand is worth billions.

2 (2m 11s):
Except that model has proved to be a lot harder than it sounds. Customer acquisition costs are really high. And unlike 10 years ago, when the DTC model really took off, there is a lot of competition now or B Parker. Isn't the only one selling glasses directly to consumers anymore. And Allbirds is now among dozens of DTC shoe brands, same goes for mattresses today. There are at least 170 direct to consumer brands that sell mattresses online. It's a crowded and confusing marketplace, but when Phillip cram and his partners launched Casper mattresses in 2014, there were just a handful of these types of businesses.

2 (2m 58s):
Philip was part of a of entrepreneurs who saw that the experience of buying something as mundane, but important as a mattress actually mattered to consumers. He and his partners launched Casper as a way to make buying a mattress simpler, a mattress that could be ordered online, compressed into a box and delivered to your door. And Casper kind of created the model for the way, many DTC mattress companies, manufacture market and deliver their products. Today. Casper's rise was meteoric. At one point, private investors valued the brand at over a billion dollars, but since its initial public offering on the New York stock exchange in 2020 Casper's market value has dropped by half.

2 (3m 46s):
And while all of this has certainly rattled Phillip creme, he's also an ambitious CEO with plans to make Casper much bigger than a mattress brand. He wants it to be asleep brand sort of how Nike was once a shoe brand, but is now known as a sports brand. Philip grew up in Sugarland, Texas, where his dad was an entrepreneur who tried out all kinds of business ideas. As a kid, Philip knew he would do something in the business world, which was his plan. When he started college at the university of Texas,

1 (4m 20s):
I very much, she knew that I wanted to do business. I didn't think it was going to be kind of the entrepreneurial path. I thought it was going to be more kind of the finance path. I recall fondly playing like the stock market when I was in fifth grade. And I, you know, during the.com mania and just being, you know, looking at the stock market quotes in the newspaper every day and, you know, probably have read the wall street journal since elementary school. And so I started UT as a finance major, but obviously kind of pivoted as I started tinkering around with doing my own things. And then ultimately did go down the entrepreneurial journey while I was in school post. I think in school,

2 (4m 60s):
While you were in college, you started your first business, an e-commerce business, right?

1 (5m 4s):
That's right. You know, at the time I didn't say like, oh, I'm going to go start my business. What should I start? It was more of, well, I don't really want to get a traditional summer job and sitting in an office all summer waterways that I could use the internet to make money in a non-traditional way, I guess, at the time. And so I learned what drop shipping was. I learned about HTML and how to, you know, build websites using HTML. And so I figured out that if I built a website and could market the website online, others could do a drop shipping to do the customer fulfillment. And that could be a way to make money. So just started messing around.

2 (5m 45s):
You had this idea, maybe I'll start some kind of e-commerce business. You didn't know what it was, but you thought it could be cool. And this is like, what 2002, 2003, something like that. That's right. So e-commerce still really early days. People still nervous about putting their credit cards online, but what did you what'd you decide to sell? Yeah, it was early

1 (6m 4s):
Days. This was kind of post the crash of the.com boom and bust. And so people were still very skeptical about it, you know, to me though, there were people online searching for products all day, every day. And so I would look up what people were searching for. You know, you could see search volumes and then I would go look for manufacturers that would ship directly to the customer if I gave them an order. And then, you know, the manufacturer would charge my credit card and do the fulfillment. And I would charge the customer's credit card through my merchant account. And I worked with, you know, dozens of different manufacturers who would sell everything from window blinds, where people would give us their measurements and it would be made to order eczema cream, to help children with eczema, sofas, or futons to how to play poker software all the way through to mattresses.

1 (6m 54s):
So I've actually been around the, the mattress side of things since the early two thousands as well. But at the time it was really just anything I could find where I could figure out that people were searching for it. And I could find a manufacturer who would do the fulfillment. I could do the rest from my dorm room. Hmm.

2 (7m 10s):
But it just took a week. This was not one website because I'm assuming you wouldn't go to a single website and see you could buy eczema cream and futons and window blocks. Right?

1 (7m 21s):
No, this, this was a portfolio of different websites. So I would generally try to build a targeted website for the specific product or manufacturer that I was working with. And it's actually at the time, I think at the time Wayfair was doing something similar

2 (7m 36s):
Is exactly our wish. We first started selling, you know, all kinds of brick, BRCA, Brack, and then furniture. And, but they'd had a malt, you know, dozens, hundreds of different websites. And this is essentially what you were doing. Was it pretty cheap to do, to do all this? It was cheap

1 (7m 52s):
Enough where I could kind of do it using misappropriating some student loan money and, and, you know, starting it with credit cards. So, you know, it was something I, I did it all myself. I had no money, you know, w was on scholarship for school. And so it was able to kind of just put it together with, you know, some, some sweat equity, I guess, and, and get it going. And then the nice thing about the model, which was true also for Casper, when we started it is just, it's a negative cash conversion, which is a fancy way of saying customers give you the money to, to buy the goods before you have to put the money out. So it's actually a very capital efficient way to start and scale of business.

2 (8m 32s):
Phillip, how did you find these it's it's I mean, you were, you were so young and, and it's such a cool idea. And this is like 2002, 2003, like how did you find even find companies that were willing to work with you? Did you just because this is before you could just like find anything on the internet, it was still pretty early days. So how did you even identify those companies?

1 (8m 54s):
You know, I wish I remembered the specifics. I remember just trying to call up companies, but it was just trying to understand like who, who was willing to do the fulfillment and call up the company and see if you could convince them, you know, oftentimes they didn't realize that I was a college in the beginning. Yeah. College kids, you know, it's, it's funny. I remember in my early twenties, I went to a Celtics game in Boston with some of the guys that I'd been buying from for years. And I guess it was my turn to go buy the beers. But in the garden you can't buy beer until you're 25 and had to come back into handed. And it was like an acute reminder of, of my youth in business.

1 (9m 37s):
All right. So you,

2 (9m 38s):
You started this company by yourself, but, but you did end up hiring employees, right?

1 (9m 44s):
Huh. So over time I had employees and then my family also helped. So at one point I had a conversation that didn't go exactly as planned, but I went to my parents saying how I thought I should take a break from school and work on the business because it was growing quickly and I was enjoying it and they shut that idea down immediately. But the compromise we worked out is that they would help me with the business. And so ended up getting my family involved. And we, you know, at one point had a, you know, I don't remember our peak, but like 20, 30 employees involved,

2 (10m 17s):
This is after you graduate college at 20 or 30 employees. Right? Not while you were still in school.

1 (10m 21s):
Yeah. No, in the, in the beginning it was just me. I was answering phones, taking live chats, taking the orders, working with the vendor, just doing everything. I mean, I, I think that's one of the ways that I learned just about every part of it.

2 (10m 34s):
So you were probably making money from the beginning cause you had no expenses.

1 (10m 38s):
That's right. Yeah. It was profitable from the beginning.

2 (10m 41s):
And out of all of the things that you tried out, I guess you noticed that mattresses like selling mattresses or foam mattresses that was doing better than other things that you were selling.

1 (10m 53s):
Ah, that's right. Mattresses. I realized like they had big margins. It's also an industry that was very slow to embrace the internet. They were doing a lot of direct response advertising, you know, Tempur-Pedic sleep number back then were, were growing their businesses through direct response advertising. And so I saw that the more these guys advertised on TV and radio, it drove people to search for these brands online. But these guys didn't even have e-commerce capabilities back then. Wow. And so we could sell, you know, products that competed, you know, memory foam products, adjustable air mattresses, and we could be early in the industry and it was, it was very profitable because these guys weren't competing

2 (11m 33s):
There. So, so why and why was it that the margins on mattresses were so high? It would explain then.

1 (11m 40s):
Yeah. So that's where I dug into the industry and just started to learn the dynamics, which is that for the last several decades, it's been a very tightly controlled industry. And when, when things are an oligopoly or a duopoly or a monopoly, that's when you're able to really protect pricing, protect margins, and you see it in other industries, you see it in the razorblade business, you see it in the eyeglass business, very tightly controlled on the manufacturing side, it's a business that private equity had loved to own love to protect. It was very predictable from a volume side. And so that's what allowed them to have big margins and, and brands mattered here. And so brands also drove higher margins, Sealy, Serta Simmons.

1 (12m 21s):
These brands have been around for a hundred plus years and that, that allows you to take margin over.

2 (12m 28s):
Okay. So you graduate from college around 2006, and I guess you, at that point, you really jumped into this business full time and, and you call it the, the Merrick group. Is that right?

1 (12m 40s):
That's right. So I ended up taking five years to graduate from Texas because I was balancing school with running the company. I grew up on Merrick drive. So decided to start the mayor group.

2 (12m 52s):
It was like a private equity group, like an investment firm, like a VC firm, the Merrick group. It was, this was your, your, your street that you grew

1 (12m 59s):
Up on that's right from first grade into college. And did you

2 (13m 3s):
Stick with, with a bunch of different things, blinds and futons and different products, or did you then focus mainly on, on mattresses selling mattresses

1 (13m 11s):
Over time? It got more and more focused on mattresses. So yes, we ended up exclusively in the latter part of the business only focusing on the mattresses and give

2 (13m 22s):
Me a sense of what kind of revenue you guys were doing at the time, like to that, you know, 2008, 2009, like, what were you guys doing? I think

1 (13m 29s):
We were in the kind of 10 to $15 million per year revenue range. Wow.

2 (13m 34s):
And where you guys, where are you profitable? You know, we had our

1 (13m 38s):
Ups and downs towards the end. The business got very tough from a profitability standpoint. And you know, one of the areas that I always personally focused on was our online marketing and our customer acquisition strategy. And what I saw was just every year customer acquisition costs went up. I think one of the brilliant parts of the Google invention is just the auction based model for buying ads. And so you just saw ad rates and, and unique visitors and cost per clicks go up very steadily. And so over time it just got harder. We, we realized we didn't have kind of enough of a moat around the business to have, you know, a defensible way to run the business profitably.

1 (14m 19s):
And it's all lessons learned, you know, learned a ton in the early days and all the way through when things got tougher,

2 (14m 26s):
You stepped down as the CEO of that company in 2009. So you're still really young and you go to work on some other ventures, which we'll talk about in a sec, but I know you eventually sold that company was sold. The Merrick group was sold in 2013, right.

1 (14m 40s):
That's right. It wasn't sold in like, you know, a big exit. It was sold to two manufacturers. Right. And it was a really way just to kind of maintain continuity when we didn't see a path kind of continue to operate a profitably.

2 (14m 53s):
Right. And again, I like to say this on the show is when, when people hear about exits or I sold my company most of the time, that doesn't mean that the founder or founders actually got rich off the sale.

1 (15m 4s):
That's right. There's a lot of complexity that goes into when you hear things like exited or sold. And it's not, it's not always the best situation. Like I said, we, we were kind of forced to that point because we never raise outside capital. It was just funding from myself and my family. And, you know, I, I'd been around kind of the family entrepreneurial journey and, and, you know, understood the ups and downs of that. But it's different when you're living it yourself. And yeah. So I, I totally agree with your point though, like stories and headlines are often missing. I'm assuming

2 (15m 38s):
In your, in this case, you didn't walk away from this sale with lots of money. No, I didn't walk away with any money. Meantime, you have a lot of experience under your belt. Now it's 2009. You just a couple of years of college, but you've already been a CEO of a company and you decide to move to New York to launch a new venture, which was about online advertising. Tell me, tell me about this.

1 (16m 5s):
That's right. So towards the tail end of when I was running mirror group, what I saw and what started to emerge then was really mobile advertising. And so the idea that I wanted to work on was if I could help make the mobile searches and mobile traffic as easy as possible for local businesses, I thought that'd be really interesting. And so that led to starting vocalized mobile, which was basically click to call search for local businesses. So what does click-to-call search mean? So at the time, if you searched like Houston tow truck driver, you, you could click directly from that search using a Google ad and be connected to a local tow truck company.

1 (16m 47s):
You could go in and do that yourself and work with Google and set up your ads. But our idea was to make the technology super easy and do it in more of a full service model. So we would set up everything for you. We would record the calls so you could audit them. We would give you a dashboard. So you had analytics around the leads that you were getting, and instead of paying per click, which is how cool would charge you, we would just charge you on a per lead or per call basis. And so we, we tried to make it as easy as possible for a local advertiser to embrace mobile advertising, which was still pretty nascent at that point.

2 (17m 21s):
And like, where are you working at? Like a, we work type thing, or like a, like what, where are you? What are you running your business out of?

1 (17m 29s):
I was a WIWORK tenant ended up kind of bringing on a partner who was based in Atlanta, who was kind of back and forth between Atlanta and New York. And we, we ultimately set up kind of a call center to sell to local businesses that was based in Atlanta. So I would go down there and that's where we had some employees, but I was the only one in New York working. And it was out of

2 (17m 49s):
A WeWork. I mean, it sounds like a great business, but at the time I would imagine it was probably hard to convince small businesses to spend significant money on this.

1 (17m 59s):
That's right. There were like two core challenges that were hard to overcome, which is one explaining to small businesses. What click to call was where you were generating these leads from et cetera. They could still very nascent. And then, you know, what I saw was just selling to small businesses is really challenging. These are businesses, which I appreciated. Every dollar matters. These are businesses, they're family businesses, where, you know, if something doesn't work, you know, th they're, they're making less money personally. And so, you know, a lot of times the, the sales would work and they would help build a business. And that felt great. But a lot of times they didn't work and it was very contentious and it just, you know, w was difficult and not something I enjoy.

2 (18m 42s):
And this is why so many companies only work with huge businesses, right? So it's like, that is it the parades principle, the 80 20 rule, right. Which is like 80% of your business comes from 20% of your customers. Right. And when you're dealing with tons and tons of little mom and pop stores, it's just much harder, presumably it's

1 (18m 59s):
Hard. And, and there was a lot of churn. And again, you would just see these budgets, they would afford, you know, an advertising campaign this month and not be able to afford it next month. And it's a, it's just a grind. Yeah. Yeah.

2 (19m 12s):
So from, from what I've read, you never got this project vocalized to profitability, but I mean, but you worked at the Singh for, for, I think for about three years, right?

1 (19m 23s):
Yeah. That sounds right. Yeah. I mean, did

2 (19m 24s):
You, you're 30 where you were kind of looking around at your friend cohort who maybe cut traditional jobs or went to law school and were now lawyers or wanting to finance and we're now on wall street and had these sort of well-paying jobs. And I don't know, did you feel like, oh, maybe, maybe I ha I got to figure this out. Like where are you getting a little anxious?

3 (19m 45s):
Yeah. I, I, I would say that's fair. It was, it was probably

1 (19m 48s):
Less on the traditional side. Like I had my friends that were like bankers and saw what they were doing and did not, was not envious of that more. I was interested in just like the, the tech scene and what was going on. Facebook was all the rage. And you saw these companies getting big and successful and a lot of people making all this money and it, it felt like an ecosystem that was totally walled off and unavailable. You know, at one point I tried to apply for a job at Facebook and was told I wasn't what they were looking for. So I didn't know what I was going to do. I had learned a ton, but, you know, I never had a traditional job. I never knew what a traditional kind of company gig look like, but of course, like still had the entrepreneurial itch and was I was working on vocalize, but I just knew it was going to be a tough gig.

1 (20m 35s):
And so maybe, you know, back to your point, I started thinking about what I would want to do next. Okay.

2 (20m 40s):
So at some point, Y you were still working on the startup, I guess you were accepted into an accelerator in, in New York, and it was at that program where you would eventually meet the guys who you would, who would become your co-founders for Casper, right? That's

1 (20m 56s):
Right. It was Gabe, Luke and Neil. They were working on a business. They were friends from brown university. Their business had an e-commerce component to it. So I understood some parts of what they were trying to do and what were they trying to sell so that they were trying to help bloggers and content creators monetize their traffic by selling curated e-commerce goods. So it was kind of like trying to operate on marketplace on bloggers websites. And

2 (21m 24s):
Meantime, you just kind of get to know these guys it's this is Neil Perry, Gabe plate men, and Luke Sherwin. Right. That's right. Yep. And I mean, how did, how do you guys start talking about mattresses about, about your background? You

1 (21m 37s):
Know, it's, it's funny. I think it started as a conversation around sleep and Neil's dad is a sleep doctor. He's a pulmonologist. So Neil knew a bunch about sleep. This was also when jawbones and Fitbits were really first coming into the market. So he started talking about what was it that, that led the mattress industry to exist the way it existed today. And it was also just based around like business models. And we started talking about what Harry's was doing and what Banabos. Yep. And we were in a startup accelerator, you know, everyone's reading tech crunch every day and reading about the, you know, massive amounts of money. All these companies were raising. And, you know, that goes back to the sense that like, we felt like there was this whole universe going on, that we weren't a part of.

2 (22m 22s):
So at what point did somebody, one of those three guys say, Hey, Phillip, you, you know about mattresses, useful mattresses, maybe we should, do you want to like, join two, we join together and do something around mattresses. Like, how did that conversation even start?

1 (22m 39s):
Well, you know, we, we would sketch out like, how would this business work if we wanted to do direct to consumer and mattresses and what were the things that would, that would entail? And, you know, so you have to go build a brand, you have to go create the product, you have to create a website, et cetera. And after it felt like we sketched a lot of this out, we all looked at it and we're like, yeah, this seems like pretty reasonable. Like we're probably missing something. And so we, we then went and sat down with Jeff Raider, one of the founders of Harry's the razor company, and Jeff was also a founder of Warby Parker. And we're like, thank you so much for making time. We know you're crazy busy.

1 (23m 20s):
Like, we really appreciate it. Just five minutes. Here's our idea, what are we missing? And he like, you know, he thought about it. And I remember him being very like contemplated and asking great questions. And he was like, no, I think this could work. And like, for us, that was like validation from the highest authority. We were like, okay, this is amazing. And we were still hesitant because we were still working on our respective businesses. And we're like, okay, now what? And I remember Luke looking at me in the eye and saying, you know, that if we don't do this, someone will do that. And won't that just kill you? And that was the question that like, I couldn't get out of my head. And I thought he was right. I was like, this should exist.

1 (24m 1s):
It will exist. I think it would be really fun to go, try to make this exist with this group. And let's go give it a shot.

2 (24m 9s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment? Why a lot of investors pushed back on Phillip's idea why he and his partners kept going and how Casper got its name, which is not the way you think stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. The following message comes from NPR sponsor. We work with, we work all access. You can finally leave behind all the inconveniences and distractions of working from home at the swipe of a card, you can unlock hundreds of nationwide workspaces actually designed for work. And with a month to month membership, you can get workspace when you need it.

2 (24m 51s):
No matter where business takes you. That's smart flexibility. Sign up today. And we work.com/npr. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Airbnb growing a business can be difficult, especially knowing where to start. You may be sitting inside an opportunity. Your home 4 million entrepreneurs have turned their homes into businesses on Airbnb. They're called hosts. You can host your extra space on Airbnb and then use earnings to travel, build Treehouse empires, or even start a podcast all made possible by hosting with resources and support from Airbnb to get started more about becoming a host at airbnb.com/host.

4 (25m 38s):
This podcast is supported by 18 T active Armour. Our lives are on our phones and with phones full of live streamed workout classes, midday, work calls and nightly family video calls. There's no room for fraud calls at T and T makes customer security our priority, helping block those pesky calls. It's not complicated. ATN T active armor, 24 7 proactive network security and fraud call blocking to help stop threats at no extra charge compatible device and service required. Visit ATNT t.com/active armor for details.

5 (26m 20s):
NPR is no compromise podcast just won the Pulitzer prize. We explore a breed of gun rights activism. That's online, organized, and unwilling to budge. I'm Chris Hacksaw.

0 (26m 32s):
I Lisa Hagan, check out no compromise wherever you get your podcasts.

2 (26m 45s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Raz. So it's 2013 and Philip and his partners have decided to launch a direct to consumer mattress brand. And they're one of the very first companies to experiment with the idea of selling a mattress online and compressing it into a box to send it. I remember buying my first mattress at Ikea and it was, it came in at a tube. I think they still do. And I like cut it open and then just let it settle for 24 hours. And it was cool to watch it like spring up, you know? So like compressed mattresses, you could buy them.

2 (27m 25s):
And this is, I'm talking about the, you know, early two thousands. What was the problem that, that you knew you knew existed?

1 (27m 33s):
So you could go do that. If you wanted to go spend, you know, a few hundred dollars and get something that would last you generally not very long,

2 (27m 44s):
Hey, that Ikea mattress was great in my early twenties.

1 (27m 46s):
Okay. Keep going. When, when you're in your early twenties, you could sleep on pretty much anything. And so that's a great solution if you're on a budget and in your early twenties. And then other than that, you were kind of relegated to going into a store like really mattresses weren't popular online. And when you talk about going into a store, it just was the worst consumer experience in existence. Like at that point in time, we were living in New York. And so Sleepy's was the predominant retailer back then. And these stores felt like they hadn't been renovated in a long time. And it just was to us, we said worse than buying a used car. And at this point in time, they use cars had been improved, thanks to the internet.

1 (28m 27s):
And you could get information and transparency, but th this was a marketplace that was specifically very opaque. You had no idea what you should pay for a mattress. You have no idea what MSRP is or any kind of quality standards of a mattress. The manufacturers change the names on the mattresses, urine, and your outlets, the same mattress with a different name, right. And that was one way that you couldn't price shop it. So it very well could be that Macy's is selling ABC mattress and Sleepy's is selling XYZ mattress. Those could be the same mattress for all intents and purposes, but you would never know that because you couldn't couldn't compare them. You know, even, even at this point in time, you asked most people.

1 (29m 8s):
And we did this survey work before we started Casper was what kind of bed do you sleep on? Almost no one could recall it. And if you could recall it, it was usually either Ikea or Tempur-Pedic. But at, at that point in time, there was nothing that we as consumers, you know, in our twenties and early thirties that, you know, we're still on a budget and wanted to buy something that we felt proud of. There was nothing that existed in that kind of category. And so that, that was the problem we wanted to solve.

2 (29m 34s):
All right. All four of you decide you're going to go for it. You have the meeting with this guy who co-founded or founded Harry's razors, and you're thinking he, we got his blessing. We're going to start this thing. Presumably have to start doing some research about the direct to consumer opportunity and, and, and what people want. And, and so what w how do you, how do you start doing that research? Well,

1 (29m 57s):
We quickly honed in, on kind of three themes. There were a lot of sub ideas under this, but the three themes were, we have to build a brand that's interesting, right? Like it has to stand for something. It has to be something that people remember that they want to connect with. That's one, two is that, however, we sell that brand. So kind of our go to market strategy in this case, like our website has to be really easy to use interesting frictionless and make the whole experience as easy as possible. And the third, and this is the one where we saw that we had a gap with the four of us was that we needed to build a product that really was the best. And so that's when we brought on our fifth co-founder Jeff <inaudible>. He is like an industrial designer. That's right.

1 (30m 37s):
So this is definitely an example of just being very fortuitous, but so we said, okay, we need a product designer who among us know a product designer. And one of us Neil knew one product designer. So we said, let's just call Jeff. We knew he was ex idea,

2 (30m 53s):
Which is obviously one of the great design companies

1 (30m 56s):
In the world. That's right. So we called up Jeff and we said, you know, here's our idea. Do you know anything about building mattresses? And it turns out, yes, IDEO had clients that were in the space and he thought our idea on kind of direct to consumer and going to circumvent the traditional retail experience was interesting. So Jeff had a design studio in Providence, Rhode Island, actually, most people don't realize we actually incorporated the business has Providence mattress company

2 (31m 23s):
And Providence. Cause those guys went to brown and yeah,

1 (31m 26s):
He went to brown and Jeff's design studio was in Providence. So we brought Jeff on to go build a better mattress and start to iterate and test that. And we hired kind of our first agency partner, which was a group out of Brooklyn called red antler to help us with the website and the branding and the experience side of things. And then we went to work on the operation side. So finding a manufacturer who would build the mattress that we designed finding the packaging suppliers. And so we went to kind of go put all these pieces together.

2 (31m 57s):
There's a lot of moving parts here. I think there were five. I mean, now you've got five co-founders right. The three guys who he met at the, at the incubator, you and now Jeff <inaudible>. And I guess everybody agreed that you were going to be the CEO,

1 (32m 12s):
Right. That's right. I was the one with CEO experience.

2 (32m 15s):
So, so, so you become the CEO, but even with, you know, when you pick a 75 different people, it's a lot of moving parts. How did you guys divide and conquer? How did you decide who did what?

3 (32m 28s):
So it was, it was kind of a natural

1 (32m 30s):
Division. I mean, we, we said let's divide and conquer. So Gabe was self-taught on coding. And, and so he was our, he, if you've met, Luke is naturally the, the brand genius and guru. And so he took on kind of the creative lead. Neil is brilliant and a Jack of all trades. And so he, he kind of started to wear the operations hat because we really needed someone to go figure that out. And that was confusing and different. Yeah. I wore the CEO hat and Jeff were the product hat.

2 (32m 60s):
And, and so you basically went to go start raising money for this. Cause this is not, this is not a, a drop ship company. This is a big idea. You're gonna need some money for this. So where did you, w w I mean that summer, did you start to look for money?

1 (33m 15s):
I would say that fall, summer and fall. Yeah. We started to look for money summer and fall of 2013. And

2 (33m 21s):
Was it relatively, I mean, was the reception pretty good? Where you going to like VC firms?

1 (33m 27s):
We were going to, anyone that we could get a meeting with and the reception was terrible. Like icy, icy, cold, several common objections were, I don't understand, like, how do you have lifetime value if someone's buying a mattress and you're only going to sell them every so often every six to eight years, every six to eight years, but actually the average households in market every two to three years, because he ever household has two to three mattresses. Right.

2 (33m 52s):
And that's a question I would ask you at the time, I'd say, well, you know, I mean, it's like

1 (33m 56s):
Totally reasonable. Yeah. It's a good question. But I don't, I don't, you can make a lot of money selling mattresses if you don't need frequency. Right. The other one was just, you know, it was hard to visualize something cool in, you know, the mattress space. Like no one had ever bragged about buying a mattress before no one posted on Twitter or Facebook, like check out the mattress I just got. And so the idea of creating a cool brand, I think just didn't resonate with people. And so we were told no dozens and dozens and dozens of times right now,

2 (34m 26s):
Normally when you meet with investors, they don't tell you what they think. They're like, okay, well, we'll be in touch.

1 (34m 33s):
Right. That's right. No one ever tells you what they actually think. And this is why fundraising is always so emotional, but we thought these guys loved us. We thought people wanted to invest in us. And that the idea everyone was very polite. Everyone was very enthusiastic, even. Yeah. Enthusiastic. And then just one after the other, it was no, you know, not, not interested, not a good time, you know, all the traditional venture and angel excuses. Yeah. And so it was tough. It was demoralizing because you get your hopes up and then not. And then, oh, we're meeting with this person. They would be the best anchor investor or the best lead investor ever. And then for whatever reason, they don't come in. And there were definitely moments where like, I don't know if this is going to come together, you know, we're, we're, maybe we're missing something.

1 (35m 17s):
And so it just creates a lot of self doubt and a big roller coaster of emotions. When

2 (35m 21s):
You went to meet with these, these investors, you said, did you like bring a box and say, this is the box that we're going to compress the mattress, and it's going to come to your home and a box you'll order it on the internet and they'll come to your home. Will you showing them that?

1 (35m 35s):
Well, we would sometimes bring like foam samples with us. So you could feel what the bed was going to be made out of and understand the construction a little bit more. But the only person who ended up getting one of our first demo beds was Ben Lear who led our seed round. And so eventually we were introduced to Ben. It's the guy who founded Thrillist, I think, right. He's a partner at Lear hippo ventures. And Ben had invested in what re Parker and had invested in some other great consumer companies was running Thrillist and then immediately got it and was very passionate about it and excited. And he did want to see, like, I got to try one of these things out.

1 (36m 16s):
So we delivered the four of us, Neil, Luke, Gabe, and myself, delivered a bed to his apartment in Soho. And he slept on that for years and ultimately led our seed round. And that's, he's the reason why Casper is in existence today.

2 (36m 34s):
I think you guys raised like a little over a million dollars for your seed round, right?

1 (36m 38s):
Is that right? It ended up being 1.8, 5 million,

2 (36m 41s):
So more than considering, more than that. And he, and, and so when he kind of signed off on that or decided to invest, that's when you get the waterfall, you get other people who want to join because they think, well, this guy is doing it. I'll do it too.

1 (36m 54s):
That's right. Ben was, is a big name in seed investing. And so using his initial check into Casper was how we were able to build momentum to fill the round

2 (37m 5s):
And what, what was going to make your mattress different? Cause you could buy memory foam, you could buy latex. What, what were you going to make it out of?

1 (37m 15s):
So ours was a all foam mattress with memory foam on top. But what we had worked on for months was just how do we construct it to be super comfortable? And this goes back to do, you know, Jeff is a brilliant industrial designer. It's all about user tested design. And so we would bring our friends over to an apartment to lay on different prototypes and get feedback. What's the right level of bounciness and what bed sleeps the coolest throughout the night. And you know, what bed feels kind of universally the right firmness, knowing that that firmness was very subjective. And so we, we went through dozens of different prototypes to get to the Casper mattress that we launched with.

2 (37m 57s):
And it was what it was a combination of, of memory foam and latex

1 (38m 1s):
That's right. It was a combination of memory foam latex to get the right amount of balance and sync and heat absorption, and the field that we were going for through user testing and Jeff,

2 (38m 11s):
The designer, he was just basically making mattresses in his, in his studio in Providence.

1 (38m 17s):
That's right. We would get foam samples from different manufacturers. There was one manufacturer that ended up being excited to work with us. It was very hard to find a manufacturer at this point in time because we were building something custom. We were doing, you know, proprietary foams and layers, but we had all of these different kinds of, and foams come in different densities and have different qualities based on the formulation. And so we could build thousands, tens of thousands of different permutations of mattresses. And so that's what Jeff was spending time doing is getting the feedback, testing different properties, whether it was he or ergonomics, things like that. And just constantly iterating to try to build the perfect match.

2 (38m 60s):
When did you guys know, when did you, when did you all sort of, did you all agree that you've finally got the formula, right. A certain point, or was there like a discussion among the founders where, where you all had different, some of you had different views? No, there, there were

1 (39m 13s):
Tons of discussions, tons of debates, very debate focused group of founders. Ultimately though we said, we're going to pick a date and we're going to launch on that date wherever we are, wherever we are on the branding, wherever we on the website design, wherever we are on the product roadmap we're going to launch. And so I think it was early 2014. We said, April 22nd. That's going to be our date, that date. I think it, it just gave us enough time to feel like we could get it done, but not so much time where we felt like we were wasting time. So, you know, I said, we're not going to let the date slip. We that's what we told our investors, we're going to do it. So

2 (39m 53s):
You had this idea to compress a mattress into a box and make it a direct to consumer product. Right. Right. And compressed mattresses was not new. You didn't invent that. But from what I understand you, that was your, that was the, that's what you branded it. Like that was your, that was the thing that you branded. It was a compressed mattress in a box. And apparently nobody was doing it that way.

1 (40m 18s):
That's right. To my knowledge, we were the first to ever brand the unboxing experience. And so we, we put the stripes on the box on the exterior and we, we put a tray on the interior, we designed kind of an instruction manual on how to unbox it. We actually included a cutting tool. So you could cut open the mattress that was basically shrink, wrapped to stay compressed. And we actually would include gifts with our early purchases. So we went to the strand bookstore here in New York city and we would buy old vintage bedtime stories and include that in. And so we made it a thing and we did it just because we said, let's try to optimize every step of the customer journey that we could in order to surprise and delight customers.

1 (41m 2s):
That was kind of the overarching philosophy, if you will, on, on like why we thought to go do that. But it actually ended up having a huge impact on our business in a way that we didn't anticipate, which was sharing. And when we started looking at sources of traffic to our website, we started seeing a ton of traffic come from YouTube in our early days. And it ended up that the Casper unboxing experience was something that people love to film on their phone and love to post online and share. And that I think is one of the biggest drivers that just created the, you know, w we're a catalyst creating Casper in our early days,

2 (41m 35s):
By the way, is it an engineering challenge to get a mattress into a box? It's just a matter of sucking all the air out and squeezing it in, is it, is it that relatively easy?

3 (41m 44s):
It's I wouldn't say it's

1 (41m 46s):
Easy because I'm sure whoever invented it wouldn't like that, but it really is just a question of like pressure per square inch. And if you put enough PSI on to some big steel plates, you can compress a lot of things, including a mattress. And it turns out foam is actually a lot of air. So you have to get the air out of it.

2 (42m 5s):
How did you come up with the name? Is it connected to the ghost

1 (42m 9s):
And no connection to the ghost? We were all working out of, you know, wherever we could from time to time. And so we would often work at a Luke's apartment in Brooklyn and Luke had an extra bedroom that he would rent out on Airbnb and Luke's roommate at this time when we were working on Casper was a six foot, six German guy whose name was Casper with a K. And we would always, for whatever reason, whenever we were over at Luke's, he was there sleeping and he did not fit on his twin mattress at all. And it was always a funny sight to us. And so again, we, we kind of gave ourselves a deadline on the branding. We had a list of a million names and when we ended up voting on the name that we all liked the most Casper one the day, because I think we all got a good laugh out of Casper's the visualization of Casper sleeping on a twin mattress.

1 (42m 57s):
And so he was our inspiration for the name. We ended up going with a C instead of the K we gave him a free Casper mattress when we launched to thank him for the inspiration. So I'd say it worked out well on both ends.

2 (43m 12s):
All right. So the five of you guys are working to get to launch date and you get to launch date and what happens like you just, you, you hit go and your website goes live and you've gotten mattresses available for sale. Is that more or less what happens

1 (43m 29s):
Basically? So we actually had convinced a couple of press outlets to cover the launch, and we were all impressed and blown away that people woke up that day, read the article and then came to our website and bought that day. I mean, we sold dozens of mattresses. We were only selling one mattress at that time, six sizes. And it turns out the story brought a lot of people into the website and those people wanted to try Casper and support Casper. So they bought from us and they were very vocal about the purchase. And we were just off to the races.

2 (43m 58s):
And that for, I think the first day I read that you sold like 40 mattresses or something, which is pretty good. Right. And it was for, you know, for a tiny little company.

1 (44m 7s):
Yeah. I mean, 40 mattresses is like $30,000 worth of business. I mean, again, that, that was like what we were forecasting to do in month six or seven. And we did it in our first day.

2 (44m 17s):
And where, w I mean, did you have the mattresses on hand or, or, or were they at the manufacturer? Where were

1 (44m 23s):
They? So at this point we had moved into our first office. The office was a second story walkup in know-how in New York city. I think it was 1600 square feet. And so we had a few in the office that we would ship out that day, put a ups label on it and ship. And then we had a like U haul truck that we had rented that had maybe one or two dozen mattresses that we were keeping out in Brooklyn. We thought we would like pull inventory from there and ship it as they would sell. But within two days we were out of all of the inventory we had. Wow.

2 (44m 56s):
And just to be clear, the mattresses were being, were being manufactured to your specifications, but, but essentially like white labeled by, by manufacturers somewhere. I think it was, it was in Georgia right at the time.

1 (45m 9s):
Yeah. So we had found a contract manufacturer who makes beds for other brands. We had convinced them to work with us Casper. And we said, this is the type of bed we want to build. Here are the four layers that we want to use. And they said, okay, we could build this bed. And so they would build the bed for us. And so they were physically built, you know, the foam was poured and they were assembled outside of Atlanta, Georgia. And then eventually we would ship products from that facility directly to consumers. And then we would also take inventory to our office where we could do our own fulfillment if need be.

2 (45m 42s):
So apparently your, your first year target was to hit, to reach about $1.8 million worth of mattress sales. And, and apparently you hit that in two months, which is a great milestone, but also a huge problem because you were, you were not shipping mattresses out fast enough. There was huge delays, right?

1 (46m 2s):
Yeah. There were huge delays, like to the point where we thought, we thought this was like an existential risk to the business. I mean, people were just super upset with us posting online about our delays. We had promised them to ship in two weeks and it was taking six or eight weeks. And we felt like the whole business could implode at this point. So we, we were trying to brainstorm everything we could to, you know, keep these customers, just having faith in us and, and giving us the benefit of the doubt, not canceling the order. My co-founder Neil had a brilliant idea at one point to send customers who were delayed on their products, Aero beds that we would buy on Amazon and ship to our customers via our Amazon account.

1 (46m 43s):
Just as a way to say, like, sorry, if you need something to sleep on, hopefully this helps you just,

2 (46m 47s):
You just go on Amazon and send people air mattresses while

1 (46m 50s):
They're waiting. Yeah. Up until Amazon canceled our account because they thought we were reselling them, which we weren't, but we were buying hundreds of these arrow beds just to help people sleep. And, you know, again, at this time there were only, I think, seven people in the business, including the five co-founders. So we were all living and breathing the customer frustration. We were, you know, I was on live chat until I went to bed and was on live chat. The first thing I would wake up and trying to keep up with emails and answer phone calls and trying to, you know, fly to Atlanta, to get our manufacturer to produce more. But you know, a big, a big manufacturer. They want to go make a run of 500 beds, a thousand beds.

1 (47m 31s):
And we're like, no, we just need to ship out, you know, dozen beds today. It doesn't bet tomorrow, whatever it is to try to catch up. And it was just, it was really tough to build our way out of the hole.

2 (47m 41s):
Why was it because it was the bottleneck, the manufacturer, presumably they're making beds for lots of other people and you guys are like, come on and make more of ours. But, but presumably they, they just couldn't make enough quickly enough.

1 (47m 52s):
That's right. It was the manufacturer. And it was really one, it was tough to find a manufacturer to work with us in the first place. And then two, we're still a tiny customer in the grand scheme of things. And so we, we would have to, we had a forecast, we shared that forecast with the manufacturer. They said, okay, we can live up to this. And then overnight said, oh wait, you know, that those beds that we thought we needed in two months, we need them tomorrow or in two weeks. And so they're like, sorry, that's not how this works. You can't just kind of flip it, which

2 (48m 22s):
I imagine that with that rapid success, it, it started, you started to attract more potential interest from investors that year in 2014. Cause I think you did, would go on to raise a series a in 2014, you raised like $13 million or more than that, a little more than that. Was it now with the initial success you had, was it easier to raise that money? Very

1 (48m 45s):
Much so, so one of the common objections we heard from investors was, you know, just too early, come see us when, when you're live and we'll check back in. And I think at that point, you know, most, I think that's just what investors say to push you off. And when we were able to come back and be like, oh yeah, we, you know, we did a million dollars in our first 28 days, you know, I think that was fairly unprecedented. And so that, that caused a lot of interest into the business. You know, we, we went from, you know, the, the ugly stepchild to the Belle of the ball very quickly and it was all new to us. And so, you know, we were, we were trying to be deliberate trying to take it all in trying to be thoughtful because you're picking, you know, a lifelong partner.

1 (49m 29s):
And the joke we heard from a lot of founders was it's kind of like marriage, but without the divorce option for your, your series a investor. So we wanted to pick the best partner we could. And that also just meant thinking about like, what do we want to go do with this business? Do we really want to swing for the fences? Do we want to run it as more of a lifestyle business? And it was a crazy time that was awesome and you know, different and overwhelming, but we ended up with a great party

2 (49m 56s):
And, and the apartment, by the way, it was, I think it was NDA, which is a huge venture for us, huge

1 (50m 1s):
Venture firm, the largest venture firm by, by kind of assets under management. And we said, let's, let's go try to build the biggest business we can. And if we're going to fail, let's fail because we're, we're too ambitious and aiming too big. And so,

2 (50m 15s):
So what, what does that mean to be, to go big?

1 (50m 18s):
Yeah. So the way we talked about it and continue to talk about is we want to build the world's first sleep brand. We want people to think of Casper when they think about getting a better night of sleep that could mean buying a mattress, but it could mean any other number of products or services or experiences when it just comes to getting the best night of sleep possible. And just like you think of Nike, when I say, you know, going out for a great run or whole foods, when I say, you know, go buy organic foods, we want people to think Casper when it comes to getting a better night of sleep. And so it was just taking the money and start to build a product pipeline, start to build a distribution pipeline. We knew we weren't going to be just digital. So we started doing pop-ups.

1 (50m 58s):
We wanted to build a global brand and business. So eventually we launched in Europe. And so that's where we just started to think about what does this business look like down the road? And, and let's see how fast we can get there.

2 (51m 10s):
Your value proposition was it was going to be easy to get direct to consumer a good quality mattress, and it was going to be cheaper. So I'm assuming your margins were going to be lower than what they were for the traditional mattress industry. So

1 (51m 25s):
We had always said, we're not, we're not building a value play. You're not going to buy from us because it's the least expensive option. And it's the lowest price, best value, lowest margin option. What we said is we're not going to play games with how we price everything. We're going to price it fairly. And so no matter where you buy a Casper product, you pay the same price. Right? And from a margin standpoint, there were just less hands in the cookie jar, if you will, on our products. So we didn't need as high cause you have a brick

2 (51m 57s):
And mortar stores and you don't have a retailers you're direct to consumer. You're not

1 (52m 0s):
Right. That's right. So we were more efficient. So we just didn't need as high of margin dollars. We'd still still have a high margin business and it's a high margin category. So, you know, you look today, we're, we're north of a 50% gross profit margin business, which is good and strong. And, and that's enough to build a, a defensible business. And to your question on like, just, you know, how many people are buying mattresses. It turns out that every year about 20 million mattresses in the U S are sold and those 20 million mattresses mean that 16, 17, $18 billion in the U S has spent on mattress.

6 (52m 40s):
All right. So

2 (52m 40s):
One of the things that, that was part of your ambition to create a brand, rather than just a mattress company, right? Because it wasn't gonna, it was going to be all kinds of sleep products. It was going to be sheets and pillows and in, and different kinds of mattresses was

6 (52m 58s):
I think

2 (53m 0s):
A year after you launched, you guys basically built a media company called van Winkle. And from what I understand, this was a media company that was going to write it. Wasn't going to promote Casper mattresses or sell them. It was just going to write about, about sleep on about things related to sleep. Is it, is that right?

6 (53m 20s):
It's I think media,

1 (53m 21s):
But he is a generous moniker, but the, I, the idea was that buying a mattress is an infrequent purchase with consumers. So what is a way that we can, as Casper stay in more frequent conversation and build more frequency of a relationship with customers. And we said, content could be a way to do that. And so we went out and we, we started van Winkles. We hired an editor to help us create content around sleep. And it wasn't about selling mattresses. It was just, let's put it out into the world, to our customers and, and, you know, have people sign up for it. And if it's good quality content, people will read it. And that will just help build the brand over time.

2 (54m 2s):
I mean, it's a really interesting idea, right? Cause you've got a consumer products company and you decide that maybe you could also expand by becoming a media company. This is a model that a lot of people do. There's a lot of, I mean, investment firms, Andreessen Horowitz, this is essentially doing a version of this. And it seems to me that you actually, that, that one of the things you thought was that this media arm could become self-sustainable. It could go self-sustaining, it could become profitable through ads. It

1 (54m 29s):
Was a thought on like where the business could go, which is either that it becomes so interesting and so widely distributed that people do tie it to Casper. And so it leads to people buying more frequently from Castro, or that it's a standalone editorial venture where we bring in ads and other advertising partners in addition to Casper. And we think of it as just like any other editorial venture. And so we definitely thought that was one place. It could go over time.

2 (54m 56s):
I know that you had Winkle going for a few years before you shuttered it and, and shut it down. And I wonder whether you ever think about going back to something like that, like going back to building content around sleep.

3 (55m 12s):
I think that one

1 (55m 14s):
Of the biggest misses that we had early days was kind of missing the ability that content could have on sleep. And when we were starting van Winkles, we saw some of the meditation apps coming to market and people were using them for sleep. And we talked about like, how, how do people use content as part of their sleep routine? And we missed that opportunity. And I think, you know, the folks like calm and Headspace have gone on to build great businesses. And I think the killer application for those businesses is not meditation. I think it's sleep. And so I think that area is super fascinating. I think there's going to be a lot of innovation when it comes to people evolving their sleep routine, including content.

1 (55m 56s):
And we would love to play in that. Phillip,

2 (55m 59s):
Did you assume that Casper would be like a millennial brand, you know, that, and was that how you kind of pitched it and did it, was, it was that, did that come to fruition? You know, I would say we

1 (56m 12s):
Were worried about it becoming too much of a millennial brand. Like we knew we were trying to resonate with New York city and San Francisco millennials, because that's who we were and that's who our early customers were. But we, we, and I think this was just listening to investors really. Like we were acutely aware of the risk of becoming too much of a millennial brand. And I think we heard that with how people were, you know, thinking about Warby Parker at a point in time. And we, we just knew that that was something we were gonna have to overcome. You know, when we started to think about, you know, non-millennial opportunities, we would go try different advertising campaigns. We would try different pop-up destinations.

1 (56m 54s):
We would just try to build the business in by going kind of community to community and thinking about the groups that we want it to resonate with

2 (57m 1s):
As you started to really take off, something happens fairly quickly in, in the, the story of Casper, which is competitors can, you've got a great business direct to consumer compressed mattresses, comparatively low overhead, because you're selling direct. And then you've got brands coming up purple, Lisa and others that happened fairly quickly after you guys launched.

1 (57m 27s):
It did. And it was way bigger of an onslaught of competition than I think certainly I could have ever imagined. And I think this is one of the things looking back that, you know, was a mistake on my part. I was kind of dismissive of competition in the early days. I never expected to see so many competitors come at us from so many different angles and that so many of them would just try to copy what we were doing and be fast followers and, and, you know, really just take everything we were trying to be innovative with. And, you know, we, we ended up saying like we started Casper because buying a mattress offline in a store was really confusing.

1 (58m 9s):
You had all these options, you didn't know who to trust. You didn't know what the different options meant. You know, I think the proliferation of mattress startups certainly got very competitive very quickly and immediately buying a mattress online became even more overwhelming and confusing than buying a mattress

6 (58m 25s):
Offline. And

2 (58m 27s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Casper dealt with its competitors, did a deal with target and later navigated a very Rocky IPO, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR support for this NPR podcast and the following message come from Hotwire. Imagine a nice vacation. Is there a view of the parking lot? No. So don't book a cheap hotel book, an expensive hotel for cheap on Hotwire. You can stay in a nicer hotel than you ever thought possible. Just select your city, neighborhood and amenities, then get your hot rate, better views, king size beds, and freshly pressed waffle woven robes await you and also actual waffles.

2 (59m 14s):
Download the Hotwire app now and book beyond your wildest means all bookings final.

4 (59m 21s):
This podcast is supported by 18 T active armor. Our lives are on our phones and with phones full of live streamed workout classes, midday, work calls and nightly family video calls. There's no room for fraud calls and T makes customer security a priority helping block those pesky calls. It's not complicated. ATN T active armor, 24 7 proactive network security and fraud call blocking to help stop threats at no extra charge compatible device and service required. Visit atnt.com/active armor for details,

0 (59m 58s):
Support for this podcast. And the following message come from Upwork. The world's largest remote talent platform. Here we are. The world of work has evolved. We can either go back and work the way we used to, or we can keep moving forward and work the way that we can Upwork the worlds of work marketplace is where independent talent and game changing companies come together to share opportunities, to make great work and to build the relationships that inspire Upwork up. We go support for NPR and the following message come from Stanford. Children's health, Stanford children's health is honored to once again, be ranked as a top 10 children's hospital in the nation by us news and world report Stanford children's health access to excellence.

2 (1h 0m 48s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's around 2015 and after a very successful launch of its first mattress, Casper is having to play defense because competitor mattress companies are springing up all over the place. It does

1 (1h 1m 7s):
Become, I think, an arms race of trying to think about how you're going to have a defensible business. And so part of it is advertising, but part of what we saw is also the distribution matters and having a place for customers to try the product is an advantage in this industry, in this ecosystem. So that's why we started opening up stores today. We have 70 retail stores opened and operating, and that's because combining that online experience with the ability to offer a trial experience with our customers is an advantage. And we started thinking about other ways to build advantages. How do we have a one-stop shopping destination for all things sleep? And so how do we expand our product portfolio?

1 (1h 1m 49s):
I think you

2 (1h 1m 49s):
Guys did a partnership with west Elm, too.

1 (1h 1m 52s):
That's right. Our first ever partnership was with west Elm on getting our products into their stores and their showrooms, and having them promote us as a way for you to buy a mattress as part of your overall bedroom set. So we were always thinking about ways to extend distribution.

2 (1h 2m 8s):
So one thing that I I'm curious about is that mattresses like cosmetics and some other categories tend to be made in central facilities where factories that make products for many different companies, right. According to their specifications. And I'm assuming that that as more competitors came into the space, they were also making mattresses in the city, you know, using the same manufacturers you were using.

1 (1h 2m 41s):
That's right. So in the mattress industry, a lot of manufacturing is done at contract manufacturers who will make foam or products for anyone in the industry. So it's not abnormal to see multiple brands being produced on the floor of any mattress factory.

2 (1h 2m 57s):
So, I mean, I'm thinking if I'm running the company, I would get a little anxious or nervous about people who were making mattresses in the same factories, where ours were being made. And, and that, that IP not being carefully protected. I, I wouldn't say

1 (1h 3m 14s):
I got anxious about like other people creating mattresses in the same facilities, because I think there's enough secret sauce in our products that really do make them stand out. If you buy our wave mattress today, it has this gel pod system that we invented. We've patented. Now where I give myself maybe lower marks on kind of my personal scorecard is I don't know that we've done the best job of articulating those product benefits to consumers. And, and it does get in the weeds to your point. It doesn't stand out as much because, you know, at the end of the day, a mattress sits under your covers and you're not looking at it everyday. You're not, it's not an aesthetic product. It just has to work well. And I think about it with like, you know, razorblades, like you would know very specifically if you're using a razorblade that's high quality and probably expensive and, you know, recent versus a low quality inexpensive razorblade, and you wouldn't be able to articulate exactly why, but it has to do with the engineering and the manufacturing processes and the quality standards and the specification and the input ingredients and all of the things that go into it.

1 (1h 4m 21s):
And I think we got away from that for a little bit and focus more on the brand and less on the product. But I think we're really focused on, on the product story at this point.

2 (1h 4m 30s):
Philip, let me ask you about review sites because mattress review sites or websites that claim to have honest reviews, the hugely influential in what mattresses people buy. Like before I started researching for this interview, I had no idea how important they are to sales. And some of these review sites have not been charitable to you took to Casper and, and you guys actually sued some of these sites saying that they were being unfair, but I mean, wonder why, why didn't you Sue them? So it's

1 (1h 5m 6s):
Has nothing to do with the content of what they were writing. And it has everything to do with the way that they were representing themselves to consumers. And what we quickly saw happen in this industry was that people were creating content. They were highly, highly compensated by certain companies for that content to be very favorable. And that's fine, as you said, it can be the opinion of someone, but where we draw the line is if they misrepresent what they're doing to consumers, which has to do with disclosure, there are some companies and some sites out there, especially at the time when we were litigating against this, that did not represent themselves as being paid by these advertisers.

1 (1h 5m 47s):
And they represented themselves as independent and unbiased. And that just wasn't reality. And so not having proper disclosures is what we we litigated about. And I think today we have a better ecosystem for consumers in the industry because you see more disclosures

2 (1h 6m 3s):
And look, you're in a high stakes business, right? I mean, you are in a competitive high stakes business environment. So there, there is going to be a war footing in some sense. I mean, it's not, it's, it's, that's just the reality. There's a story out there that one of these companies you settled with called Sleepopolis was eventually acquired by another company called Jack media. The Casper provided a loan to, to acquire Sleepopolis. And then the story is that the review of a Casper mattress on sleep Opolis turned from a negative review to a positive review after that happened. I'm not saying that it's not illegal. It's not, I'm just saying that that that's a story. And you got some flack for that from some, some media outlets for doing that.

1 (1h 6m 49s):
That's right. I think the narrative that, that, that media outlet took was not fair or accurate. I mean, to the story I just said is not true. No. So the narrative that was behind the story again, so there are good operators in this ecosystem and there are bad operators in this ecosystem. And in our view, Jack media was a good operator. They wanted to buy this site and we talked to them about financing that acquisition so that they could operate it. And they had complete independent editorial control and they ran their business. We were just a financing partner for them. And today we're, we're fortunate. There are a lot of very good actors providing content around mattresses, providing content around sleep, and the ecosystem is much better than it was back when we were forced to litigate.

1 (1h 7m 37s):
I mean, litigation's always the last resort, but if, if, if the NAD, the, you know, if the advertising standards that the law says and that the independent advertising bureaus are are saying are not being upheld and that's misrepresented to consumers, we, we, again, just felt it was, you know, an obligation upon us to take action, to let the good actors build their business and their there's a great business to be built on the content side, on the advertorial side of the mattress industry and of the sleep category. So long as you do it with proper disclosures, which is what's going on. And so, again, it's the narrative behind it. I think that was a little,

2 (1h 8m 17s):
I know that around 2017, you started to enter into conversations with target target. From what I understand started to look at you as a potential acquisition and, and you guys started to talk pretty deeply. And now knowing what I know about acquisition talks, that they're very intense. You've got to open up all your books. It's you got to stay totally secret. You can't talk about it with anybody. It's. I mean, you, you, you sort of entered this process with target.

1 (1h 8m 53s):
So I, I wouldn't say we got, as far as, as you're alluding to in the process, target had taken a keen observation to what Casper is doing. They saw what our partnership was at west film and target wanted to push more into the wellness side of things. They wanted to make a bigger push into sleep into the mattress side of things. They had a big betting business. They wanted to do more in their pillow business, Brian Cordell, the CEO, who I was introduced to. And he said like, the commercial opportunities are huge. I think we can build a big business together. And that's where we sat down. You know, we, we talked, you know, amongst our board and, and you know, the founders and the management team.

1 (1h 9m 38s):
And we said, what's the best way to work with target today. And we said, if they want to make an investment and take a minority position in Casper, and if they want to help us more importantly than the investment, if they wanna help us commercially, and the investment will help catalyze that then great. That's the win-win. And that's what we ended

2 (1h 9m 56s):
Up. So now with target as a strategic kind of investor, you are, your mattresses are in target stores still today, right? That's right. All right. So Casper, you hit a huge milestone in March of 2019. You raised around, you brought in another a hundred million dollars, and I think you at a $1.1 billion valuation. And I mean, that's huge, but it also, I imagine increases pressure, right? Because you've got to, you've got to now show that that's, you're really worth that, that money. What did you do? Did you already, in March of 2019, believe that you were going to take the company public within a

6 (1h 10m 40s):
Year Marshall

1 (1h 10m 42s):
Of 2019, we definitely started focusing on what does it mean to be public ready, IPO ready? What does the IPO process look like and what do we need to do to be prepared to be a public company? So we were definitely working on that in early 2019.

2 (1h 11m 1s):
I mean, this is what happens, right? When, when an investor makes an investment in a, in a, in a company, they are expecting that there's going to be some kind of exit either it's going to be acquired, or it's going to go public because investor needs a return. You guys first went to investors in 2013. So it's you now looking at seven years later and you know, the clock is ticking. And, and, and is that why you decided that going public was the right decision? You know,

1 (1h 11m 29s):
We, we actually really didn't feel pressure from investors. Since we started the company, since the five of us got together, it was always like, what's the next milestone for the business? What's the next milestone for what we want to build. And then let's get there as quickly as we can. Okay. We, we raised, you know, as you said, another a hundred million dollars in March of 2019, what's next. Okay. Let's, let's get ready to be a public company. What does that like? So it was really, I think, more self-imposed pressure to get public than anything,

2 (1h 11m 59s):
But going public means that you have to reveal everything going public means your, all your financial statements, your documents are now public documents, because that's what it means to be a public company. And so a month before your IPO, you had to, you know, all your documents are out in the open and it showed that you were not profitable, that actually you had lost money in the previous quarter. And that the company wasn't yet profitable. That's fine. That happens all the time with many companies. And when people buy a stock, it's often on the belief that eventually they'll reach profitability, but, but it, but all of a sudden, you kind of lay, lay it out there, right? I mean, you're not, you, you, you saw out in the open

1 (1h 12m 39s):
That's right. It's, it's all out in the open, but we weren't, we weren't afraid of that. Like we, we had, we have a good story and we have a very bright future. And we're a business that even to this point in time, I think in, in my judgment, it's been the right point in our business life cycle to invest capital, to help us grow our foundation, to help us ultimately become a very large and profitable business. And that that's very common for companies early in their life cycle. And if you look at other companies that went public in 2019, that was a very common narrative. You had Uber and Lyft who were going public and not profitable.

1 (1h 13m 20s):
You had smile direct and Peloton that were going public and non-profitable and Casper continues to have a story that I think will ultimately prove to, to resonate in the public markets. We've had a choppy time since we've been public, but, you know, I think that's as much timing as it is anything. Th this is a little

2 (1h 13m 40s):
Bit of a sensitive topic, cause I don't, I don't want it to come across as sounding like, you know, calling after you or criticizing you, or I don't want to make you feel, I don't, I'm not trying to make you feel bad. I'm just, it was just as an exercise in running a business and the ups and downs of a business. I'm just really curious about where your mind goes, which is you had raised money on a billion dollar valuation in, in 2019, you go public in 2020, and investors essentially value the company at the end of that, that IPO at $500 million half, listen to half of what your valuation was when you raised money. And, you know, today it's, it's about a little over $300 million and it's the market cap valuation.

2 (1h 14m 26s):
And so what is the story you tell yourself about that? How do you process that?

6 (1h 14m 36s):
That is the

1 (1h 14m 37s):
Reality. And I would say, you know, uncomfortable saying it's not good. You know, th the last thing I personally would ever want to do is lose an investor who, you know, I think of it is investing in me as, as much as it is investing in the company. The last thing I would ever want to do is lose an investor money. And so it, it doesn't feel good at all and it's, it's not good. And so I, it is a very motivating factor to me to get our stock price up and, and to have our investors make money. That said, I do truly believe it's a moment in time. I think we did have unfortunate timing when it came time to tapping the public markets.

1 (1h 15m 19s):
We were the first, I think, visible high profile company to go public post. We work, which meant there was a ton of negative sentiment around companies that were investing capital into their business and around, you know, these, the startup side of things. And we were really one of the last visible companies to go public pre pandemic, which just means that people immediately started to focus elsewhere as they should. But, you know, you live with the, the timing that you have in life. And so, you know, it's going to take time to work our way out of where we are, but it's definitely a reality that we're dealing with. And, and that, I feel a lot of responsibility. Hmm.

2 (1h 15m 59s):
How do you handle it as a leader? Because you are the CEO of all the firepower, right. Is, is aimed towards you. That's just how it, how happy you choose to be the leader. You've got to absorb the firepower, but you also have to diffuse it, diffuse it somehow and, and deal with it. How do you deal with, you know, articles like in, in quartz or an article about your IPO? And it was critical. And I think Forbes had an, had an article said, don't buy Casper and there've been other critical articles. I'm sure you read, then you have to be aware of them because that's part of your job. How do you internalize that kind of criticism?

2 (1h 16m 40s):
Do you just think to yourself they're wrong and I'm going to prove them, right?

1 (1h 16m 43s):
Yeah. I'm not one of these people that uses it as a way to get super fired up and like that that's not what motivates me. Like, let's go prove these guys wrong. And that's not what you would hear at Casper either. Like, you know, I don't use it to rile up the troops if you will. And, and largely, I also, I don't dismiss it. So I'm not like just head my head in the sand and like, not understand what's going on, but I don't sit there and read these. I don't get overly focused on it. I don't internalize it. Like I won't lose sleep. If someone were to write something like that about the company or whatever it may be. I mean,

2 (1h 17m 20s):
Do you like meditate or do you, are there things you do to cope with it or are you just wired that way?

1 (1h 17m 26s):
I think I'm just wired that way. I don't meditate. I, you know, I don't take like my aggression out in a workout class or anything like that. I try not to let the highs get to me and I try not to let the lows get to me and I just try to stay pretty balanced. And I think that is felt at Casper. So I, you know, I try to keep the company focused on that. Let's remember that we're going towards a point on the horizon. We're not living in the today. And, you know, over time, these things take care of themselves.

2 (1h 17m 59s):
I want to ask you about something that you guys were actually really pioneered in the, in the mattress industry, because initially when you, when you sold them, I think it was like 40 days. You get a, as a 40 day trial period, but you, up to, to a hundred days now, pretty much every mattress company, a hundred days, you can try it out. And if you don't like it, send it back to us. That still to me seems crazy because I think you don't even require people to use a mattress cover, but if someone is using it for 90 days and sends it back for the money back guarantee, I have to assume that that the mattress is dead. You can't reuse it.

1 (1h 18m 31s):
That's right. So you don't, you don't actually send it back. We'll recycle it locally and give you a credit

2 (1h 18m 38s):
Again. They get, you get a credit to buy another product.

1 (1h 18m 41s):
No, no, you get a full refund, take your cash and, and do whatever you want with it. Just eat that. Yep. Just cost of doing business

2 (1h 18m 49s):
Because you can't write a mattress like you sleep on it. And we know how much skin and sweat is inside of a mattress. Just look at any science website. You'll find out if you're curious, you can't the secondary market for mattresses. I can't imagine that hot just seems like a crazy thing to offer people a hundred days started with

1 (1h 19m 9s):
The idea of let's put ourselves in the customer seat and work backwards, and the idea of laying on a mattress for 30 seconds in a store, and then saying, okay, I want to spend a third of my life on this for the next 10 years was equally crazy to us. Totally crazy. And so, you know, if, if that is one end of the crazy spectrum, the other is what would be the most crazy way to sell a product that when Casper launch was sight unseen. And we said like, just no questions asked return policy. If you don't love it, we'll, we'll take it back. And fortunately, you know, few customers do, but we just want you to find something that you sleep great on.

6 (1h 19m 50s):
You have about

2 (1h 19m 50s):
420 employees. Now, something like that,

1 (1h 19m 54s):
I it's about 350 kind of HQ employees. And then we have several hundred retail employees as well. And

2 (1h 20m 2s):
You are the last one standing. Right? All the other founders co-founders have, have moved on in some way. I mean, they may be, but they're not involved in the day to day of Casper. Right. That's right. So do you sort of feel like, you know, Hey guys, where would you go? I mean, I know you, you earlier mentioned you're good friends with everybody, but do you sort of wonder like, Hey, wait, why you, why what's what's going on here? No, I,

1 (1h 20m 23s):
I don't, I think these things like just take their, their natural progression and some of my co-founders are younger than me and earlier in their careers and get into wanting to move on to new challenges and, you know, totally accepting of that. And I think early on, we said, let's be mindful that like, you know, none of us signed up for this to be our forever job until we retire, but let's always make sure we put Casper first in our decision-making, but also just be realistic that, you know, if, if one of the founders wants to go on to do something else, like let's just prepare for it and talk about it and do right by, you know, the rest of the team.

1 (1h 21m 3s):
And that's kind of how it played out when

2 (1h 21m 6s):
You started selling mattresses and your dorm room at UT in 2003, could you have imagined running a public mattress company in, I mean, more than a mattress company, but could you have imagined running a public company that is centered around mattresses direct to consumer mattresses? No.

1 (1h 21m 27s):
Would be the short answer. Certainly not anything that's specific, but

3 (1h 21m 32s):
I will say like, growing up

1 (1h 21m 35s):
Like business was what I was fascinated by. And my sister would tell you, like, I would force her when we were little, like let's play business and I would use my briefcase. And, you know, before I could write like scribble out, you know, fake letters and checks and things like that, like business's always been what I've been like really passionate and curious about. And so I do think, I always dreamed of like, what would it be like to run a public company, be a public company CEO? And so this was definitely on my bucket list. Like did, did I think I would get here this way and at this age and with this kind of company? No, but you know, definitely something I aspire to since I was little.

2 (1h 22m 16s):
When you think about where you've got, you've gotten to as a founder and a CEO, how much of that do you, do you think is because of how hard you worked and how much of it do you think it's due to just being lucky and being the right people at the right time and the right kind of things breaking your way.

1 (1h 22m 36s):
It's a tough question. I definitely am someone that puts a lot, the majority of the way life happens into luck. You hear the references of like running a company, running a startup. It's like, you know, being in a boxing match and you're just constantly hit in the face. And, and I think that's a hundred percent true and, and having traits that were ingrained to me since I was little like perseverance and persistence, and to be able to absorb that and work through it and absorbed the ups and downs. I'm lucky that I'm in the position to have that chance and to be where we are at this point in the journey. So definitely I think bias towards the luck side of things, but know that there's a lot of factors that go into the journey that people end up on.

2 (1h 23m 25s):
That's Philip Krim, co-founder and CEO of

6 (1h 23m 28s):
Casper. It's just one more question for you. You've got a two year old at home, right? I do. Do you let them jump on your bed? I

1 (1h 23m 39s):
A bit more encouraging of it than my wife is. Yeah.

2 (1h 23m 42s):
The only thing is no Springs in mattresses anymore. No one's making, I mean, they are, but when I was a kid who jumped on the Springs and you destroy the Springs well, so

1 (1h 23m 49s):
Newer models of Casper actually hybrids. And so they do have Springs in it. So they're bouncing. I think the

2 (1h 23m 55s):
Advantage is that if he destroys your mattress, you can easily replace it with one from other guy. Yeah. He's got a, got he knows a guy. Who's got to go, Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you're not a subscriber to the podcast, please do subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us, our email address is H ivt@npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter, we're at how I built this or at guy Roz, our Instagram is at how I built this NPR and mine is at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by James DeLuise with music composed by REM, Tina or bluey. It was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Derek gales.

2 (1h 24m 36s):
Our production staff includes Casey Herman, Rachel Faulkner, JC Howard, Juliet, Carney, Ferris, safari, Liz Metzker, Janet Lou, John Lee and Emily sober. Our intern is Harrison VJ Choi. And Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Roz. And you've been listening to how I built this.

4 (1h 24m 59s):
This is NPR. This message comes from NPR, sponsor Ford, the all electric Mustang, Mach II, and a stock car race around a track. The stock car veers off toward a mobile pit crew harnessed to a moving flatbed truck. Visit ford.com to see a heart racing Mustang, Mach II receive an over the air update.