2 (0s):
Support for NPR and the following message come from Comcast through Internet Essentials

1 (5s):
Comcast has connected more than 8 million people

2 (8s):
from low-income households to high-speed internet most for the first time more at Comcast Corporation.com Internet Essentials. So before we start the show, I want to remind you that tomorrow is the last day of our annual public radio fundraiser and we're asking you to show your support for your local public radio station. You've heard me say it all month. So please Just take a moment to give your gift by December 31st. Just go to donate dot npr.org built. And thanks. Hey, everyone. Happy New Year. And thank you all so much for being such an incredible Community 2019 was such a great year for all of us and it was so much fun meeting some of you at our live shows and at the how I built the summit and right now we are busy planning our lives schedule for 2020 and also our annual Summit.

2 (57s):
So stay tuned for details on all of that. Meantime I can't think of a better way to close out the year then with one of my all-time favorite episodes of the show it first ran back in July of 2018. It's a story of Stacy Brown and Chicken Salad Chick. It is a true hero's journey and any warning here this episode. We'll take you on an emotional roller coaster ride, but it is totally worth it.

1 (1m 25s):
We hit the ground running on what we called our Southeastern fundraising tour and packed up coolers full of chicken salad to hand out to possible investors, and we pitched to anyone that would listen in every single meeting that we had. We heard you want us to invest this much money for a minority share of a business that does not have A single franchise open, thanks, but no thanks laughed out of the room.

2 (2m 6s):
From NPR it's how I built this a show of that innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm guy Roz and on today's show how a stay-at-home mom went from selling homemade chicken salad to friends and neighbors to building one of the fastest-growing restaurant chains in America. She calls it Chicken Salad Chick. Okay, so chicken salad never really had strong thoughts on it. Either way, you know totally solid lunchtime option. But if you live in most parts of the Southern United States, then you know that chicken salad is much much more than just a solid option.

2 (2m 52s):
It's like a lobster roll in Maine where it might seem like it's the same thing everywhere, but it's those small nuances those delicate differences that fuel pack. In a debate over which Lobster Shack is the best Lobster Shack and these are the kinds of debates Southerners have over chicken salad. These are the kinds of debates Stacy Brown would have with her friends and Stacy happened to make really great chicken salad now today chicken salad Shake is one of the fastest-growing restaurant chains in America, but what you need to know for now is that Stacy grew up in Rome Georgia. She ended up at Auburn University in Auburn Alabama where she eventually settled Old with her first husband.

2 (3m 33s):
He worked full-time while Stacy stayed home to raise the kids, but

1 (3m 38s):
always knew I was going to start business, huh always But also knew that you can't do everything at once and it was my time to be a full-time mother and it happened that the perfect storm for when I would start that business came in the shape of a divorce and at that time Carson. My oldest was six Jack was three and Lydia was too wow.

2 (4m 12s):
And you've got to figure this out.

1 (4m 14s):
Yes to know. Okay, I have these three children. I've got to make ends meet. I have to support them, you know divorce is a disaster. It's a financial disaster. It's an emotional disaster. But when you know, you have small children to take care of the instinct to take care of them first lets you push through that because you know, you have to take care of these kids. So all that other Stuff really gets pushed to the back until you can get through this survival because there's really no time to sit down and cry.

2 (4m 51s):
Okay, so you are trying to figure out what to do. And what what did you start to

1 (4m 55s):
think? So when I was in school dinner times in my home were really sacred times. My mother cooked every meal and the four of us sat around the dinner table every night, and I remember That my father started conversations that revolved around what problems did you come across today? And our dinner time conversations were about Solutions and how could we solve everyday problems? So I started to think ahead before dinner time. What am I going to present tonight to Dad? Yes, and that really was what started my entrepreneurial spirit that In process of what problems can I solve?

1 (5m 46s):
So when the divorce happened and I was in this situation and all of a sudden what do I have to offer the world? What and I an expert on what have I perfected over these last year's as a stay-at-home mom that people would value. Well, I knew that I was a good cook and I happened to be obsessed with chicken salad up

2 (6m 9s):
obsessed with chicken

1 (6m 10s):
salad. Just so by obsessed what I mean by that is first of all is obsessed with eating at not making it so every restaurant that I frequent it if they had a chicken salad on the menu, which everybody should note that anybody that serves lunch there is chicken salad on the menu, which should have told somebody something. Yeah, and I was so fascinated by how different it all was and who was going to have the best recipe and I was always in search of the Best recipe because as a southern woman, if you found a great chicken salad that you want to share that information with your friends and you want to be able to tell people where to go get the gold because it is a southern staple.

1 (6m 54s):
So it was just a silly little Quest you know that just if it was on a menu then I ordered it. I had my hometown favorite. I had a favorite in Dalton, Georgia, Columbus, Georgia, Auburn Alabama where I attended school all the towns that I lived in. So I knew that I could cook and I felt like I was a connoisseur of chicken

2 (7m 17s):
salad. So you thought hey go let me try to make chicken salad and sell it.

1 (7m 23s):
So if I could come up with a really good recipe I could just make it from home and I could sell it door-to-door. Then I could be with the kids just like I'd always been and maybe it's going to be enough to make ends meet.

2 (7m 38s):
What was your basic chicken salad recipe at the

1 (7m 42s):
Well, when it started I didn't have a recipe, you know how to eating a lot. I didn't have a recipe. So I thought well, I loved the depth of flavor from my hometown favorite. I love the texture from my Auburn favorite. I love the moisture content from my Dalton favorite if I could take what I love about all of these different recipes and put it into make mine. Maybe this is going to be the perfect recipe. Yeah, so I Doing that. It's just like a science experiment and oh my gosh, I went through cooking whole chickens on the bone. I cooked chicken breast on the bone. I cook boneless breasts. I cook tenderloins all different types of chicken would yield different amounts which affects everything it affects the recipe.

1 (8m 31s):
It affects the food cost all of it

2 (8m 33s):
where you like roasting chickens and then mixing it up with mayonnaise and celery and some salt and spices and that was basically

1 (8m 41s):
it. So I boiled chicken.

2 (8m 43s):
Ah, wow,

1 (8m 44s):
whole chickens. Well, I started with whole chickens. I moved to breast on the bone. I did skinless breasts and I ended up with tenderloins and I found that all white meat tenderloins yield the most consistent product and when you're doing things by weight, you need the most consistent end result that when you said what's in your chicken salad, so I had just this one recipe right? Well as I am making this recipe I thought you know Elizabeth down the street. We had a conversation about chicken salad and she loves fruits and nuts in hers. So I'm going to make one for her.

1 (9m 25s):
Hmm now Julie across the street. She loves spicy stuff. I'm going to make one for her and then if I'm going to have one with fruits and nuts, a lot of people are allergic to nuts, so I'm going to make one with just fruit. So all of a sudden I had Current flavors and I started making recipes and I would package up little Tupperware containers of what I thought was a good recipe and I would take these little Tupperware containers to people that I did business with in town

2 (9m 58s):
that you do business with for

1 (9m 59s):
what so hair stylist and in grocery

2 (10m 3s):
stores. Oh, I see. Okay. I got you.

1 (10m 5s):
So anybody that I came across town, you know that I would normally see so I said would you please Is just sample this and tell me what you think and they would say, uh, it's a little too dry. It's too soupy too. Salty little Bland and adds I received this feedback will go back to the kitchen and I tweaked and tweaked and tweaked and then one day I handed this recipe to somebody and I watched their reaction was something I had not seen yet. And they close their eyes and their head went back and they made just the strangest noise.

1 (10m 48s):
It was just oh wow. And so that was a real reaction. I mean that was impressive. So I took that recipe and continued to sample that recipe on neighbors and Friends anybody. I came across and said tell me what you think of this until I had a wide range of people that I had sampled this one recipe, but they all had the same. Same response. So that told me that this was the recipe

2 (11m 18s):
shit just out of curiosity. So for the time you separated from your husband to the time you got the recipe down ready to sell roughly. How long is it like a few months?

1 (11m 29s):
I would say it was probably a few months

2 (11m 32s):
and while you were experimenting making chicken salad, like was anybody any friends or people cared about you to be but he say hey You may want to just get a pic. Just get a day job at I mean, you're really good at being to eat salad, but this is not a sustainable way to make a living selling chicken salad, or like did anybody say that to you or people

1 (11m 53s):
just kind of quiet? Yes. Now my parents they did not hold back with that. They said now Stacy, this is silly. You have got to go get a Dependable job and support these kids and I said, please just hang on. Me give this a try. I've like this could possibly work. Now. I had friends that told me later that they were saying that they did not tell me to my face. They did say. Oh, yeah good. Yeah. Good luck. That sounds

2 (12m 25s):
good. Did you sense that from them?

1 (12m 27s):
No, I was so determined. I was blind as a bat. I was just going to make this work.

2 (12m 33s):
So you are determined you don't really care if people think you're kind of like have lost your mind. Yeah. They're honestly,

1 (12m 42s):
There there probably were people telling me that I was crazy in a very soft Southern way

2 (12m 47s):
is a soft Southern way like a little bit polite but a little bit passive aggressive.

1 (12m 52s):
Absolutely, right? Absolutely. It's an art it is an art

2 (12m 57s):
form. So I'm trying to imagine you making chicken soup. First of all you had three kids and I've got two little kids did they demand a lot of attention and you were trying to make chicken salad and Sell it and so were you doing this like at night like what are you doing?

1 (13m 16s):
So I would be with the kids during the day and when I would put them to bed, I would start cooking. Wow, and then we would get up in the morning and I would start to panic because I had all this fresh product that I needed to sell quickly and put the kids in the car and we would go knocking on doors. They would sit in the car and I would go knocking on a door with a basket and I asked them if they would like to buy some chicken salad.

2 (13m 44s):
How much were you selling a like a was it like a quart of chicken or a pint or something is a pound a pound of kind of how much are you selling it

1 (13m 51s):
for? I think it was eight dollars and I really thought that I was an aggressive sales person and that I was ingenious and when I look back I think they were thinking. Oh here comes that poor pitiful woman here. She comes peddling that chicken salad lock the door and shut the blinds here she comes but they Got it, and then they play standing orders and the word group and I needed a name because I knew I was going to sell it door-to-door and I thought the key to my success was going to be a car magnet. I thought the only way people are going to find out what I do for my home is to put a car magnet on my car.

1 (14m 37s):
And as I drive around town and I sit at red lights people will be able to see. What I do so chicken salad has to be in the name and I'm the chick that's going to bring it to you. So Chicken Salad Chick is catchy. Yeah, so that became the name of the business and at this point I reach out to Kevin Brown who had been a family friend for 10 years. He was a computer software salesman. I knew he was very busy. A Savvy and I didn't really know what I was doing. I had come up with a good recipe. Yeah, I had a name but I needed help understanding really the ins and outs of running an effective business from home.

1 (15m 24s):
Hm. So I reached out to Kevin I said, please come help me. I don't know what I'm doing. So told me about my name had him try the recipe. He was over the moon about the recipe and Kevin said, you know if you're going to have different flavors. You really need to differentiate them somehow like I don't know give them like girly names or something. And I was like, it's Chicken Salad Chick. It's all coming together as a team. And not only am I going to name them after chicks and I'm going to name them after real chicks chicks that have influenced who I am today best friend since kindergarten college roommate mother mother-in-law aunt's And neighbors they all eventually had named sex and these chicken salads came to

2 (16m 17s):
life.

1 (16m 20s):
So I was delivering Fancy Nancy fruity Fran classic Carol and Jazzy Julie where my flavors I was delivering these around the neighborhood and I thought, you know the gateway to communities our hairstylists and teachers if you can get a good product in the mouth of hair stylist, And teachers you will be connected to every family in town. So I went and put a large bowl of classic Carol in my children's School in the

2 (16m 53s):
Teachers Lounge like a giant bowl of chicken salad.

1 (16m 56s):
Yes. I put business cards out. I put crackers around this giant bowl and the phone started ringing off the hook

2 (17m 4s):
because everybody was like, this is perfect. I can go home and have to make dinner or lunch is for my kids because it's gonna be ready made fresh.

1 (17m 12s):
Chicken salad in the fridge made from scratch made from scratch and that turns into me cooking longer hours and I find myself crying a little bit. It's starting to be overwhelming and as fate would have it the next phone call that came came from the health

2 (17m 33s):
department. How do they find out about

1 (17m 35s):
you? Well, I don't really know it was Anonymous caller that called the health

2 (17m 40s):
department and said this This person is doing

1 (17m 43s):
what they said. This woman is cooking chicken salad out of her home, which was illegal. Is it for like food safety reasons? Yes, because you have to conduct business out of a kitchen that is inspected by the health

2 (17m 56s):
department. Yes, right. Okay. So you got this call from from like an inspector at the health department. Are you freaked out or you scared?

1 (18m 4s):
Well, it was a little depressing because I had worked my tail off it seemed to be working people were ordering this. Salad, you know and all of a sudden I'm shut down. I'm back to square one. I've got to leave the kids and go get a nine-to-five because what I was doing was illegal. Yeah, so it was a dark time. It was a dark day that wow, this was working. This was really working and it's all over and people liked the chicken salad so much that they knew I had been shut down because I had to tell people You'll know and they would call anyway, and they'll go.

1 (18m 45s):
Hey, I'm friends with Elizabeth. She said if I told you maybe you'd make me some chickens out. I had to say. All right everybody. No, I'm not bootlegging chicken salad. I'm not doing this. I'm not doing this

2 (18m 60s):
you're going to be making like the bathtub gin version of chicken

1 (19m 3s):
salad. You could see me in the corner of an elementary school parking lot with my hatch open and

2 (19m 10s):
and so you were finished your Your business was done. It was done. I was told

1 (19m 16s):
shut down

2 (19m 16s):
immediately. When we come back, how's Stacy found a totally legal way to keep making chicken salad and grow her business? Well beyond her neighborhood stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to one of our sponsors who helps make this podcast possible State Farm. Why do you need State Farm renter's insurance?

2 (19m 57s):
Because it helps protect the stuff landlords don't like your furniture that gets drenched by a broken pipe or when a burglar makes off with your new laptop. When you add it all up your stuff is probably worth more than you think make sure it's protected with State Farm renter's insurance find an agent or get a quote at statefarm.com. Support also comes from Uber

1 (20m 20s):
Uber is committed to safety and to continuously raising the bar to help make safer Journeys for

2 (20m 25s):
everyone for starters. All drivers are background checked before their first ride and screened on an ongoing basis and now Uber has introduced a brand new safety feature called ride

1 (20m 35s):
check which can detect of a trip goes unusually off course and check in to provide support to learn more about boobers commitment to safety visit uber.com safety.

2 (20m 49s):
Did you get a smart speaker for a gift of the holidays? Well consider it the gift that keeps on giving right because it can help you keep up with the news just say play NPR to hear your local NPR station and all your favorite NPR shows as well. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's 2007 and Stacy's homemade chicken salad operation has been shut down by the health department. But just when she's about to give up her business partner, Kevin comes up with an idea.

1 (21m 23s):
He said, you know, you've gotten a lot of attention here in this neighborhood. I bet that we could find you a little takeout spot. Just something small and you could give this a go and it would pay your bills and I'll help you do it and we decided to partner on paper. So I was 51% It was 49 and we were going to open up a little takeout spot. So there was a drive-through window in this tiny little 800 square foot Shack and and that was going to be it

2 (21m 59s):
that was going to be Chicken Salad Chick. How much was your rent by the way $800 pretty good price for a business. And what was Kevin's motivation to help you mean? He had a full-time job like did he really believed in the

1 (22m 13s):
business? Yes. He was inspired by this crazy reaction that was happening in town. And then it's exciting to start a business and we had been family friends and whatever all the He's got together. He and I always had a meeting of the minds of what was going to be the next greatest big thing. So we already had that connection and then all of a sudden we're going to start this little chicken salad business together. Yeah, but now this is 2007 right before the huge recession, right? He's still selling software and his job gets eliminated.

1 (22m 55s):
Well, so he was pretty devastated with that because he had an ex-wife and a daughter to support and he said, you know not to worry. I'm going to really put all my effort into helping you start this chicken salad business and then when it gets up and off its feet I'll go get a real job and I have never let him forget that he said that

2 (23m 20s):
so so just to paint the picture for me you guys are working out of an 800 square foot like And with a drive-through window and did you install an a commercial oven in there and like commercial sink? And did you have to do all that stuff?

1 (23m 36s):
So we are building this little thing from scratch and neither one of us had any money. We could not hire a contractor to come build this thing. So we were going to Home Depot and we were buying flooring. We're laying the flooring we were buying paint were painting the walls. We were hanging drywall. All and thankfully I had wonderful parents and they would come from Rome Georgia and they would stay at my little place and keep the kids while Kevin and I built this restaurant. Wow, and this was going to be such a tiny little thing. We didn't need commercial equipment. We just needed residential because this is not that big a deal.

1 (24m 16s):
Yeah. So everything was absolutely Homespun and we opened finally January 7th of 2008 so recession, Is here is there yeah,

2 (24m 29s):
and and did you so by this point your Incorporated? You've created an LLC like you've done all that stuff. You are a bona fide business. Now, you're legit. We're legit. You're legit. Okay, and the County Health Inspectors are like, yep by your legit you open the doors and on day one where your former customers like aligning out the door waiting for chicken

1 (24m 50s):
salad. So on day one, we cooked 40 pounds of chicken salad, so You could have it as a scoop a sandwich or you could buy a pound you would choose your flavors of chicken salad. We would complement those with are made from scratch side salads and then every lunch got the cookie because my view is that you don't really know your full until you have one little bite of sweet that says you're done and

2 (25m 19s):
happy so that first day you make 40 pounds of chicken salad

1 (25m 23s):
and and we open up the doors and Of our family and friends came to support us and all these well-wishers and flowers and balloons and plants are being delivered and the walls are lined with all family and friends and you can see that in the middle of the room. There's not a single customer. No one shows up. Hmm. There's just such a deep sense. This heaviness is the elephant in the room. I could just feel everyone's thoughts like I mean, how could she think this was going to work? It was so heavy and I thought what have I done what have I done? I've just put every penny to my name into a business that only serves lunch only serves take out and only sells chicken salad.

1 (26m 13s):
We could not have made it any more difficult for you to be a guest. You had to fit into a very slim demographic to Be Our Guest. Yep. So, you know, I'm thinking how stupid how stupid how could I've done? Us and the first guest walked in the door and everybody in the room just attacked her like she was the millionth customer, you know that she would but she was the only customer

2 (26m 41s):
like people just ran up to her and said hello. How are you? Can we help you? Have come right this way right this way like like that kind of how it was

1 (26m 47s):
like oh, you just it was just we just mauled her and people were you know, it's the South everybody was hugging her and thinking

2 (26m 59s):
wow, just like what did I do? I just showed up for some chicken

1 (27m 2s):
salad. I know and guess what she's never shown

2 (27m 5s):
back. No. Well. Okay. Well, she's

1 (27m 6s):
listening we scarred that woman.

2 (27m 9s):
So she shows up for the chicken for chicken salad and and then

1 (27m 12s):
what so she is stunned by all the attention that she's getting she orders her lunch. She leaves and then People start coming and a line forms. The line goes out the door down the sidewalk and we sell out in two hours. Wow.

2 (27m 33s):
What? What do you attribute that to mean you you opened up in there were no customers and just took a couple hours.

1 (27m 39s):
It's just took lunch top. All

2 (27m 40s):
right fair

1 (27m 42s):
enough. We opened up at 10 o'clock in the morning.

2 (27m 47s):
Nobody wants chicken salad until

1 (27m 48s):
noon. Yes. I just wanted people to be And so Kevin and I looked at each other and said well, let's make some more. So we made 80 pounds the second day and here was a surreal moment a realization every one of those faces that we saw on the first day was there on the second and they brought a friend and we sold out in two hours again with twice the amount of chickens out and very quickly. It turned into what always said look like the floor of the New York Stock

2 (28m 25s):
Exchange in that 800 square

1 (28m 28s):
foot in an 800 square foot building and I'm thinking okay people are liking this and they wanted everything we had to cook we could not make it fast enough. We were running out of food, but we weren't making a

2 (28m 41s):
dime. My sumption would be the case for crushing it you were making money hand over fist and we weren't and you are at what why

1 (28m 49s):
well, we didn't know how much Money we were spending on inventory. We didn't know how to project how much we needed to cook and our waste we'd have waste of one item and then not enough of others. Yeah. So I remember very clearly this day. We were running out of chicken salad and Kevin and I had busted out the backdoor we run down the production kitchen to grab more broccoli salad more grape salad. We're out when we come back down to the service kitchen and he turns around and barricades himself against Or he said Stacy stop. So what he said this isn't working. We are not making any money and nobody is going to work this hard.

1 (29m 33s):
We're working our tails off and we're not making any money. It's not going to work and I said get out of the way. I've got to feed these people so he knew then she's not going to give up so he went in there and he worked on our processes. And every day he would say today we did this in six steps tomorrow. We're going to do it in five today. We did it in 5 tomorrow. We're going to do it in four and he turned us into a well-oiled machine and it didn't take him very long in the grand scheme of things. So we open January 7th of 2008 and we were making money by 2009.

1 (30m 18s):
Wow, and we opened two more restaurants in Auburn to pull the chaos away from that one little Shack, but I have to imagine you were working like

2 (30m 28s):
crazy like morning till

1 (30m 30s):
night. So, you know, the reason that I wanted to do this was so that the children would have that stability so it would not make sense. If I said to heck with all that I'm going to go open a restaurant that's going to have me working all hours of the night. Yeah, and when we open the restaurant we said we are going to run a restaurant the restaurant. Is not going to run us. So the first thing we did that was smart was we primarily serve lunch. So we're not going to be there at 4 o'clock in the morning preparing breakfast and we're not going to be there at two o'clock in the morning closing down a bar and then Kevin made the commitment. He said I'll take the later hours. You take the earlier hours so that you can be home with the kids for the majority of the day and he held true to that commitment and we got married.

1 (31m 20s):
Whoa, wait you didn't you?

2 (31m 21s):
Buried the lead during that time you were the the two of you were both single parents and and you were working together. So so I guess you start to fall in love,

1 (31m 31s):
right? Yes. I mean crisis bonds you yeah the fire. Yeah. Yeah, I guess she's say we fell in love over chicken salad. Yeah.

2 (31m 42s):
So in that first year you open up a business and you also get married to each other.

1 (31m 48s):
Yes. So in November of 2008 week. Closed the restaurant we hung a sign on the door that said the chicken the rooster have gone to get married and we flew to Jamaica. We got married. We stayed there for four days. We came back to the fire of the restaurants and a blended family. So now that we're for kids so Kevin had a daughter Olivia about to at that time and so we came back to I say three restaurants for children and the cat and the dog ran away. It was it was my mother says it was a festive

2 (32m 24s):
life. So this business really started to take off in Auburn, right? I mean who are the who is coming? I mean was it college students? Was it little lunchtime crowd? Was it just it was at everybody?

1 (32m 39s):
Well, okay. So when we open the restaurant I had no clue that naming it Chicken Salad Chick might determine and I found out once we open the restaurant we became known as a chicky place, you know, this was a For women, huh? I had no clue. You know good food is good food, right? Yeah. So then it was really lots of fun to observe male behavior in the Chicken Salad Chick. So I had you know these names of the chicken salads sassy Scotty Fancy Nancy fruity Fran nutty Nana all these names. Well the men would come up to the counter and they would say just give me the one with the fruits and the nuts and And I would say well that's Fancy Nancy.

1 (33m 30s):
Is that the one that you would like Fancy Nancy? They say Don't make me say the stupid names can't you just number them

2 (33m 38s):
but they came in the door.

1 (33m 40s):
Oh, they came in the door. So the first time they would come in they'd come in with a girlfriend or a wife and they'd elbow her and they'd say you order because they didn't want to have to say the names and once they ate it the girlfriends and wives didn't have to come anymore they were coming for The food and they didn't care about saying the names they were all in. So as you as

2 (34m 2s):
you grew and as you had more and more customers coming through the door, how did you finance the second and the third locations through the revenue of the first restaurant house? So the cash flow is able to help you open up those other

1 (34m 18s):
locations. Yes, and because believe me every Bank laughed us out

2 (34m 25s):
of those off. Office you could not get a loan to open up now. Wow, you're this incredibly successful business in the bank said no

1 (34m 33s):
way right? They said you had to be in business for over two years, you know with a steady income to show that this was a sustainable

2 (34m 44s):
business. So the banks would not give you any money right but wasn't this also around the time where you start to think about the idea of possibly franchising?

1 (34m 55s):
Yes, so, In this college town and all of the students would come and they would bring their families to Chicken Salad Chick because it was a unique place to Auburn and the moms and dads of these students would say wow, this is awesome. What do I have to do to get one of these in Little Rock, Arkansas? What do I have to do to get one of these in Virginia, huh? Because we're running these three restaurants and you know still in somewhat survival mode. We would say are you kidding? Ting like we can barely breathe franchise. Are you kidding? I mean, I would joke around and say put on an apron and help out in the kitchen because I can't do anymore.

1 (35m 39s):
But you know, we got tired of saying no, so we said let's just put your name on a list and if we ever get to it will give you a call and that list quickly grew to over a hundred people that wanted franchises and by And 10 we were starting to even write the documents to franchise the concept and then found ourselves in the position of how are we going to rent a franchise company. We have three restaurants that it's taking every bit of every effort that we can muster. Yeah, we need to

2 (36m 17s):
partner. So how did you start to look for a partner?

1 (36m 20s):
Well, we wanted to partner with people that had franchising experience because we had none. And a couple husband and wife was introduced to us. I think this was 2012 and the husband had franchising experience with Major Brands. So that was very encouraging but there was a little issue with how they wanted to partner. They wanted 51% of the business and Kevin was now completely no that's not going to happen. But you know, I rationalized it out by saying We really didn't have plans of getting into the franchising business.

1 (37m 1s):
And so our exit strategy is probably going to be to sell out to these people anyway one day. So what's the harm in selling them 51 percent because they're going to take the lead on the franchising part of this

2 (37m 15s):
anyway, and they were also presumably going to put some cash up.

1 (37m 19s):
Oh, yes. Yeah, which for us was exciting that we had worked this hard in all of a sudden we were going to have a little realization of Of you know some

2 (37m 27s):
success so you took the deal

1 (37m 29s):
so we took the deal and and if you had sound effects that were go won't walk very quickly. It went downhill. Yeah, they had a very different vision for the brand of where it was going to go and we were not comfortable with that. It was not a good working relationship and we knew that if they took the lead on that it was going to be End of the

2 (37m 56s):
brand so what did you do?

1 (37m 59s):
So we had a meeting with mr. And mrs. So-and-so and Kevin said we need to dissolve this partnership because it's clearly not working and the husband said well kids. This is not a partnership. We owned 51% of this business and we can fire you with just cause and take your shares anytime we

2 (38m 23s):
want. Wow.

1 (38m 26s):
Yeah. Yeah. Wow, I felt like the blood left my body like we have been purchased by sharks. I can't believe this. How could we have been this wrong? And thankfully that time we had a board of directors and we took this situation to our board of directors and they said mr. And mrs. So and so you need to give the Browns the chance to buy you out because they're the founders of the business and they said, okay, we'll do that and they said here's our Which was three times the amount that they had purchased four months earlier. Wow, and not only is this is our price but you have 30 days to get it to

2 (39m 8s):
us. How much were they asking

1 (39m 9s):
for 1.3 wound point three million and keep in mind that at this point we didn't have a single franchise open. So Kevin and I determined to make this work. We hit the ground running on what we called. Is our Southeastern fundraising tour he put together. His best presentation is best pitch and I packed a chicken salads full of to hand out to possible investors, and we pitched to anyone that would listen anybody that had a friend that could be interested. Please come and listen to us. So we traveled and held meetings in hotel conference rooms Chamber of Commerce conference rooms and every Gold meeting that we had we heard you want us to invest this much money for a minority share of a business that does not have a single franchise open.

1 (40m 9s):
Thanks, but no thanks laughed out of the room. And this whole time that 30-day clock is ticking away. So with two days left on that 30-day clock. Kevin is telling me where Sitting on the back porch. He said you have got to get a grip on reality. This is the end. It was a good thing but it is the end and we'll figure out something else and I was not willing to face that well we go to work into our tension-filled office and a lady in the office slid me a piece of paper and on that piece of paper.

1 (40m 56s):
Were the names of five people and she said call these people it's all I've got but give them a try who was that lady in the office? Her name was Claudia Isaac and she was our receptionist.

2 (41m 10s):
So she said call these people they might help.

1 (41m 13s):
Yes, so I called those gentlemen and I begged and I begged with no shame and I said, I know it sounds crazy. But will you please just come listen to what we have to say and they Eat so we went to a conference room at the Chamber of Commerce in Auburn Kevin gave them his best for our pitch and we took them to lunch at Chicken Salad Chick. I packed them up full of coolers of chicken salad. We put them in their cars and we said goodbye to our last chance and that was going to be it and very quietly Kevin and I got in our car and we were driving back to the office knowing that it was over And Kevin's phone rang and one of the gentlemen in that meeting.

1 (42m 6s):
His name was irlen McWhorter and he said can you to come back to the restaurant? And we said sure and we whipped the car around we get back to the restaurant and we sit in a booth with this very kind gentleman, and he said I believe in the two of you and this is a good thing. NG and I don't want to see it die and I will write you a check for every penny that you need. Wow, and I'm sure he thought I was having a stroke because I absolutely was coming. I was falling apart tears are flowing at much and I'm stunned and Kevin is nodding and saying yes, sir.

1 (42m 52s):
Yes, sir. And he became the most wonderful partner we ever could have asked for.

2 (42m 59s):
And he was just I mean was he what was his professional was his background?

1 (43m 4s):
So his background was in construction. He opened and constructed over three hundred loaves. Are you familiar with low? Sure, of course? Yes, so he was a self-made man from the ground up and he understood that people had helped him in his career and he appreciated that and he was willing to help us out. Yeah,

2 (43m 29s):
so you you're back on your feet. And at that point, were you able to start selling franchises?

1 (43m 36s):
Yes. So erlin infused Capital into the business. We got into a great office building and we were able to hire the most wonderful passionate people to build the infrastructure that could support opening franchises effectively. Where was the first location? So the very first franchise location was

2 (43m 58s):
Alabama and how to do there

1 (43m 60s):
it's just wonderful they came at us like we were not prepared. So the

2 (44m 5s):
expansion started in Alabama and what did you have your first location outside of

1 (44m 10s):
Alabama? Well, the Third location was Columbus, Georgia. So you guys

2 (44m 15s):
were I mean, this is like big time like you're starting today. You can start

1 (44m 19s):
to see where this is heading. Yes.

2 (44m 22s):
We must have been incredibly exciting.

1 (44m 24s):
Oh my gosh. It was amazing and as We're building our infrastructure. We are selling an opening more restaurants and everybody is Happy amazing end of story. I wish so no didn't in there. So after we had a number of owners and we were on fire and the line to sell restaurants was long. Kevin said we need to have a conference. We are legit. We need to get all these owners together and celebrate and make a plan for future growth. We need to get together. So we held our first conference in Destin Florida while we're there in between putting on these segments in these classes Kevin, which this is not like him at all was having to lay down in pain and we thought he had gallbladder problems and he said Just going to go to the doctor when we get home.

1 (45m 23s):
But let's get through this conference. So we got through the conference goes to the doctor and And so at age 38, Kevin was diagnosed with stage 4 colon cancer and it had metastasized to his liver. So it was the beginning of another fight.

2 (45m 50s):
Wow. I can't even imagine I just can't imagine what that was. Like,

1 (45m 59s):
well, he was the toughest man. I have ever known in my life. and it took him about three days from the time that he got the news to process what was happening to him and then he came out with a new purpose and a new Mission and his purpose became helping other people with this disease that could not fight for themselves because he was a fighter and that was the beginning of Of the Chicken Salad Chick foundation and this became a new part of our mission and he went at that full force.

1 (46m 45s):
I mean he had stage 4 colon cancer. He was taking chemotherapy, but he didn't miss a day of work. Wow, if he could stand up he was at work and he fought and fought for this foundation, and he said we've got to make an impact on Research fast and he came up with the idea to hold a concert in jordan-hare stadium, which is our football stadium on Auburn's campus and he said not only are we going to hold a concert injured in hair, but we are going to have Kenny Chesney headline

2 (47m 24s):
it Blake one of the the yes. Yeah, right the

1 (47m 27s):
biggest name in country music. The only person that could fill that Stadium would be Kenny Chesney and he got Kenny Chesney and he got jordan-hare Stadium. Unfortunately, he passed away. Before the concert he passed away November 21st, 2015 and the concert was in April, but on that night in April 50,000 people walked in to jordan-hare stadium for a Kenny Chesney concert and it was the most amazing unbelievable night.

1 (48m 11s):
You could

2 (48m 11s):
imagine wow. Amazing.

1 (48m 14s):
He was just such a tremendous person and a tremendous presence. And so now I have the honor of picking up the fight in his name.

2 (48m 28s):
And he not only left the Legacy the foundation but but the legacy of this business that's growing. Yes. And I mean really really growing and that you guys how many locations does does Chicken Salad Chick now

1 (48m 45s):
have so we have 85 locations now and our goal is to be America's favorite place for chicken salad. So that gives us a lot of ground to cover so we can't wait to see how the rest of the country receives us. We're very excited to bring the taste of the South to the entire. Tree.

2 (49m 9s):
I think that in 2017. Your company was like number 37 out of 5,000 of the fastest growing businesses in the country according to ink or fortune or Forbes. One of those magazines. That's that's unbelievable. It's

1 (49m 24s):
insane. It's crazy and it's chicken salad. Yeah, and it always tickled me when I would hear people like investor type people say really just chicken salad. You think that's going to work? A whole restaurant off of Just chicken salad and I was like really Pizza you think of restaurant will work off of Just Pizza or Burgers. You think that would work? What's the difference?

2 (49m 52s):
Do you have a sense of how many people are employed by chickens? Hello chick today. It's going to be

1 (49m 57s):
hundreds. I'm thinking us like 1200

2 (49m 60s):
1500 and I've seen reports of Revenue figures from 2016 and I do you guys are You talk about your Revenue at all. Is that private?

1 (50m 12s):
We do I mean it's out there and whenever I speak at the University to classes our students, you know are so attached to their phones and it's hard to get their heads up off of their phones sometimes but it's so funny. The one thing that raises heads of the students are when I say remember about what you're capable of when your passion is involved because this was a business that only needed to make five hundred dollars a month to make ends meet is now making 75 million dollars a year.

2 (50m 43s):
Wow. How much of this of the success of this Enterprise do you think has to do with the skills that you and Kevin brought to it? And how much of it was just lock look

1 (50m 57s):
mmm. I don't know. It's been too hard for me to say it was luck. We worked really hard. It's that would that's hard to accept luck. It's not I don't think it's luck. I think we have paid our dues. I think we were good Learners. I think we also knew that we weren't it. Like I know what I'm good at and I know what I'm not so great at and every part of the business. Deserves to have an expert in their field for it to all work a hundred percent on all cylinders.

1 (51m 36s):
So Kevin and I are very early had to understand what we were great at and what we were not great at huh, you know, you don't have to be a rocket scientist. You don't have to have millions of dollars. You just have to have Drive in the will to get up and go and when life knocks you down you just keep getting up.

2 (52m 2s):
That's Stacy Brown founder of chicken salad. Check this past November the private Equity Firm Brentwood Associates acquired the restaurant chain for an undisclosed amount Stacy still has a minority stake in the company and she is still serving chicken salad. In fact earlier this year. She kind of went back to her Roots. She acquired her own franchise of Chicken Salad Chick right in her hometown of Rome, Georgia. I keep thinking about how you boil the chicken. It's just Mind-blowing because I always roasted an entire chicken and then take all the meat out and then make some mayonnaise and add some Dijon mustard some green onions celery.

2 (52m 43s):
There you go, you know salta got my chicken salad, you've blown my

1 (52m 46s):
mind and that you just described another whole recipe. Yeah, probably perfect free, but you haven't tried mine yet. And please do stick around because in just a

2 (52m 57s):
moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from one of our sponsors jump jump software from SAS. Let's scientists engineers and data explorers interact with their data to find Trends and see what is statistically significant visit JMP.com. Try to see what's hidden in your

1 (53m 19s):
data. NPR's life kit wants to help you make changes that actually stick this New Year from how to do dry January to how to start a creative habit. We've got new episodes all month to help you start the year off right new episodes every Tuesday and Thursday. Listen And subscribe to life

2 (53m 40s):
kit. Hey, thanks so much for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and today we're checking back in on over webmin and his wife hel?ne e out in Phoenix their story starts back in 2013. They were both in their 50s and feeling a little Restless.

1 (53m 59s):
I think we dearly wanted to do something

2 (54m 2s):
different but we were also completely broke not exactly living on the street broke, but they did have one daughter in college and they lost a ton of money. Honey in the housing crash. So it was not a good situation and they decided to come up with a plan and I said to myself find something that we love to do and maybe we can sell to people and we almost had to do it anything they wound up doing it actually grew out of offers love for music. He would come home at night and noodle on his acoustic guitar, but as he was doing this he was thinking, you know, this is fine, but this experience it could be a lot.

2 (54m 43s):
Lot better. Yeah, I want to have what the electric guitars could players have, you know, they get all the toys all the gadget that can attach any sound that they want. They can paint the music in any way. They want Choppers thinking I want to do that too. I want to make my acoustic guitar sound more Dynamic more electric, but I want to do it in a really simple way with no bulky amplifiers. Nothing to plug into a wall so he comes up with an idea. For a little box try to imagine this. It's the size of a big iPhone shouldn't imagine that you take this thing and you attach it to the back of your guitar and then you give it some battery power you build in some electronics and then don't anything that you need to do is push one button and you start playing.

2 (55m 37s):
And suddenly from the body of the guitar. You don't hear only your guitar, but you also hearing a different kind of effects. We are obviously listening to offers invention as I speak. It's called the tonewood app, and it's pretty much how he envisioned it. It's a battery-powered box that attaches to the back of your acoustic guitar and in the Box are a bunch of electronics that can make all kinds of cool effects Reverb delay tremolo overdrive you can Feel that you are inside Carnegie Hall. It's like if I couldn't sing suddenly I could sing.

2 (56m 17s):
And it sounds pretty impressive now, but let's not get too ahead of ourselves. I mean the tonewood am didn't just fall out of the sky fully formed back in 2013 over was working on the very first prototype in his kitchen and his wife hel?ne e used to watch him work.

1 (56m 34s):
I would see him come back with these bags like from Hobby Lobby or wherever he was and I'm like, oh God, like what is he up

2 (56m 40s):
to? And in this case? It was actually believe it or not a sponge that I had. I went to Hobby Lobby. I bought and it was electrician tape that how held everything together and some electronic devices that I had at home that I basically put together and yeah that first prototype was kind of janky looking but over eventually got together with an electronic engineer to make the next version and by the summer of 2014. They were ready to show it off at a trade show in

1 (57m 9s):
Nashville. And the first really impressive musician that walk down. The lane was Larry Mitchell, who is a Grammy Sure, and I went up to my said would you like to try the tonewood amp and he went with over to the whisper room and when he came out he said to other musicians, I don't even know how to explain it. You just gotta go

2 (57m 29s):
try it and that basically became Helene e&o Firs marketing strategy, they'd ask all these well-known musicians to try the tonewood amp and then get them to make videos of themselves playing

1 (57m 41s):
it. You know, we're here in Phoenix, Arizona and George Benson heard about

2 (57m 45s):
us.

1 (57m 48s):
And then many artists introduce it to artists like Travis toy from the Rascal flab at the king. We went to her home Janis Ian Joe Bonamassa. Say Vince Gill the word kept on spreading and spreading

2 (58m 8s):
and you've got folks using it all over the world and Helene Ian overtook some of these videos flip the switch and use them to launch a Kickstarter campaign. Pain, they raised a hundred and twenty thousand dollars which was enough to get two factories in Phoenix to start making the tonewood app. This is about five years ago. And today they've sold close to 40 mm of the apps and expect to gross close to three million dollars this year alone moving from really being on a brink of being broke to profitable. That was a real blessing for us

1 (58m 42s):
when your midlife and you don't really have savings

2 (58m 46s):
and

1 (58m 47s):
Don't really like what you're doing. You become more

2 (58m 51s):
hungry.

1 (58m 52s):
So this was like a really important Adventure.

2 (58m 59s):
If you want to find out more about the weapons and the tonewood amp or here previous episodes head to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org. And of course if you want to tell us your story go to build dot npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe at Apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcasts. And while you're there, please do give us a review. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or Skyrise our show is produced this week by runned Abdel fattah with music composed by rum Tina Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Canada slim Julia Carney leave a grant and Jeff Rogers.

2 (59m 40s):
Our intern is Sequoia Carrillo. And before you go I just wanna remind you to please consider donating to your local public radio station by December 31st, because your gift helps bring Public Radio 2 listeners like you donate to your public radio station at donate dot npr.org built. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.