1 (0s):
Hey, it's skyrise here. You know one of the Hallmarks of economic crises like this one is that people actually start businesses slack betterment? Even Airbnb all companies. We featured on this show. We're all founded during the last economic crisis. And a lot of people are talking about using this period now is a chance to reimagine what they do and if that's you well, I've written a book that you might find helpful. It's called what else how I built this and I wrote it for anyone who is starting a business thinking about starting one or just looking for inspiration and ideas from the incredible stories in the book The how I built this book is designed to be that voice in your head cheering you on when you're feeling like you just want to give up the book is based on interviews with hundreds of leading entrepreneurs and it traces at start a business or pursue a big idea and how to avoid the big mistakes along that Journey.

1 (59s):
Normally I'd be Leaving on a book tour at around this time where hopefully I'd get a chance to meet some of you and thank you for your support of our show. But of course book tours are all going virtual right now. So I wanted to make sure that you and our most devoted listeners get a chance to get a signed copy. And if you pre-order the book in the next few weeks before September 15th, I'll send you a free signed book plate that fits right inside. You can order the book. However, You get your books or you can find all the information you need at Gyros.com or how I built this.com.

3 (1m 41s):
I mean it was amazing how quickly people got it. I mean, I remember the first International show that I did in Paris for the EU and I'm standing there when we introduced it and I went to the ladies room and then I'm walking back and literally there's like a wall of people around our booth and in the booth. I couldn't even get in and they're all staring at the place mats, and it was

2 (2m 4s):
like everyone's talking about it was like instant. From NPR is how I built this show about the innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements we go. I'm guy Roz and on today's show. How is simple splash of color accidentally launched Sandy chilewich into a 40-year career as a designer entrepreneur and creator of the

1 (2m 37s):
now-famous chilewich placemat. Some of the most successful Brands we've had on the show were incredibly simple ideas that didn't require much startup Capital at all. Stacy Madison had a sandwich cart in downtown Boston at the end of the day she cut up leftover Pita toast it in the oven and sell the chips in baggies for a dollar eventually that became Stacy's Pita Chips Lisa Price wanted better skin cream. So she makes the shea butter and the Oils in her kitchen and pack them into baby food jars to sell at flea markets eventually that became Carol's Daughter a line of personal care products Kathleen King baked chocolate chip cookies and turned those into Tate's bake shop all three of these entrepreneurs use their most valuable asset their own creativity.

1 (3m 36s):
This was Sandy chill, which is most valuable asset as well back in the late 1970s in New York when the city was filled with struggling artists and squatters living in abandoned Apartments she and a neighbor decided to buy a few pairs of Chinese slippers and dye them into different colors that simple idea turned into a brand called Hugh and eventually they branched out into tights after Sandy sold Hugh. She launched a second company called chilewich, which is known for selling Home Products, especially

2 (4m 11s):
placemats made from All

1 (4m 13s):
woven vinyl Sandy grew up outside of New York and came

2 (4m 18s):
from a family that had been in the leather goods business for Generations. She says she was a pretty bad student. She went to Sarah Lawrence College but ended up dropping out twice. So to earn money she painted made sculptures and sold handmade jewelry, which was making a little bit from the jewelry, but one night a simple creative

1 (4m 40s):
do-it-yourself idea change

2 (4m 42s):
Sandy's life. And

3 (4m 43s):
what happened is that I met I met a

2 (4m 45s):
neighbor of mine in the Loft building that I lived in in New York

3 (4m 49s):
in New York city. So I'm living in NoHo that was a factory building. Everybody was an artist in the building and one woman and I who at that time she was an art teacher. She was also doing some art but mostly teaches

1 (5m 4s):
her name was Kathy Moscow or Michelle was it was in Moscow Moscow

3 (5m 9s):
Moscow and one evening. We were Together we were a little tipsy drinking wine and I think we were in her Loft and we're looking in her closet at her shoes and at that time all young downtown women what they would wear every day were cotton canvas shoes that we bought in Chinatown. They were black and they were like really thin sole rubber back and that was cheap Chic and what resulted was

1 (5m 39s):
like the flat shoes like

3 (5m 40s):
the black eye. Yeah flatshare easily. Very Mary Jane's and they were $3.99 in Chinatown and we thought I don't know how we thought this but it just occurred to us because we both have our creative. We wondered like why doesn't anybody make these in colors and that night we one of us had Clorox. I had RIT die and we bleached out the black it actually came out and we over dyed them. Okay, and they

1 (6m 10s):
look pretty great. You just thought will make them for ourselves.

2 (6m 13s):
Our friends or whatever. Yeah. Well, this will be fun. I don't know why I

3 (6m 16s):
think sometimes you just do it because it's fun to do it. So so we went and we got more of them and we died a bunch of them and then we had a building meeting in my loft or her Loft the can't remember and we had all the shoes out and everybody in the building. They all said, oh my God, where did you get? These ads are amazing this what I mean, so

1 (6m 38s):
just cried Mary Jane's, you know, because it seems so simple like such a simple thing.

3 (6m 43s):
Well, this is a Time seriously were things were not available in a lot of colors. This was before or around the same time that for the first time you get a t-shirt in 12 colors like Canal genes, which was one of the forerunners of this was just a couple of blocks away from us where you would get t-shirts that people would die at home and then sell because you couldn't get a t-shirt in a pale teal color people have made t-shirts. They made white, you know or black maybe. All

1 (7m 11s):
right. So you guys

2 (7m 13s):
Have all these artists in them in the Loft and they love them and they would an end and I did that spark further discussion about maybe we should actually make more of these from what like we have been Kathy, you know what that lead to

3 (7m 26s):
so what was happening. I was still had the jewelry going on in my Loft and I got an appointment at that time Vogue magazine would have open days and you could show product to all the kind of fashionistas that work. There this is they would just have an open day where

1 (7m 45s):
they could just walk in and show the stuff you're making

2 (7m 48s):
I think it was by

3 (7m 49s):
appointment, but they were very the it's not like it is today they encouraged and wanted to see new stuff. You know now it's like very it's not quite the same way. You kind of have to be more established and so forth, but then I had an appointment or ready to show them my jewelry, right? And this is the time this is the woman that was the editor-in-chief before Anna Wintour. This is Grace Mirabella she was She was the heavy and she was there forever before Anna took over sure. So we go up there and we're with all these fashionistas and I've got my jewelry and we decided I decided I said Kathy come with me. Let's show them the shoes too. So we showed them the jewelry and then we show them the shoes and they all set, you know, and so many words forget the jewelry tell us about the shoes.

3 (8m 36s):
Wow, like

1 (8m 38s):
these were really simple shoes that you got in Chinatown. They were just in different. Colors and they were blown away by those shoes.

3 (8m 45s):
Yeah. Well because everyone knew the shoes and they were great, but they were no one imagined them in any other color but black so it was like it was like think that was a big

1 (8m 57s):
thing. Yeah. I'm trying to think of something that would be analogous like like car tires car tires are black but if somebody pulled up in front of your house with yellow neon are tires, or orange car tires, you'd be like, oh my God. Where did you get those car tires in

3 (9m 11s):
Orange? I That's totally but you know that's taking it to the furthest extreme. But this is at a time when towels were available in four colors. I said beige white darker brown. I mean gray, that's it. And that was the beginning where people started to offer more colors in everything.

1 (9m 33s):
So they're looking at you and they're saying hey this jewelry and not for us, right but the shoes we love the shoes. And and what did that mean? I

3 (9m 42s):
mean Well, it goes a little further because then they said it look hold on for a minute. We'll be right back and they all left and 10 minutes later. Grace Marabella walks into the room. Oh, wow. She says, oh my God these shoes and so C. So this is on a Friday and she said we need to take these shoes to Sardinia. We're leaving on Monday

1 (10m 8s):
to Sardinia

3 (10m 9s):
to Sardinia. We have a shoot in Sardinia. I want all of these Others in size 10 or size 9 in which they can you do that, you know, and yes, I hope he said yes, we can do it. Of course. She said I'm going to put you ladies on the map or something like that. It was like she was it was like a movie it was a movie it was

2 (10m 29s):
without question. And I mean this

1 (10m 31s):
was for people who don't let me know. I remember like there was a magazine called Mirabella. I don't even know what still around. Oh for sure. Yeah for sure

2 (10m 38s):
is that is very magazine

1 (10m 39s):
named after like that. She started so, how did you get did you go? Go rushed out to Chinatown and scramble to get these these shoe sizes. Yes. I mean we

3 (10m 48s):
had to get a whole case of like 40 pairs in a box to get the one size 10 that was in the Box well, and because they didn't sell them singly so we probably got like 10 of these boxes. I don't remember and we try to simulate those colors which we did probably drunk one night and like how we going to get this color again. So we did it. They were still wet on Monday morning. We're blow-drying With a we we didn't sleep. I mean we were just making these shoes and off they went to Sardinia and there's

1 (11m 19s):
going to be a lag time between them read the photo shoot and Oneness probably five but six months

2 (11m 24s):
later, it's going to be the magazine.

1 (11m 26s):
So at that point, what do you do? I mean the you decide to make this a business you can Kathy say, you know, but I think we got something

3 (11m 33s):
here, you know, it was certainly quite a long time before it went into the magazine, but when they came back, they knew that they shot them in. This will be they Told us a two-page spread and it said she's by Kathy and Sandy because we didn't even have a company name and they can't take a credit unless their customers can buy it in the store. So we went to Bergdorf Goodman. We told him we had a credit in Vogue with a look at this product and would they buy it so that we can cover the credit and they

1 (12m 3s):
did so it would set available at Bergdorf Goodman.

3 (12m 5s):
Yes, so they could say

2 (12m 6s):
that what did you price the shoes up

3 (12m 9s):
God, you know, I know ultimately they were like $15 we started to buy them in quantities. We went to Macy's we went to other stores at that point and showed people and then we're buying, you know, all these big boxes, but we weren't using all the sizes because some of them were tiny. I mean, none of it made any sense

1 (12m 30s):
economically, so alright. So when the Vogue spread came out was there like a huge rush to buy them or what? Do you remember about

3 (12m 38s):
that? I would think we were selling a lot and I can't I don't remember the These but we were selling a lot and we were we had to work all night long. I mean we had we had people that came in and were dying and bleaching through the night. And this

1 (12m 52s):
was all in your loft apartment look like a rather Judah bunch of washing machines. You were using to Die the shoes and

3 (12m 59s):
stuff. Well, it was my home and it was a big Loft and it was very open and I had the whole back area was really nothing. It was an old studio and that's where all the washing machines and dryers were. To place to kind of lay the shoes out store the shoes. I mean I had 3,600 square feet in this Loft was huge.

1 (13m 20s):
All right, so you are basically dying these shoes and getting them out the door and eventually you call your your business Hugh H UE, which stood for what was that

3 (13m 31s):
name just colors, you know, it was it was like the all these colors because that's really what we were doing. We just offering something that was kind of a very pedestrian product and offering it in tons of colors. Yeah,

1 (13m 42s):
and it was you and Kathy kind of running this shoestring business and and I guess like pretty soon after you launch the shoes you started to get into tights dying tights had a bad happen

3 (13m 57s):
because every editor, I mean we were like The Darlings of the press because of color and ever all the editors was symbol. What else do you guys do in color? Ah, so we were looking for things that were kind of cool that we're never available colors and one of them were Were these cotton nurses stockings which is kind of hard to believe that we even pick them up because neither one of us were stockings but and some other products to these cotton gloves that were sold in Chinatown, but some of these cool garter belts all these kind of weird accessories and we put them into the same dying manufacturing. And again, we were get like two pages in Mademoiselle magazine and we were at the beginning called Hugh shoes and then we just

1 (14m 43s):
became Hugh and and I'm thinking like cotton stockings were they was it thin cotton thick cotton? Let me with a like tube socks. What do they look like?

3 (14m 54s):
Well, nobody wears stockings anymore it unless they're pornstars something. It's got this like really

2 (15m 1s):
because it's a garter

3 (15m 2s):
belt. It's like, you know, they were called nurses stockings what we were buying our because nurses had to wear I think cotton was in their uniforms not not only because that was uncomfortable so they would wear a Part of belt to hold them up. So nobody we weren't saying. Hey, let's wear stockings. It was more like we just trying to feed the market with color and and something that was always so boring. So this was this wasn't

1 (15m 26s):
just a guess at this was like a kind of a revolutionary or you know, sort of a new kind of offering and in the fashion Arena. Well,

3 (15m 36s):
honestly the stockings didn't become the big thing. It's what we did based on the feedback. We got from customers. It's and us making a stretch cotton tight. How did you come to that? Well, because people were saying we love the fact that is cotton. We don't want to wear nylon and but we don't want to wear a garter belt can't you make a cut and tight for us, you know, so that was what we did. We did a couple of things like that that kind of changed the world of leg where that was one of them. How

1 (16m 8s):
did you how did you identify the the right material to use?

3 (16m 13s):
You know, it was identifying how to combine a stretchy material with the cotton to make a tight. And this had very much I think to do with Kathy. I think the nylon pantyhose there was nylon wrapped around a stretch fiber. So what she was saying is why can't we find somebody to take cotton and wrap it around a stretch so that we can make a stretch tight made

1 (16m 43s):
out of cotton and was that possible to do? Yes, and we did it. Well, so here's my question. I mean you're in your mid-20s at this point. How did you like? How did you figure out how to just like manage the business?

3 (16m 58s):
We didn't know what we were doing from a business standpoint. I mean, we're making all this inventory. We don't realize like hey, you have to sell your inventory before you make more stuff. I mean, they didn't know what we're doing and and

1 (17m 11s):
I love that you just making a bunch of stuff. And then like oh, we gotta sell this exactly right? You weren't making the sale first and then and then making a guy

2 (17m 19s):
absolutely and also not

3 (17m 20s):
every color you make is going to sell and sell know. What are you going to do with all those pink things that you just made? You know, where does that go and and you're making the wrong things and you're not selling to enough people or people are not paying you fast enough. I mean, they're just basic parts of the business and how to deal with cash flow and how to deal with, you know, receivables and collecting and so we're definitely You know losing money, but we knew we had something great and the somebody a mentor of mine who was a friend of my brothers that who went to business school and had been out in the world and he came over and looked at both of us and he appreciated what we were doing.

3 (18m 0s):
He looked at us and he said let me just tell you right now one of you has to stop designing and you have to sell full time. There's nothing else. That's what you have to do. And that's what I

1 (18m 10s):
did huh? So you decided That you were going to focus on on sales in the business and Kathy was gonna focus on the creative side. Yeah. And did you want to do that? I mean it isn't kind of Designing the products a little bit more fun.

3 (18m 26s):
You know, I've always been an an in the later businesses I did designing alone is not kind of enough for me. I do like the business side and I do like the marketing side and I have a very very interested in that and and I didn't know it at the time but I volunteered for that position and I really learned how to sell which I think I had a talent for anyway, so I do like the I love the that combination of Art and commerce. How did you get the word of

1 (19m 1s):
it? I mean in the beginning you have this this sort of attention from these Publications, but then like let's say I don't know, you know bollocks, which doesn't exist anymore

2 (19m 10s):
in any other Calvin mean

1 (19m 13s):
Southern California, so let's say bollocks carried your stuff like how would how would people walking into a bolex know about your product

3 (19m 20s):
you go to the Hosiery department and you see it we had great packaging and we did very unconventional photography at that time. All of our products had a picture of a woman with the product and they were kind of way more fashionable. You know, the Hosiery departments were a commodity Department in most stores. They were so basic pantyhose really ugly socks and Mean just nothing and when we came aboard and there was another company called hot stocks at that time. But the holy we were huge part of the Hosiery Department. We still are at some of

1 (19m 52s):
these big stores Howard. I mean, I understand how early on you funded the business you would just use money to buy these shoes, but eventually you have to buy lots of inventory and they had to be said to be sold. So, how are you funding it? How did you have? How are you getting the cash to build this business

3 (20m 9s):
up? I can be quite specific my father. Had lent us $300,000 any gave it to us as we needed it. You know, I would ask him look we really need 10,000 and we need 20,000. So that's that's what capitalized it plus at the beginning. I was I kind of didn't take a salary up probably for several years, but then I did and it was able to pay

1 (20m 33s):
both Kathy and I you know, we get Sandy we get from time time letters from people who when they hear some stories will say Hey, you know that story. Sorry, I didn't I couldn't identify with it because I don't have a parent who has a lot of money who could help me out. And I think you know with some justification will say you know, that that sounds like they had all these advantages. You know that I don't have and what I mean. What do you think when you hear that?

3 (21m 0s):
Well, I hear it. I mean I definitely hear it and you know, and I've spoken very often, you know, especially at schools and art schools and everything that you know, they want to get a more practical. Idea of you know, what one can do with it. Whatever. Yeah, I'm always a little uncomfortable about that part. I mean but I the fact I actually the this is the first time that I've ever said publicly to anybody as I did with you today to tell you a literally exactly how much I got from my dad and at the end of the day, you know, it is what it is. I mean, I know it's I was lucky.

1 (21m 38s):
Okay, so you you're growing you you and Kathy and And selling a bunch of different things. Yes, eventually you stopped. He stopped selling shoes was that just because they went style or or what?

3 (21m 52s):
No, I think it's like it's something that I've certainly learned and really believe in is that you got to narrow your focus and be clear on what you're doing for. It's just it's a different you have to look at your Avenues to distribution and who you're selling to it just wasn't going to work. I wasn't gonna be able to sell these shoes in a Hosiery Department. Just I identified this like this product has legs. Let me put it and this can grow and I kind of knew that intuitively

1 (22m 20s):
and so the idea was to grow it. You kind of had to kill one of the babies, which was this Mary Jane's.

3 (22m 27s):
Yes, and we have to kill a bunch of things while you're growing in my opinion and a big one that we did was back. Then there were two sections in a woman's if so, if a woman wants a sock or a tight or a pantyhose back in those days there. Were different sections within the Hosiery or the leg where area and one was kind of casual socks and tights and the others were pantyhose and we were trying to sell both of them and it was definitely my thing is like no, let's be the best in one area or another because it's splitting us up and that's what we did and I tend to that's something that I learned on my own and it's carried me through in general.

1 (23m 10s):
So in 1991 you

2 (23m 13s):
You

1 (23m 13s):
decided to sell you and Cathy decide to sell the company. Yeah, and by the way, I should mention Hugh is still around you can still buy their likings and tights and shapewear and stuff like that. Yeah, you and Kathy stay on as co-presidents for a few years. Did you I mean, I'm assuming that essentially you become financially secure that point for the rest of your life. You could have probably stopped

3 (23m 38s):
working probably. I mean, I wouldn't have lived, you know, the We're not like the billion-dollar business. So like it's not that kind of money, right but it was nice. It was a really nice sum of money and it didn't put any panic in me.

1 (23m 51s):
And did you sell it? Because you just wanted to kind of move on or was just it was just an offer you couldn't refuse or you were just kind of tired or what do you member behind the

3 (24m 1s):
idea? I think that to be honest, I think my relationship with Kathy she and I both I think we're both kind of feels like it was just hard to work together and and I you know, so was it was time? We were together. We were doing this for a long time. So it was time to move on or you

1 (24m 17s):
guys not getting

3 (24m 18s):
along I would say it was a little striving it wasn't horrible or anything. But I we were fighting. Yeah, I think I also I you know more and more I wasn't designing, you know, and then it became kind of difficult for me to kind of get back in

1 (24m 38s):
you wanted to get back into the design side and but you'd been out of it for so long as a salesperson that It was yeah and probably Kathy felt ownership over those designs understandably.

3 (24m 47s):
Yeah, and and she I mean I definitely had my you know, my hand and a couple of designs that can say a hundred percent. They were mine, but in general she did amazing things who's very good at it and I wanted to do that not with Hosiery, but I needed to do that for myself. Yeah. I mean I loved what I did, but then I it just wasn't as much fun anymore and I wanted to

2 (25m 8s):
change. When we come back in just a moment house and he's big change was inspired by the Museum of Modern Art in New York and a factory making outdoor furniture material in Alabama. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible. First two epic Provisions maker of Epic bar.

2 (25m 51s):
Beef was Nature's idea. The Epic bar was their idea the new beef sea salt and pepper bars have three grams total carbs why it's in their nature after all they're made with a hundred percent grass-fed beef and Nature's macros 3 grams total carbs 11 grams of protein. Find them in the bar. I'll or at Epic bar.com. Thanks also to manscape. Are you still using your beard trimmer for the rest of your body manscaped lawn mower? 3.0 was specifically designed to make manscaping easy featuring Advanced Skin safe technology. The body trimmer won't make a snag.

2 (26m 33s):
It's waterproof and sharp resistant. So you can trim in the shower head over to manscaped.com and use the code NPR And for a limited time get a free pair of boxer briefs and a travel bag and free accelerated shipping. Thanks also to a p.m. Presenting spectacular failures a show that looks into some of the biggest flops in business history, including Forever 21 and Napster learn about what they got wrong find

1 (27m 1s):
Spectacular failures wherever you listen to podcasts. The way things are going right now, even if you can keep track of what's happening in the news, it's hard to know why it's happening what it really means. That's why we have created a daily podcast that answers your questions about the news in about 10 minutes every weekday. It's called

3 (27m 23s):
consider this new episodes every weekday afternoon from NPR.

1 (27m 30s):
And just a reminder you can pre-order the how I built this book right now. And if you do I'll send you a free signed book plate to go inside the book. The book is a collection of

3 (27m 41s):
insights and wisdom from some of the most

1 (27m 43s):
incredible and inspiring makers inventors Builders and dreamers on Earth to preorder and to get your free signed bookplate while supplies last. Please go to Kyra's.com or how I built this.com Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's the mid-1990s. And Sandy chilewich is finished with you and she wants to get back to designing things and creating things herself something. She hasn't done in a while. But at this point Sandy does have close to 15 years of experience making selling and distributing products and running a business.

1 (28m 31s):
So she's pretty confident. She can Lon New Venture if she can just come up with another great new idea.

3 (28m 39s):
So it's this very organic kind of intuitive process and I decided I'm just going to explore ideas and see where I land. Okay, and I got a studio downtown just one room was on Lafayette and spring it was like so inspiring down there then

2 (28m 59s):
you just got a studio space to like just to

3 (29m 1s):
have a kind of a room of My own, you know and one idea that I had which for the life of me. I don't understand where it came from but you know the butterfly chair, you know, that's for sure. Okay, so I was loved the chair extremely uncomfortable. But I always loved it. I loved that the idea of the canvas and the wire and bubble bottom and I had this idea like wouldn't that be great like as a bowl. I mean that whole concept of having a

1 (29m 27s):
fabulous bowl

3 (29m 29s):
a butterfly for or creating a concavity with a textile. To be a

1 (29m 33s):
container a bowl to hold what

3 (29m 36s):
fruit vegetables.

1 (29m 37s):
Okay, like a fruitful you put on your counter. Yes. Okay. That was well, that's where it

3 (29m 41s):
started. So, you know, I my husband's an architect. He had his own practice at that time and he helped me build this prototype and it was like very organic like a you know it we're using wire and then I go out because you have to have Fabric and the because I was in Hosiery I kept I was always drawn to stretch. Materials. Yes, so I bought this stretch netting it's like what people use for girdles, you know, so playing around with it. If you stretched it around this structure. It's like a trampoline because it's stretchy, it's Barney. So the only way to make it a concavity is to pull it down in the center and so hard to explain this without seeing it, you know, it's dumb, but ultimately I called this the rabo after my older son.

3 (30m 28s):
Okay, and the first thing I had to do is to see if people actually would buy this

1 (30m 33s):
Thing

3 (30m 33s):
so I was connected to somebody that was the head of the MoMA design store and they saw it and they launched literally launched their whole website with an image of that

1 (30m 46s):
bowl the Museum of Modern Art, New York. Yeah, which has a really cool online shop so they picked it up and they put it on their on their

3 (30m 53s):
website. Yes, and they had they never even had a website before. Oh well and when they promoted the e-commerce site they have this great. If we took a picture of my balls flying in the air and that was what they use to sell and tell everybody that they had of a website and there was a poster of my bowls like flying through the air in front of the museum the actual Museum of Art like right at the entrance. It was like, I mean, nothing made me more proud as like I couldn't believe it was there but then I did I I did everything that I would have done and that I did do in a little business. I always that's what I liked, you know. Start with one store, then learn more than you know, so that's what I did that did it again with Rebels.

1 (31m 39s):
I mean the rebels are very cool. It's a it's a wireframe bowl with a stretch material that looks cool. But you know, it's not something that it's not like stockings that people need. It's a real Niche product like the Museum of Modern Art gift shop is the place to sell it it was this was not going to turn into a scalable business apps. Solutely

3 (32m 3s):
because everyone was coming to me and saying, you know, it's such a great concept because I did the Bulls in the boxes. Why don't you do lighting? Why don't you do furniture? And I actually I did like small prototypes and I realize, you know, that's just pushing it

2 (32m 15s):
that I hit, you know, I hit

3 (32m 16s):
the note here. It's perfect. You know, this is what his that's all this is and so I bought in this whole process of kind of expanding the ray Bowles. I started to experiment with other materials that I could create a concavity with. It I found it just accidentally this outdoor furniture material that I found at this Library called material connection, which it had just opened their doors and I was probably one of their first

1 (32m 44s):
customers a lack of a library in New York,

3 (32m 47s):
right? Yeah. That was it was some I don't know it's still there

1 (32m 51s):
and it's basically a library for materials. You can just go and like feel and touch different materials.

3 (32m 57s):
Yes. This guy that started his name is George balerion. He's kind of iconic in the design business, but I thought all go to them. Maybe they can that can find something and I found this Factory in Tuscaloosa, Alabama that made outdoor furniture upholstery. So I got some of the material I'm looking at this material and it's pretty ugly and yet it's waterproof it stain resistant. It's like it's woven so and it's, you know, it's got opportunities, you know, so

2 (33m 26s):
I don't like a woven

1 (33m 27s):
vinyl. It's a woven vinyl

3 (33m 30s):
which I didn't even know what that was, you know, and it would this was you

2 (33m 33s):
I'm

1 (33m 33s):
like, I'm trying to imagine like just outdoor chairs and like sling chairs, you

3 (33m 37s):
know, like whatever is like outdoor outrebound a pool and I just became intrigued with the material and so honestly, I don't understand why in a way how placemats even entered my brain because honestly, I don't remember even eating on a placemat. But all I know is that I tried to get more more of the fabric so I called them and II bad Badgered to speak to somebody important down a cipher which is a Tuscaloosa, Alabama. It's a big weaving Mill and I told them you know, look I want to I want to come down there. I want to talk to you guys. And so I did so I go down there. It's a really big Factory

1 (34m 17s):
in purple. You told them. Hey, yo, I'm a designer. I've already had a successful business with this thing called Hugh, right because they knew that

3 (34m 26s):
brand they knew the brand of women. They're certainly did her. So once I told him what I said, look, you're not dealing with a complete rookie. Here, I know what I'm talking about, you know and a lot of what they showed me was more interesting and it's the enough for me to start making some prototypes of place mats, which is how I

1 (34m 46s):
started just just I'm trying to curious like how did you even see this material and think placemats these this be

3 (34m 54s):
placemats, you know, it's a good question because seriously, I'm telling you. I don't understand how I think it was just one of these dumb moments where like it's sitting on my table and I think I said, you know, this is a really good place - it looks good. It looks good on my table to frame something. It's looks great. It's a barrier of some sort and that I have to do so little I don't know how it came to that moment. I really don't I think was very very organic. It's just looking at it and like this looks good on my table. I think that's what

1 (35m 28s):
happened. So you basically get them to make you some Who's have designs that you decide them and colors and you decide to make a go of this. I'm assuming you use the proceeds from the sale of your previous business to fund the solutely

3 (35m 42s):
and

1 (35m 43s):
you get the first delivery. Where did you also go back to the Museum of Modern Art

3 (35m 48s):
Shop abs and I went everywhere that I sold the ray Bowles. We're going to buy this because this kind of a home design product. So I already have in a way an already a built in its small distribution, but I have

1 (36m 0s):
distribution channel was Buddy, like weird sending you in place mats are you know usually cloth or you know, or they're kind of anachronistic people don't really use them. I mean, did you get any feedback like that

3 (36m 15s):
in general? It was I mean, it was amazing how quickly people got it looks like I mean, I remember the first International show that I did in Paris for the EU and I'm standing there when we introduced it and I went to the lady And then I'm walking back and literally there's like a wall of people around our booth and in the booth. I couldn't even get in and they're all speaking multilingual and they're all staring at the placemats and what it is that you don't even have to touch this thing. You can have it on the table beautifully set and you know exactly what it is what it can do and how to maintain it.

3 (36m 56s):
It's you don't even have to touch it and it was like everyone's talking about it was like

1 (36m 60s):
instant. I mean, I remember the first time I saw them and I and full disclosure. I have some of them I probably bought them 10 years ago and they're very simple and so there was nothing like it at the time like people saw

2 (37m 12s):
it. They are like never hero and right away people like

3 (37m 15s):
this is so cool. I love those thoughts. It was so instance and you know, it's a humble product. That's the thing. But what goes into it when you see the designs that were doing now people get to own such a beautiful thoughtful product. That's you know $14 and they get to see it every day. So but let me just say one funny thing about the when I first told people and they say it when the store would ask well how much of these going to retail for and I said like $12 and they said that's a dozen right and was like, no that's one place mat. Yeah, and so that I change that whole

1 (37m 55s):
idea because people thought a placemat was a disposable exactly, right because 12 bucks is still a good price, but, you know perplexed Lace methods that's a lot. So and and did you I didn't I didn't know until I we set up this interview that your name was Sandy chilewich. I thought Chiller which was this kind of English, you know, right Village brand. How did you come to call it after your last name?

3 (38m 19s):
You know, it's probably that hunger that I had that was left over from Hugh where I feel so the ray Bowles, you know, that was my they proved to me that I was a designer. That was hugely important to me because I It really kind of lost that identity and I wanted to know if I'd still had it in me and a product is not a business. The rables was a great product and it was not a business and once the placemats when that happened I could see it. I could see the future there that you know could be rugs could be this or that and I want my name attached. I was very proud of it and was time to do that

1 (38m 56s):
when you started this when you started get wider distribution of the place mats because I think I initially you had them in like boutiques. Gift Stores and today they're available on Amazon and Crate and Barrel and you know William Snow Munson West Elm big place like that. Do they catch on pretty quickly. Did you see

2 (39m 13s):
that happen fast, or was it a slow

3 (39m 14s):
burn? No. Oh my God, you know I've had so much experience, you know, it's you, you know, it's like selling in versus selling through are two different things. It's great that you got the order, but did it sell to the customer or to sell to the to the ultimate party that's going to you? Zipped and when I sold the ray Bowles to MoMA, I was in their store every day counting the stock because I wanted to know whether or not it was selling to the point where the buyers that she actually physically pushed me out there a sense and you cannot come here every day and down stock because I need to know is this going to work or not? Because I have to know how I was going to produce it in real it for real, but the same thing with the placemats.

3 (39m 59s):
I mean, you know, it's really about self through I would call. The stores and say how many did you sell this week and I would knew before they did that. We had a winner.

1 (40m 8s):
We should acknowledge that you must live near a hospital.

2 (40m 11s):
By the way. There's a lot of sirens that you live your

3 (40m 13s):
hospital. But you live near a hospital where ever you are Manhattan Lenox Hill, you know the reality of yeah

1 (40m 19s):
pandemic ehre interviews, we're done this video. So when your husband Joe came into the business, was there any part of you

3 (40m 29s):
nervous about that? You had a partner

1 (40m 32s):
this is different. Is your life partner and he brings a certain set of skills of probably very valuable as an architect. But as it was it was a part of you nervous about working with your

3 (40m 44s):
spouse. I don't think I was nervous before I can't I it's hard though. I mean I don't you know, there's no separation and you know, it's not so easy working with your spouse. I don't think it's so easy. I don't think either Joker I would say it's so easy. Yeah. I mean it certainly has some good things that we've done great things together. Together but all the turmoil that you have at the office. It's hard to cut it off and you continue the arguments or the controversies at home. It's just knows that it's not so easy.

1 (41m 13s):
There's a nice picture of the two of you on your website in the About Us section. You and Joe and you seem like, you know, the nice picture and and but do you find that I mean, he's probably a designer to right? He's an architect and you love design and are there moments where one of you really just have The kind of surrender to the other person,

3 (41m 35s):
you know, he is never tried to be involved with the design he found his own thing which was

1 (41m 42s):
manufacturing and you make most everything in the u.s.

3 (41m 45s):
Right? Yes. Everything is woven for us in Alabama and pretty much everything we make is finished either back to admit different materials for different flooring or wall covering both. The ultrasonic equipment is in I mean, he built a factory. That's what he did and this is their

2 (42m 0s):
Furniture Factory in Georgia.

3 (42m 2s):
Yeah. And it's our Factory and you know, it's grown like crazy and we employ a lot of people and it's you know, it's all made here

1 (42m 11s):
so that the tears made in Alabama and then it's all cut and it made into products in Georgia.

3 (42m 17s):
Right? So all the also like so with naked into products, but also we laminate different backings to the materials in laminating machines that Joe helped design that you know that are very specific to our needs, but

1 (42m 32s):
you

2 (42m 33s):
We're so successful that you track it a lot of copycats,

1 (42m 36s):
right? I mean even now you can probably find companies that are really just copying what you're doing. How do you

3 (42m 43s):
well as first, you know, it's a person feels terrible. But at the end of the day at this point, you know, and it's all about how quickly be really saturated the segments of the marketplace that we really wanted to saturate copies over the years in general are viewed and they are in fact cheap. Beep knock offs from China, you know, we have very very strict trademark and and you know copyright protection and we've sued people and we've made big companies stop when they get too close to our designs. You can't copyright a bit simple basket weave its but when people get close to really are more graphic designs and certain other things we can I don't know in America.

3 (43m 25s):
We don't have any competition to be honest. I mean within the stores that were in if they carry somebody else's we've told them And if you carry this we're pulling out and nobody lets us

1 (43m 36s):
pull out a wonder. I wonder if you we are in the middle of this Global health and economic crisis, and I have to imagine you've have like 99.9% of businesses seen a slow down because people can't physically go into a shop. So right you still have to rely on direct-to-consumer probably a lot. What does it meant for your business right now?

3 (44m 1s):
Well, I mean I mean the lucky thing is that all the big stores like, you know, cratenbarrel. Let's say is our biggest customer or stroll the table or any of these big people they will have web sales and we've been building those businesses with these stores for a long time. So we're not dependent on brick and mortar and in addition to that because we have our own Factory when somebody orders, you know placemats from West Elm we can ship directly from our Factory to the customer

1 (44m 28s):
but from like a design perspective, right so much of what I You do has to happen in a room with people looking at the material like right in on that table.

3 (44m 39s):
I mean my design team first of all were nowhere near as big as that there's one to four people in

1 (44m 44s):
my life, but you still need to like pass things Razzle you doing that like on zoom and

3 (44m 48s):
stuff? Well, no, that's a hat that has been I mean actually my master Weaver. She actually wove all of our small samples that were going to do for fall 21 in her home well, and we all met for the First time all with masks to look at all the things that we have Piper. Do you know it's not ideal but we're functioning and we actually did a season and also be given that the sales are definitely down. We don't have to have every skua so many new skews. I mean it who knows if the world's going to come back like it was you know, so but we're doing okay, you know, we look we cut expenses we have to furlough a little bit will be hired pretty much 99% of the people that were furloughed for a couple of months back.

3 (45m 32s):
But it looked it's we have to rethink everything. It's just it's tough, but I don't know. I feel very bullish. I feel our product is really good. It's just damn good. You know,

1 (45m 42s):
when you think about the journey you took and you know, the considerable success you've had as a businessperson entrepreneur. Do you think more of it has to do with luck or more of it has to do with your hard work and the skills that you brought to it.

3 (45m 56s):
I don't think luck had anything to do with it. I don't I think it has to do with Endurance it's constantly testing yourself being open-minded. Hugely listening to negative feedback. You've got to be able to listen. You have to listen and you have to make sure when people say they like something that they really really like it. You got to constantly test the value of your product and I think I did that. I think I did that very

2 (46m 26s):
intuitively. That's Sandy chilewich. She's the co-founder. Hugh and the founder of chilewich and by the way, remember Sandy's label the design that was featured on the Museum of Modern Art's Web Store. Well, if you hadn't difficulty imagining what the rabo looks like if you do a quick image search, you can see it for yourself. Just make sure you type it all as one word. Otherwise, you'll just see bowls by Rachael Ray. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org.

2 (47m 8s):
And if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or at guy. Roz can also follow me on Instagram. That's as guy got Roz. Our show is produced this week by Casey Herrmann with music composed by Rob Tina of Louis. Thanks. Also to Julie Carney Candice limb, Neva Grant Sarah saracen. And Jeff Rogers, I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this.

1 (47m 40s):
This is NPR. Fifty years ago Chicanos March through Los Angeles to protest the Vietnam War. They were met with overwhelming police force. It's shaped a generation of Chicanos leaving some inspired and other scarred. I remember the words Econo being a bad word the legacy of the Chicano moratorium. Listen now to the it's been a minute podcast from NPR.