0 (0s):
Hey everyone and happy new year, we'll be back next week with a brand new episode. But for today, we want it to revisit the story of Steve Ells of Chappelle Lake in the introduction. You'll hear me say that Chipotle has about 2300 locations in the U S and around the world. Well, a record of that in 2017, and since then Chipotle has added more than 300 additional locations. Anyway, if you haven't heard the story yet, it's a great one. So enjoy

1 (33s):
Over a one-month period. 52 people got sick with equal I, but you freaking out well freak. I don't know, freaking out it's the right to the right way to describe it. I mean, it was, it was an all encompassing, I mean, because it was like, it was really intense. You know, you wouldn't wish this on anybody, you know, that anyone would get sick from the food that you serve them is really a tough thing.

0 (1m 9s):
That's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements.

1 (1m 16s):
<inaudible>

0 (1m 20s):
Guy Raz and on today's show how Steve Ells turned his love for San Francisco's mission style burritos into Chipotle a restaurant that launched America's fast casual fruit craze. So there's a famous Ted talk by a guy named Barry Schwartz. It's called the paradox of choice. And in it very explains that virtually all current research on human behavior supports this idea that we humans. We don't really like to have too many choices, anything beyond four to six actually makes us anxious and unhappy, which could help explain the success of Chipotle because if you've ever been in one, you can probably tell me the menu by heart burrito, bowl, salad, tacos for options.

0 (2m 12s):
That is it. There isn't a whole lot to agonize over it. And it's one of the reasons why Chipotle just exploded in the two thousands on the Eve of the millennium, the company had just a bit more than 20 stores. And today Chipola has nearly 2300 locations across the U S and in four other countries. And its value is around $14 billion. Now Chipotle a, as you will hear was never meant to become what it became. It was supposed to be a one-off burrito joint in Denver a burrito joint that would generate enough cash to finance a high-end restaurant. That was Steve Ells his plan. He was actually a classically trained chef and he wanted to make a Michelin star food, not foil wrapped burritos.

0 (2m 56s):
And at the earliest recollection I have in being

1 (3m 0s):
In the kitchen and, and cooking, I was on the third grade and we lived in Germany and I remember cooking scrambled eggs.

2 (3m 9s):
How'd you make them, did you scramble them before? Did you, did you crack the eggs into the pan and scramble them or did you scramble them before?

1 (3m 14s):
No, no, I I scrambled them before a, with a fork in a ball. And then my mom had a, a very well seasoned, a cast iron skillet. Nice. I mean, it was very, very smooth and a almost nonstick. And I used to push the Kurds into the center in a, in a square shape, a perfect square, maybe three by three or three and a half by three and a half, something like that. And then, and then it was when it was just set enough, I would flip it over. And I mean, it was very controlling Mike, and he says a lot about me because I'm a little bit of a control freak. And of course I had no idea then, but, and it was just an interesting, it's an interesting memory

2 (3m 58s):
Look at what point did you start to, cause I've read like stories about you in college, where you had your dinner parties and, and people were like, what is this butter that you bought? Are you, you know, you'd be, you'd make like duck con feet and stuff. Like, how did you even know about this? How did you get into foods at such a young age?

1 (4m 14s):
Yeah, well, you know, my mom was a very adventurous cook and a really good one and she had a garden and she got all the cooking magazines. It had a lot of cookbooks and, and, and I used to, I used to spend time in the kitchen and 'em, and, and follow along. And, and at some point I started watching cooking shows, Julia child and, and a gram on the galloping gourmet and the, the PBS series, the master chefs series. And I really loved those and, and would duplicate the recipes and, and, and, and like to cook for my family. And then when I was older in high school, I started having people over. Hmm.

2 (4m 51s):
So you go to college in it

1 (4m 54s):
And in Boulder, right? Yes. And you study art history. I did a, you know, of course it made zero sense to my father. What do you do with an art history? He would, he'd be like, so what are you gonna do in art history degree? Of course. And I would say, you know, I don't know what was the, we'll see how this unfolds. And, and probably I, I was thinking that I would continue and go to graduate school, but my roommate suggested to me that I go to cooking school. She said this just weeks before graduation, why did she suggest that? Well, she knew I was into cooking and I think she had visited the culinary Institute of America and said, Steve, you would love this place.

1 (5m 36s):
So I applied and I went and, and only went because I don't think I knew exactly what I want it to do. So it was an adventure, but I would say there is a, there was a halfway point where you go for a few months in work in a restaurant of your choice. And I chose to work at stars, restaurant in San Francisco, most famous restaurant, like one of them in America at the time Jeremiah tower. Right. It was the, was the head chef. It was a really important restaurant. And I had eaten at stars a few times when I was in college and loved it. What, what was he like? I mean, cause he knew, I mean, I've, I've read a little bit about him in like Mario Batali worked for four, I'm a tons of really famous chefs.

1 (6m 18s):
What, what was he like to work for? It's hard to describe really what, what he's like. I will say that he's an amazing visionary and quite a perfectionist. And so it was a high pressure for sure. And it was super, super stressful, really, really hard work that you would put your dishes up and, and all of the cooks with put the dishes away and Jeremiah would come along and, and taste. And it was, it was a range from, you know, a nod, like, you know, a good job to pick up the plate and throw it in the trash, which was a really traumatic, but I loved it. I really did. And, and I'm, I'm lucky to have been able to work there when you were first in San Francisco, did you, did you encounter burritos or food that you would eventually, you know, would actually change your life?

1 (7m 12s):
Sure.

3 (7m 12s):
Well, th the idea for a Chipotle is a combination of food borrowed from stars and sort of a technique and a service format borrowed from the Taqueria was in the, in San Francisco, in San Francisco, mostly in the mission district. What was so special about those taquerias? Like what did you notice? There were a few of them in, and, and they were quite good. And I used to, I used to go to these places before work. Hmm. So the first time I went to a friend of mine took me and I got the burrito. It was probably a carnitas burrito, giant flour tortilla, and all of the things on it, on the inside, the rice, the beans, the meat, salsa, cheese, et cetera, and then wrapped up and then wrapped in foil.

3 (7m 58s):
And I take it to the counter and I, and I unwrap it and he was like, what are you doing? I'm like, I'm unwrapping my burrito, take the foil out. He said, no, no, no, no, you peel the foil back. And you know, I'm like, Oh gosh, okay, let me re wrap and try this again. And I, and I loved it. I just, I was intrigued and, you know, growing up in, in Colorado, this is not how we ate burritos. Burritos were on a plate and then smothered with green chili and you eat them with the night before. And so, and so this was, this was a really interesting experience for me. And, and I went to a lot and I just started counting the number of people going through the line and thinking, Oh my gosh, he's got a five bucks piece to do some quick math.

3 (8m 40s):
It's a couple of guys cooking, couple of guys serving how much they make. So I, you know, on the napkin, I was like, wow, okay. This is a pretty good economic model. Of course I wasn't called calling it an economic model. Then I was, I just said, I could probably make some money with this. And, and with that money, I could afford to open up my, my full-scale restaurant.

2 (9m 2s):
Just to understand you, you sought that a Taqueria could earn you enough money, that you could open up a, a, a fine dining restaurant. Right. Wow.

3 (9m 9s):
I mean, that, that seemed logical to me that, I mean, that seemed like the way to do it. And you know, these, these, these burrito shops, these taco RIAs, we're a small, the investment would be low. The rent certainly was low and, and there were lines out the door. And, and I thought that, that I could make enough money to fund my full scale restaurant. And so I knew I wanted to move back to Colorado to start this. What, why? Well, there's nothing like it in Colorado. I certainly didn't want to compete with all the tuckerias in the mission. It was not, it wouldn't be novel to anybody. Maybe it would be really good. Maybe I could make better burritos, but again, I thought I wanted to go to a place where no one had seen this style of service before,

2 (9m 53s):
By the way, how did you figure out how to do the recipes? I mean, obviously you're a chef, but you know, there's techniques and there's ways of, of really making refried beans or Pinto beans or whatever it was and to the carnitas, how did you come up with your method? Sure.

3 (10m 9s):
Well, Starz was really good training. We would, we would come in at, at noon and we would learn at that time what we were going to cook that evening. And, you know, there wasn't a set menu per se, and there weren't recipes per se. You had to, you know, figure it out based on the style of the restaurant and, and what, you know, Jeremiah and Marc, the executive chef wanted. And so it wasn't like I had to, you know, labor over the, the recipes. It was it's, it's relatively simple food, or I should say it's, it's really simple food and Chipotle. Yeah.

2 (10m 44s):
So, all right, so you want to go, you wanted to go to, to go back to Colorado and it was the idea to go to, to maybe open it up in Boulder, Colorado.

3 (10m 52s):
Yeah. I thought I would open it up in Boulder and had trouble finding a location that I liked that I could afford nothing seemed right. And a friend of mine was working in Denver and somehow met a commercial real estate broker. I went to his office and made a pitch and just said, here's, here's what I'm thinking of doing. And I described Chipotle pretty much as you see it today.

2 (11m 18s):
And what was your, what was your description too? And what was

3 (11m 20s):
Going to be well, I, you know, I described the food. I described the service format. I said, I said, first of all, we know it's going to be an open kitchen and we are going to be grilling meats and cooking whole beans and mashing avocados for guacamole and grading the cheese and dicing the tomatoes and jalapenos and onions and chopping fresh herbs like cilantro and oregano. And, and, you know, he, he was, he seemed very excited about the prospect. And so he said, well, give me, give me about a week. I'll, I'll identify a, you know, a few potential real estate sites and we'll go on a tour.

3 (12m 1s):
And we, we saw a, a Dolley Madison ice cream store was the first sight we saw near the university of Denver campus. And it was 850 square feet. It was in terrible condition. It needed a lot of work. I think the rent was $800 a month or something like this was a pretty good, yeah. Basically nothing. And so I convinced my father to lend me the money was actually part, investment, part loan. How much did you need at that point? This is a 93. I, I, you know, I forget how much I, I told him initially, but it ended up being $80,000, $85,000. So,

2 (12m 41s):
So it was a substantial, but not insane amount of money. I mean, you, you, you basically had needed that money to clean up the place and make it look nice.

3 (12m 51s):
Yeah. I mean, I had to strip off the vinyl tiles on the floor to reveal the Oak wood floor underneath which I refinished and painted the walls and built out a kitchen and tiled it and put up stainless steel on the walls of the kitchen and all that stuff. Well, so I had an architect of record to get the, a, to get the permit and found a contractor. It didn't sort of designed and Built as we go. And I was there every day and I was, I was, hands-on helping them build,

2 (13m 21s):
Do you have a natural design aesthetic? Is that like, are you, is your, is just a, you know, something that you're naturally good at? Well,

3 (13m 30s):
I would say that the design aesthetic came out of the necessity to be frugal. So the, so the table bases were, were pipes. The service counter was faced with barn metal, just, just materials that were inexpensive. And they were easy to, to install. And I remember making the tabletops with the, with the contractor and, and we were applying the stainless steel to the top of the plywood. And, and then you wanted to put stainless steel on the edges also. And I said, no, no, no, no, you have to, you have to let people see the plywood. They have to see the striations to the point where they have to see how it's built. And so the aesthetic for Chipotle, I was very much about how it was put together.

3 (14m 15s):
And I think this spoke to the food. So as you looked past the counter into the kitchen, you could see the basic ingredients. You could see, you know, chicken and steak and avocados and rice and beans and all of the things and how it was simply put together. And so I think This connection to the built environment was something that made the brand special. And I don't think it was obvious to most people. I don't think maybe it wasn't even an obvious to me at the time

2 (14m 46s):
The U S so you open a, the first store in 1993. Right. Right. And, and it, it was, is going to be like a temporary thing. Yeah.

3 (14m 53s):
Yes. This was going to be one restaurant and this was going to be a cash cow that could a fund and helped support a full-scale restaurant. You know, I knew, I knew that full scale restaurants were a dicey proposition. I mean, they go out of business often there it's hard to make margins and a very difficult to operate. And so I want to Chipotle to be a backup. Yeah. I deliberately made it very simple to operate only a few items and simple cooking techniques, not a lot of ingredients and able to operate with just a, just a handful of a, of a crew members.

2 (15m 33s):
How did you come up with the name? Chipotle cause I remember when I first saw Chipotle a I I knew what a Chipotle pepper was, but I was like, what, how is that pronounced is, and this is like in the early, like the mid nineties. So I was like, is it Chipotle or is a key potable, like How and I could not of been the first one. So how did you come up with that name?

3 (15m 56s):
So I knew always that I was going to use Chipotle peppers in the marinade and, you know, for the braise, for the barbacoa in the beans. And I, and I want to use Chipotle because it really adds a depth. It's not about the heat necessarily, but a smoky character that I think really adds complexity to the food. Yeah. Yeah. And, and, and I was introduced to Chipotle peppers at Starz in Jeremiah was a big fan of Southwest cuisine. And, and it just occurred to me as I was looking at a can of, of Chipotle peppers. And I've said, Oh my God, that's the name? I'll call it a polo shirt. And, and of course, nobody knew what it was Chipotle it was a day.

3 (16m 39s):
And every thought, everyone thought I was silly for, for choosing a name that people couldn't pronounce. And then when he said, Oh, here's the name? Its Chipotle. And people were like, what? Well, yeah. So imagine choosing a name that people can't pronounce and they don't know what it means. I said, did you ever think maybe they're right. Maybe this isn't the right name. Chipotle it was not an easy place. I remember a customer's coming in and they have to say, well, what is that place? Which poodle Chipotle, Chipotle all kinds of, all kinds of pronunciations to know I've heard at all. And then you had to walk up to the counter and actually build your burrito. And this was, this was confusing to a lot of people.

3 (17m 21s):
They said, well, what do you have? And I said, well, do we have all these things here? This burritos. And in the burrito, I can put rice and beans and meats and salsas. And I mean, he looked, you think about it now. And, and it just seems so obvious how you, you would use Chipotle But in the early days. And it was a very novel experience was also a novel experience to have an open kitchen. So close to the customer. I mean, the grill was just a few feet away from customers. And so they really, they were really involved in the production that was, you know, the cooking and, and the service. And it was, it was by design. I mean, you know, every time you have a dinner party people or in the kitchen, people want to be in the kitchen.

3 (18m 4s):
And so, so Chipotle was designed to, to invite people in, to bring them close to where the action is. And you were the chef and also the cashier. And you had a couple people helping you at two at the beginning was that I opened, I opened with, with really only a handful of people. And I asked some of my friends if they wanted to help work the line and, and yeah, I was really sort of cobbled together.

2 (18m 32s):
And did you, did you just make stuff or did you actually have recipes written down?

3 (18m 36s):
Oh, no, no, no. There's nothing written down. I just made stuff Guy that the menu was developed the, the day before I opened. And it was interesting because when I trained the cooks, how to make all the different and, you know, ingredients, that was, it was how I learned at stars. It was, it was about technique and then about tasting as you go. And it just didn't occur to me to write down recipes. Yeah. Because I wanted people to taste the food and really understand the techniques of cooking, not just think about adding, you know, a cup of this, a tablespoon of that and, and be done with it. Probably when we opened, I can't imagine that was another fast food restaurant where the crew actually tastes the food.

3 (19m 19s):
And it's just, I just don't think they, they did that. Right? Yeah.

2 (19m 22s):
You, you, you start this restaurant and like, what are people immediately? Is it a hit right away? Because, because you said a burrito in Colorado was a thing on a plate smothered and green chili sauce. So did all of a sudden people say, Oh right. Burrito, San Francisco style burritos here in Denver.

3 (19m 39s):
Hmm. So I remember opening a July 13th and I opened for dinner. It was mostly friends. And I think the sales the first day were probably $240 or something like that. And the next day, a little bit more, and the next day, a little bit more, and we sort of, we got faster and more efficient and, and word spread pretty quickly. And students got, got back to campus in September. And so that helped business a little bit. But the turning point was in October of 93 of 93, and the restaurant reviewer for the Rocky mountain news was named bill St.

3 (20m 23s):
John. And he came in a few times and then introduced himself and said, Hey, I've been in a few times, I'm going to write a restaurant for you. I said, yeah, that's great. How's the, how's the review you going to be? And he said, why, I'm not going to tell you. I'm like, okay. And the next day a review came out and it was, it was a really glowing review.

1 (20m 48s):
And it was one particular a sentence that, that stood out and, and, and, and I'm paraphrasing, but it went something like this, it's just Chipola is unlike any fast food. You've had, everything has depth, character nuance and layers of flavor. That really struck me. I'm like, well, this guy has got it. Because, because when I think about cooking and seasoning food, I'm thinking about those things and what happened next, though, we were completely unprepared for what happened a bit, a line out the door that did not stop mobbed mobbed.

1 (21m 29s):
And we ran out of food the first day. And so we got a bigger order of the next day and ran out of food the second day and just could not keep up. And that started it

0 (21m 43s):
Chain of events that would forever change the way we think

1 (21m 46s):
It's a fast food stay with us. I'm Guy rise. And your listening to how I built this from NPR.

0 (22m 17s):
Hey, everyone, just a quick, thanks to our sponsor, Western governors university, ready to earn your degree. But need a university that works with your schedule. WG used programs were built to be flexible with no set log-in times and a 24 seven access to most coursework. You can earn a respected bachelor's or master's degree on your schedule. Listeners of this podcast can have the $65 application fee waived, learn more at wgu.edu/how I built this. Thanks also to click up. You don't need to exist on for hours of sleep to be productive, enter, click up a completely customizable work platform with all of the features you've ever needed to build your business.

0 (23m 2s):
All in one place joined a hundred thousand teams across companies like Airbnb, Google, and Uber, who are already using click up to level up their productivity and save one day a week. Guaranteed click up is free for ever. So get started and click up.com/ NPR today. Thanks also to Workday in today's changing world, fast decisions need to be smart decisions. That's why Workday delivers quick insights to help you your finance team plan for what's next Workday, the finance, HR, and planning system more@workday.com.

0 (23m 48s):
Life kid is rethinking new year's resolutions. All this January. We were thinking about both really big and really small changes. If you're wanting to change up your life and start fresh, we've got you covered. If you're looking to just make your home a little nicer, we've got you there to listen now to the Lifecare podcast from NPR. Hey, we'll come back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Ross. So it's October, 1993. Chipotle EY has a single store in Denver. That's been opened a few months and I got a great first review from a local paper. And people started showing up to buy burritos. Like a lot of people, it was crazy,

1 (24m 29s):
Crazy busy. And remember, this is 850 square feet total. Yeah. And so a little less than half of that was the, was the kitchen. So you were presumably profitable and your first year I was profitable it in the first few months. Wow. And I remember paying my dad back the loan part and, you know, probably that year and still taking a salary for yourself. You know, at that point I was living in the basement of a friend's house, in a couch in the basement. And I slept on the couch. I was working from first thing in the morning until, you know, late at night and doing that well every day.

1 (25m 11s):
And I remember I've paid my dad back and he said, well, Steve, wait a minute. You can't be the key to, can't be making that much money. And I said, well, dad, I really, I think it's doing very well. And, you know, he knows, he knew that I hadn't taken any business classes and had never demonstrated an ability to balance my checkbook or be frugal about organizing my finances. So he said, well, you really ought to get a, a bookkeeper. I said, well, I do have one. He goes, well, we really let him let's let me sit down with him. Well, next time I'm in town. And I'm like, alright. And so we remember, we sat down with the, with the bookkeeper and, and he was blown away. He was like, this thing is really efficient, making a lot of money and it continued to get busier and busier and busier.

1 (25m 53s):
And then everybody started asking me when I was going to open up the next Chipotle way.

0 (25m 59s):
Would you still, in your mind planning and on an opening, a fine dining restaurant?

1 (26m 5s):
Oh, that was what I was thinking about. Yeah, for sure. And I had no intention of opening in another sport way. And so I was like, okay, maybe I'll open one more. So I called my dad and I said, you know, everybody's pressuring me. So I said, dad, I think I'm going to do it. He was like, alright. So I think maybe he put in a little bit more money, but it was mostly cashflow that opened a second restaurant. And that opened about a year and a half later. And it opened up a much busier than the first one, if it was extraordinary. And so I said, all right, I'll open up one more. Wow. It all in Denver all into the

0 (26m 44s):
Room because, because people probably saying like, wait, it's a three. And Denver, there was, I was actually, that was one of my dad's questions. He was like, Steve to think Denver, we're going to have to have these I'm like, I think so dad, and then now it's a one per 50,000 or something. Denver at what point does, I mean, does somebody say, or do you say, or do you think maybe, maybe this is it, maybe this is the thing that's going to, that we should be pursuing. Maybe we, maybe this is bigger than just Denver.

3 (27m 15s):
Well, so that happened after I had a dozen restaurants or so maybe less, maybe eight restaurants. I honestly, I, I forget, but I thought I would go to Kansas city. It seems like a neat food town. People are really into barbecue. It's a really strong barbecue culture there. I liked that. And I thought there could be a burrito culture too. And so, you know, it didn't open up a super strong, but it did pretty well.

0 (27m 43s):
And did you, was that the idea of that to where you just going to keep expanding like one store after another?

3 (27m 48s):
Well, the idea of expansion, wasn't about building an empire. There wasn't a number I was going after. I never thought, Oh my gosh, if I could only have, you know, 10 restaurants or 20 or 50 or a a hundred or a, a thousand, it was never, there was never like that. But I mean, you were still expanding. So how are you, how are you funding that expansion? As, as you know, I, my dad funded the first restaurant and then I started signing up Lisa's for restaurant four, five, six, seven, and then I went to my dad and said, you know, I'm signing up. Lisa's I think I'm going to need a cash infusion. Would you like to invest? And, and luckily he, he said, yes, we open those restaurants and it was successful.

3 (28m 31s):
And I said, well, I'm going to continue to open up some more. Would you like to invest it again? And he said, you know, why don't you go raise the money yourself? And I said, well, how do you do that? And he said, well, you need to write a business plan and you have to go pitch it to people who are qualified to invest. Right.

0 (28m 48s):
Just to be clear that you had already had a bunch of stores at this point, you did not have a business.

3 (28m 54s):
No, no, no. If there was a business plan, he was making burritos and it was, I was just making this up as I, as I, as I went along and, and, and I remember I, I hired a, a, a college buddy who went off to get his MBA. So I hired him in and say, well, we have to put this business plan together. And so as we put the business plan together, what emerged was this economic model of the investment to sails the resulting margin? Did you understand any of that stuff, by the way, while I didn't, as we were contemplating the business plan, but after having to pitch it, you know, if it was my MBA, really, that was, that was my quick and dirty business school.

3 (29m 38s):
And so during the time where I was pitching it, I, one of our

1 (29m 42s):
Early investors who turned out to be a board member and, and he was really instrumental in helping me understand how special the economic model was at Chipotle. What was

2 (29m 53s):
It about the economic model that was so special?

1 (29m 56s):
What was very, very efficient. First of all, the, the investment cost was, was a very low and, you know, typical, fast food at the time had to have room for a drive-through. They were usually free standing. And so all of that required a sizeable investment with Chipotle. We were going into strip malls often in the inexpensive center units, not the more desirable end caps. This was early on. The investment was very, very modest and our production system or our service format really was an assembly line. And as volumes increased, as we serve more customers, you, you would get, you know, a higher and higher margin, a higher contribution margin.

1 (30m 41s):
And so the resulting returns on investment were extraordinary. And again, nothing like this. And in the restaurant industry at the time,

2 (30m 51s):
Did you go to like private equity companies or the venture capital?

1 (30m 55s):
I did. So I, I, I started to go to the institutions and then one of my initial investors, Al bell Docky suggested that I send a plan to McDonald's and, and he had met someone in McDonald's that was thinking about new restaurant ideas. Right. And so I thought, well, that's a really bad idea. How I, you know, Chipotle and McDonald's are so completely different. I just want to just send them a plan, see what happens. And so I did, and within a few weeks I got a call and a visit. And a couple of weeks later, I got another call and they said, Oh, can we bring some more people? And that kept going on for about a year.

1 (31m 36s):
It culminated in a visit from the CEO and their CFO.

2 (31m 43s):
What did they eventually did? They made an offer to, to invest in Chipola? Did they want to buy it out? Right.

1 (31m 49s):
Well, initially I think they want it to buy it out. Right, right. And I wasn't, I wasn't willing to sell. And so they made a very, very small investment enough to open a few restaurants and, and, and then they, you know, the, in the annually they would, they would put in more money over a seven year period. I think they put in $360 million or so, but the majority of that was in the last

2 (32m 9s):
A couple of years, but that McDonald's investment, which may have been tiny for them, because it's a multi-billion dollar company that cash infusion for you guys was tens of millions of dollars. That was transformational

1 (32m 20s):
Completely. There was a, there was no, I was very lucky in that. I don't think there's anyone else who would have been able to invest that way and bet on the come. And what I mean by that is, you know, we opened some markets, California was a great example where sales were really soft and the restaurants

3 (32m 40s):
Weren't making money, but McDonald's was very patient. And, and they believe that the sales would come in in some of the markets that were softer and indeed they did. So

2 (32m 51s):
Yeah, they basically put in some money and that means McDonald's had a chunk of the owned a chunk of the company at that point. Right.

3 (32m 56s):
But they, they own the majority of the company toward the end of the seven year period. But as we develop the relationship over the years, we realized that, you know, our way of doing things was more appropriate than what their system had to offer.

2 (33m 15s):
Yeah. Because you guys did things like source your meat from a specific ranch farm. Like you found this ranch that had a free range pigs, and you, you went with it.

3 (33m 26s):
Right. Right. I was reading a, a quarterly magazine called the art of eating. And this particular issue that I was reading was about a Nyman ranch and the poor farms in Thornton, Iowa. And at the time I was reading this, I was thinking about changing the recipe for our carnitas. And so, as I was reading this article and I was learning about, you know, the way they, they raise their pigs, which I guess is, was much different than the typical way the pigs are raised in the United States. The vast majority of pork is raised in confinement. So if you contrast that with, with what I saw at, at Nyman ranch, I mean, it's just, it's such a stark contrast.

3 (34m 13s):
So after sampling there a pork, I decided that I wanted to switch all of my supply to Nyman ranch took about a year to get there. But eventually we did

2 (34m 22s):
Was, it was McDonald's ever saying to you, Hey, look, you know, it doesn't make sense that you're buying, you know, these expensive product. I mean, you look at our supply chain and how efficient it is. You know, you can save a lot of money. Could you can increase your profit margins or do they just keep it out of that?

3 (34m 39s):
You know, they would ask questions, not dissimilar from the questions you ask, but that they would see the results. So I, you know, I remember when I put Nyman ranch, pork on the menu, I have to increase the price of the carnitas burrito. And I think it increased by about a dollar or something. And so in the world of fast food, that was just not understood. I mean, he got to remember, this is the time when a fast food had the, the 59, 79 99 price point. I think that was at taco bell and, and the dollar value menu and things like this here, here, I am raising the price of the carnitas burrito by a dollar. And after we did that, we started selling more carnitas burritos.

2 (35m 22s):
I mean, obviously your business approach and theirs were totally different. And so I, I, I would imagine that you were, you weren't going to last in a partnership forever. Right?

3 (35m 34s):
Right. Well, so McDonald's a very strong franchise system and their franchisees obviously wanted one at a part of Chipotle way. And certainly they would have been capable of, of operating Chipotle way. There are, there are a lot of good operators in the McDonald's system, but the economic model was so good that we want it to own it. And you did not want to franchise the business. And we didn't know that was perhaps the biggest point of contention. Right. And McDonald's sort of had a duty to their franchisees to, to offer Chipotle AZ as a, as a growth vehicle.

3 (36m 15s):
It just didn't, it wasn't going to be a fit. And we felt like we were ready to go our own way.

2 (36m 25s):
The expansion of Chipotle. It was unbelievable. I mean, after that McDonald's investment, it was like, it was like a rocket, you know, I mean, an everybody in there and they're brothers and sisters wanting to create the next Chipotle. How did that affect your, your personal life? I mean, were you just like, on top of the world, like so excited about this, or were you stressed out about this? Cause you went from 13 stores to 500 stores very quickly, and then from 500 stores to, you know, thousands now But but did you enjoy that? Was it exciting or were you overwhelmed ever?

3 (37m 4s):
So if you think about my original plan for Chipotle and I failed, okay. The intention was to, to start a new one little Chipotle way, and then to be able to step away from it and use the funds from that restaurant to open and operate my full-scale restaurant. So I failed because I never stepped away from Chipotle. In fact, I don't, I don't think I took a day off a, in the first year, the only time I left was when I had to run out, you know, to take the money to the bank or go to a supplier or something like this, certainly there was stress to it, but it was, it was really exciting on the other hand, though, as it, as it got bigger, a and, and the challenge of Scot, much larger of the challenges of operating a large business.

3 (37m 53s):
I just always wondered if I was qualified. So it was a psychic, I never went to business school. I didn't think of myself as a CEO. You know, how, how on earth am I gonna learn to do this? So, so there was a lot of gout self-doubt

2 (38m 6s):
I imagine there was. And that, to me, that seems like a very healthy thing because they would be, I would not, I wouldn't feel confident if you didn't have self-doubt. I mean, that's the thing, like you're a, you're a chef and, and you are all of a sudden at the helm of this massive growing empire with tons of employees scaling quickly, right? How did you even know how to deal with personnel and management and all the stuff about you?

3 (38m 30s):
You, you learn along the way, and there have been so many transformations the way.

1 (38m 37s):
And so over the last 24 years, it's about, you know, reinventing yourself in a learning new things. But I got good at finding really good people. I think, I think that's probably what I'm best at.

2 (38m 55s):
So you go public, your share price, just skyrockets. And this is, I guess, in, in, in 2006, and then you have a pretty big crisis in 2015. What was that like for you to deal with this is we can talk about the details, but first of all, what,

3 (39m 16s):
What was that like? Sure. Well that, you know, that anyone would get sick from the food that you serve them is really a tough thing. And so immediately, you know, you, you know, we try to figure out what could be causing this. And it was, it was a very difficult thing to figure out. And there were a lot of experts who we brought on immediately and, and, you know, the CDC and lots of investigations

2 (39m 43s):
Started in, I guess the Pacific Northwest, there were some people got sick from, from after eating it. And, and

3 (39m 49s):
So, so, you know, over, over a one month period from basically mid October to mid November 50 to people got sick with e-coli, were you freaking out? Well, I mean, freaking, I don't know, freaking out is the right the right way to describe it. You know, we were really well, I mean, it was just, it was a all encompassing. I mean, it was, it was like, it was really intense. You know, you wouldn't wish this on anybody, but if you back up and think about it, you know, nobody was bringing in as much fresh food as much fresh produce and meat as Chipotle.

3 (40m 29s):
So what we realized is that we needed to develop protocols to prevent any kind of a pathogen coming into the system.

2 (40m 37s):
That was just impossible to do a a hundred percent of the time. Right.

3 (40m 40s):
You know, you, you, you can never say a hundred percent. Yeah. But you can, you can get very close to zero. So, you know, the I'll give you an example, think about an avocado. They are potentially pathogens on an avocado, but you wash the avocado, write the avocado is washed after it's harvested. But what if that avocado could be infected somehow falls on the ground and hits, hits a little rock or something. And that, and just that little spot where the pathogen is pushed under the skin. Yeah. And now you wash it, but you don't wash that little spot. And what if, as you put your knife into the avocado, it hits a cut.

3 (41m 22s):
It hits that exact spot, but what are the chances of that? One of the one in 1,000,001 in 10 million, thinking about all the other companies I cut at home and I don't wash them well, that's right. You, you, you cut dozens. We cut millions and millions. And I'm not saying that the avocado was responsible for a four for this particular incident, but we've looked at every single item we bring in. And we've ensured that there are a number of interventions along the way. And so what we do with this avocado now is after we wash it, we plunge it into boiling water for five seconds. This is called blanching. And, and it's not long enough to cook the avocado, but just long enough to bring the temperature of the skin and the area under the skin, just high enough so that it would kill any pathogen that might be there.

3 (42m 15s):
And we do this with lemons and limes and bell peppers and jalapeno peppers. It's a process that is very, very thorough. And, and the chance that a pathogen can survive through that is certainly near zero

2 (42m 31s):
Steve. You had this incredible run from The literally from the first story you opened that was profitable. And then you hit this crisis point in 2015. And I can't imagine you ever dealt with anything even remotely close to that. So where were you mentally prepared?

3 (42m 51s):
Well, you know, I'm here now, so I got it, got through it. Yeah. But, but we weren't, we weren't prepared as an organization for it, obviously. And, and, and since that incident was, we're two years away from it. Now we are, we are at a different company. We have top-notch board of directors that are independent and very critical, ah, in, in a good way, in a challenging way. And, and we are prepared now for a lot of success ahead of us.

2 (43m 30s):
I mean, when you think about the, the valuation of the company, this number, I mean, I guess it, it's taken a little bit of a beating because of the crisis you face, but I mean, at its highest, it was, it was what like, like near $20 billion.

3 (43m 45s):
Yeah. 21, 21 billion. I think what's the highest

2 (43m 47s):
$1 billion. I mean, for a burrito restaurant started in Denver in 1993. That's pretty insane. You know, I mean, when you think about that a hundred, do you sit back and say,

3 (44m 2s):
Wow, how awesome is that? Or do you think about that? It doesn't really work that way. It's, it's not a big, stair-step sort of increases. It's a relatively linear and, and sort of, you know, just get, getting bigger, taking on more responsibility, the evaluation, all the sort of things. It's just, it's, it's been a relatively linear.

2 (44m 24s):
And do you think, and so is it the amount of money? Just a bit

3 (44m 28s):
Distract? I don't understand. I mean,

0 (44m 32s):
D is, is it mean anything? I mean, cause I would think I would be incredibly proud of that. You know, that, that you grow this thing too, such a huge place in, in that period of time.

3 (44m 44s):
So again, I've always, so when I, before I started the first restaurant, I used to tell people, but I wanted to show that just because food is sort of fast doesn't mean it has to be a typical, fast food experience. And that evolved to saying that I want to change the way Americans think about any fast food. And I remember when I started saying that we weren't very big, that that sounded like a big audacious goal, but the basic idea behind our purpose is that, you know, food that's raised right. Should be people's everyday food.

3 (45m 25s):
And as I see others who have opened restaurants that are based on the Chipotle the model, you know, I'm, I'm very excited about that to me. That's, that's what, that's, what drives us,

0 (45m 39s):
How much of your success do you think is because of luck and, and how much because of

3 (45m 43s):
Either a hardworking skill. So, you know, my success in the early days was I think I, I caused a lot of that success, but I, then you have to layer on being in the right place at the right time. I was lucky to be, to have a father who could, who could invest $85,000 in my first restaurant, because I couldn't have raised that money myself, that a McDonald's allowed me to basically run the company and tap into their resources. You know, it's a combination, but also a lot of it is a, you know, if I, if I go back to this, this concept that I learned in cooking school, it's, it's this French term called museum plus everything that's right.

3 (46m 30s):
Place. Yeah. Everything in its place and its, and its basically, you know, you could think about it, you know, before a service, you have your museum plus. And, and that means that once service starts, everything you need for a successful service at night is laid out. Just so and, and so I think

0 (46m 47s):
About, I think about, you know, my

3 (46m 50s):
Overall museum POS that I've, that I've set myself up for success.

0 (46m 54s):
And that seems to make sense for me that Steve Ells founder of Chipotle all the way Steve step down as CEO for the company in 2018. And despite the fact that Chipotle now makes enough money for Steve to fulfill his dream and open up that high-end restaurant. He always dreamed that he says that moment kind of the past. And you know, there's still a lot of money to be made in burritos. Thanks so much for listening to the show this week can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can also write to us at HIB tea at NPR dot org.

0 (47m 35s):
And if you want to follow us on Twitter, we're at and how I built this or at Guy rise and an Instagram it's at Guy dot bras. This episode was produced by REM teen era, Louie who also composed the music. Thanks also to Farah Safari, Liz Metzger, Derek gales, Julia Carney, JC Howard Neeva grant and Jeff Rogers. I'm guy Raz. And you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR

4 (48m 9s):
The world economy seems sluggish or your interest rates feeling abnormally low. Your economy might be exhibiting symptoms, have a once in a lifetime recession, ask your podcast provider about a twice weekly dose of planet money. The economy can be perplexing and PRS planet money can help.