0 (1s):
What is actually going on with the economy nowadays, the price of gas inflation? Are we in a recession? I'm Jeff Glow, co-host of NPRs Planet Money. Come along with our super team of econ experts as we delve into the stories that show you how the world really works. That's Planet Money from npr.

2 (22s):
How I Built This is pleased to have Slack as our presenting sponsor. Slack, where the future works. Let Slack be your digital hq. It's one digital space that brings together all of your people and all of the tools you need. Having Slack makes collaboration easier and more flexible so you can be a lot more productive. Don't wait to see what you can accomplish with your own digital hq. Head over to slack.com/dhq to get started. Slack where the future works. Don't you hate it when you can't find your phone or your keys in your bag, or worse when your water bottle leaks all over the bottom of your bag because it was rolling around and the cap got unscrewed.

2 (1m 6s):
Well, the Performance Bag brand Dagney Dover can help their bags keep up with your busy lifestyle and help you stay organized. I got the Arlo tech organizer from Dagney Dover right before leaving on a family trip. Everything was so practically designed, stylish and a lifesaver for keeping our cords and chargers organized. First time customers get 10% off using code built@dagneydover.com. That's D A G N E D O V E r.com and code built.

3 (1m 42s):
I used to get really upset when I see yogurt on the lid.

2 (1m 45s):
On the lid. You didn't wanna see on the lid. You wanted it to be so perfectly smooth in the cup that the It wouldn't touch the lid.

3 (1m 52s):
Yeah, I would open a cup and if I see yogurt on the lid, that was a bad day.

2 (1m 58s):
You were totally obsessed with it as you should be because you're, you're trying to make a product that's so good that it's going to knock people out the first time they try it.

3 (2m 8s):
Exactly. I have no luxury of, oh, I wish I had done that. I wish I had done that. This is one shot. If it's not successful, I'm out.

2 (2m 23s):
Welcome to how I built this, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Ross and on the show today how Honda Akaya arrived in the US with no money and no plan. Bought an abandoned yogurt factory and built Shani into one of the top selling yogurt brands in the US A few years ago. I interviewed Eric Ryan on the show. Eric is the co-founder of Method Soap and one of the ways he came up with the idea for what would become method was by simply wandering the aisles of supermarkets.

2 (3m 8s):
He'd walk up and down an aisle and just look at the products and he'd ask himself two questions, which category is ripe for disruption? And do I, Eric Ryan have the ability to make that disruptive product? He soon landed on natural and eco-friendly dish soap and with his co-founder Adam Lowry, they started to make soap in their kitchen. Eric felt that there was room for a beautifully designed and packaged hand soap that could compete alongside the usual suspects, and he turned out of course to be right. Now there are lots of examples like this. Stories we've told on the show, like Dogfish had beer or away luggage or Angie's boom, Chicka Hop.

2 (3m 52s):
All of these brands saw opportunity to offer up a better experience within an existing category of products. Now, if you were to walk up and down the yogurt aisle in American supermarkets in the 1980s or even the early nineties, your options were pretty slim. You'd see Dan in yo play and supermarket brands and what we now call Greek yogurt was almost nowhere to be found and mainly in small specialty stores, which is kind of crazy because today Greek style yogurt accounts for 50% of the entire $8 billion yogurt market in the us.

2 (4m 33s):
That's roughly $4 billion of Greek yogurt sold each year in America alone. And the brand most responsible for its rise, Shani Chobani's founder Hyundai is from Turkey, but Greek is the term Americans use to describe yogurt that has most of the water strained out of it. So it's thicker and creamier than other kinds. It's the type of yogurt that ate when he was growing up in a remote part of Eastern Turkey. And when he immigrated to the US in the mid 1990s, he had no intention of turning the thick creamy yogurt of his childhood into a billion dollar brand.

2 (5m 15s):
And a story of how he came to do exactly that is one of the most improbable and yet inevitable stories we've ever told on the show. Improbable, because Hamdi barely had any money when he got here, he spoke almost no English. He had no background in business. He'd grown up in an isolated community of shepherds and farmers. But that is one of the things that makes his success, well almost inevitable because those shepherds and farmers, they knew everything there was to know about cheese and yogurt. And from an early age, Hamdi learned how to make it himself. He also learned how to be incredibly resourceful and as it turns out, incredibly determined, even stubborn when he had to be, he would need those traits to navigate the many hairpin turns he encountered while building Chobani, starting with a feta cheese business that almost drove him into the ground.

2 (6m 15s):
Hka grew up in the 1970s and eighties near a tiny town in a Kurdish region of Eastern Turkey. He lived in the mountains with his family in a semi nomadic community.

3 (6m 26s):
The nomads were really isolated from the everyday life. Yeah, we kind of, we were kind of people like from Mars really. We would come to town and buy our flowers and sugars and whatever it is. And then the second we are done, we are on our horses and and mules and we are up in the mountains. Right. So we don't get involved with anything. Yeah. And the only thing that we has exposed to stories outside of that little town and the mountains is the people who come back from the big cities, whether for military service that they have done or they travel for a reason of selling the cheese or bought some grains and they will come up with stories and what they saw. But we really were very much isolated from the reality of lives.

2 (7m 9s):
Hmm. From what I, from what I've read, your dad had a quite a successful cheese making business right in in town.

3 (7m 18s):
Yeah. So he was aga So aga means he's the leader of the tribe. And my father kind of didn't wanna follow that tradition, but he was kind of natural leader. Now, because you're aga you don't have other things like, you know, we didn't have bicycles for example. We didn't have toys, we ate the same thing. We, we had the same conditions, we live under the same tents. So it didn't make it too much difference in life. But what it did is you had a reputation. People will trust you, they will value your opinion and usually you will buy all the other people's cheese and you combine them and you would, my father would take it to big cities and sell them.

3 (8m 5s):
Right. So he created a little bit of business out of it, but nothing major like it was, I would say, a small business.

2 (8m 12s):
You know, it's interesting cuz when you hear like semi nomatic, you think, I think people think like the steps of Asia or Tibet or something. But, but I mean, you, you, you grew when you grew up when you were a boy, like you, you were more or less, you know, I mean you had everything you needed from what I understand, right?

3 (8m 30s):
Absolutely. Yeah,

2 (8m 31s):
Yeah, sure. You weren't living like in a dirt room, sleeping on the ground.

3 (8m 35s):
No, no, no. We, we had a, you know this, in life, I don't think we call ourself poor. We never, we never consider ourself poor. You know, we consider ourself lucky

2 (8m 48s):
And, and you had like a, a television refrigerators and, and you know, ovens and, right. I mean,

3 (8m 52s):
Later Yeah, later. Yeah. When it arrived to town, we would afford to be able to buy TVs and refrigerators. And I remember my mom when, when she got first time the washing machine, it was just fascinating. Would all watch it how it does it, you know, gather

2 (9m 6s):
Around that. Yeah,

3 (9m 7s):
Yeah. No, they could afford things. It wasn't, you know, very rich life. But it was, yeah, it was decent life. Absolutely.

2 (9m 15s):
You did go off to college, from what I understand, to Ara University. Yes. And from what I gather, from what I understand, you were, you were a student there during a particularly volatile time in Turkey especially for, for, for people like you, for ethnic Kurds. And, and you became a bit of a, of a political activist at the time. You, you were, I guess even involved with some left wing and, and socialist groups, which I, I guess made you feel like, like Turkey at the time wasn't the right place for you to live. And, and, and so you decided to leave the country. Yeah,

3 (9m 53s):
Exactly. I thought, okay, I'll go to Europe just because everybody else did at the time. And I had a passport luckily. So I was thinking like, I would go to France, I would go to Germany or somewhere around in Europe and I was talking to my friend, a stranger who actually stranger is a person. When I would help my brother in his stores, he would come every evening around 5 30, 6 o'clock, this guy with a glass, serious looking guy, you know, maybe in his fifties he would come and buy small things like eggs and tomatoes and some meat and all that kind of stuff. Yeah. That guy heard me saying to my friend that I'm going to go to Europe.

3 (10m 35s):
He just said, don't be stupid. Go to America. And I remember telling him, why would I ever go to a capitalist imperialist, you know, country that has done all these bad, you know, that typical, you know, the language. He said, you think Europe is good, go to America and if you don't like it, you can always go to your Europe. So I dismissed them. I said, get your eggs and meet and go to your place and not see you tomorrow. That night I couldn't sleep. I, I thought about what that guy said. Now I had no knowledge of America other than what I saw in movies and TVs.

3 (11m 17s):
Yeah. So I waited that day, the next day until that guy showed up and I put him on the side and I said, tell me more. How do you know America? How do you go to America? What can you tell me more about? It turns out that he studied in the US and he knew a lady in the center of Anura that had an agency that would send students to universities across the country for learning English. And he gave me his, her her, her numbers. And he said, go to this person, go to school, try to learn them some language. If you like the land and if you like the way of living, you can stay in further study.

3 (11m 58s):
And if you don't, you can go wherever you want to go.

2 (12m 1s):
So you basically came to the US under this, on this program to learn English to study. And you, and where did you, where did you land? Where did you arrive to?

3 (12m 13s):
So I go to this lady and she said, okay, so you want to go learn English? I said, yes. And then she says, where do you wanna go in America? I said, I don't know. So she opened this map and she was telling me, and I remember like yesterday, oh, I have school in Boston. I have a school in Delaware, I have school in New York. And she was going on. I said, okay, stop New York. New York is good. And then she opened up another map and says, where in New York? I have few schools in New York. And that was the first time I realized New York is not a city, it's a state. Right. So she had a school in Albany. She had a school in Manhattan. And I remember saying that, you know, those big buildings in a big town, big city, not in there, but not too far from there either.

3 (12m 57s):
So she said, okay, I got you. And two weeks later I had received the acceptance form and this whole thing happened within a month. And wow. I went back to my hometown where I grew up and my mom was there. And I spend a week there with my mother and probably one of the hardest goodbye of my life, my mom was old now, she couldn't go up in the mountains anymore. That this is the time where you start seeing snow up in the, you know, the summits of the mountains in a, in a and you know, this is the time that the families are coming back.

3 (13m 39s):
And, and I dropped her in the hospital where she needed to have a checkup in, in, in the town. And we hug and, and and I said goodbye. And I had a nephew and I was taking him to anchor to his, his dad. And when, and I was driving, this is the one of the few times that I started to learn drive. And I was driving from town to Anura. And when I'd left, I saw my mother on the rear mirror. And that picture I remember always my life. And she's having that motherly walk on the streets towards the hospital.

3 (14m 20s):
And my, my, my nephew tells me, uncle, why are you crying? And I say, I'm not crying. It's raining. And it was raining, you know, from the window. That was my last good goodbye to life of tribe. My last goodbye to my town. All the, all the life that I had in those mountains, in the tribes, the shepherds, all the conflicts, all the university, everything that was designed to go go for me in that life. I just go back to that moment and that's goodbye. And within two weeks I was, I was in New Jersey.

3 (14m 60s):
That was the last Turkish Airlines landing in New Jersey.

2 (15m 2s):
Wow. And I think you ended up starting out at Adelphi University on Long Island. Is that right?

3 (15m 8s):
Yeah. Turns out that acceptance was a D University in Long Island and it was one of, one of the most expensive English class. And I had $3,000 in my pocket my brother gave me from Istanbul.

2 (15m 20s):
You had two. So you arrive with $2,000, three, $3,000 and you get to Adelphi to study English. And how did it go? Or how long did you last there? Because I don't think you were there for very long. Right?

3 (15m 32s):
A month.

2 (15m 33s):
A month, okay.

3 (15m 34s):
Yeah, just a month. Because the $2,000 of it was spent in the first month.

2 (15m 38s):
You, you were running outta money.

3 (15m 40s):
I was literally running outta money. I couldn't, I had to learn how to speak, I had to learn. I had zero, like really zero English. You

2 (15m 48s):
Had zero English? Zero,

3 (15m 50s):
Zero.

2 (15m 50s):
It's amazing this 1994, it's not that long ago.

3 (15m 53s):
Yeah. This is October, 1994. And you're like a fish out of ocean. It is. It whole life has dramatically changed in so fast. I wasn't even having mental preparation for this. Yeah. 23 years old, 22 years old. You know, it's not easy.

2 (16m 10s):
It, it must have been incredibly lonely.

3 (16m 14s):
Very, very. But I have other worries. What do I do for living? What do I, how do I pay for the school? How do I, where do I work? Am I allowed to work? How do I survive? Who do I trust? Who do I talk to and all that kind of stuff. Yeah. So I start doing things like, you know, you hear from the other students, you do dishwashing, you know, help here and there when people hire you and you get by, you know, you just go through the every day. Yeah.

2 (16m 44s):
And I think at this point you had transferred to to Baruch College Yeah. In Manhattan. And, and you were still studying English there, is that right?

3 (16m 53s):
Yes, exactly. And a few months in, a teacher at the Bar College gave a homework for, for language. And she asked us to write something in English, how to make, and I understood that part. And I wanted to write how to make cheese

2 (17m 15s):
Where the assignment was. How to make anything. Just

3 (17m 17s):
Something something something.

2 (17m 18s):
Yeah. How do you make something

3 (17m 20s):
So with the help of someone in that, you know, place where I was living, I tried to write how to make cheese. And then a week after this amazing lady teacher, she comes to me with a paper in her hand and tries to tell me with a very passionate voice. I don't know if she's angry at me with what I wrote or if she's trying to tell me something I don't understand. So I brought another Turkish student from the other class and, and asked him to tell me what she was trying to tell me. So it turns out she had a farm in upstate New York.

3 (18m 1s):
She had goats and cows and she allowed my paper and she was inviting me to her farm for a weekend so we can make some cheese together.

2 (18m 11s):
Wow. Cause you of course knew how to make cheese cuz you'd grown up making cheese. I

3 (18m 15s):
Know. It's

2 (18m 16s):
Like Yeah. And she had happened to have the, the raw materials, but just didn't know how to, how to use them.

3 (18m 21s):
Yeah. And actually the, the, the, the part that shocked me that in New New York there was farms. I mean, I never even imagined that there were farms or the animals. I mean, I thought that was in our part of the world. Right. I mean I never, I never thought about it. Right. So I was having a hard time and I can't wait for the weekend to come. She tells me which bus to take and where she's going to pick me up. And she brought down everything if I get lost so I can ask people. And she put numbers and she picked me up from the bus station in Albany. And then from the Albany bus station is another hour drive to the border of Vermont. You know, this beautiful, I mean, as I'm going, I'm just, I can't believe what I'm seeing in these hills in the mountains.

3 (19m 4s):
Yeah. I feel like I'm back home. And it was a simple farm and that they were professionals, husband and wife, one and teacher, and one was an engineer and they wanted to have a farm.

2 (19m 17s):
And it was their weekend. Like their weekend home.

3 (19m 19s):
Yeah. They would come for the weekend.

2 (19m 21s):
So, alright, so you get up there and so what, what do you do? I mean, you're there for the weekend, so what did you do? How do you teach them how to make cheese?

3 (19m 31s):
We made it from the goats milk, which is the closest to shipment that I grew up with. Yeah. And in the evening they, they made sandwiches, they made fire and we sit around the fire, which is, you know, that's what we used to do. You know, when we were in, up in the mountains, I had the best time. And the end of the second day, as I was getting ready to go to the bus station, I said what it would take like in that line, I dunno how I said it, for me to stay in the farm and work in the farm and go to school from here. She, I dunno what she exactly said, I think there was some issues with it.

3 (20m 16s):
But in month or two months later, she said, you know, if you still want, you can come and, and stay in the, in the, in the farm. Huh.

2 (20m 25s):
So she was offering you to go move up there. Yeah. And, and by the way, I'm just, I'm just assuming that you, when you got there, cuz your, your assumption was there were no farms in New York, but when you got there, it kind of took you back to, to where you grew up, right. Because you're like, oh, all of a sudden I'm around farms and animals and Exactly. Goats and sheep and cheese.

3 (20m 46s):
Yeah. When I came back the, i I made my mind. There is no, no way. No no way. I'm living in the city. I'm moving somewhere up there. Definitely. Because now I know a place like that exists.

2 (20m 60s):
You wanna be around goats and cheap.

3 (21m 1s):
Exactly.

2 (21m 2s):
And trees and rivers. Yeah. I, I get it. I totally get it. So, so, so she offers you to move up there and, and you took the, we know you took the

3 (21m 11s):
Offer. I jumped. You jumped. Oh my god. I jumped.

2 (21m 14s):
And what were you gonna do for, for, was she offering to pay you to or were you just gonna figure that out on your,

3 (21m 18s):
On Well, I don't think they could pay me. Yeah. But I could live and help. Right. So that's, that's kind of how it could, and until I get the job or I, I move out and all that stuff. But it ends up being that I lived in that farm for a year and a half.

2 (21m 33s):
And what did you do?

3 (21m 34s):
I did everything. I did everything in that farm.

2 (21m 37s):
And you're living there by yourself in rural Yes. New York, upstate New York. On the, on the Vermont border. Just you this, like, this kid from Turkey.

3 (21m 45s):
That's exactly how you describe this kid from, you know, the Kurdish kid from eastern part of Turkey living in a and what do I do? So I wake up five o'clock in the morning, I gather the cows and I put them on the lined up. I milk them, I clean everything, I feed them, I water them, make sure that the calves are fed. And then I will drive 60 miles to Albany to go to school in Albany. Continue to learn English.

2 (22m 14s):
Oh wow. And you did that every few days?

3 (22m 15s):
Every day, every day I drive. Wow. And then I would do it five o'clock in the morning milking. And then when I come back from the school, the first thing at six o'clock I would do again, same thing. Milk the cows and all that kind of stuff.

2 (22m 29s):
And, and by the way, Hyundai, did you have any friends? I mean, you're like in your twenties, you're a young guy. Were you just like milking cow, you're working on the farm, going to school, working on the farm, going to school

3 (22m 40s):
In the last six months, my brother, my younger brother came and joined me. Not much friends. The everyday farmers. I interacted with farmers and really, I think I got to know America really well because I moved up there and I got to interact with farmers. I got to interact with residents, real people. Not in New York, really? You have people from all over the world. Right. So you have Turks and everybody up there. You know, I, I was probably the first person from Turkey that I've ever seen.

2 (23m 14s):
Yeah. All right. So your brother comes and visits you while you're there. And then I think the, the following year, 96, your, your dad comes to visit you in New York. Yes. Tell me a little bit about that visit, cuz I think this would be a kind of a pivotal visit. I mean, he, he was sort of presumably coming there to, to kind of see you and your and your brother had been, had been there with you and, and he was sort of coming there to not just to visit you but maybe also to find out what you're gonna do with your life.

3 (23m 41s):
The simple way of putting it in is my mother sent him to say, go check them out and see what they're doing, doing right. And then he comes and I'm trying to figure out what I'm going to do with my life. I don't know. And, but one thing is for sure we have to work, we have to make some kind of income. And he said, seems like there's not good feta cheese in here.

2 (24m 7s):
Your dad, when he visited, he, he noticed that that the, what we like call feta cheese Right.

3 (24m 13s):
Is not good here. And it was not good. It was pretty awful. Yeah. It was pretty awful at the

2 (24m 17s):
Time. And, and just to be clear, like this is something that he would just eat for breakfast every morning. Right? He would have feta or, and olives. Right. This is kinda a traditional Turkish breakfast. Right.

3 (24m 30s):
And he tasted and it says, this is really bad. Is there anything good? I said, no, this is it, what we can find. And I said, wow. Why don't you ask your brothers to send you feta cheese and you can sell it here. That was the big idea.

2 (24m 44s):
Yeah.

3 (24m 46s):
So I got to work and found an Armenian distributors who carried Middle Eastern products based in Queens.

2 (24m 54s):
In Queens. Okay. So you found, and they were, and and you called them to see if they would be interested in carrying your cheese?

3 (25m 1s):
I called and I went to visit with him. So at that time I got some samples and stuff from back home. My brother sent it to me and I went to visit and I said, we make this cheese, would you be interested buying it? And I says, well you have to know the law. If it has to be a hundred percent ship milk, otherwise it will be exposed to duty, it will be too expensive. All these worries and questions. But the answer was yes, I will consider it. And that was the beginning of my business journey until that moment I had never been involved with business. Well, yeah.

2 (25m 37s):
Can I ask you a question about the cheese? So this is cheese that your brothers were actually making back in Turkey? Yes. And, and was the cheese in jars, was it canned? I mean, how did you, how did they ship it? Was it shipped in coolers or did it not require cooling at all? How

3 (25m 53s):
Did you receive it? Oh, definitely cooler. Yeah, definitely cooler. It has to be refrigerated. Right. And we made really good money on importing that cheese, at least compared to, you know, working here and there. Right. So we don't have a lot of expenses.

2 (26m 9s):
Right. It was, it was just you and your brother and just making sure the cheese arrived and, and that's all you were importing? Just the, just the fed. That's it.

3 (26m 16s):
Yeah. But then my mother got sick and I went to Turkey and I came back with my mom, discovered that my mom had a very severe liver disease, that we had no idea that she had it then. Then six months after she passed, I had this time of being again feeling like numb. It was this time of total loss. Yeah. Cuz she was the most important person ever been in my life. And she was the most important person in the family. She, you know, my, my father was a big shot and all that kind of stuff, but really it was my mother, the reason that I was in New York City, that she made me to be that person, to be independent and come here and of course, my god, the love that she had and caring that she had and, and, and then she made us, at least I can speak on my own, she made you feel like you were the most special person in the whole universe and, and made sure that you believed in it.

3 (27m 23s):
Yeah. So she was my backbone. She was everything that I was, and now she was gone. So it was, it was very, very massive event and it was extremely difficult to, to really stand up and, and get out of the bed for a long, long time.

2 (27m 43s):
Wow. I I guess you were, you were eventually able to, to somewhat recover from that and, and get back to the business. You, you were running with your brother Beal.

3 (27m 57s):
Yeah.

2 (27m 58s):
But, but from what I gather, you started to, maybe both of you started to think, you know, you know, hey, we can probably make more money or, or grow our, our business if we, if we made the cheese or, or we made it here in the us right. Is, yeah. How did that, how did you start to tell me about like that thought process. When did you start to think that, that that's what you should do?

3 (28m 23s):
It was another idea of my father of saying, you know, this importing thing is, you know, with the currency going up and down and all the things that are happening and it's not a very hard cheese to make. And you can even make it with the, with the cow's milk. Why don't you find a place where you can make this cheese here, given there were domestic fabi made here. The problem was, it was horrible. Like literally awful. Like it was so bad and say, okay, people are buying this stuff. So if you make it a little bit better, you know, it's endless. Yeah. So this is no brainer. The question is, okay, where do you make it?

3 (29m 4s):
How do you make it? What kind of, what kind of environment? What kind of place and how do you put this together?

2 (29m 12s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment. How Hamdi starts his own cheese business, but switches to yogurt after pulling a vital piece of junk mail outta the garbage. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This. How I Built This is brought to you by Northern Trust. The landscape of modern wealth is complex challenges and opportunities intersect, which is why the Northern Trust Institute was created. It's a research center dedicated to surfacing new insights and the best financial advice.

2 (29m 56s):
The Northern Trust Institute is dedicated to helping you confidently move forward with advice that is grounded in real world outcomes and backed by proven credibility by analyzing behavioral patterns and identifying the strategies that have been most effective for their clients. They position you to take action with confidence and achieve the best outcomes. Whatever your ambitions might be, talk with a Northern Trust advisor to achieve your goals. With a bold new approach to managing wealth based on advice that is grounded in research tested and tailored. Visit northern trust.com/institute. That's northern trust.com/institute.

2 (30m 40s):
American Giant chooses to manufacture all of its clothes in the United States with their high quality long lasting goods. They make sure their products stay local and stay out of landfills. Unlike how most clothes are made today as quickly, cheaply and profitably as possible. Clothes from American Giant are made to last not to wear out. For example, their classic full zip hoodie is a sweatshirt that actually wears even better and softer 10 years after you got it. I've been a huge fan of American Giant for a long time now. I'm actually wearing their hoodie right now in the studio because I love what they make. I love their shirts, I love their jeans, their socks, their products are super comfortable, they're really durable and they're made locally.

2 (31m 25s):
They're made in the United States. You can see more of their story and shop the classic full zip@americangiant.com slash built and get 20% off when you use code built at checkout. That's american-giant.com/built promo code built. Hey, welcome back to how I built this. I'm Guy Raz, so it's around 2002 and Hyundai has decided to start making and selling his own FETs. He gets a local development grant to open a small factory in Johnstown, New York.

2 (32m 6s):
And now he needs to get hold of some vats for making the cheese.

3 (32m 11s):
How do I afford to bring the vats? VAT is this stainless steel vessel, let's say 2000 pounds. They can go 10,000 pounds where you pasteurize the milk. Right. It's like, how do I afford to this equipment? And there was a local bank called MBT in Johnstown and the gentleman there said, you know, you can get the U S D A to have a loan guarantee meaning Right. It gives some kind of comfort to the banks. I guess that's the way to put it in place. Yeah. That they will lend to the local, you know, businesses to start their business or expand their business. And if it goes wrong, then the risk is 90% removed.

3 (32m 55s):
And they set up the time meeting with gentleman out of Syracuse of the s D A and he came and met with us. And then we heard back after, I don't know how long a month or two that we were given 90% guarantee or the banks was given 90% guarantee. It was, it was mind blowing. So that basically took care of that part. All I had to worry about is the 10% and you know, working capital and all the unthinkables.

2 (33m 23s):
Yeah. All right. So you get, you get the loan right. To, to make this happen. And you've got two things that you have to do. You have to start making cheese and then you have to start selling it. So was first of all in the making cheese, cuz I think you, the factory opened in 2002, you called it, it was called Euphrates. This is the company that you and your brother started to make cheese. Exactly. And did you, so you made cheese, you had a pallet by, you know, that year for sale. So I'm assuming the making the cheese part of it was not that hard. It was the everything else that was hard. Or am I wrong?

3 (33m 58s):
No, I, I, you know, in Terry it should have worked. You know, you have the milk. Yeah. You have the culture and it should work. I had one of the worst time making the cheese.

2 (34m 13s):
Why?

3 (34m 14s):
I, you know, turns out the Terry and the reality is two different things. But

2 (34m 19s):
You knew how to make cheese. You had been making cheese for years.

3 (34m 22s):
Yeah. The milk is different. Right. And then you make the cheese and then how it stays in after two months or a month or two weeks. The, the texture is not right. I mean, it's close, but it's not perfect.

2 (34m 34s):
You're saying the, and getting the consistency is hard because Exactly. Because every milk, every shipment of milk is different.

3 (34m 41s):
Every shipment of the milk different. Now we made cheese with unpasteurized milk, now you're pasteurizing. And so you have to fine tune that and you're relying on culture companies, you're relying on, you know, equipment companies to be able to make that kind of adjustments. So there's a lot of trial and error. We couldn't do all of those things until we had the rats in place.

2 (35m 2s):
Yeah. By the way, how many people were working there?

3 (35m 4s):
5, 10, 10, 12 people. Yeah. I'm making the cheese. I'm packing it, I'm salting it, I'm putting in the pallet. Pales, you know, 10 pound pales or 20 pound pales, whatever it is.

2 (35m 15s):
Where did you find, where did you find customers to sell all that cheese?

3 (35m 19s):
So that's a, I start looking at Greek distributors now because now I'm really making fata like really fata. Yeah. This is not a table cheese anymore. It's a salad cheese. It's a cheese that they put on their Greek salad. Right. So who are the buyers of this cheese are the Greek distributors. And what they do is they deliver to diners. You know, these diners are all over the

2 (35m 49s):
Northeast. There's Greek diners everywhere in the northeast. Yeah, yeah,

3 (35m 53s):
Yeah. It's, it's to go to go places. Right. So right in these diners, one of the most popular thing that is even comes even without your ordering is the Greek salad. And that Greek salad has

2 (36m 5s):
Chunks of fed on it.

3 (36m 6s):
Yeah. But I, i, soon enough I'd realize that this is not, this is not a huge margin thing. Yeah. You know, you have large manufacturers, even though their product is pretty awful, you have these large manufacturers out of Wisconsin that make millions of pounds. Right. They ship it all around the country and you know, you look at the diners, the quality is not the number one thing Really? Yeah. I mean it is but it's not, you say. Yeah. It says okay, they get it. But I put onions in there and I put

2 (36m 40s):
The olive

3 (36m 41s):
In there. Yeah. I put on black olives and I put the olive oil and no

2 (36m 46s):
One cares

3 (36m 46s):
About the feather by the time. Yeah. Who

2 (36m 49s):
Cares. Yeah, I get it. I get it. And but, but so and were you going literally from diner to diner? Or were you working with like a big distributor who would then do that for you?

3 (36m 58s):
Yeah, so not big, but the distributor. You can't go d to Dyna.

2 (37m 2s):
Yeah. It's not possible. You can't scale that.

3 (37m 4s):
Right. Yeah. So the first eyeopening for me was, I called this distributor of the Syracuse and I says, can I come and show you some fat? I said, sure. Come. And I go and I show him. He says, okay, I'll buy it from you. And I'm like, wow, you know, I feel like this is cool. I said, how much you buy is, is two pallets a week now every other month. Oh God. I mean, two pallet every other month is not in the, it's nothing fraction of It's nothing. Yeah. It's basically, so how many of these people I have to have to be able to even pay for my expenses?

3 (37m 47s):
It is at this point I'm saying what an f I did now, like what I got myself into.

2 (37m 53s):
Yeah. I, I read, I read something you said, you said that the years, those two years from 2002 when you started the factorys in 2004, it's the first two years you said was the most difficult time of my

3 (38m 7s):
Life. Yes. It was literally most difficult times of my life. And I have gone through some difficult time before that. But this was really, really hard. There was no way I could survive. There's no way this could make to the other side. There's no way. Every day this business was gonna die every day, every day, every day. I don't have resources. I don't know the knowledge, I don't have experience. I'm new to the country. I getting myself into this. I'm already not complete since my mother's dad. I mean, it's, it's a lot of emotions. And I remember there was a, a little creek next to the, you know, plant.

3 (38m 47s):
And I will go there and I will cry and cry and cry by myself and then I will come up after I'm done into the inside the factory and start making cheese. But it was, that two years made me who I am today. But also it was one of the most difficult times of my life. Yeah.

2 (39m 8s):
That two year period, you get through it. But you did start to turn a profit after those two years. A small profit, I think.

3 (39m 17s):
Yeah. So I realize that I'm not going to be, I'm not going to be able to sell the feta amount that needed to pay all my expenses in this place to one person or two person or five person. I, I have to get it as much as I can. So that means that I have to go between Boston or New Hampshire or Maine to all the way down to Florida and east wise, maybe Detroit and Chicago and find all these small distributors that would buy one or two pallets a month. I, I slept on the roads with the van and meet all these amazing small distributors. Family owned small distributors.

2 (39m 58s):
Yeah.

3 (39m 59s):
And I end up getting them hundreds of them. Wow.

2 (40m 3s):
Yeah. Cause I think your, your sales were, I think you hit about 2 million in sales by 2005, but you had like 40 employees, so no one was getting rich, you know, 2 million in sales and 40 employees.

3 (40m 16s):
No, I didn't think that this, this would make me rich or you would get rich out of this. Right. All, all I wanted to do is survive, you know, and two years, 2004 you get it and say, okay, I think I survived. I think I survived. Yeah. Like middle of 2004 I felt like I could breathe. Yeah. Yeah.

2 (40m 34s):
Wow. But that year, something pr pretty pivotal happened. A property came, came up for sale, I guess not too far from there. What, tell me the story of, of how, what, what how'd you find out about this property? What was it?

3 (40m 47s):
So here's the thing. I'm really a messy person. Even today, I'm pretty messy at my office, in my desk. So once maybe a month, maybe every couple of weeks I decide that I'm going to organize my desk. I'm just gonna go through all the documents, all the papers. All the letters, you know. Yep. And you open the envelope. Sometimes you don't even open the envelope. You look at the, where is it coming from and you know, this is somebody's trying to sell cars. Somebody tried to sell mortgage, somebody tried to sell credit card, whatever that is, you know those junk mails and you just tear them off and put them in there. And every once in a while you see an interesting envelope. Yeah. So I come to this one and I open the envelope.

3 (41m 29s):
I don't know where it comes from, of course, it's interesting. I open it, I look at it, it's literally an ad. It says fully equipped yogurt plant for sale. Wow. And you can tell it's really, really old. I mean, the picture is also says 1920. You can tell it's an old and of course, you know, no interest. So just like the other ones that I don't remember what it was, I throw them into the garbage. I continue and you're going through like 20, 30 minutes. And I still don't know why I went back to that garbage. And I picked up that page. Now my tea remainings in there, my, you know, my cigarette that it was put it into a t t tea cup that is also in there.

3 (42m 15s):
And, and I look at that picture again and I'm staring at it and there's a big number on top top that turns out that it's a real estate agent from Utica. And I called the person answered and said, yeah, this is a yogurt factory. It's an old one, it's craft. And they closed it and they're selling it as is. Hmm. And I asked the price, I said, what's the price? He said, $700,000

2 (42m 49s):
For a yogurt factory.

3 (42m 50s):
Yeah. Okay. And I'm looking at this whole thing and you say, even if it's the worst condition, how could this be $700,000?

2 (42m 58s):
What you mean? It was, it was underpriced

3 (43m 1s):
So cheap. It's very cheap. So I thought he meant 7 million.

2 (43m 6s):
You thought based on the, based on the photo you saw on the postcard that it was $7 million because the, just cuz of the equipment.

3 (43m 13s):
Yeah. Because I know pretty much what things cost. Yeah. From the experience of putting a smaller version into our plant. Yeah. You know, it's 20,000 square feet. This one says 67,000 square feet. So it's three times bigger.

2 (43m 26s):
And it was owned and it was owned by craft at the time they were selling it. Yes. Okay.

3 (43m 30s):
Yes. So was enough. Interesting. So I said, can I come and see it tomorrow? And I picked one of the guy from the plant who was working in the production and it took us two and a half hours to find it. It was just back roads and country roads. It's not like next to the, next to the highway. Yeah. And I saw it from the distance, this old place. And I get there and you go up and then someone name is Rick Lake. Rich Lake says hi, I'm the production manager, the plant manager is not here. I was told to give you a tour.

3 (44m 12s):
And he takes me to the plant and it's basically every time he goes to the places he turns the lights on. It's not a working factory anymore. It was until maybe four months ago. Five months ago. Yeah. So that's basically the last week of the plant. All employees are 55 people in the last six months. They're just, I guess closing down slowly, bringing down, shutting things off. Yeah. I am not seeing the buildings anymore. I'm seeing, I'm reminding this sad feelings that only would come to our town where I grew up.

3 (44m 55s):
If somebody died in the Eres River and for months, for weeks. Like there was this heavy feelings all over the town. Like people,

2 (45m 5s):
You felt that when you got to the town,

3 (45m 6s):
You felt it. Yeah. You felt it. Like there was

2 (45m 8s):
Wow. Like, like few Neal feeling. It's

3 (45m 12s):
Yeah, I felt like somebody died

2 (45m 15s):
Because they were about to lose their jobs.

3 (45m 18s):
They were not only losing jobs, they're losing a place has been there for 70 years. It was a sign of life really. That steam came out of that place was a sign of life. Everybody's grandfather worked there, mother worked there, father worked there. It was just walking in that plant was walking in a cemetery. It was that kind of,

2 (45m 40s):
And and, and by the way, the, the, from what I understand, this was a place that made cream cheese, Philadelphia cream cheese was made there.

3 (45m 49s):
Exactly.

2 (45m 50s):
And yogurt too.

3 (45m 52s):
Yes. Briar's yogurt. Yeah.

2 (45m 54s):
And I'm curious because from what I understand, from what I've read, it was really old. I mean, it was like crumbling paint and it was not in great shape. It didn't look good.

3 (46m 4s):
Yeah. And there is a smell, old smell

2 (46m 7s):
Like old just kind of stale or you know, kind of Yeah. Old cheese smell.

3 (46m 12s):
Yeah. Everything is old. The the biggest important things that the real estate agent keep telling me is that it is as is. We don't take any liability of anything. So you buy it, it's all as is. You can't come back and say, oh, this doesn't work. That doesn't work. Yeah. Whatever the, whatever the things that you find is good and bad, it's all yours. Yeah. And I left that place after a couple of hours. And then when I left, I called Mario Papa, who was my attorney in Johnstown. And I call him up, I said, Mario, I find this place. I didn't think that I was be interested walking in, but now I just left.

3 (46m 54s):
It's a really amazing place. It's got everything. I can make yogurt there and I want to buy it. And I'm like, I'm just like, you know when when you see something and you just call and you don't make sense, you throw all the words that you know into it and you're excited and all that kind of stuff. This guy's like, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. Just wait. Hold on, hold on. Tell, tell me what you think. Who, who owns the company? Who's closing it? What kind of place? And the guy said, honey, this is the largest food company in the world.

2 (47m 26s):
Craft. Yeah, yeah, yeah.

3 (47m 28s):
And wonderful. Yeah. And getting out of yogurt business, they're closing the factory. Who the f are you, you think that you can make something out of this?

2 (47m 37s):
Which is a fair question. I mean, if the biggest, one of the biggest it's a companies is getting outta the yogurt business, at least there in that factory, why would you think you could make it work? He was asking you fair question. Yeah.

3 (47m 49s):
Makes no sense. Very fair question. And I said, no, no, they don't make good yogurt. I can make good yogurt and you know, I know how to make good yogurt in Turkey and you know, people love it. I've seen it in New York and all that kind of stuff. And he said, 700,000, right? I said, yeah, it's cheap. 700. I said, you don't have $700,000.

2 (48m 6s):
He said that to you. He said, you do not have, yes, exactly. You do not have $700,000.

3 (48m 11s):
You will never have $700,000. And if anything you haven't paid me in the last six months. I have bills. It just basically said, and it was true. I had not. Yeah. So he said, you just made it. I know it's been painful for the last two years. You just, you just can't breathe Now don't do this to yourself. I know you get excited about things, but just, just breathe.

2 (48m 32s):
Which is very good advice. I mean, good advice because he's trying to look after you. He knows what a grind it was the previous two years to make the cheese factory the cheese, you know, plant barely profitable. And he, he knows that you're in for a nightmare if you try to do something new now.

3 (48m 52s):
Yeah. It's, he thinks that this is the stupidest thing. Yeah. And I took his advice very seriously. He was right. Yeah. Yeah. And I am, in my office, maybe a few weeks after I have this regional bank is called Key Bank. And you know, they're sales people. They, they go from businesses to businesses in the communities and say, what can we do? Do you need anything? You know, all, you know how they are. And there's this two gentleman shows up, one is name is Pat bci. And then he has another person next to him, his name is John Ryder. And I said, pat, I just went to this place and I saw this yogurt factory and they're selling it for $700,000.

3 (49m 40s):
And you know, I, I called Mario, Mario, think it's a stupid idea, but I thought, you know, if I get this place, I could make some really cool yogurt out of this place. And I keep talking about, and he says, how, you know, we are partnered with SBA Small Business Administration and if we get their backing, we can come up with a plan. I mean, of course I have to go look at the plant and look at the equipment and all that kind of stuff. We could make this happen. So small chance, but it's possible. Wow. It's worth pursuing. And says, why don't you make a business plan and I'll send you some applications and you fill it and we can look at this.

3 (50m 21s):
Now I said, business plan, I've never done a business plan. How do you make a business plan? Yeah. In the last couple of weeks I put a, a business plan together, a couple of pages. He helped me how to do it. And then a few weeks later, we went to, few days later, we went to the plant and see it. And we keep in contact with the real estate agent to tell the, to make the story short.

2 (50m 42s):
They got you the loan.

3 (50m 43s):
They got me the loan.

2 (50m 44s):
Wow. Can I, can I ask you a question about the, the business plan for a moment? I mean, your plan clearly was to make yogurt, but what were you gonna do that was different? How are you gonna, I mean, if, if, if, if craft wasn't making it work, what was the thing that, like when people said to you, Hey Hyundai, what are you gonna do? What'd you say?

3 (51m 7s):
So his little bit of background, you know, I dunno if it's, I mentioned we eat so much yogurt in Turkey, right? So yeah. Breakfast, lunch, dinner. I mean, you can't imagine a meal or time or occasion that you don't somehow consume yogurt. Right. But compared to what it was here, the, the yogurt was 10 types worse. It, it, it was literally horrible. Like it was awful stuff. Right. And I thought it's milk and culture. There's not cost side of this. It's just milk and culture. It's just knowing how to make it. And I thought people will love it. Why would it not? If there is a better yogurt that is made? I thought people will love it if they're buying this shit.

3 (51m 48s):
They could buy that stuff. If they're buying that stuff. Yeah. They would buy that thing. That was my data point. And then the second data point for me was, you know, if you meet with people and people ask you where you from and you say from I'm from Turkey. The next thing they say, oh, I was in Turkey, or I was in Greece. And within few minutes the first thing comes up is the yogurt that they had in, in, in Greece, in Turkey. Yeah. You know, with honey and walnut. And that was one of the best thing ever. So there is a disconnect between how people are talking about it and how the market conditions are.

2 (52m 20s):
So you have the confidence that this can, can work. You, you get the, the money to buy the factory. And from what I understand, that summer of 2005, you spent a lot of that time just getting the factory like cleaned and painted and repaired.

3 (52m 37s):
Yeah, exactly. So within that, I have four factory workers that I hired. Actually, the the manager who was the plant manager who was closing the factory, I I, I asked him, I said, if one day I wanted to bring this factory back, who are the people you would recommend for me to hire? And he recommended, he says, you gotta get Maria because he knows, she knows all the vendors. You gotta get rich because he knows all the production equipment. You have to have Mike Allen, Mike is the guy. The guy knew exactly where the, all the pipes were, where the lines were. Yeah. Because there was no drawings. This was so old. No one had, you know, the, the, the blueprints of the plant.

3 (53m 20s):
So I had to convince my calendar to come back, which I did. And then the wastewater side of, of things, that was Frank. He knew how to turn that back on. So I had those four people with me in the summer of 2005. Right. And they're questioning me. They're looking at me, says like, who is this guy? How are we going to, and I can tell the way that they are interacting with me that they're not overly excited. They're not overly, you know, drunk with it, but they're cautious. At least they have a job. And they're looking at me and saying, what kind of, you know, ideas and improvements that he's going to make. So I'm managing that human psychology at the same time, while I am not saying I don't have any ideas, but at least I'm not sitting around and doing nothing.

2 (54m 6s):
All right. One, one important point, and I, you know, just to, and I think a lot of people know this, which is the reason why what we call Greek yogurt is thicker is because it's separated from the way, right. Right. Cause because milk is 99 or 97% water. Right. And then when you turn it to yogurt, there's still a lot of water in there. So Yeah, you've gotta literally put in a centrifuge like spin the yogurt Right. Really quickly to get the water out. But you did not have, like, that's a very expensive piece of equipment. I don't think it was in that factory. Right. Cause this factory wasn't making Greek yogurt, it was making regular, you know, American style watery yogurt.

3 (54m 42s):
You're a hundred percent right. In a commercially, this cannot be done with the cheese clot. It needs to be centrifuge separator. And these separators are, you know, I would say, you know, close to million dollars by the time.

2 (54m 53s):
Million dollars. Yeah. And by the way, you just spent $700,000 buying this production facility.

3 (54m 60s):
Yeah. So there's, there's no, no way in hell I have million dollars to buy something like this. Yeah. I only have maybe a couple of hundred thousand that I can spare. And that includes everything. So I need a used version of this. So I'm going on internet looking at everything I can and see if I can find something that is used. So I found one in Madison, Wisconsin and I called the person, they said they have it. I wanted to go see it. So I went to Chicago Drive from Chicago to Wisconsin. And in that drive, basically I came up with the name Chobani. Huh. Truban means shepherd in Turkish. And Shani in a little bit of different way of saying it is also means shepherd in Greek.

3 (55m 43s):
But the meaning of the word is always pure, simple. You know, someone who helps, someone who leads someone. It's, it's a very beautiful world in, in, in all dimensions. Yeah. And I was so excited with the name. I couldn't wait until I get back to Chicago to go to my room and see if that chovan.chovan.com was available.

2 (56m 7s):
And I guess it was because you got the domain. Yeah. And so now you've got a name and, and you've got a separator to make the, the Greek style yogurt. So, so what else did you need to do? What, what happened next?

3 (56m 21s):
So I spent the longest amount of time about the cups, you know what the cup is gonna look like,

2 (56m 26s):
The cups for your yogurt that you were

3 (56m 27s):
Gonna sell. Cups or my yogurt. Yeah. I was so convinced that if I am going to make this yogurt and is going to make it in the shelf, it cannot be in the cups that is available in this country. It used to be some Europeans cups, but the cups are as simple as it sounds, if it goes into yogurt, it needs to be FDA approved. So, so you can't just get the cups from anywhere. It needs to be FDA inspected plant. And I found out that there is a plant in Bogota Columbia that I went and they said, we will make it for you. We will sleeve it for you and we'll ship it for you. And I said, that was good because none of the packaging companies here would make it for me.

2 (57m 6s):
And this was gonna be, initially Chobani was just single serving yogurt. It wasn't like it in the big tubs that you buy it in now, initially it was just a small cup.

3 (57m 16s):
Exactly. Small cups. Yeah. And I wanted to have a foil that every flavor has its own foil design on top of it. And at that time, you know, for now it's very, very normal. It's not a big thing. But at that time, people said, why, you know, people never do those things. Yeah. And don't you, don't you waste, don't you? Aren't you wasting your money? Aren't you making yourself competitive and all that kind of stuff. My view was I spent so much time making this yogurt and I think it's, it's one of the best that I've made and people will not, you know, see the difference if I put 'em in the same cups. So if I can catch their eye, have them to try it once, the yogurt will finish the work.

3 (57m 60s):
Got it. And that will be the conversion.

2 (58m 2s):
And the recipe is simple. It's, it's milk and a culture. But I guess when you talk about perfecting it, it was about how long you sort of, you heated it, you know, and how long you sort of let it kind of rest. I mean, because the basic ingredients, it's two things. It's, it's milk and culture. Right.

3 (58m 20s):
That's exactly right. And unless you make the, you know, flavor ones. But the basic thing is very simple milk and culture. Yeah. And you don't wanna use preservatives and you don't want use any, any other ingredients. So it was just trial and error until you find it. It was,

2 (58m 34s):
Yeah. And really it was about, it was about experimenting with temperature, time, and incubation. And then you've gotta blend it to make it creamy. Right. Right.

3 (58m 43s):
After you strain that the, it's, it's, it particulates, you know, you have small particulars.

2 (58m 48s):
Yeah.

3 (58m 48s):
There's lumps. Yeah. There's lumps. And you need to smooth that without breaking the texture. Right. So that's, that's extremely important as well. I'm, I used to get really upset when I see yogurt on the lid. You

2 (59m 0s):
Know, on the lid. You didn't wanna sit on the, wouldn't you want it to be so perfectly smooth in the cup? Exactly. It wouldn't touch the lid.

3 (59m 7s):
Exactly. I would open a cup and if I see yogurt on the lid, that was a bad day.

2 (59m 12s):
Right, right. You were totally obsessed with it as you should be because you're, you're trying to make a product that's so good that it's going to knock people out the first time they try it.

3 (59m 24s):
Exactly. I wanted to make it something that, that they look at from every dimension. This is something that they've never seen before and probably halfway through it would've made the job, because this is huge standards. I'm going, yeah. But I have no luxury of, oh, I wish I had done that. I wish I had done that. This is one shot. If it's not successful, I'm out. And I'm out in a very, very, you know, very bad way.

2 (59m 53s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment, how Chobani starts growing so quickly that Hyundai can barely keep up. And then how it almost goes bankrupt. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This. You don't write an elevator for the music or pick an airline for the movie. So when it comes to audio entertainment, it makes sense to choose Audible. Audible is the home of storytelling. With all of your audio entertainment in one app, find the best of what you love or discover something new. Let your imagination soar with audible's, audiobooks, podcasts and originals.

2 (1h 0m 36s):
And as an audible member, get full access to their growing selection of content. You can download or stream their included titles all you want. Audible has books narrated by all sorts of different voices. Even mine, by the way, an audible. You can listen to me read my own book, how I Built This. Check it out. Plus tons more audio, books and podcasts on Audible today. Let Audible help you discover new ways to laugh, be inspired, or be entertained. New members can try it for free for 30 days. Visit audible.com/built or text built to 500 500. That's audible.com/built or text built to 500 500 to try Audible free for 30 days audible.com/built.

2 (1h 1m 22s):
When building a business, there are tons of moving parts. One that's often overlooked is having a network that connects your business. Thankfully, with at and t business, you can pick their best wireless plan with the features you need for your small business. For example, your teams can work remotely with phone to laptop tethering, and up to 100 gigabytes of hotspot data. Wherever business takes you at and t business has the features you need, visit att.com/get biz unlimited. After 100 gigabytes with at t's unlimited elite plan hotspot speed is slowed to a max of 128 KPPs.

2 (1h 2m 10s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Rise. So it's 2007, the Yogurt Factory is up and running and Hyundai has found the first retail location for his Greek style yogurt. A kosher grocery in Great Neck, New York.

3 (1h 2m 26s):
When I made that first yogurt, it took us all night. Kyle and I, one of my colleague who led the sale side of things, we were in the plant probably until like one or two o'clock in the morning and we made four flavors each about 50, 60 cases and we shipped it to this person and I'm waiting for some kind of response, how is that gonna come? And when I received the second order, I called the person and I said, what do you see if you could share me some, some observation? He says, yeah, you know, he didn't say this is flying off the shelf.

3 (1h 3m 7s):
He didn't say, this is amazing. He said, well, it looks like people are buying it. And some people came back and bought again. So yeah, send it me some more. And that was encouraging.

2 (1h 3m 16s):
Yeah. And then I guess pretty soon after you were, you got into that kosher store in Great Neck, you got into your first grocery chain, which was ShopRite, which is a chain of stores on the East coast. And that's, that's a, that must have been a pretty big deal, right?

3 (1h 3m 34s):
Yes. That is the biggest event in the history of Giani. Now, in order to be able to make it to ShopRite or that kind of conventional stores, you have to pay what they call it listing fee. Yeah. And every cup, I don't know what it is now, but I think at that time was $30,000 for each cup to be on the shelf.

2 (1h 3m 54s):
Just let me just let me understand this. So when you go to a small grow kosher grocery store in Great Night, New York, you just send them a pallet and that's it. But if you wanna get into a big grocery store like Kroger or ShopRite, you actually have to pay them a fee Yeah. To stock your products. And it's, it could be a lot, it could be tens of thousands of dollars per per product that you sell.

3 (1h 4m 16s):
Exactly.

2 (1h 4m 17s):
And by the way, all grocery stores do this, right. Target, Walmart, they all do

3 (1h 4m 21s):
This, most of them.

2 (1h 4m 22s):
And they do it because they can. Right. Basically

3 (1h 4m 25s):
That's the, that's the only way Yeah. That's, that's a revenue generation for them. Yeah. And for a small startup, it's a big block. If you wanna play on a mass, you know, supermarket chain, you can pay, I don't know if you have four SKUs for products that you put on the shelf. So four times, you know, 120, $150,000.

2 (1h 4m 46s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 4m 47s):
And $150,000 massive money. And if it doesn't work within three to six months, it comes off the shelf. So he has to perform to stay. Right. There's no obligation. So

2 (1h 4m 57s):
It's a huge, it's a huge risk. It's

3 (1h 4m 59s):
A huge risk.

2 (1h 5m 0s):
But, but here's the thing, it seems to me the next logical step would be to go to Whole Foods and to try to get into Whole Foods. Yeah. Which is easier in a lot of cases, cuz there there's a lot of autonomy and the buyers are regional and, and, and they don't have the, the high stocking fees and or I think any fees. So why wouldn't you just go down that, that route?

3 (1h 5m 20s):
So I did not have huge interest on national channels. I wanted this product to be in a mass channels where ordinary people shop.

2 (1h 5m 32s):
Hmm. You didn't want this to be like an elite product.

3 (1h 5m 34s):
Exactly. I was very convinced once I can make this to main channel and people tasted it, this is going to go up. You know, everybody was gonna happy. All I needed was one example. Yeah. And then the ShopRite guy said, how are you going to pay for the, for the listing fee? And this is a true story. The guy said, well we need to get paid and we had no money. And we said, can you take percentage of that 150,000 from each invoice when we ship it to you? And the guy said, yeah, that's fine, but what if it doesn't sell? You know, I have no invoice, I have no, what am I gonna cut it from? I personally said, if it doesn't sell, I will give you the factory.

2 (1h 6m 17s):
Wait, so hold. So he's saying, well what if it doesn't sell? You're saying My factory's the guarantee.

3 (1h 6m 23s):
Yeah. I said, I'll, I'll give it back. And the guy laughed and I think he found out that this is pretty crazy and bold and he made a decision to take it. And then, and about two, two weeks later, I had a phone call from him. He asked Kyle to call me and he called me and he says, I don't know what you're putting inside this yogurt. I don't want to know, but I cannot keep it on the shelf. Wow. When he called me, that was the combination of three years of doubt, hard work, finding solution, being on the road, trying to figure out things and all that kind of stuff.

3 (1h 7m 6s):
Hassle. That call really summarized the whole thing for me.

2 (1h 7m 10s):
How is that possible? Hum. You got, how do you just put it on the, the thing is that you put on the shelves and you still have to get people to notice it cuz you go into a grocery store today there are 25, 30,000 products. How did people even know about it?

3 (1h 7m 27s):
It was the cup. It

2 (1h 7m 29s):
Was just, it was just the, the label. It was bright. Yeah. Yeah. It was just, it's looked different. Yeah.

3 (1h 7m 35s):
And then I priced it below my cost. At that time

2 (1h 7m 41s):
You knew you were gonna lose money.

3 (1h 7m 43s):
Yes. I was Okay to lose money for probably two months.

2 (1h 7m 49s):
Okay. And by the way, how many shop rights were you in? Like five 10? No,

3 (1h 7m 53s):
No, it's all of them. I think it was over a hundred and 120, something like that

2 (1h 7m 56s):
At that time. Wow. So

3 (1h 7m 57s):
Yeah, you, you get into system wide. Yeah. But I had a simple napkin calculation. If I reached the 20,000 cases, I will break even and everything after that it would be, you know, profitable.

2 (1h 8m 11s):
And a case is, is how many cups? 12. Okay. Yeah. So you were taking a gamble that people would just find out about this at shop rights and buy it.

3 (1h 8m 19s):
Exactly. Hmm. And when he put it into an ordinary shelf, like a common shop where everybody shop on, on yoga tile, I received an order and it said 25,000 cases. And I'm looking at this order and I'm saying, is this 25,000 or is it 2,500? I'm not sure. And I called Kyle, I said, is this accurate or is they missing one zero? He says, no, that's accurate. Wow. And I said, is this for a month? Or he says, no, that's for the week.

2 (1h 8m 48s):
Yeah. I'm wondering, hum. I mean this is a thing, right? It's a, it sounds great. You're selling all this yogurt, which is exciting, but then you have to actually fulfill those orders. Like how, how are you actually able to make all that yogurt?

3 (1h 9m 5s):
So that is, So, you know, you say you get this all good news that wants 25, we want more stuff. The other one tons cases. And then you look at your blueprint, you look at available equipment and the volume, you look at all the limitations that you can think of and they all cost money. Right. And how you're going to, how you're going to meet the demand. Yeah. So you're converting, you know, cooler space into a filler room. We converting toilets into the offices. We whatever needs to be done outside of jeopardizing the quality of the food we are trying to find.

2 (1h 9m 47s):
I read that you were, you were like, every people were like sleeping in the factory because you, you literally had to fulfill these mass, mass orders and you just did not have, I mean the people and the facilities to actually do it. Unless you just operated 24 hours a day.

3 (1h 10m 3s):
It is, I mean, you're talking about Thanksgiving, Christmas, short, 4th of July weekends. Anyone who has a minute to spare, they're back in the factory. And it's not even, I'm asking, they're doing it by themself. You have to realize, guy, this is a plant that was the last factory that got closed. Right. So you have a large corporation closed and left. You know, they're looking at me and says, what are the chances? And then they see the orders are coming and this is like, what the hell is going on? Like, is this ever possible that this could happen? So everyone went from complete disastrous mindset or soul to exciting place where everyone gets so elevated.

3 (1h 10m 48s):
We were just high in a way. Right.

2 (1h 10m 52s):
And you were chain smoking just to get through the day. Yeah.

3 (1h 10m 56s):
And I was, I was, I was taking Tylenol, Advil like nuts. I was, I was.

2 (1h 11m 6s):
Wow. Yeah. Not, you were not taking care of your

3 (1h 11m 8s):
Health. No, I was physically mass. Most of the nights I'm sleeping on the, the floor on, on my office there, there is an office I guess and chairs. We are eating pizza every day. I mean it's, it's pretty, pretty horrible. Yeah. Lifestyle.

2 (1h 11m 23s):
Yeah. Alright, so you obviously this thing is taking off and then you start to get more accounts and there's BJs and then, and then Costco. But you had to, I mean now you really have to bring lots of people in. And one of the things that you, you did was there was a, I guess like a this refugee resource center, like in that part of upstate New York. Yeah. And they had people who just needed work and you were like, great, we need, we need, we need people to work. Tell me how you like connected with them.

3 (1h 11m 59s):
So this is how it happened. Utica is about 30 minutes drive from where the plant is in south sson. And I lived in Utica,

2 (1h 12m 7s):
Utica, New York. Yeah.

3 (1h 12m 8s):
Yeah. I lived in apartment in Utica. And I hear that people are settling in Utica as refugees from around the world and they're having a hard time to find a job. Yeah. And I called the refugee center and I said, what is the problem? And she said, these are people have a right to work legally settled. And they don't speak the language, they don't have, you know, transportation or people don't wanna touch it because it's an unknown and you know, all the other social issues. I immediately said, we can solve these problems. I drive from UAT plant every day. So why don't we get some cars and buses that people can come with and we will hire some translators and we will train them at the work and we will make this work.

3 (1h 12m 50s):
And people had concern and said, why are you sure you know how people are gonna take this? I said, I'm pretty sure I know my people. And that was started very slow and, and the people who started working there brought their brothers, their sisters, it became a community. Yeah. And I never thought that was a refugee work. It was people in the community and an opportunity for them to participate as much as everybody else participated.

2 (1h 13m 19s):
So you have the people, right. And you've got this plant by 2010. So just three in three years you're doing $260 million in revenue. That's like, by my calculation, that's more than 150 million cups of yogurt that you're selling. How do you go from like two, you know, maybe hitting 200,000 to 150 million cups. How, how do, how were you doing that?

3 (1h 13m 48s):
Well, one of the best thing that I had is the, the, the, the price architect that I put it in place. It was giving me enough profit to be able to invest back into the company.

2 (1h 13m 60s):
So you could finance the growth entirely through the sales of the yogurt. You could finance because making more yogurt means buying more milk means buying more containers. Like you gotta pay for for all that. And, and that is usually when a business goes out to investors or private equity, you know, to bring in a big chunk of cash to scale. You were able to do that just from the sale of the yogurt.

3 (1h 14m 23s):
Exactly. And having a micro attention on the cost. Keeping it extremely simple. You know, at that time, you know, not only 250 million until 600 million I run that company on QuickBooks. Wow. And everything, everything in Chobani was internally financed. We never had a a an outside investors. Right. So I had over billion in sales in, in five years and making really, really good margin, good profits. Every penny. I had not even taken a penny from the company. I just put it back into the company and invest in equipment. Yeah, yeah.

2 (1h 15m 4s):
But here's a question. Hum. Right. You're this guy from a village in rural Turkey. Right. And yeah, it's Kurdish Village. You barely spoke English when you came to the US or here you are now. Okay. So a couple things I'm assuming start to happen. First of all, the big, big brands, the Dan ends and you know, of the world start to see this and are like, we gotta get into the Greek yogurt business. But the second thing that I imagine is you've got people coming up to you and saying, Hey Hamdi, you're gonna get crushed by Dan and you'll play the general mills soon. You gotta bring in outside capital. You've gotta blitz scale this thing. You've gotta bring in a professional team to run it.

2 (1h 15m 45s):
Cuz you are not equipped to do this. You don't have the experience. You don't, you're gonna get crushed. And I, I have to imagine people were saying that to you.

3 (1h 15m 53s):
They are. And I'm getting a lot of phone calls from private equity people. Venture Yeah. Venture capitalists and all that kind of stuff. I'm getting calls from the ordinary banks. But this is the blessing I had. I was isolated in that small town upstate New York. Yeah. I have no previous network of people in business. I, I don't know anyone. And I am kind of unreachable. I have no board, I have no advisor, I have no investors. And the people in the company is factory workers and sales people and you know, that kind of stuff. So we are kind of from Mars.

2 (1h 16m 34s):
Right. You just had your head down just working all the time. You weren't,

3 (1h 16m 38s):
And I, I don't even, I don't think it sinks at me that what I have just made it, I don't even realize what it is until like you just touched a little bit that I realized that this is how it is. You build something, the big food is going to come with two things. One, they want to sell. And in that is a hitting another, you know, information. If you don't sell, I'll make the same thing. Yeah.

2 (1h 17m 4s):
I'll crush you. I mean you're, you're, you're a big food companies are must be coming to you and saying, look, sell to us. We can make this bigger. You'll make a lot of money, but if you don't do it we'll just do it on our own. And you know, we've got massive marketing budgets. We we've got a huge distribution network. Like you're gonna be in trouble. Yeah.

3 (1h 17m 21s):
Yeah. That's very scary. And all this time I'm betting on they're gonna be very slow and they were slow. So by the time they wake up really I was at five, 600 million sales area. Wow. And they did come and they said, what about selling? And the numbers were with billions. Wow.

2 (1h 17m 40s):
They were offering you and you, you could have just cuz you owned the company, it was yours.

3 (1h 17m 44s):
Yeah.

2 (1h 17m 45s):
It's great. Great offer.

3 (1h 17m 48s):
So now, so imagine this guy, you know, working in the factory 24 7 living in a one bedroom apartment in Utica that the bed hasn't been, you know, fixed maybe

2 (1h 18m 2s):
Chain smoking, not taking care of himself, drink a lot of coffee, eating pizza slices. Okay.

3 (1h 18m 8s):
Exactly. And then somebody says you can be a billionaire and I can't even spell billion. You know, really, literally I didn't even how to spell billion. So now that's you yourself having this real moment. Right. No one can tell you what to do. Yeah. No one can stop you. What to do? I have done no promise to anyone. I have no partners. It's just this things in front of me.

2 (1h 18m 40s):
So there must have been a pull to just do it. Take the plunge.

3 (1h 18m 45s):
Hi. Imagine I am in upstate New York. I am mid thirties. Right. Maybe at that time, I dunno, close to 40. And I have offered this huge amount of money and Yeah. This endless what you can do with this money. Yeah. And I said no to it. And I said no a few times

2 (1h 19m 7s):
And why

3 (1h 19m 9s):
I was more excited about the journey these things was happening than the value was generating from it. And it felt like I'm in this soccer game and I'm in the middle of this soccer game and I love it and I'm into this game in such a massive way and I'm completely elevated. First time in my life I feel like things are coming out of my being that I didn't even realize it existed. And I feel alive. Like the childhood I used to be is like, I'm wondering what is behind that mountain? What is behind that mountain? I have this enormous amount of curiosity and I wasn't going to stop it for anything that in the world that, that that desire to see where this, where this was gonna go.

2 (1h 19m 59s):
Yeah. But you clearly had enough confidence that your brand at that point, I mean, cuz I think by 2011 you were the number three yogurt brand in the country after yo playing danon. Yeah. But at that time you knew that there was gonna be an explosion of competitors.

3 (1h 20m 18s):
Absolutely.

2 (1h 20m 19s):
And and you weren't worried.

3 (1h 20m 21s):
I was very worried. Yeah. I was very worried. And when I said no to those things, I knew that I needed to build another factory out west

2 (1h 20m 30s):
To make more well, to produce more obviously. Yeah.

3 (1h 20m 32s):
To produce more and de-risk it, you know, be in one location and bring more innovation to it when people will copy the first thing I do, I would be on my way to the second thing and the third thing. Yeah. And I built the factory in Idaho, which I went to Idaho first time I said, we need to build this factory really

2 (1h 20m 51s):
Fast. It's a million square foot plant. Yeah.

3 (1h 20m 53s):
Yeah. It's one, I think now it's 1.4. At that time it was close to 1 million square foot plant. Wow. And with 14 lines, we built it less than one year. Wow. So that really, it was, it was in the borderline stupidity, meaning I underestimated how complex that was going to be. And I under underestimated how crucial would that be on the health of the company if I was wrong and if I did something not right. Yeah. And one plant or one location or you know, early company's, you know, journey is completely different than the second phase.

3 (1h 21m 36s):
And if you don't make that transformation, it's, it's gonna be extreme damaging. And it became almost, the problem with that is you do not know how to make separation with your people that you started with when the company grows.

2 (1h 21m 51s):
In other words, you, you had to basically get rid of some people and you, it's hard to do that when, because they were the loyal people who helped you start it.

3 (1h 21m 59s):
Exactly.

2 (1h 21m 60s):
But you had to, you had to make some changes.

3 (1h 22m 2s):
Yeah. We made changes after we hit the wall. Right. We had a quality issue with, with mold.

2 (1h 22m 7s):
Well this is in 2013, you guys, I think you had a recall, which really was very damaging. Right. It was actually quite damaging for you because you, you, you don't use preservatives and Yeah. You know, and you had some containers that got spoiled.

3 (1h 22m 22s):
Yes. I will never forget that gentleman that came to our plant in Idaho. He said, Hyundai, this is mold. Mold is in the rooms in the bread, it's everywhere. You know, you open the cup and you see green mold and it's not nice. Yeah. And it was, it was a recall and as you said, it was very damaging. But we came out, we, we fixed it all the issues and it took us three more years after that to get the bottom of the structural issues like peoples and all that kind of stuff. But to my bone, to my cell, I knew the investment in Idaho was the right thing. What I would question now is the way that I did it. Right. I would've been more prepared and I would've done in, in stages.

3 (1h 23m 4s):
I wouldn't do it in as fast. I would be more cautious. I would put more, you know, team members in place and make some changes.

2 (1h 23m 11s):
Right. Cuz the, the, the mold issue came from that manufacturing plant in Idaho. Exactly.

3 (1h 23m 16s):
Right. Right. And there was a time that I will never forget, which is another, you know, moment that I will always go back to. You're about to file bankruptcy.

2 (1h 23m 30s):
You were about to file bankruptcy.

3 (1h 23m 32s):
Exactly. I've never talked about this anywhere before.

2 (1h 23m 34s):
You were so that, that recall was that damaging? You'd gone from

3 (1h 23m 37s):
It wasn't that damaging. Yeah. But what it is, is the banks got really nervous and they wanted their loan to be paid back. Yeah. And, and that loan was used to build a factory supported by Ibida. Now you have enormous amount of losses because of that factory.

2 (1h 23m 53s):
Yeah. So the recall happens, all the loans get called in. Yeah. And you've gotta basically come up with a cash and so you're thinking we're done. We gotta we gotta file bankruptcy. Well

3 (1h 24m 3s):
There's cash. Yeah.

2 (1h 24m 5s):
With

3 (1h 24m 5s):
People want the world, they want so much from it. Yeah. And the people who are showing interest, looking at your situation and they start acting opportunistic.

2 (1h 24m 16s):
So they offer less money.

3 (1h 24m 18s):
Ah, they offer more money, but they want more,

2 (1h 24m 20s):
They want more equity. Right.

3 (1h 24m 22s):
Exactly. And then they use different, different reasons to come up with those things. At time came and I remember the gentleman called me and he said, here's the amount that you will get here is the, you know, percentage of the company that you have to give away, which is what was almost majority at the time. And, and you will be out of the company. And I take this, I said, okay, what will happen if I take this? I'll probably regret every day going forward. You are an entrepreneur, you build things and you make one misstep and then someone comes with the money and say, Hey, take it or leave it.

3 (1h 25m 5s):
Or this is our conditions for you to do it. And I look at this and I say, I must say no to you. And I tell you why, because if I'm gonna die, I'm gonna die now and I'm gonna die one time. I'm not gonna die every day rest of my life. So I said, I'll take this company to to bankruptcy. Wow. And you say, how do you go from the top of the mountain to bottom of a hole in, within three to four months? Yeah. Right. And I'm not expecting that, accepting that. And I said, okay, it's fine. I built it, I'll bury it. And and it's

2 (1h 25m 39s):
A very, I mean, you're very stubborn right. And I mean that's a good quality, but it can also be, you can also be a sometimes not a good quality.

3 (1h 25m 47s):
Yeah. Ask my wife about that. Yeah. So she would say the same. You have a way, you have a way to make me say things that I've never said before. But I love that this conversation because, because we come close to making decisions like that that people normally don't know. It is hard that people make decisions. Yeah. But I had no doubt at that moment, I remember walking from my apartment at that time, I had an apartment in New York to an office where I was meeting one of my colleague and a lawyer and, and a financial person. And next to the park I cried and I, I saw the steers coming because it's, it's, it's, it's hard.

3 (1h 26m 29s):
It's hard that you are about to bury something that you give your best to and you built and the options were not good enough for you to be able to Yeah. You know, save it. Yeah.

2 (1h 26m 45s):
Clearly you didn't file for bankruptcy, you didn't, but how did you get outta that

3 (1h 26m 49s):
A night before? A night before? Wow. Yeah. One night before, before we file and the banker called and said, honey, we hear that you're going to do this. It's gonna makes us look so bad. I think they were also acting, acting really out of ordinary at that time, forcing me to do something. And he says, well, why don't we give you so much money and six months as long as you promise you're going to do an event that you're going to deleverage yourself in certain things. I said, yeah, sure. But I had no idea this was gonna come. I knew this was a, a rote that we were gonna end up and this company was gonna be a bankrupt and maybe wouldn't exist later on. Yeah.

2 (1h 27m 29s):
If you had filed bankruptcy, it doesn't necessarily mean that the brand would shut down. Right. I mean, you, you, you could restructure it totally, but Totally. But it was unclear what would've happened.

3 (1h 27m 39s):
I, I don't know. I mean, but the, the one thing is how do you go become one of the fastest growing company in the history? Because we literally went from zero to billion in thousand five years without taking a penny from our, it's crazy. In that factory. It's, and how do you go from

2 (1h 27m 54s):
It shouldn't have happened. This, it's a story that should never happened. It should have been buried by the big yogurt makers within a year or two.

3 (1h 28m 1s):
Yeah. No, no.

2 (1h 28m 2s):
How, you know, I'm, I'm curious because when in, in, after that crisis, right in, in 2014, tpg, this private equity firm comes in, makes an investment and part of that agreement is that a man named Kevin Burns would become the interim president and coo. Yeah. You were the ceo, you had founded this company from nothing. You built it from a cheese place in upstate New York into what it was. So the achievement at this point was enormous. Now there was pressure for a new CEO to bring in a professional ceo. There were, there was, at the time, there was an article in the Wall Street Journal, I'm sure it was not easy for you to read.

2 (1h 28m 44s):
Yeah. But it was critical of you. It said, you know, he's in over his head, you know, there's not, the operations are scattered and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. I'm sure that must have been difficult for you to read, but I also wonder whether a part of you was able to say, you know, look, I I I've done this, I've made this. Yeah. Maybe we should have a different CEO in here.

3 (1h 29m 6s):
I think you come to a realization at a certain time and you say, okay, I'm good at certain things, but I'm not good at this and this and this. Right. I was very convinced that I knew how to start things, how to scale things, but not necessarily put the infrastructure in place to be able to run the company day in, day out without, you know, being involved in the floor every single day. Yeah. So that I saw that value and that's not because we were not growing, that's not because there was a lack of opportunity, all that kind of stuff, or I was tired or I didn't want to do it. I was questioning myself if I'm capable of taking this company from what it is to next level, because I had never done this before. Yeah.

2 (1h 29m 44s):
And you should be, and by the way, you should be asking yourself that

3 (1h 29m 48s):
Question. A hundred percent. Yeah. The problem with the, the, the, the, the CEO things is through this journey of my, from 2009 to 2011, I probably interviewed five, maybe six candidates for ceo. And every time I, I interviewed a person and I would see a dimension that would not fit Chobani, I would see a dimension that it would be risky. I would see a dimension that it would not, it would not be a good working relationship with me, whatever that might be. Yeah. I was extremely worried about the culture and what I want this company to be.

3 (1h 30m 30s):
Now it's coming to a place that business can be really, really powerful force and it is not about, you know, money, it's not about this, but what is the role that company can play in society? Yeah. I can't say I had that state of mind in 2009, 2010, 2008. No. Right,

2 (1h 30m 49s):
Right. Because you, in the last sort of 7, 7, 8 years, really very much publicly turned, kind of made Chobani into a company that was, you know, big advocate of immigration reform, to hire hiring refugees, you know, supporting refugee, you know, admissions into the United States, things like that that are risky. Right. Cuz a lot of companies don't want to, for understandable reasons, don't wanna take stances on hot button issues because they just wanna focus on their brand. And oftentimes that's a good decision, right. You just like, we just want people to buy Coke and Pepsi. Like, don't, don't ask me what our politics are, but you decided we're gonna actually stand for these things that there's lots of people in America aren't happy about.

2 (1h 31m 37s):
So why, why? I mean, it's risky.

3 (1h 31m 40s):
I look at from the human perspective side of it, I said, why can't we do things that is good for the society and community? And yet I can prove, the only reason Choan is extremely successful if it is, is because of those angles. I didn't follow the craft route. I followed the, the kid from, you know, from Kurdish mountains belief Yeah. Mixed with the farmers in that community and say, you know what, let's open the doors, let's open the windows, let's open the walls that people can come in and participate and be part of the success that you built. But never, ever in my statements, I have said something that I have not implemented into my own place for years and prove that this works before I come.

3 (1h 32m 21s):
I have a credential to go out and talk about it.

2 (1h 32m 24s):
Yeah. Hamdi, the, there's so much we can talk about and obviously we're not gonna be able to get to everything in the story of Chobani today, you know, roughly Chobani's got about 20, 22% of the yogurt market in the us It's, it's a, you know, massive company with lots of different brands there. You know, there, there's talk about eventually taking the company public, which may happen next year or, or maybe beyond. When you think about the story of this young guy who is like, grew up, you know, helping his family, their, for their flock of sheep and goats to, you know, how you kind of made it to the US and, and you know, all those people in, in New York who brought you their farms and let you kinda live there and, and then you built a company that, you know, with a multi-billion dollar valuation.

2 (1h 33m 16s):
How much of that do you think has to do with just how hard you worked in America and how, how much do you think has to do with how lucky you got

3 (1h 33m 25s):
I guess combination of all? I don't know. I sometimes pitch myself to see that this is really happened. Mm. I always say I brought a seed. Maybe it was loaded with a lot of tradition, love, you know, knowledge, you know, whatever it is. But this land was a great soil for that seed to become something. Yeah. And my, I have three kids now, a girl and two boys and that's, I feel likes my biggest responsibility to make sure that the next generation, my children and the children's and children's and everybody's children find the land the way that we found it. And if anything is improved.

3 (1h 34m 6s):
But I think it's in there, it's in an under anonymous amount of stress. And we cannot take this as, you know, as like granted we, we just have to make it work and we need to work harder to make sure that this stays alive.

2 (1h 34m 21s):
That's Hyundai founder and CEO of Chobani. By the way, would you agree with me that raw milk is someone who drinks raw milk? Would you agree with me that it tastes better than, than pasteurized milk?

3 (1h 34m 37s):
I grew up raw ship milk. Right. We never pasteurized it. So good. It's very good. But I wouldn't give it to my kids. You

2 (1h 34m 43s):
Wouldn't give it

3 (1h 34m 44s):
To your kids. No. Risk is too high. Risk is

2 (1h 34m 47s):
Too high. Yes. I know, I know, I know. But it's delicious.

3 (1h 34m 50s):
Totally.

2 (1h 34m 50s):
Yeah. I won't serve it to you if you come over, I don't want you to die.

9 (1h 34m 54s):
If you drink it, I'll drink it. I'm sure you know what you're doing.

2 (1h 34m 59s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you wanna contact our team, our email address is i t id.wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter or Instagram, our account is at How I Built This and mine is at Guy Roz on Twitter and on Instagram, guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by Josh Lash with music composed by Arab Bluey. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Claire Moraima. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Liz Metzker, Alex Chung, Kerry Thompson, Katherine Seifer, Elaine Coats, John Isabella, Chris Masini, and Carla Esteve.

2 (1h 35m 41s):
I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey Prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and add free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon Music app today, or you can listen early and add free with Wondery plus an Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear@wonderyshop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.

10 (1h 36m 15s):
Hey, I'm JJ Reddick, host of the Old Man of the three. My basketball career has taken me on an incredible ride from playing under Coach K at Duke, A trip to the NBA finals in an NBA career spanning 15 seasons. And now I'm bringing that same passion and insider knowledge to the old man in the three podcast. Each episode I sit down with NBA legends like Grant Hill and Gary Payton and some of the best in the game today, like Luca DCI and Kevin Durant. Nothing is off limits. On my show, we talk player to player, friend to friend and share our personal experiences both on and off the court. We discuss anything and everything from career ending injuries to the psychology of being a good coach and leader. Like when Luca Dich talked about how he needs to grow emotionally as a leader in order to lead the maps to a championship, follow the old man in the three.

10 (1h 37m 1s):
Wherever you get your podcast, you can listen, add free on the Amazon Music or Wonder App.