0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

1 (9s):
New Year's is here and with it brings the possibility of change. As one behavioral scientist put it. Fresh starts are really powerful. So as you head into 2023, life Kit is a great resource to help you plan your life and tackle changes both big and small. Listen to the Life Kit podcast from npr.

0 (27s):
TurboTax has experts who can help relieve you from the stresses of taxes and file for you so you can do not taxes with TurboTax and Expert will do your taxes from start to finish, ensuring your taxes are done right, guaranteed so you can relax. Feels good to be done with your taxes, doesn't it? Come to TurboTax and don't do your taxes. Visit turbotax.com to learn more. Intuit TurboTax, full service products only video meeting while an expert does your taxes required. See guaranteed details at turbotax.com/guarantees. What was their purchase order for

3 (1m 4s):
1.1 million sticks and it was larger than the previous year altogether in a single po.

4 (1m 11s):
Wow. And I'm thinking, oh shit, like how this is, I was like, this is not what we discussed. This is way more than what what we had we discussed. And so I was like, gimme a second. So I, like, I go in my room, I build my spreadsheet, I'm, I'm calculating the total, like what does it actually look like? So I'm like, Pete, we need, I dunno, it was like one point something million to be able to, to fund this. And so we then had to figure out like, how are we gonna get the money to even fill this po?

0 (1m 44s):
Welcome to how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz, and on the show today how two partners who set out to sell steak wound up making sausage in the form of chops. A grass fed meat stick that does a hundred million a year. Starting something that fails is one of the worst feelings in the world. You invest time, money, energy, passion, and for some reason the idea you have just doesn't work.

0 (2m 31s):
And then you're left to figure out what went wrong. And if you know what I'm talking about, that process is a little like physical therapy after an injury. It takes a long, long time to recover, but it's also critical. And without that reflection, you are less likely to land on a new idea that will work. Because if there's one thing about this show I want you to learn from. It's not the successes of the founders, but rather their failures. And today's show is about two failures that would eventually lead to a success. One of those failures was so catastrophic that it left Pete Maldonado millions of dollars in debt and forced him to declare bankruptcy after that.

0 (3m 14s):
He had a hard time even finding an apartment he could rent. But he learned some very valuable lessons from those setbacks. And most importantly, it gave him the kind of perspective he needed to make tough but smart choices about his third idea, a brand of meat snacks called Chomps. Now if you haven't heard of them, they look like slim gems, tubes of soft chewy meat. Except unlike similar brands, chomps made a point of appealing to a different type of consumer. For starters, the sticks are made with grass fed beef and they don't have any added sugars. And while I can't vouch for whether chomps are considerably healthier than slim gyms, millions of people swear by them as a clean source of protein.

0 (4m 1s):
Anyway, Pete started the company in Chicago in 2012 with a partner named Rashid Ali. Neither Pete nor Rashid jumped into their meat snack business fully committed from day one. They took it slow and for several years it was a side hustle for both of them. Pete worked in real estate, Rashid was a consultant. But eventually as Chomps was discovered by paleo eaters and CrossFitters, the partners realized they were onto something big. Both Pete Maldonado and Rashid Ali came from immigrant Families. We'll hear from Rashied a little later on in the interview. We'll start with Pete. His grandparents immigrated from Columbia and Pete grew up on Long Island in what he describes as an evangelical Christian household.

0 (4m 46s):
And by high school he was super into sports.

3 (4m 50s):
So I played baseball and then I started wrestling and then I started weightlifting because of my wrestling coach. He was a big weightlifter and he taught us a bunch of different, you know, weightlifting moves and, and I just wanted to get as jacked as I could get. Like, cuz that's just what you did growing up in Long Island, in New York. It was, that's a very much part of the culture up there. Everyone was, looks like a, you know, if you went to a nightclub when you were a little older, he looked like a body building show. I mean, everyone was just huge. So that's, I I got really really into it, you know, and I would, I would learn every little thing about it and, and that's what I did. So I would help my friends all with their workouts and I would help them, you know, with their nutrition plans and all that.

3 (5m 32s):
And I did this, you know, in high school. So. Wow.

0 (5m 36s):
And so you, you basically, I guess, eventually became a, even while you were in college, like a personal trainer for other people? Yeah,

3 (5m 43s):
Oh yeah. For a college kid it was big, big money. I would, you know, get up to a hundred bucks, a hundred hundred bucks an hour sometimes up to 150 if I was visiting someone's house. Wow. So I'm like, that's a, it's a good amount of money for a young kid.

0 (5m 56s):
Alright, so, so you graduate, I think around 2004. And, and then did you become a full-time personal trainer? Is that what happened?

3 (6m 6s):
Yeah, well, I never graduated actually. Funny story. So I was in this, my business class, one of the classes, it was one of the professors, we leave the class, he was done teaching it. And he goes to go start his car up and he starts driving to the parking lot. I see him driving and he's got a flat tire and he's driving this little tiny, like, hatchback car. And it was a real beater. But, you know, I, I felt bad for the guy. I was freezing out. And so I went and changed his tire for him and I was just like talking about him, about his car. And he is like, this car is terrible. It breaks down on me all the time. And I just remember thinking to myself like, how am I learning business from this guy? Like, this can't be, this can't be right. Like, like there's no way he's a successful businessman.

3 (6m 49s):
Like, I made that decision literally as I was ch changing this guy's tire that yeah, I was done with college.

0 (6m 55s):
Wow. So you dropped out?

3 (6m 57s):
No, yeah, I just stopped and I went to, I was gonna go, I went personal training full-time.

0 (7m 2s):
All right. So you, you dropped out and I guess you weren't there too much longer cuz I, I think around 2004 you moved to Florida when you were around 22, is that right? Yep. Why?

3 (7m 12s):
So I loved, loved the weather at a buddy that I grew up with that lived here as well. And actually he was, he was also very entrepreneurial and we would always talk about business ideas and he was on the, in the contractor. So he actually got his certified contractor's license. He was building homes and, and I was like, you know what, I'm gonna go down and start a business. And so that's what I did.

0 (7m 34s):
So you're in Florida 2004. This is like the heyday of No Money Down mortgages and all that craziness that was going on all over the country in Florida was like a huge part of that. There was like a real estate gold rush happening. And from, from what I understand, you kind of got into that a little bit, right? You're a young guy. Tell me about that. Did you, were you thinking, yeah, I could like, you know, sort of get no money down loans and buy places and flip 'em? Were, were you doing some of that?

3 (8m 7s):
Yeah, so I, when I moved down to Naples, I actually moved in with a buddy of mine who owned his house and I rented a room from him and he was in real estate and then my other buddy was obviously the contractor and I'm watching him just crushing it. He's building homes for, you know, some of the largest publicly home traded home builders and building a great business. And, and I was like, I'm missing out. I see the opportunity, let me get in on this. So had perfect credit and really, really high credit score, which was pretty much all you needed back then to get a loan.

0 (8m 41s):
So I, I

3 (8m 42s):
Decided I was gonna start flipping houses.

0 (8m 44s):
What, how'd it start? Tell me about the first place you got.

3 (8m 47s):
Yeah, so first place was, I think it was a hundred percent financed and it was, I bought that in 2006 and then it like a

0 (8m 55s):
Fixer upper.

3 (8m 56s):
Yeah.

0 (8m 57s):
So you'd basically get a loan, put no money down, fix it up, and then flip

3 (9m 1s):
It. Yep. And so I would partner with my buddy who was the contractor. He would have his guys come in, help us, and we would split the profits. Right. That was the, that was the concept. Yeah.

0 (9m 9s):
And this is 2006. This is when, now this is like, at the time we now know was the height of the market,

3 (9m 15s):
The absolute height. Like if you look at a chart of like real estate prices, you see it go up, up, up until like right after we bought the first house and then it was just tanks. Right. And so it was a very weird time. How,

0 (9m 30s):
How over leveraged were you?

3 (9m 32s):
Absolutely. To the gills. I mean, it was at my rock bottom, it was a couple million in loans that I ended up getting stuck with.

0 (9m 46s):
How many, how many places did you own?

3 (9m 48s):
At the time it was four houses, I believe. Where it was like, there's no coming back from this. It's just getting worse and worse. Nobody's buying anything.

0 (9m 58s):
And this was all, I mean, you were like 26, 25, I mean you were getting loans. It's kind of crazy, right? I mean

3 (10m 7s):
It, looking back at it, it's like the craziest thing. Like I, I am like, did that really, like what was, who was, what was anybody thinking? And I see pictures of myself now at that age and I'm like, I would see this guy and never lend him money. God. But yeah.

0 (10m 24s):
Alright, so so you were, when the market crashed, right? Starts, starts really declining in 2006, but the crash really becomes apparent in 2008. You, you're stuck with all this debt and these properties that no one wants to buy. What did you do? Did you declare bankruptcy?

3 (10m 44s):
Yeah, so this, this lasted for over a year. I ended up working with an, a local attorney here who was representing a bunch of other people in the same situation. And, and he introduced me to a bankruptcy attorney. And that bankruptcy attorney was like, well this is how you do it. You basically just file bankruptcy, you control it now. So in hindsight it was, I felt like it was a bit premature still. And I hate, and I also hated the idea that I walked into that courtroom to do the bankruptcy filing and my credit was still just below 800 and then you file a bankruptcy and it's just done.

3 (11m 25s):
Like, it was like a 400 like within his weeks. So.

0 (11m 29s):
And how old were you when that happened?

3 (11m 31s):
I think it was 26 or 27.

0 (11m 34s):
All right. So you're 27 bankrupt. Not a good place to be, but the one advantage you have is that you're 27, which means you have a whole lot of life ahead of you, which is probably what that lawyer said.

3 (11m 47s):
Yep, that's exactly what he said. And the other thing he said was, if you have something you know you're working on that you think is gonna be successful, the time to do this is now where you have like, you know, something that you're gonna work on that that could be a bright future. That would be the time to clear things up and, and move on to that.

0 (12m 6s):
So what, what was it that you decided to do? I mean, you've got no cash and no credit and no ability to borrow money. And obviously you could make money as a personal trainer and through odd jobs, but did you try to get a job as a personal trainer right away?

3 (12m 22s):
I did actually. I went to, I bounced around to a couple different gyms and I would just kind of train there and do their, their thing. But then I had had this wild idea that I wanted to start a food company, you know? Cause I think one of the, as as a personal trainer, the one of the things I noticed was that I would spend a lot of time and way too much time putting together meal plans for clients. And they were always busy and it was very difficult for them. Yeah. And so I was like, man, there's gotta be a better way. Like maybe I could bring something to the market that would solve the problem. At the time it was like Nutrisystem was the big, you know, diet was that the meal plan delivery.

3 (13m 3s):
And I was like, I I could create something better than that cause their food is absolutely terrible. And I thought I could compete and I ended up calling it frozen fitness and I ended up finding a co-packer to help me make the product.

0 (13m 17s):
And what was it, what was gonna be different about it versus like, Nutrisystem or any other frozen like meal plan? Well,

3 (13m 23s):
Well nowadays they're a dime a dozen, but they weren't doing it back then. No one was doing it.

0 (13m 28s):
Right. And, and it was right cuz I guess if you did Nutrisystem, you would, it was like a subscription you had to or Jenny Craig. Right. They were brought sent to your home. Yep. And this was something that would be available where, at the grocery store at,

3 (13m 40s):
So originally I had the idea, I wanted to do it just like Nutrisystem, you could go to the website, you can order it, you could call in and order it. And, but then I realized how expensive it was gonna be to start to build the website and all of that. And so I realized one of the things I could do is sell it out of gyms, but gyms didn't have freezer space. So I found these really cool little glass top ice cream freezers that were coming in from China. I could get them for like three 50 to 400 bucks a piece. And I bought five of them and I must, I saved up some cash and was able to buy those and I dropped them in some gyms.

0 (14m 23s):
What was the value proposition? Yeah, it was, it was healthier that, yeah.

3 (14m 27s):
Yeah, it was healthier. But I also had, they were macro friendly,

0 (14m 30s):
Macronutrients,

3 (14m 31s):
Macronutrient friendly and had the right amount, that ratio of protein fat to carbs.

0 (14m 37s):
Right. Which bodybuilders are focused on. So this was the, that was your target audience bodybuilders or just fitness buffs or

3 (14m 43s):
Yeah, it was any fitness buff. And then we had two lines, one for people that wanted to lose weight, one that, for people that wanted to bulk up and just kept it really basic.

0 (14m 53s):
And the meals were tell, describe what they were. I mean, what what was a typical meal?

3 (14m 58s):
Yeah, so it was a basic meal that you would have at, at home. So, but it was flash frozen, so it would have chicken broccoli. There was some sweet potatoes in one of 'em. That one was actually a balsamic chicken, which was one of the favorites. We had a a pasta with meatballs. We had a tilapia for a little while, but I, I did not like the smell of microwaved tilapia. So, no,

0 (15m 22s):
No one likes the smell of microwaved fish. It's very controversial. Yeah. Now my, I've got many questions about this, including how they were made. But first of all, this seems like a very like cash intensive process, like business proposition. Like you can't just do this with a thousand bucks and you know, I guess if you were selling 'em yourself, but like you've gotta get the food and it's gotta be packaged and then frozen and then shipped and then the refrigerator. So where, where did you, how did you finance it?

3 (15m 54s):
So thinking back, this is probably one of the, one of the more lucky instances of my life where one I was, I, one of my house, I ended up buying a house in Orlando, was one of the four that I was, I was left with. And that house, a guy reached out to me, he and his wife wanted to rent it and I asked him what he did for a living and he tells me he works for a frozen food company. Wow. And he managed, he's on the op side, he does the, he handles the manufacturing. He was actually a really good guy. He wanted to, he, he kind of just took me under his wing and he taught me everything about the U S D A, about co-packing, about sourcing and, you know, and so I let him live in my house for next to nothing.

3 (16m 36s):
And then he helped, helped me find a co-packer.

0 (16m 39s):
But still, you, you had to have money to do this. So how did you, how'd you do it? Where did you, did you go out and find investors or did you take a bank loan? Like I guess you couldn't cuz you had no credit. Where'd you get the money?

3 (16m 54s):
So I ended up putting a business plan together, started reaching out to various investors in town.

0 (17m 2s):
In Naples.

3 (17m 3s):
In Naples. And there was a guy I met and he put me in touch with an investor who was a real estate guy here who owned these RV parks. He was very interested in what we were doing. He owned a gym as well. And that guy wanted to invest. And so I, I formed a deal with him and we went to town and started trying to make product. Wow.

0 (17m 28s):
Yeah. How much did he put in?

3 (17m 30s):
He agreed to putting in 250,000. He actually put in I believe 60,000. Right. And then the world really fell apart when the real estate market meltdown happened. And he got hit pretty hard. Then it became me begging him for more money and then him telling me that he actually is not gonna gimme any more money at all. He wants his initial investment back as well. Which

0 (17m 58s):
Was how long between the time you raised the money from him until the time you realized you weren't gonna get any more money from him.

3 (18m 5s):
Like, oh man, it was probably six months and

0 (18m 9s):
Wow.

3 (18m 10s):
Yeah,

0 (18m 10s):
Because you were in, I mean, presumably in a few gyms and I, I guess I read that you actually managed to get to up to like 50 or 60 gyms with your freezers and the, the product, but, which sounds awesome. It's pretty impressive, but still, like, you gotta get people to open the freezer and to buy the thing and if, if it's just sitting in a gym and no one's telling anybody about it, it's just a freezer and a gym.

3 (18m 35s):
Well, the one thing that I learned the hard way was that when you have no distribution, there's nowhere to replenish the freezers. So we would place the freezer, I would actually drive up with a pickup truck to, we had them from south Florida all the way up to Atlanta. I'm in Naples, Florida. I didn't really think about like, how am I gonna replenish these things? I, I thought that I could just pack 'em up and mail 'em. And then that proved to be incredibly expensive and I wasn't gonna be able to do that. So yeah, it, it, we realized that there was a major gap in the business model, you know, but, but that, but the, my big idea that I fixated on was really, okay, I'm gonna build this website and compete with Nutrisystem.

3 (19m 18s):
I've already proved out that there's a need for the, the product people were buying it when they would get it. But I went way too big on the, on the website. Like, I wanted it to be absolutely perfect. And I wanted to be the seamless, you know, experience for customers when they went to there. They had all the options and, and I was building out all the tools that I could, you know, think of that anybody would ever want, which was the absolute wrong thing to do. So I, I burnt through a good amount of cash trying to do all the customization and in the end never got to fully functional website just because of that.

0 (19m 55s):
I think it, it ended up lasting about 18 months in total. From the time you launched to the time. It, it kind of fizzled out what happened, why, why did it fizzle?

3 (20m 5s):
When my investor told me he wanted money back, I said, I can't give you your money back. It's all in frozen inventory. I'm like, I actually need more money to sell it. I have no way to tell anybody about this. And so the arguing went back and forth and it got ugly to say the least, where I, I didn't like some of the threats that were coming my way. And so I I, I packed it up. I actually ended up walking into his attorney's office and handed him a terribly written piece of paper where I just ha signed over the business to him. And I said he could have all that inventory and the business cuz I don't wanna do this with him anymore. And so that was that.

0 (20m 44s):
Yeah.

3 (20m 45s):
I was weighing over my head. I think it was a good idea at the time, probably should have gone to raise money from a vc, somebody that, that could actually add value

0 (20m 57s):
Who had food experience.

3 (20m 59s):
There you go. There you go.

0 (21m 1s):
Because your guy was a real estate investor. Yeah. He knew nothing about food. Yeah. Right. All right. All right. So that fizzles out, I guess around 2008, 2009 ish. And, and I guess at this point you, you moved to Chicago to follow your girlfriend, who's now, I believe now your wife. Yep. And I guess in Chicago you just had to get back into real estate and, and, and wind up making, you know, decent money doing apartment rentals and commercial deals and, and were you happy doing that? Did you, did you enjoy that?

3 (21m 33s):
So I enjoy deal making, especially big deals. I get very excited about that. But you finally get to a closing or you don't, right? So you don't, and you get nothing. Or you get to a closing, you get a big check for it, which is great, but then you kind of, you start from scratch the next day you were, you're not building anything. There was no residual. And that always kind of ate at me. I, I hated that idea. So I was just thinking like, what can I build that would have residual income for me that I could build maybe on the side and, you know, continue doing my big deals. That would be maybe my, the, the bulk of my income.

3 (22m 14s):
But then this can be like the supporting, you

0 (22m 16s):
Know. So you were thinking, you were constantly thinking of what, what could I do?

3 (22m 21s):
Oh

0 (22m 21s):
Yeah. But never thinking maybe I'll reconstitute the frozen food business idea.

3 (22m 27s):
No, I was so heartbroken about that one that I just couldn't, but I, I would say that I loved food so much and I real, that was one thing that I learned from that I loved that business. It was like so cool to me. I loved watching the food get made. I loved knowing that like you're, you can package it up and just sell it to someone and then somebody's in the, some random part of the world can just be eating your product. Like to me that was just like, you know, it's a really cool thing to think about.

0 (22m 54s):
Meantime, you're still a fitness, like would would you call yourself a a fitness fanatic at that point? Still in like 2009, 10?

3 (23m 3s):
Yeah. I mean, I, like, personally at that point I had already kind of got drifted away from the personal training and I was kinda getting burnt out I think with a lot of my, you know, my regular routines. But then that's when I found CrossFit actually in Chicago,

0 (23m 18s):
This was when CrossFit really started to kind of hit its stride. Oh yeah. And just these gyms were blowing up everywhere. And you discovered CrossFit.

3 (23m 25s):
Oh yeah. I loved it. It was, it added this element of competition where now I'm like competing with the other people in the gym and oh man, that was so addictive. And, but you know what I, I just realized then that if I can create something that would get any type of traction with the, within the CrossFit community, it could blow up like wildfire. And so I kind of had my target market in mind Yeah. For the next venture.

0 (23m 55s):
But you just weren't, weren't sure what that was gonna be.

3 (23m 58s):
No, I mean I had, I had an idea and I wanted to be in food and I, I learned this thing following Tim Ferriss actually. He had a blog and in this, on this blog, he interviewed a guy named Noah Kagan. And Noah did this interview talking about how to create a a million dollar business in over a weekend. And essentially what he talks about is establishing like proof of concept and using free tools like Google Trends and then taking out some really cheap, back then they were really cheap Facebook ads to, to see if you can get anybody to pay for the product. Even if you don't have the product yet, maybe you have no money to even produce it.

3 (24m 39s):
Create an ad, put it out there, see if someone will actually transact and just refund them back their money and tell them what you were doing. And then, you know, and then I was like, this is like the craziest thing ever, but such a good idea. So I started using these tools and looking at grass-fed, like the search terms for grass-fed beef, for grass-fed beef delivered any type of search term that was all related to that. So paleo, keto, all of those. And every single one of these search terms were just like an absolute, like, it was like a trajectory, like a hockey stick trajectory.

0 (25m 13s):
Hmm. And also CrossFitters, which you know, for a variety of reasons tended to like adopt a what used typically called a paleo diet. Like no car, no, no grains, no basically food that a caveman would eat.

3 (25m 30s):
Yeah.

0 (25m 31s):
And, and grass fed meat is a part of that diet like that you're to, you're sort of, that's encouraged.

3 (25m 38s):
That's it. Absolutely. And seeing what I was seeing with this kind of cult-like community, the idea originally was going to be like, can I compete with Omaha steaks? They're not doing grass-fed beef. Maybe I could just do grass-fed ground beef and steaks and ship those to people, create my website and do it a much simpler, do a much simpler website than I was originally trying to do with frozen fitness and get that off the ground.

0 (26m 6s):
And, and what was it gonna be called?

3 (26m 8s):
That was called Logic Meat Locker

0 (26m 11s):
Logic Meat Locker.

3 (26m 12s):
Though there was logic behind the name actually. So, so the L O G I, so low gi, so low glycemic index was one of the things that

0 (26m 22s):
We were

3 (26m 22s):
All talking about with

0 (26m 24s):
Target. All right. Okay. Yep. Low glycemic index meat and meat. We know it's meat. Yeah. As you probably may know, we had ButcherBox on this show, which started like three years later in 2015, which did work and, and is a great name, ButcherBox. But that was essentially the, the concept that you would, it would be like that he would just have a subscription and you would get cuts of meat.

3 (26m 48s):
Exact idea. Yep. So that was my idea. Now it was like, how do you figure out how to get that going? Yeah. Then I go to a wedding, A good buddy of mine and his wife and my wife and I are friends with them and they were getting married in Missouri. I met his brother-in-law, his brother-in-law happened to own the only facility in central Illinois that was a certified organic and U S T A plant

0 (27m 14s):
Meat packing

3 (27m 15s):
Plant, meat packing plant. So he was already in this business packing all different types of meat. He was, he was processing for hunters doing their, the deer, like the venison meat. Yeah. And he had all types of relationships with these smaller grass-fed beef farmers and kind of a smaller network of producers. Hmm. So I talked to him about my idea and he said, you should come out to the plant and meet me. Yeah. Now when we get back. And so I did. Hmm. And he was gonna be almost like an as like a co-packer. So he was kind of the third party he was gonna allow me to, you know, tax will process it and then he was gonna actually pack it and ship him out for us. He didn't really have a stake in the actual company. He was just more of a third party, a partner of ours, of mine.

3 (27m 59s):
Yeah.

0 (27m 60s):
Alright, let's pause here for a moment because I want to bring Rashida who's been patiently, quietly sitting there.

3 (28m 8s):
Hey.

0 (28m 9s):
Hello Rashied. So sorry. So you grew up in the Midwest, in Iowa. Your dad was an immigrant from Pakistan. Yep. And you studied business in college and I, I guess like around 2012 when you met Pete, I guess you were working as a, as a consultant. How, how exactly did the, did the two of you meet?

4 (28m 29s):
Yeah, so some of my college friends, their wives were friends with Steph, Pete's wife and I think Pete's wife. Yeah. Yeah. So there, there was a f Pete makes a joke. It's like, I think we went to a few like group dinners and me and him didn't really click. We we're just like, you know, it was just the guy across the table. I don't think we interacted much. But then a couple months later there was, there was a birthday party where some friends and that we were all playing poker. And ironically enough, me and Steph's wife made it, it was down to the two of us as he was gonna win the tournament. And at one point I think she threatened to push me down the stairs if, if I beat her.

4 (29m 10s):
I don't recall exactly who won, but Pete and I at some point were just kind of off to the side and were chatting and he was telling me about this business that he had started. And, and so what he was presenting was more convenient solution to get grass-fed beef, which

0 (29m 25s):
Did, you know. Yeah. Did you know about the grass-fed beef thing at all? Or was it the first time you were even hearing about it?

4 (29m 31s):
Yeah, it was the first time. Like I, I wasn't into CrossFit or paleo, so like Pete mentioned it, you know, but you plant a seed. I start doing the research, I, I get excited. So I talk to him, him about my background in operations and finance and numbers and like, I love living in Excel. It's just how I was wired. And he was like, wait, that's the stuff that I hate. Like, he was like, and, and then from on the flip side, he, him really good on the sales and marketing the creative side. And it's like something where I kind of struggled. Yeah. But I'm, I'm good with, if you give me an idea, I can challenge it. Right. I can, I'm wired to, to, to challenge and find opportunity and make it better. It's just the way I'm, I'm, I'm wired and so it, it complimented our skillset.

4 (30m 12s):
So I pinged him the next day and we were like, he goes, do you wanna partner on this? And he was like, sure. We met for lunch. And I mentioned how much had he invested? And he was like, I think it was, was it 32? $53,250 I think is what Pete had put up. So I cut a check and matched that and my wife was a, was an attorney. She drafted the partnership agreement and yeah, Pete Mootz very quickly. So I think it was signed within the next 24 hours. And that effectively was the start of the partnership.

0 (30m 42s):
And and that set your 50 50 partners off to the races essentially, right? Yep. Were you even looking to start a business at all?

4 (30m 51s):
No, but I think what Pete effectively presented it was a living case study. And so in my mind I was like, let, let's see if we can get this off the ground and see what it can become. You know, he and I both had a full-time job that were, were bringing in money and this is just something on the side

0 (31m 8s):
To do on the side. Okay. And what did you like about this idea? I mean, cuz it's, it's awesome. I mean, ButcherBox obviously has really done well, but I mean, it's complicated. It involves shipping and there it's heavy to ship things and that's expensive. And there's weight and there's dry ice and there's meat. And what did you think, I mean, given your background Rashid in, you know, investigating and really digging into diligence, which by the way you didn't do at all in this case, you made a decision in 24 hours. Like this runs completely counter to what you were doing as a professional, which was spending weeks and months like learning about a business. Right.

4 (31m 45s):
But the interesting thing was, like, so I was a Omaha's steak customer. I actually, I like the product.

0 (31m 50s):
Okay. All right.

4 (31m 51s):
And so I was familiar with right, the business and I mean, who doesn't like steak? And

0 (31m 59s):
When he,

4 (31m 60s):
And when he explained and then Pete kind of explained grassfed versus grain fed and the, and the health benefits, then I'm like, oh, I shouldn't have been eating that the whole time and maybe that's why I'm gaining weight or, or whatnot. So I had a basic understanding of how the business worked and I'm also like, I, I knew I could figure it out, but what we figured out was shipping frozen without scale, there's no path to profitability. And, and because the, the business was like self-funded, we had to figure out a way to make it profitable. And so that's where like I couldn't, like, I couldn't solve the equation equation of like just buying enough and selling enough.

4 (32m 42s):
Cuz the, the subs, ButcherBox is a fantastic brand. They, it's a great business, but they figured out a formula that worked and yeah, it's being able to put the right things in the box to have it make sense from a margin perspective. We took the approach of, you know, you can buy ground, you can buy a filet, you can buy a ribeye, you can buy a strip, whatever. But people were picking and choosing and unless they picked the right combination, we, we couldn't make money cuz we also couldn't charge 25 bucks for shipping. Right. And so that's where we, we really struggled to get the, the economics to work.

0 (33m 16s):
And did you start by just doing Facebook ads?

4 (33m 20s):
Yeah, so Pete had built a WordPress site. We started doing Facebook ads and a little bit of the paid search like Google ads.

0 (33m 31s):
Yeah.

4 (33m 32s):
But our moms were our best customers the first couple, couple months. But then also, like, to Pete's point, like he pivots hard and he pivots fast. So like I'm kind of wor kind of walking through it and I'm learning about meat processing and the yield loss. Like, you'll buy a loin and cut as many filets and you're, there's always loss. So like we were losing money every which way. Plus the shipping was tough to figure out. So at the time our, our co-packer was also making a, a multi-pack of meat sticks. It was, I think it was like p like six or eight in that pack. Yeah.

0 (34m 9s):
The same, the same co-packer that was, that was the processor that was processing and shipping the meat for you was also making like slim gyms

4 (34m 17s):
Similar format. But it was, it was all packed in one pa all lined up. Like if you think about you buy a pack of pencils, they're all lined up long way. And so he sold a multi-pack and, and we had branded it under the logic name and I think that's where the light went off with Pete was like, he ate a ton of slim gems when he was a kid. We were thinking about not wanting to ship frozen and can we make a shelf sable version and a healthy version of the Slim gym. And that's where the kinda the light bulb went off

0 (34m 49s):
When we come back in just a moment, why Rashid and Pete traveled to a tiny town in Missouri to find out how the sausage gets made and how a call from Trader Joe's leads to a deal that they can't afford to make. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This. I talk with so many business leaders who use Squarespace as they're all in one platform for building their brand and engaging customers online. Squarespace lets you easily create a dynamic website and sell anything your products and services and even content you create.

0 (35m 32s):
Squarespace makes it really easy to get started with best in class website templates for all types of businesses that can be customized to fit your specific needs. Squarespace also provides you the tools you need to run your business smoothly, including inventory management, a simple checkout process, and secure payments. Whatever you sell, Squarespace has merchandising features to make your products look their best online. And using squarespace's in-depth analytics tools, you can learn where your site visits and sales are coming from to analyze which channels are most effective. Check out squarespace.com/built for a free trial. And when you're ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

0 (36m 18s):
This episode is brought to you in part by visible, visible offers their best rate all on one line. Not four lines, not three, not even two. Just a one line wireless plan with unlimited data for $30 a month. Taxes and fees included, all powered by Verizon. Switch today@visible.com and get $20 off your first month when you use Code Built 20. That's built 20. A special offer for how I built this. Listeners offer ends March 31st. New activation and offer code required for data management practices. Learn more@visible.com. Additional terms apply. Hey, welcome back to How I built this.

0 (36m 58s):
I'm Guy Raz, so it's 2012 and Pete and Rashid have pooled together about $7,000 to start a grass-fed meat company. And their first idea selling full cuts of meat doesn't pan out. So instead of steaks, they lean into sticks.

3 (37m 17s):
And so I like proceed like why don't we do a healthy version of slim gems, let's just do a single stick and a, you know, shell stable and let's do that. And that's actually when I, I came up with that, that chomps name. And I created this pretty terrible logo. I think I was using like Microsoft Word art or something like that to, to create this logo. But I had the word chomps on the package and I, I looked at the US pto, so the patent and trademark offices website and I ran a search for trademarks and looked like I shouldn't have a problem getting chomps snacks sticks trademarked. And then also found a decent url, which was go chomps.com and I could get that for like 12 bucks.

3 (38m 3s):
And so that was where I kinda latched on and I remembered just as a kid, you know, and it's, I'm, I'm embarrassed to admit it today, but I mean the number of slim gyms I used to eat, I remember I used to ride my bike up to the 7-Eleven and get a bunch of 'em. Yeah. Have my pocket and by the time I got home I'd eat 'em all.

0 (38m 22s):
Yeah. So, so this co-packer right? This meat processing plant, they had the ability to make these for you essentially. They were already making something for you so they they could make it.

4 (38m 34s):
Yeah, they were making sticks, but they had to be refrigerated.

0 (38m 38s):
Why?

4 (38m 38s):
It's because of the license they had and they weren't familiar with, to be able to get it to be shelf stable, you have to hit certain critical critical control points. So your active water and your pH level. So we were selling a refrigerated version, but then we were like, we can, you know, there's slim gyms out there. Like they're, they're making, we

0 (38m 57s):
Should figure this out.

4 (38m 57s):
Exactly. Yeah. And so we just started doing our research to find a partner that could make kind the version that we wanted to create.

3 (39m 5s):
Yeah. And we started looking at all the different labels and each one of these meat sticks has the, the u s A legend on there. So we had a whole list of people to contact. And then we found one specific one in Missouri in this very small farm town called Greentop, Missouri.

0 (39m 26s):
Which is the one one what?

3 (39m 28s):
Co-packer?

0 (39m 29s):
A co-packer. Okay. A a manufacturer. Yep. Okay.

3 (39m 31s):
Manufacturer. And Greentop happens to be about two and a half hours south if you're driving from Des Moines where, where she grew up. Right. And so we decided, well here's a guy, let's go meet him. So he and I jumped in the car and essentially if you were driving down this main road and sneezed at the wrong time, you would've missed the town. Yeah. Cause it was so small. And the plant quote unquote plant wasn't actually a manufacturing facility. It was a little corner store that had almost like a deli section. And in the back of the deli section he had one little oven where he was cooking meat sticks

0 (40m 13s):
And, and like I'm trying to imagine how you make a slim Jim. Like it's got a casing and you gotta pack it in there. Like how, how did he have like a machine to do this?

3 (40m 25s):
Yeah, so essentially what you need to do is there's a stuffer. So you need to actually, to get the ground beef, the beef has to be ground up already into hamburger meat. Yep. And then it's stuffed into the casing. So there's an actually machine that has a little, little nozzle on it and you put the casing over it and then that's where it shoots through there into the casing and it almost looks like a hose filling up with the, with meat. I got

0 (40m 48s):
It. Yeah. And then you cook it on low temperature to dry it.

3 (40m 51s):
That's it. Yeah.

0 (40m 52s):
And, and is the casing sometimes made out of an animal intestine and sometimes made out of like

3 (40m 58s):
It's co beef, beef collages cos so it's actually sourced in beef cow Hyde. Yeah.

4 (41m 4s):
It is a bit of a manual process where you're filling up totes, dropping the meat in, doing all the process, but

0 (41m 9s):
It's basically sausage making.

4 (41m 10s):
Exactly. It is, it's exactly that. Yeah.

0 (41m 13s):
So you meet with this guy, by the way, what's his name? Kevin. Kevin Are you meet this guy Kevin. And he's a small time slim Jim type per like, he's a small time business, he's making this. But to make this right for CrossFitters you couldn't use sugar, you can't use any grains or wheats or stabilizers or who knows. There's tons of things that a CrossFitter wouldn't be able to ingest. So how did you, you got there and you met with him, what'd you say? Did you say, Hey, could you do something for us? But but we want it with none of these things.

3 (41m 48s):
That's exactly, yeah. You, we even talked about, you know, what, what would it take to, to, you know, to remove some of these ingredients that you're clearly using a lot of this for shelf stability and like, do we need that? Do we absolutely need those things to, to keep the product shelf stable? And he's like, no, you don't, you don't, it just makes life easier from like a yield perspective or you know, to get longer shelf life you can do this, which is more of just a way to make more money as a small producer. But we decided, okay, we wanna do this with the best ingredients using the best beef and none of the added stuff, the added ingredients that aren't necessary.

0 (42m 25s):
And he said, well if you can get it to me, I'm happy to do it.

3 (42m 28s):
Yeah.

4 (42m 28s):
But it was different cuz we, we had talked to a few other co-packers and a lot of them would say, you have to have sugar if, if you don't have sugar, I'm not gonna make the product. And so Kevin was at least willing to say like, if this is what you want, I'll do it. Then I, I think that's when we knew Yeah, let's let's bet on Kevin. And, and, and he also, the, you know, with any co-packer you talked about the m moq, the minimal mortor quantity. Yeah. Like we were able to go in low enough where it made sense where we could produce just enough products, sell it online and go back.

0 (42m 55s):
Yeah. And this was his own brand? Yeah.

3 (42m 57s):
Yeah. It was under the Western Smokehouse brand.

0 (43m 0s):
Alright, so you got your guy and, and what's he gonna make like a thousand sticks or 500 sticks?

4 (43m 7s):
I think the first run was a thousand pounds, which we would make about 9,000 sticks at the

0 (43m 12s):
Time. Wow, okay. And and was he also gonna be the fulfillment center? Like or were you gonna go back to, to pick him up and haul him to a warehouse in Chicago?

4 (43m 23s):
Oh no, there's no warehouse at, at that time. Okay. It was, it was Pete's condo at the

0 (43m 28s):
Time or Pete's condo. Right. Okay. Exactly.

3 (43m 31s):
So he, he shipped him, he he packed him up and and shipped them in big. Yeah. Put 'em on a crate or a, a pallet. And it was actually, the funniest thing I used to have is a, a truck with a, a lift gate pull up to the, to my garage in my, my condo I was living in, in Chicago and unload up an entire pallet of product. And I'd go out there with a luggage cart and I would pull all the case boxes off of the pallet, throw 'em onto this luggage cart cuz it had wheels on it. Bring it into my condo. We had a spare like a second bedroom and that was our fulfillment center. It

0 (44m 8s):
Was your warehouse. So how, between the time you first met Kevin and the time you got your 9,006, i I imagine that's a couple of months and probably you're, you gotta get the flavor right. So how was that working? Were you going back and forth? Was he ship, was he sending you samples that you could try and then you would like say more, more paprika or like a little more salt?

3 (44m 29s):
It's exactly, it was just, yeah, we landed on that original stick recipe that is the same exact recipe we use today. And it only took us a few tries. It was kind of where you think about it nowadays we're like, man, like big food companies spend millions and millions of dollars trying to zero in on the right flavor profile. And we landed on it very quickly. Yeah.

4 (44m 53s):
But it, it was a very challenging process. There was a lot of times where we would receive product that we couldn't even sell.

0 (45m 1s):
You couldn't sell because why?

4 (45m 3s):
One, one reason we had a, a significant issue, which it's called delamination, where the, the, the packaging wasn't filled the right way and it was cre it allowed a air to get into the package. They call it a channel. And so it was either the film issue or the packaging issue. But anyway, we have thousands and thousands of sticks that effectively are starting to discolor. So we clearly couldn't, couldn't do it. But we've already spent that and at that time we don't have contracts. Right. It was like he's blaming the film company, film companies blaming Kevin for packing it wrong. And so like yeah, at the end of the day we're stuck in the middle and we have thousands and thousands of sticks that we couldn't do. So we kind of had to take it on the chin. Other times the meat would come out too fatty. So the product would have like, we called them cheetah spots where it was very spotty and, and we started learning more about the quality and consistency and we started to get a lot smarter around the suppliers we were partnering with.

4 (45m 52s):
Right. We started realizing that not all grass fed beef was created equal.

0 (45m 57s):
And and this was really gonna be the, the proving ground here. Cuz you were Rashid you were still a consultant and, and, and traveling a little bit and Pete, you were still renting apartments to people.

3 (46m 10s):
Yep,

4 (46m 10s):
Exactly.

0 (46m 11s):
So, alright, so you've got 9,000 beef sticks in your con in spare bedroom in your apartment, now you gotta sell them. So how, how did you guys start to do that?

3 (46m 22s):
So I meant Rashid mentioned, I I built a website on the WordPress platform. Yeah. Which, you know, obviously was a, it was, we got our first orders through that and realized it wasn't, wasn't the best process and that that was around when Shopify started getting big. Yeah. And that's when I started taking a look at Shopify and I, I, I ended up building a second website over there just to kind of see what, how that would compare. And it was just, you know, so much better.

4 (46m 47s):
Yeah. And I think the other thing was we started, at the end of the day, we knew that the, the Chomps brand of the time, it didn't have a following, but in the paleo, in the CrossFit communities, we identified that there were these key influencers. And this was before what influencer marketing is now, but there were these folks that, you know, if they stood behind a product people would follow

0 (47m 9s):
And, and so you could do all of this, like build the website and make the product with the $7,000. It was, you didn't need more money to start it.

3 (47m 19s):
We just had to be as scrappy as you could possibly, you know, imagine. But at that time I was handling all customer service as well. So anybody that came to the website, like I I I would try to make it a very personal experience. And that was one of the things that Rashid and I talked about, like early on it was, you know, we have no money, we have this product, you know, what can we do that's not gonna cost us any money. Yeah. Let's give good customer service. And one of the things that I would kind of, you know, grade myself on was on my response time and you have no idea how many emails I've gotten back from people. Well they would email in, I would respond within seconds and they would be like, that is the fastest email response I've ever gotten from a company.

3 (48m 0s):
And like I would say I would actually save those emails as proof that like, this is working and people are appreciative of it.

0 (48m 6s):
And Pete, you were presumably some days you were out showing potential client's apartments, but then you'd race back to the apartment and fulfill orders and pack 'em and ship them.

3 (48m 17s):
Yeah, so I, well at that time, like I was kind of slowly weaning out of real estate and doing more and more of the, the chomp stuff and I just realized that this thing is taken off, you know, faster than I ever imagined. But we would, I had a Jeep Grand Cherokee at the time and we would pack all the orders, put the labels on there, stuff them inside my Jeep Grand Cherokee. Only one of us could fit in the car at the time. So I, cuz it was just like every seat was taken with boxes and I would drive up to the, to the post office and they would force, they would, I wasn't allowed to go to the front door, I had to go in the back and I would just load 'em up into one of their carts and deliver 'em at USPS and they would take 'em and ship 'em out.

0 (49m 0s):
And I guess it was pretty manageable in the first year or two because presumably the volume wasn't overwhelming. Right. I mean, how many typical orders would you get a day? I, first year

3 (49m 11s):
It was a handful. Right? Like 10, 20.

0 (49m 14s):
Yeah.

3 (49m 15s):
And independent, you know, if we had something going on, which you always expected those things, if there was like an email blast going on and if it was some blogger we were working on that was gonna go feature them, we would always get a, a flood of orders and then I would spend the next however many days packing them up and the receipt would fly in from wherever he was working and then he would, we would kind of tag team it and just get through 'em all.

4 (49m 36s):
But I, I do think the, the, one of the big milestones where it kind of, it did a few things is there was this platform called Uncrate. I don't know Guy if you're familiar with Uncrate?

0 (49m 45s):
No. What is it?

4 (49m 46s):
So Uncrate is kind of like, you know, Maxim Magazine where it's just like cool guy tough like tech cars. Sure. So it's a, it's an online platform where they just feature cool stuff and a guy I worked with, you know, knew the editors there. So we sent Chomps to them and never heard back. And p you're moving at this time you're moving from Chicago to Naples and I, I'm on my honeymoon in Bali. And when you're using Shopify, every time you get an order, you get like a notification on your phone. Yeah. Almost like a text message. And I remember my phone was in my hotel room and I, I get back and I have like seven missed calls from Pete and I have, we have like thousands of orders and we're like, whoa.

4 (50m 27s):
I'm like, what is, I call p and he's like, what is going on? Where are all these orders coming from? And Unre editor wrote about Chomps and they didn't even tell us that they were going to do that. And so it was interesting cuz you know, our consumer prior to that was primarily CrossFit, paleo whole 30, like very focused. And Uncrate is just like your general guy, right? Yeah. Where it's like you're 20 or 30 something that was just interested in, in it. And it showed, oh wow. The product has a lot more broader appeal and it just material. I mean, it took us, I don't know pe how long to fill all those orders. Like it was

0 (51m 4s):
A lot weeks. It was

4 (51m 5s):
Weeks. And that was a, a big milestone of growth. And that's where like at that point it was a lot of work to get those orders out. We did it, but then that's where we're like, we need to find a fulfillment Yeah. Partner because it was just Pete and I putting sticks in a box and sticking a label was not driving value.

0 (51m 23s):
Hmm. But, but Rashi as you, as you mentioned, Pete was moving, I think around this time he was moving from Chicago back to Naples and Florida where, where his wife was from. And so when he, when Pete said he wanted to do that, I mean, I gue I guess this is still kind of just a side hustle for, for both of you. Right. And so like you, you Rashid were still a consultant. And by the way, was it, I mean, was it profitable at that point? I mean, was it, I I can't imagine it was making that much money, but, but what was it?

4 (51m 54s):
Well, it, yeah, I would say it, it was profitable and I think one of the things as, as a consultant, what I realized was the value and understanding of cashflow. And so we got terms with our co-packer and with our protein supplier. And so effectively the goal

0 (52m 12s):
Was on protein supplier is the, is the meat

4 (52m 14s):
Company? Yeah. Yeah. The beef company. Yeah. And so once we got the product, like the clock was on and we needed to make sure we sold through it to generate the cash, to pay off the invoice when it's when it's due. And the other thing is the blessing. We only did e-commerce. It was direct to consumer and all of those transactions were credit cards. So we got the money up front. That's why we liked e-commerce. I mean, first is cuz it was a side thing for p and i. So it didn't require you to be on nine to five. You can kind of do it on off hours. But also we got paid up front. The product itself, the chomps sick, it's, it's ideal for shipping. It's very, yeah. Dense. And it, it's like we stumbled on a lot of these things where it's like, wow, it's, it's the perfect product.

4 (52m 56s):
But it also, I think the un crazed situation put pressure on the business when we realized we had to solve this problem that we couldn't fill it ourselves. Right. And so that's where we, we kind of aligned with a third party to do the fulfillment that integrated with Shopify. And it kind of made the business again, a bit more streamlined where we realized that it, it was a problem we had to solve.

0 (53m 17s):
Right. What, what at what point did you guys have to go to a bigger facility? Were you still even in this, these first two years? Was it all being done by this guy in, in Iowa?

4 (53m 29s):
In Missouri, yeah. In Missouri. It's the, yeah, the, I mean they're still one of our, our, our manufacturing partners today.

0 (53m 35s):
He's in Missouri. Okay. Kevin is in Missouri. So Kevin still works with you today.

4 (53m 39s):
Kevin has, has kind of rolled off. There's new owners there, but the facility

0 (53m 42s):
Itself Yep. Still and grass fed meat. Amer, especially domestic grass fed meat was still expensive, but there were fewer producers even then. Where were you sourcing it from? Anywhere you could get it in the us

4 (53m 58s):
Yeah, we, we had a few domestic partners, but we actually started having some quality challenges. Cause I think the way that they process it and, and measure the lean point, it's a, they call it core drilling where they'll, they'll drill and measure and get an average versus some in all other places in the world they, they actually will x-ray every single individual box and it's more automated. The other thing was, like you mentioned before, there wasn't a ton of supply. So that's where we started to figure out, you know, are there other opportunities for grassfed globally? And we ended up landing on a partner in Australia in both Melbourne, Australia and Tasmania.

0 (54m 38s):
Yeah. Cuz they produce a lot of grassfed meat in Australia. And in 2014, do you guys, and you may remember this, Rashid, cuz you had the numbers, roughly what was your revenue that year? Was it like a few hundred thousand? Tens of thousands?

4 (54m 55s):
Probably. Maybe that's when we broke a hundred thousand. Yep.

0 (54m 58s):
Yeah. And, and what's the margin, what were the margins on that? I mean are these sticks pretty, pretty inexpensive to make? Cuz it's a premium product. Grass fed meat. And as you had mentioned earlier, Pete CrossFitters and Paleo and people, they were used to paying higher prices for the food that they were consuming.

4 (55m 16s):
I I would say the, the gross margin, it's an expensive product to make, but our business, like Pete and I weren't drawing a salary and we didn't really have any costs,

0 (55m 27s):
Expenses. Right. So

4 (55m 28s):
Right. But the, like, this isn't, this isn't like the cosmetic space where it's, it's these crazy, you know, 50, 60, 70, 80% gross margin products. It was kind of within that, that 30 to 40% level. Right. So Right. So at the end of the day, like we were, we were profitable because the business was very lean. Right.

0 (55m 46s):
So, so really, I gotcha. Okay. So, alright, so you are essentially an e-commerce business and you're, and and, and really you're focusing on, I mean it's interesting cuz we, we did a few years ago our bar and our ex bar was also started in Chicago. And you know, this guy started by going to CrossFit gyms, taking the product to CrossFit. Cause it was no energy bar for CrossFitters. They all had grain or they all had sugar or they all, and there was nothing that was totally paleo. And that's really where you guys focused, right? I mean you were, that's who you were targeting at the beginning. Yeah.

3 (56m 20s):
And they, they had a little bit of a different go-to-market strategy despite that they, they started with E-com as well, but they also went very hard in, in terms of CrossFit with like all the, like attending a bunch of the shows. But Rashid and I couldn't do that. This was a side gig for us. It's actually funny, we were, we're we're buddies with Peter and Jared, the founders of our ex bar. And they would see us at various shows are wherever or see us in Chicago trade shows, trade shows, and see or see us in Chicago at the CrossFit, one of the CrossFit gyms. And we would, they just, every time they'd see us, they'd be like, you guys full-time yet? Are you full-time yet? And we would, they would kind of push us cuz they both dove in right away going full-time and building the business. And we all know where that ended up. Right.

3 (57m 0s):
So Yeah.

0 (57m 1s):
And you guys were doing this really slowly, slowly, it was like part-time cuz you needed, I mean you, you both needed your income and, and you had good jobs. And Pete, you'd been through catastrophic failure already. Yeah. So you were probably hedging your bets a little bit.

3 (57m 17s):
I had to at that point I realized, I was like, all right, okay, I gotta be smart this time.

0 (57m 22s):
And Rashid, you too. You were, you were kind of hedging your bets.

4 (57m 25s):
I, I was. And I, like, I had my first kid in like 2015 and so my wife wasn't working, it was just me. So like, again, similar situation where it's like I had have income. The business wasn't at a scale where we could draw anything and we needed the cash to continue to grow it. So it just, it wasn't the right time. Yeah. And, and we talk about like, the dynamic of Pete and I, a lot of the tension was around when we both would go full-time.

0 (57m 49s):
Yeah.

3 (57m 50s):
But I think at that point was where I was like, I'm in, I'm, so I'm going all in. And so I, I was kind of just done. Like I saw that, you know, writing on the wall, this, this thing could get huge if we just dedicated our time to it.

0 (58m 4s):
And so by 2015 you were full-time on this.

3 (58m 7s):
It was a year later. So 2016. Yep.

0 (58m 10s):
What happened that, that prompted you to go full-time?

3 (58m 14s):
Trader Joe's? So our first major retail customer.

0 (58m 18s):
Wait, how did that happen?

3 (58m 20s):
So I was down here in Florida actually walking my English bulldog, taking her for a walk. And I get a call on my cell phone one day and it's a very high up person at Trader Joe's that had been there for a long time. Told me that her daughter had been eating chomps and started bringing the product home. And the family liked the product and they, they wanted to find out about putting the product in into the stores and

0 (58m 46s):
Wow.

3 (58m 47s):
Yeah. That was, I I honestly, I thought I was being punked and it must've been like, you know, a prank call, but it turned out she was legit.

0 (58m 56s):
So Trader Joe's calls you and what I'm assuming you're like Yeah. Would love to talk more about this.

3 (59m 3s):
Yeah. And you know, the obvious discussion's really gonna be around, you know, private label

0 (59m 9s):
Already at that point.

3 (59m 11s):
Yeah, I mean they wanted, they wanted to do, you know, that's, that's just how they work. I mean essentially the, the conversation went, you know, we would love to bring in the product. It needs to be under the private, the Trader Joe's label. Right. We just weren't set up to do that at all. And being able to manage two different brands essentially through our co-packer, like he was, he was already having a hard time dealing with our, our scale. Yeah. And then now running another separate brand and just to, not to get to into the weeds on how it works, but the, the U S T A really makes it difficult when you're making any kind of changes to your packaging. So for us to start from scratch on creating all new packaging for Trader Joe's was not something that we could handle at the

0 (59m 54s):
Time. This is an important point, trader Joe's, which this is where I first saw chops in 2016, cuz I was on a paleo diet and I was like, oh cool, I can eat plantain chips and I can eat these things too. But what they do is they will bring in a product oftentimes, you know, I don't know, whatever it is, a cookie brand. And then over, you know, over the next year or so, you won't see that cookie brand anymore. But you will see the exact same cookie product just under Trader Joe's label. It's the same product, it's same quality and maybe a little bit cheaper. And then it's a tra it's like Trader Jose's or Trader GTO's or whatever they call it, you know, and then the, the the brand name you could still buy at like Whole Foods or whatever.

0 (1h 0m 37s):
So this is their business model and they essentially said to you, Hey, we'd love to, to sell your product under our label.

3 (1h 0m 45s):
Yeah. And, and so I I basically kind of politely said, I, we just can't, and, and in hindsight, if I had known the type of volume that they could move, I probably would've been able to, you know, or tried a little harder to, to figure out how to make that work. But,

0 (1h 0m 59s):
But you said no immediately you said we can't do that.

3 (1h 1m 2s):
We just cut in. I mean it was, it would've been a huge undertaking for us. Right. So it was actually an interesting conversation because it ended up where she was able to bring in a certain percentage, like I think it was 5% of the skews that they should brings in each year. She could do branded. And she said, I would, I would do this for you, but she wanted to make sure that we had all of our ducks in a row. We can handle the scale, we could finance it, all of those things. And so of course, you know, I'm a sales guy and I'm like, yeah, of course we could do all of that, you know, and then when their actual first POS came in, that was game changer.

0 (1h 1m 36s):
What was their purchase order for?

3 (1h 1m 38s):
It was 1.1 million sticks. Oh

0 (1h 1m 42s):
My

3 (1h 1m 43s):
God. And you know, when we saw that first po like that's where I was like, this is it. This is what's gonna put us on the radar. Yeah. It's gonna change everything. And it, it was larger than the previous year altogether in a single po Wow.

0 (1h 1m 57s):
One purchase order is bigger than your, all of the customers that you had in the previous year. You by, by a lot. Probably

3 (1h 2m 2s):
By a lot, by a lot.

4 (1h 2m 4s):
To put it into perspective, we, we were running about 10,000 pounds a month, anywhere from five to 10,000 pounds a month.

0 (1h 2m 11s):
And this is frozen meat just being shipped from Australia at this point.

4 (1h 2m 16s):
Yeah, that's the raw pounded. So, so 10 to 15 was our normal click. This required us to do about 150,000 pounds,

0 (1h 2m 23s):
150,000 pounds of meat a month because of Trader

4 (1h 2m 26s):
Joe's to fill this one po That's the scale.

0 (1h 2m 28s):
Wow. But there was no way all this is being made by that single co-packer in Missouri.

4 (1h 2m 34s):
Well it's funny. So first of all, like Kevin told us, no, probably a half a dozen times, but I just kept asking it in a different way where it's funny, like once we got through it and got them all, like, I remember where I was talking to him and he's like, Rashid, I don't know how you convinced me to do this. Like, cuz it would just, it was a lot. But no, it's the same, the same partner was able to scale with us. So getting him to at least commit and getting the supply plan in place, like that was a feat. But before we could even do that, we then had to figure out like how we were gonna get the money to even fill this po Right. Because this was an e-commerce, right? We, we didn't have that amount of cash. So I think we, we got the PO on a Friday, we're looking at this and we're like, I'm thinking, oh shit, like how this is, I was like, this is not what we discussed.

4 (1h 3m 23s):
This is way more than what what we had we discussed. And so my phone rings, it's Pete, and and he's like, you seeing this? I was like, yeah Pete, this is a lot more than what he's like, yeah, yeah. And so I was like, gimme a second. So I like, I go in my room, I build my spreadsheet, I'm, I'm calculating the total, like what does it actually look like? So I'm like, Pete, we need, I dunno, it's like one point something million to be able to, to fund this. And so in this situation we needed the cash.

0 (1h 3m 51s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Pete and Rashid pulled together the cash they need in order to grow and why they go through a very rocky period as partners Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to how I Built

2 (1h 4m 5s):
This.

5 (1h 4m 17s):
Think Your job stinks. Just wait until you hear what it was like to be a funeral clown long before all of human knowledge was on a device in your pocket. People had some pretty bizarre professions. Luckily you don't have to come in contact with a sin eater or barber surgeon now, but you're about to find out what it's like to get surgery with thin afternoon Shave from Wondery. This job is History is a new podcast hosted by me, Chris Parnell each week will invite actual people from the actual past who've worked the strangest and most unexpected jobs throughout time on this job is history. We delve into these quirky and absurd jobs where Alberto, brilliant interview questions that will keep our guests on the historical hot seat.

5 (1h 4m 59s):
Come get weird with us each week as comedians from the Groundlings and UCB act out these old-fashioned gigs from another time. You'll be glad your guidance counselor didn't recommend any of these careers. Clock in and follow this job as history. Wherever you get your podcast, you can listen ad free on the Amazon Music or Wondery app.

0 (1h 5m 22s):
Hey, welcome back to how I Built this. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 2016 and Pete and Rashid have just gotten their first big purchase order Trader Joe's 1 million Sticks. And the question is, where are they gonna find the money to make that happen?

3 (1h 5m 40s):
That's the fun part. So we were like, all right, well what are we gonna do here? Like we have no time to go to some, you know, institutional investor or Yeah. Anybody else. Like what are we gonna do? So we both just decided let's just call everybody we know. And so we actually thought of like what the terms would look like that we would offer people. And we were gonna do like a short term debt with a simple interest rate. I think it was a 10% interest rate. We would pay it back within, I wanna say it was nine months Rashid, is that what it was? I think the first one. Yeah.

0 (1h 6m 11s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 6m 11s):
And we raised money from, it's probably eight different investors that put up between a hundred to 200 a little more. Some of 'em had a little more

0 (1h 6m 21s):
And they were just bridge loans. They were not equity investments. Yeah.

3 (1h 6m 24s):
It was all, all friends and family. Rashid's family, his brother, his dad went hard. They actually helped us out big time. And then,

4 (1h 6m 33s):
But the funny thing about like my brother contributed a lot, but he actually made me do a personal guarantee on it. And I was like, Jamil, what are you, what are you talking about?

0 (1h 6m 42s):
He's like, I want your house.

4 (1h 6m 43s):
Exactly.

0 (1h 6m 44s):
And you're

4 (1h 6m 44s):
Firstborn. I still remember like we were, we're negotiating the terms. He's like, no, no, I need to make sure you, you guys have a personal guarantee on this. Oh my, I I get it. So we, I mean we, it was a, it was a very smart decision when we look back, right. Given that we didn't have to give up equity, it was a dead only, but there was risk in it. So I like we, we, we were always very transparent about the risk but also say like, you gotta trust in Pete and I we can, we can execute it. And we did.

3 (1h 7m 5s):
Yeah. And, and Trader Joe's, they gave us some projections they thought that we were gonna do and they, they kind of let this on their forecast and we far exceeded the projections I think by five times.

0 (1h 7m 19s):
Wow.

3 (1h 7m 20s):
You know, and it was just validating for us. And then the craziest thing was to think that there's just now millions of new people all over the country

0 (1h 7m 28s):
Exposed to this brand.

3 (1h 7m 29s):
Yeah. I mean we, we we 10 x the business from 2015 to 2016 and then putting it in a perspective, like we launched August 8th, 2016.

0 (1h 7m 40s):
You launched in Trader Joe's in August of 2016. Yeah.

3 (1h 7m 43s):
And so the bulk of that year's revenue came into the back half of the year, you know, since August.

0 (1h 7m 49s):
Alright, so you are in Trader Joe's and it is just, and this is 2016 and you are full-time on this. Pete and Rashid, you are still got

4 (1h 8m 0s):
This? I'm still, I'm still part-time. I'm still traveling.

0 (1h 8m 3s):
Yeah. You got a good job going. Was, did there start to become some, I don't know, tension or pressure between the two of you? Because now it's a real business. It's like, you know, you got a million dollar order.

3 (1h 8m 16s):
Yeah, I would say it was, that was probably the source of most of our any contention back then. Yeah. I think the way I felt about it was that I was over here working on things and then he would come and his consult, he's a consultant so what he does, he walks in and he spots issues and points them out to people and tells you what to do to fix 'em. Right? Yeah. And so I'm over here like, what the hell? Like I'm over here busting my butt and then you come in and you're picking apart my work. Why don't you quit your job and work with me would be so much more efficient so I don't go down some path and have to like unravel everything I just did. And so like that was this like ongoing, and, and by the way, the things he would point out were like, I would get so mad cause I'm like, he's freaking right.

3 (1h 8m 59s):
Yeah. Like what? And I'd get mad at myself and mad at him and it was just like super frustrating. But yeah.

4 (1h 9m 4s):
Yeah. And I would say like, I, I don't think Pete and I communicated we are both super competitive even with each other and we always wanted to win. So even if it was like I, our idea versus his idea. And so I think fast forward, we, we now know how we're wired, how we tick, we know kind of how to work to, I mean, I think right now we're working together better than we ever have. But it doesn't mean like it's all kumbaya that we, we still, we still will, we need the tension. Cause I think that's what makes the business special because we have such differing perspectives when it comes to how things should be and it allows us to challenge each other the right way. But it, it, it was very, I mean it just created a lot of stress and, but in my mind too, like all the things from an operations perspective, accounting, finance, I still was managing all that.

4 (1h 9m 50s):
Right? It's like I, I was doing it behind the scenes and sometimes Pete didn't fully understand all the work that went into it. And I think unless you live in the world of operations, like there's just a lot of stuff that needs to happen for it to run the right way. And not hearing anything means you're doing a good job. Right. But it, it was just, there was tension, there was stress and it, it, it put a lot of pressure on our relationship.

0 (1h 10m 13s):
So what does it take for you Rashid, to, to leap into this full-time? What was the catalyst?

4 (1h 10m 19s):
I didn't go full-time until January, 2018. Wow. Yeah.

0 (1h 10m 24s):
And by that point you guys were probably already

4 (1h 10m 27s):
10,000,010 million

0 (1h 10m 29s):
In revenue.

4 (1h 10m 30s):
Yeah. That, that was, that was the right time.

0 (1h 10m 32s):
How much convincing does it take for you to go full-time?

4 (1h 10m 37s):
Are you trying to like, bring up

0 (1h 10m 39s):
Stuff?

3 (1h 10m 39s):
I'm sorry. I'm not trying to thank

0 (1h 10m 41s):
You. I don't wanna I don't wanna bring trauma up again. I'm sorry. No, I mean you're, you are a cautious person, obviously super cautious. But what, so what was the catalyst that made you feel comfortable enough to do that?

4 (1h 10m 51s):
No, I mean like from my perspective again, like we were profitable but we were profitable cuz the business was lean. Right? Pete and I weren't really drawing, we didn't really have infrastructure. So when we got Trader Joe's, Pete and I made the decision that we were gonna be the best trader Joe's partner. We weren't gonna leverage all those folks seeing it to try to get into the other retailers.

3 (1h 11m 12s):
Yeah. By the way that is, it was totally contrarian to what all of the, like other people in the industry, even advisors that were working with us, they were pushing us to do the exact same thing and saying, use this as a springboard. This is your chance. Use this momentum, get

0 (1h 11m 28s):
Into Walmart and Tara. Because Trader Joe's alone is not, you can't really, you can only hit a ceiling. You can't get beyond that ceiling, which is true. But they that's what they were saying to you.

3 (1h 11m 38s):
Yeah. And, and we just, it didn't intuitively felt wrong. It felt like what we should be doing is treat Trader Joe's the absolute best that we ever could be the best possible vendor that we could. And that's exactly what we did. And in hindsight it was the absolute right thing to do. You

4 (1h 11m 56s):
Know, just, and, but we were, we were still growing e-commerce, right? So that's where it's like we were focusing on e-commerce, Amazon and Trader Joe's and both were just, I mean, trader Joe's, every time we launched another skew, the business would, would almost double.

0 (1h 12m 8s):
Wow. So you're now in this full-time and that, and it was obviously related to the growth of this thing. Yep.

4 (1h 12m 16s):
Yeah. So January, 2018, Pete and I come to an agreement, we're like, okay, Rashi's coming full-time. We open an office in Chicago, we hire two folks

0 (1h 12m 25s):
To do what

4 (1h 12m 26s):
Marketing and then kind of an operations support role just to be

0 (1h 12m 33s):
Yeah cuz but by up to this point you weren't really, didn't have any marketing budget, now you've got cash in the bank.

4 (1h 12m 40s):
And so we hired this marketing person to kind of really professionalize the brand. And I think one of the big things we did in 2018 was we had a packaging refresh where the brand chomp says, you see the brand today? That's what kind of came out of that process. And it, and yeah, I think that was a, a big milestone in, in our growth because it allowed Chomps to stand out on the shelf compared to kind of all the other brands out there that are kind of the, we say the sea sameness.

0 (1h 13m 7s):
He, here's what I don't understand. I'm starting to see a little bit of it now in, in like Whole Foods and I've, I've bought some of, of them just to test 'em out competing brands. But, but at the time, like 2017, you're crushing it at Trader Joe's. I'm surprised that the company that makes Slim Gyms or that does Jack's links or something wasn't like, Hey, we gotta get on this grass-fed slim gym thing.

3 (1h 13m 33s):
They they all tried briefly. Yeah. I mean they

0 (1h 13m 37s):
All And did that wor did that worry you? At least initially?

3 (1h 13m 40s):
Yeah, for sure it did. But I think what what happens is, like the customers that were buying those, those products, they know those brands and they're not interested in those brands. It doesn't matter if they're selling something that's, you know, comparable, they know what that what that it's more of a, it almost be like selling out, right?

0 (1h 13m 59s):
So even when those big brands came out with grass fed organic jerky products like yours competing products, it would be like, I don't know if, I don't know, Coca-Cola came out with a kombucha. People would be like, I'm I'm gonna stick with my kombucha brand.

3 (1h 14m 13s):
Well, well first off, I think a lot of it is people are seeing through some of that greenwashing too. So they're going for specific claims, right? Just to check boxes. But the customers are so educated nowadays. They know how to read labels, they know how to read ingredients list. And so you might have something on there trying to claim certain things. So for instance, there was a product out there that was, this is how it read 100% beef grass fed, right? So you changed the order. So our, our label says 100% grass fed beef, that's the right way to say it. They said a 100% beef grass fed. Yeah. I have no idea what that means or like why it would be that way, but they, it was something strict, something a little shady going on.

3 (1h 14m 59s):
And I think, you know, I think customers caught onto that and I feel like that's, and we're very selective too. Like we will go through 10 different flavor profiles before we actually launched something. And even today we only have nine flavors. So you gotta imagine like those types of bigger companies, you know, they over innovate. They throw, you know, as many different skews out there. They test and see what's gonna work, but they do it when it's out in the marketplace and Yeah. You know, anytime we ever launch a product now we, we spend a lot more time and there's a lot more feedback coming in. Yeah,

0 (1h 15m 29s):
I'm, I'm curious about price point, right? Because this is not a, the same price as slim gyms, right? And but it, I guess, did it not matter? Were you just not even worried about that because you were going after a different consumer willing to spend more money on this, this beef stick versus a, a slim gym or a a, a competing beef stick? Well,

4 (1h 15m 48s):
So like if you look at the category in general, right? You have Slim Gyms, you have Jack links, but they're the majority of the jerky categories in C store convenience, right? Gas station and Chomps. We're not playing in that space right now. And so a lot of the times, like we're not necessarily going head-to-head with

0 (1h 16m 5s):
Them. You're not going up against Jack's links or whatever the other

4 (1h 16m 8s):
Brands are. Like, we're starting to a little bit more as we get into broader retail exposure, but like our core, it it, you know, Jacqueline and Slim, they're not in Trader Joe's, right? They're not in Whole Foods, they're not in Sprouts. And so that's where it's like, you know, we wanted to make sure we're priced right so the consumer will will not like bulk on it, but like we're priced, we're line priced with all the other competitors in the space.

0 (1h 16m 28s):
Once you were, you're in Trader Joe's and you're really in hit 10 million in revenue, presumably people are saying to you, Hey, you gotta have more products. You gotta have a larger product line, more skews. And really the kind of beauty of the business was its elegance, its simplicity, it's really, it's one product. It's beef sticks. But there was probably pressure on you to like diversify beyond that. Does to go into like, I don't know, puffed beef crunchies or stuff like that. Did did, did you get people saying that like you cannot build a business on beef sticks alone?

3 (1h 17m 5s):
Well we would get comments like that, but then we would just be like, have you looked at our growth? I mean you can't, you can't argue with numbers, right? And that's just the, our growth was very strong and it was all very concentrated within this core product line. We get comments every so often, but it's like, you know, I think we've kind of proved that wrong at this point. We're gonna be exceeding the, we have exceeded that, that nine figure range of, of revenue. So

0 (1h 17m 32s):
Over a hundred million dollars in beef sticks, it's incredible.

4 (1h 17m 35s):
Well I would say we do have Turkey as well, so,

0 (1h 17m 38s):
Sorry,

3 (1h 17m 39s):
In

0 (1h 17m 39s):
Meat sticks and venison. And venison, right. It really is amazing. I mean it shows you there was zero market for the, well there were slim gyms, but it just shows you the just consumer habits have changed so much because I would imagine most people eating this are probably into nutrition. So this is like a protein kick for them. Yeah, it's probably somebody who's not choosing to eat a Snickers bar, even though they're great. Right? It's it's a different kind of consumer. Well

3 (1h 18m 7s):
Yeah, very different. And here's a, here's a fun fact actually. So our core consumer is over 70% female. Hmm. So if you think about that jerky or meat snacks category, how it's so

0 (1h 18m 17s):
Dudes, it's truck trackers, it's

3 (1h 18m 19s):
All dudes, all dudes just look at that set. I mean it's all like even the colors of their packaging, it's the blacks though,

0 (1h 18m 24s):
Jack links,

3 (1h 18m 25s):
All of it. All of it. And we've got mommies, we've got, you know, it's a, it's pretty wild and we didn't really set out to build the business that way, but I feel like the way that we started within these niche diet tribes very early on, those were all very heavily female focused. But then also as an e-commerce brand in general, like we built the brand on social media that's, it was all free for us back, you know, back when we did it. Yeah. That's, that was the way to do it. And so females were really driving that.

4 (1h 18m 51s):
And I think also there's one stat, like with one of our retailers, we were bringing 40% new folks to the jerky set. So people eat chomps, not because it's a jerky product, it's just a better for you snacking option.

0 (1h 19m 4s):
So I imagine during the pandemic, like many snack brands like Cliff Bars and others there you just saw massive surge cuz everybody was like stockpiling shelf stable stuff for a while. But then probably like a lot of those products you saw a dip because, well people were going to, weren't going to the gym and maybe people had a, a chomp stick in their bag in their gym bag and people weren't, you know, they were in their house in their pajamas. Right? And, and you, and I think you did see a dip in 2020 in sales, right?

3 (1h 19m 33s):
Yeah. So we saw that massive spike that you mentioned. Then the rug got pulled out from underneath us, you know, because we're very, we're impulse, we're an impulse purchase, right? Like you're, you're at, we're at all these registers at all these different retailers and if you suddenly see a huge drop 90% overnight and foot traffic that hurts and so your product's gonna stop moving on top of that not being an essential item. Or not the paper towels, toilet paper, whatever, you know, other items or just a snack. The distributors themselves were, were not even saving room on the trucks to, for products like ours. So they were either just sitting in their warehouses, not making it to the store or they just stopped ordering.

3 (1h 20m 19s):
And I, I think as soon as everything came back online in terms of like distributors having more of that, that capacity and other retailers opening these doors back up and allowing more people to come into the stores, we saw all of that demand come back and then some and it things just blew up. Like the brand just kept getting bigger and bigger and faster than we ever imagined and we hit a production capacity with our co-packer.

0 (1h 20m 45s):
How did you solve it? Did it just kind of work itself out?

4 (1h 20m 48s):
No, I mean we've, we have now three separate manufacturing facilities and three packaging lines running simultaneously and we went ahead and ordered six more. So we, next year we, we may have up to five facilities running Chms to be able to keep up with demand. It just took time right At the end of the day. Like we didn't want to flip a switch and, and not have faith in the new manufacturing partners to be able to produce the exact same product. And so it just, it took time to get them to stand up. But now we're in a, we're in a lot better shape.

0 (1h 21m 19s):
And this is a, a kind of a mind blowing thing. You have a tiny staff for a company that does over a hundred million dollars. How many employees do you have Full-time?

4 (1h 21m 28s):
We're just under 40 right now.

0 (1h 21m 30s):
It's unbelievable. Yeah,

4 (1h 21m 32s):
We need a lot more people. We're yeah,

0 (1h 21m 35s):
You need more people.

3 (1h 21m 36s):
Yeah, we'll have, we'll have 70, the HR roadmap is built out to 70 through the end of end of 23. But

4 (1h 21m 43s):
I think the, the other thing is like Pete and I see so many other companies where they surge employment and you see these layoffs and yes, Pete and I were like, we're so aware that we, we want to grow the team the right way and we never want a situation where we kind of grew too fast. And I think it, it's also the tension between Pete and I as far as like our measured risk on how we want to do and I think we found a happy meeting but like people is one thing where we're very deliberate about who we bring in. We wanna make sure that they meet our core values but also that there's longevity and it's not something where it would require us to pull back.

0 (1h 22m 17s):
Is is Rashid is in your view, Pete the one always wanted to race forward and you're the one kind of restraining him just a little bit?

4 (1h 22m 24s):
I would say Pete describes it as

3 (1h 22m 26s):
Where Chuck barreling down the road, I'm the guy with my foot pinned on the gas Rashid's actually steering the truck and he set up the guardrails to make sure we don't fly off the highway and we're just going faster and faster and faster right now.

4 (1h 22m 39s):
But I do think like, it, it, I would say like my approach isn't to slow things down, but I think I can, I can refine sometimes Pete's ideas, but I think collectively we both are able to pour fuel on the fire, right? Like if we want to get something done we can execute and move quickly but also do so diligently like it's, it's tough to do both.

0 (1h 22m 59s):
Alright. And the, up until 2022 is 10 years in totally bootstrapped, you've just taken a couple of loans all repaid 2022, you take, decide to take your first outside investment, 80 million from Minority Stake. I think the company has valued it two to 300 million roughly am I right about that valuation

4 (1h 23m 22s):
To about 200. Okay.

0 (1h 23m 24s):
And it's awesome cuz now you can take some money off the table. You've been boots strapping this for so long. What does that investment allow you to do now? To to to, I mean, cuz you're everywhere, you're in all the big box stores and where does the growth now come from? How do you get bigger?

3 (1h 23m 41s):
So I would say more importantly than, than the cash because we didn't do the raise cuz the company needed cash, right? We needed, what we were doing is we were trying to align ourselves with very, very smart people. We were interviewing investors to see who's gonna bring the most value.

0 (1h 23m 57s):
I I'm sure with your cash flow and your margin and your low cost, I'm sure there was tons of people wanting to invest.

3 (1h 24m 3s):
Yeah, I mean we, we had, we had opportunities for, you know, minority stakes, majority stakes, or we could have sold the whole company and we, we were not excited about that whatsoever. Like we, we have so much work to do and things that we know that we can accomplish on our own, but we do also realize and we recognize that we've never built a company this big before. We'll be the first ones to raise our hands and kind of say we need help. And at this scale it's, you know, we have something significant to lose. And so what we wanted to be able to do is learn from somebody else's scar tissue. And I think that is so valuable that's worth more than any amount of money. So it's just been an, an absolute, just a game changer.

3 (1h 24m 43s):
And they totally leveled up the business since they joined.

0 (1h 24m 46s):
So when a private equity firm makes a minority stake, usually down the road, it means they wanna outright own the whole business. And, and that may happen here, that down the road, you know, this, this private equity firm will, will buy out, you know, or maybe you'll all sell to a, a larger company or something. I mean, I'm assuming that, you know, you both love what you're doing, you've been at it for 10 years and full-time really only for about five or six. But what do you think, I mean, you know, you already have built this massive brand and clearly at some point, you know, there's gonna have to be a, some kind of exit because you do have an investor here.

4 (1h 25m 27s):
Yeah, I mean I think we'll have a feeling when we may need help and raise our hands and that may drive it, but I think, you know, we've got a good five to seven years to continue to, to build towards that billion dollars. Like at the end of the innovation go two ways, right? It can either be really bad or be really good and that's why we're, we're patient about what we bring to market. There's a lot of stuff that we're working on right now and we have a lot of good things underway, but we can grow with our existing line. We don't need to launch more products to, to grow at least in the next two years.

0 (1h 25m 57s):
Hmm. When you reflect on this story, obviously a lot of really great strategic thoughts gone into this and the fact that the two of you partnered on a, you know, really you got married quickly, right? Overnight, it was a, it was a Vegas shotgun wedding. How much of, of what happened do you, do you ha think has to do with the work and how much do you chalk it up to luck first to you, Rashid?

4 (1h 26m 23s):
I would say it's a little bit of both, but I think what, what I think Pete and I are really good at is taking luck and capitalizing on it, right? There's, there's kind of a burden hand opportunity and there's a few different approaches you could take and I think, you know, we were fortunate to get that call from Trader Joe's, but we were also, we're able to leverage our skill and what we, we thought the wanted the business to do to, to capitalize on that opportunity.

0 (1h 26m 48s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 26m 48s):
What I would say is, you know, both Rashid and I come from immigrant families and you know, just growing up watching my grandmother working two to three different jobs, raising six kids on her own, unable to speak English really well, but it was just, she just did it. And then my dad had that exact same mentality. It's just the mindset that he has always, always had and really instilled in me. That's what I've seen growing up. Rashid comes from a very similar background. I think the two of us is really have this scrappy, resourceful mentality and extremely resilient. Like it does not matter if, if you tell, if we set our minds to something, we will make it happen.

3 (1h 27m 31s):
And that's just how we've always been.

0 (1h 27m 36s):
That's Pete Maldonado and Rashi Ali, co-founders of Chomps. By the way, if you look at the Chomps website, you will find all kinds of interesting recipes for how to use the snacks sticks in a bunch of different ways. There's Chomps Kesh, chomps Kebabs, chomps Quesadillas, chomps Chili, even a Valentine's Day dinner for two pasta carbonara with yes Chomps. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you wanna contact our team, our email address is ibt id.wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at How I built this and mine is at Guy Raz and on Instagram.

0 (1h 28m 16s):
We're at How I Built This and I'm at Guy dot Raz. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by Bluey. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Susanna Brown. Our production staff also includes Casey Herman, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Liz Metzger, Katherine Seifer, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung, Chris Masini, Carla Estevez, Sam Paulson, and Lauren Einhorn. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey Prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and add free on Amazon Music.

0 (1h 29m 0s):
Download the Amazon music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear@wonderyshop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.