3 (0s):
Hey there, it's guy here and really quick before we start this brand-new episode of the show how I built this isn't just a podcast but also a book A book filled with stories and lessons from some of the world's greatest entrepreneurs about the gift of failure the beauty of ideas and the path to building something meaningful. You can pre-order the book right now wherever you get your books or by visiting Kyra's.com.

4 (31s):
One of the best ways we would get customers to sign up is we did this Lululemon promotion where people would get $100 gift cards Lululemon if they signed up for class pass and stayed with us for 6 months and one day I get to the office and there's like a letter on my desk and I open it and it's a cease and desist from Lululemon God and I remember you know, my first instinct was like, oh no, should I be scared? But then I was like, oh my God Lululemon knows who we are.

3 (1m 6s):
From NPR it's how I built this show

4 (1m 9s):
about innovators

3 (1m 10s):
entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz and on the show today when pile Kedah Kia couldn't book a dance class online. She built her own solution called class pass a booking service for Fitness classes now valued at over a billion dollars The more complex your business idea the more likely that it will take a lot of time to get it right think about companies that depend on data to optimize their services door - for example doesn't just deliver food.

3 (1m 52s):
It's a logistics business same with Amazon and even Peloton all these companies provide services that require a lot of data to function effectively but to get there too. Get to a place where they all worked more or less efficiently required many years of pain to be clear.

4 (2m 13s):
There is no

3 (2m 13s):
simple playbook for running a complex business. There is a lot of trial and error and sometimes trying to build a complicated business is like trying to improve an airplane mid-flight, which is sort of what happened with class pass class pass is a subscription service that gives its users access to words of thousands of Fitness classes in cities around the world back in 2010 class pass founder of pile. Kahdijiha was working a corporate job in New York and also running a dance troupe and one day she wanted to sign up for a dance class online and couldn't do it easily.

3 (2m 53s):
So in 2012 pile on a co-founder launched class tivity a search engine where people could sign up for all types of classes from Fitness to photography. But not only did that idea flop it went through many painful iterations upgrades adjustments and pivots before it became what it is today earlier this year class pass became the first so-called unicorn of the decade when it raised around a funding on a billion dollar valuation and 2020 was set to be the best year in class passes history, but then the company flew into a big giant.

3 (3m 35s):
Giant head wind called covid-19. The fitness industry has been one of

4 (3m 39s):
the hardest hit since the pandemic began. So

3 (3m 43s):
these days pile is found herself in the middle of an unprecedented crisis for her company a business that has largely depended on people showing up to Studios to take Fitness classes. Now one of the criteria for coming on to how I built this is generosity. You have to be generous in recounting your experience, even if it means talking through Personal and professional failures and setbacks, but most of the time entrepreneurs talk about these things while looking in the rearview mirror in piles case. The setback is happening in real time, and she's being tested in a way. She could never have anticipated. But for now, let's start at the beginning of the story.

3 (4m 26s):
How was born and raised in New Jersey her parents had emigrated to the u.s. From India in the 1970s my mom's brother.

4 (4m 35s):
Instead of giving them a wedding gift told them that he would give them two tickets to America and they you know got on a flight came here probably worked, you know for jobs to make it work and we're living in small apartments, you know taking buses to work both. My parents are chemists and that's really been the backbone of their life. Tell me a

3 (4m 56s):
little bit about your I mean about like your household was it you know was was Indian culture a really important part of your life as a kid. Did you go to like Indian School on the weekends? I got a Sunday stuff like that.

4 (5m 9s):
So growing up. My I was one of the only Indian people in my school. So I had an interesting, you know, sort of dual identity where you know, my high school and Elementary years were filled with you know, going to soccer practice and cheerleading practice. And then on the weekends, I would go to sort of this adjacent Community. It was a town called Parsippany where there were a lot more Indian people. And that's where I really got a sense of my culture and my community and on the weekends. I would also start dance practice. So my mom's best friend

3 (5m 43s):
my dance teacher.

4 (5m 45s):
She started teaching us Indian classical and folk dance when I was three years old. Wow, and we yeah, so we would do this in basements right? There was no there was no ballet school for Indian hands, you know, and even though my parents wanted us to assimilate, you know, I think it was very important to them that we stayed connected to where we came from and for me dance was That way of doing that even though probably at the time I didn't appreciate it much. I was like, why am I waking up early on Saturday to go to dance class? So,

3 (6m 13s):
how did you how did you get super into Indian dance? I mean because it sounds like is this is something you did and we're going to talk more about this but some of you did throughout school and then to college like what was it about Indian dance that just really kind of Drew you in

4 (6m 28s):
so in India, there are at that time. I mean, it's called Bollywood now, but it was called the Hindi, you know film In Hindi films and there were actresses like Madhuri Dixit and sridevi who were you know, these unbelievable actresses that would dance in these movies and you know to me they were like goddesses and they you know, like emulated this power of expression and Charisma that you know, I think as an Indian girl, I would sit in my house and I literally would put the video on over and over and over again and try and emulate it. I think for me what I started realizing with Indian dances it was this way for me to feel connected to where it came from especially because I was around people who didn't look like me and it also became this place where I felt really confident.

4 (7m 18s):
I became this performer when I was you know, very young. I remember since I was 5 I performed at every family function or party. I would have to have like my cassette ready my dance outfit ready, you know, and I think that that was really Important for me to find a place where I felt so alive. I felt like I could touch people and I think when you're that young and you realize that you have the power to affect other people it changes you at a very deep human level, and I think that's really what happened to me.

3 (7m 52s):
I read a story that when you are thinking third or fourth grade you performed at school and and and kids laughed at you and tease to you. What do you remember about that? I

4 (8m 3s):
remember exactly what I was wearing. I remember going on to the stage and you know, I think at the time I didn't think my culture my background was that big of an issue and then I started doing this dance and it was what my dance teacher had taught me and we had performed. By the way, like at Major places as a dance company, you know and and sort of Indian Community, but I didn't realize it wouldn't translate to my you know,

3 (8m 32s):
Elementary School family. Probably white kids exactly.

4 (8m 35s):
I just didn't see the difference. I just thought it was okay. Well like I love doing this and I do this when I compete over the weekend and even though the audience is filled with Indian people, why wouldn't it work and my school auditorium and clean a little bit after I started dancing. I remember people started like Cooing and laughing and I think I remember feeling really bad when my sister was sort of embarrassed of me when I came home and realizing that oh, I am different and I actually think that started this phase of my life that probably lasted a good six seven years where I had my Indian life and I had my my like American life and I kept them very

3 (9m 14s):
separate. Would you describe yourself as like shy and quiet or would you describe yourself as confident as Isabel as a

4 (9m 20s):
girl Young? Kid. Yeah, it's actually pretty interesting. I was pretty shy and quiet and I think that was a dynamic of my family like my mom and my sister were both very like loud dominant personalities. It actually took me until I would say going to college where I started realizing what a leader I was and how you know what my voice was and how to sort of take control of situations because I was I was the baby of my family and even within all my cousins and everyone like I was a baby and I also I know where we're You know over over this microphone, but I'm 411 and I was never very tall. So, you know, I was always a small person and so I had to really find a way to come out of that and I started really realizing that once I went to college

3 (10m 7s):
and what about school? Was it pretty did it come pretty easy for you?

4 (10m 11s):
I would say education was a very important pillar of my childhood getting good grades was sort of a non-negotiable. I had to work hard to get. Good grades, though. It wasn't I don't you know, I think there's people in the world who are sort of just like great at getting you know getting through school and didn't have to study and would just like Ace the test. That was not me. I had to study it was actually interesting English and writing we're just harder subjects for me maybe because of you know, my parents, you know didn't always speak English in the house but like math and science it just was so it was easy for me and I loved it and I used to always even like think about how my life revolved around numbers and actually Did my entire college application essay on how my life revolved around the number two?

4 (10m 56s):
So

3 (10m 56s):
sort of the number two? Yeah, what tell me more about the number

4 (10m 59s):
two. So well, I was a second daughter and this idea of having dual identities, which I was just talking about like I was indian-american and I always really had this very analytical side to me. But I also had a very creative side to me and that's really I think throughout my life like the other sort of dual identity. I had which I always wanted to come together

3 (11m 20s):
and I guess that That sa got you into MIT, which is where you went. And I read you you majored in something called operations research, which is like I guess like a sort of a scientific approach to management. Yep, but why you were there I guess you also stuck with dance right like you kept you

4 (11m 37s):
kept dancing I stuck with that and if it didn't exist, I created it. So even at MIT, there was no Indian dance troupe that existed on campus with the style of dance that you know, I had done so I created it in my second year. Of being at school in my you know it I put on shows there. It was my life. Like I think everyone anyone who's like known me. I mean a lot of people obviously no me today as the founder of class fast, but before that, I mean everyone's just like pile is a dancer and that's who she

3 (12m 6s):
was just for a moment and please be immodest hear how you must have been really good. I mean like competitive level dancer.

4 (12m 14s):
It was I think the way I dance that really captured people I think you know since I was younger people would just like stop and watch me dance and it was because like I said I dance from my heart and I think whenever you see someone's like entire being come alive and doing anything in their life, right and I think I always talk about this is Dan it was dance for me. I think it's music for other people. It's you know, it's being active for others and that was my home and I think when you see someone come so in connection to a place where they belong it's it makes everyone feel alive

3 (12m 50s):
one of the cool things about When you see em in Indian dance troupe, it's so seamless. It doesn't it doesn't seem choreographed but it must be like intensely choreographic every tiny movement right is practice and rehearse and rehearse.

4 (13m 4s):
Absolutely. I mean, I used to cry a graph big dances for our culture shows at MIT. And you know, I think what was nice is I would bring you know my entire class together. We had a lot of Indian people at MIT. So some of the dances I would choreograph

3 (13m 19s):
had 40 people in them. Them

4 (13m 21s):
getting 40 people to move in who 40 people who didn't have a lot of dance background to move in the same way taught me a lot about

3 (13m 28s):
how to lead. Yeah. So you graduate from MIT, this is Brent 2005 and you join beIN as a consultant a lot of smart young people do that. And did you at that point ever think about like opening your own thing one day or was that not really top of mind? I actually

4 (13m 48s):
thought about starting a dance company right away, right? I got two and you were at the dance company, correct? That

3 (13m 53s):
was what I would have that as a business.

4 (13m 56s):
Yeah, that's exactly what I would have done or even just like starting a studio or something, but I'm actually really glad I did an eye and I've thought about this like getting real world experience and especially in a place like New York City is so important. So obviously, you know, I got real world experience working at Bay and but I also got to see how sort of the dance community and arts Community worked because I was dancing and taking class through my first, you know few years living in New York City to which taught me Ooh so much about how you know other fields work as well. And I think I needed that hands-on experience. And I don't think I was ready at that point to even though I kind of like believed in myself that I could do something. I didn't know what it was nor did I actually realize how the world

3 (14m 36s):
works but it sounds like this was this was really what you wanted to do because I guess you only lasted a band only lasts a band about three years and you took a new job. Actually that would allow you to focus on starting a dance

4 (14m 50s):
company. Yeah. Yep, so, you know, I think the first few years when I was working at Bain I was able to sort of Juggle going to dance practice after work and you know going to performances on the weekends. I have you know, I have some interesting stories where one day I remember I was walking to work and there were tryouts for So You Think You Can Dance going on outside my door and I called in sick and decided to go audition. Like these are some of the conflicts I was having in my life and the TV show. Yeah, the TV show and you didn't make it I'm trying to make it. It's okay, but that's fine. But it was one of those things where I would have these incredible sort of dance experiences happening, you know while I was working and I didn't like that.

4 (15m 35s):
I didn't have this predictable schedule. And so while most of my friends were going off to business school. I ended up taking this job at Warner Music Group in their digital strategy group because

3 (15m 45s):
it would give you time or to work on this because you wanted to work for

4 (15m 48s):
Warner so I kind of at least Guard hey, I'm taking a job in an industry and with that, you know with selling something I believed in right? So that was sort of a way. I think I convinced myself that it was the right place. And I under you know, it was actually a really interesting time in the music industry because everything was moving from physical to digital. So I got to see like an entire transformation happen. Did I really know what I want like at that time. Did I was I really passionate about that job? No, but was it a means to an end? Yes, and so you start this dance

3 (16m 19s):
troupe and I is it pronounced saw dance? It's

4 (16m 21s):
yeah, it's saw as

3 (16m 23s):
a saw dance dance. Oh Dance troupe and this was like your passion but this really was and you were performing all the time on weekends in around New York City. Yep, and how are you? Were you like running this thing?

4 (16m 38s):
Yeah. So I was you know, I called myself the artistic director and executive director every second. I wasn't working, you know in my during my full-time job. I was either choreographing rehearsing, you know, I was booking space. I was finding places for us to perform their you know, I had 10 dancers many of them. By the way also like Executives at huge companies working Consulting. Like, you know, we all we all kind of had that dual Dynamic so we wouldn't have practice until 8 p.m. At night we would dance until 10:00 10:30 go home kind of do it all over again the next

3 (17m 11s):
day and how did you recruit them? How did you find them? It was a

4 (17m 14s):
community-based dance group in the sense of you know, I think everyone through college like every single College had an Indian dance. Stroupe, so we all knew he was either when I started building this, you know, they were like with I'd love to do this they missed dance, right? This is also the Crux of so much of where class has came from they were missing dance everyone missed doing something in an activity that they loved so much and so it was definitely the busy at one of the busiest times of my life. But also, you know, this is sort of where it started for me and I realized what you can do if you

3 (17m 46s):
hustle was your goal at the time to like to turn this into a sustainable Double business were you hoping that that you could quit your day job and and dance full-time.

4 (17m 56s):
Look I wasn't building my dad's company for money and all the girls dancing at the time weren't doing it for money either. All right, we all had other jobs. We all had right ways to make income. So we were really doing this to share our hearts until this day. I mean my dance company is set up as a non-profit. It is something actually that we do because we enjoy it I think for me at that point in my life, I wasn't ready to fully skill my dance company. Me and I kind of really wanted to find a way to Bill to bring my business side and everything. I had sort of studied with my passion together. So I actually started thinking about building something new and that's really when you know, the seeds of starting a company like classpath started.

3 (18m 36s):
Yeah. So, how did it start? Like what what did you do?

4 (18m 41s):
So in the summer of 2010, I went out to San Francisco. I met a bunch of entrepreneurs because it was one of my friends birthdays one of my former. In vain friends and all her friends were building apps and ideas. And in 2010 in New York City. I could not count. You know, I didn't know that many entrepreneurs grow. Most of my friends were in finance banking or fashion. So I you know go and talk to them about these ideas. They're telling me about what they're building. I mean some of them weren't even great ideas, but I remember thinking to them and asking them like you do this full time, and they said yes and I was it was sort of this new idea for me like and it made me think about this.

4 (19m 21s):
If of Entrepreneurship and what if I could really blend, you know, my creativity with my business skills and build something as well.

3 (19m 28s):
So you have sent this trips and Cisco clearly inspires you to Sparks an idea in your head. And what do you go back to you come back to

4 (19m 35s):
New York. So I come back to New York, correct. So I take a red-eye remember on Sunday night and I remember thinking to myself, you know, what pile like why don't you give yourself two weeks to think of an idea and hey if you think of an idea maybe entrepreneurship is the right way. If not, okay. Maybe it's time, you know. Look for another job in Corporate America. So I'm studying ballet at the time. I was going to class obviously a ton. I wasn't we weren't inactive dance phase at the time, but I was obviously still training. So on the Tuesday after I get back I you know get on my computer. I have my valet clothes with me. I start looking for a new class to take I end up with, you know, seven tabs open. I'm looking at the schedule.

4 (20m 15s):
I'm looking at the teachers. I'm looking at the times and it's all over the place, right? The format's are different time. I'm kind of getting lost between, you know the times and the subway I need to take and by then it's been two hours and I've missed class and I don't go that day and that's when it hit me. I realized oh my God. This is a disaster. This information is all over the place. What if technology could help people put this all in one place for them to be able to you know continue to do their passions and go to class that was the initial moment for

3 (20m 45s):
me this idea of like and I remember that right like you would look for you know bunch. Different yoga studios for example or whatever and they're you know websites and tabs and sign up here. And yeah, and and so you were looking at that thinking there should be just one easy way to do

4 (21m 2s):
this, right? And at the time I was really obviously inspired by you know products like OpenTable Seamless Web

3 (21m 9s):
ZocDoc those were

4 (21m 10s):
all a part of the offline to online movement that was going on. So that was the idea and you know Open Table, I think had just reached a billion dollars at the time and so everyone, you know, Knew there was a lot of scalability in a product like this. So that's sort of for me the market research. I started doing in those models to see how I could build this for

3 (21m 29s):
classes. So you're kind of thinking about this book, but didn't what's the next step? I mean, you still have a job at that

4 (21m 36s):
time, right? Yeah. So I I'm still working for Warner. I start, you know, once again doing some research looking at these adjacent bottles. I start doing some, you know, a little bit of qualitative research with my friends. So I start telling them, you know, hey, I want to build this idea like Ben table for classes which by the way sounds pretty good. Right anyone. It sounded everyone was like that sounds great. I would do it and I am by the way the name of the company at the time was called dabble dabble now because that was what I thought the company would be thunder feel like a place where people could dabble in different classes. Yeah, and I you know, I would just kind of tell them about the idea and they were people were really interested in in me starting it.

3 (22m 16s):
So and you were I mean were you

4 (22m 19s):
looking for for funding at that? A pointer or not quite yet. I had to quit my job. Like you said, I mean, I wasn't fully there yet and obviously like for me getting my parents blessing was actually really important thing for me. I remember sitting down with them Thanksgiving of that year. So we're in 2010 still and you know, I was pretty like burned out when it came to my job at work and I remember just thinking like, oh, I don't want to go back into the office on Monday and my mom looked at me and she goes why don't you quit and that was actually a very Rising thing to hear from someone like my mother who's you know, as I said emigrated here wanted to make sure my sister and I were stable but I think what she had realized I had been working for six years.

4 (23m 1s):
I had sort of checked every box that I needed to for them. I think my mom almost got to the point where she was like you can stop working like, you know, go do what makes you happy because it's happiness is as important and that's when I kind of got this freedom to be able to sort of dream about what I wanted to do. I Decided in January that I would quit I

3 (23m 23s):
said to him 2011

4 (23m 24s):
2011 January I decided I would quit I write an email to you know, all the executives and people I had worked with that Warner music group and the vice chairman of the company Michael Fleischer. He invites me up to his office and he wants to hear about my idea and you know, I'd probably interacted with him two or three times throughout my experience, but he was really interested in hearing about a new idea. So I go up there. I started telling him about you know, dabble the time. And he was like this is amazing. Like I'm going to introduce you to someone who can you know, who's running this text art program David koresh and he's like and I want to invest money. So here's $10,000. Wow. Once again, like I'm kind of fascinated by the fact that you know, I'm about to walk out, you know, or quit my job and it's like the scariest day of my life and I walked out with a $10,000 check on the day.

4 (24m 13s):
I

3 (24m 13s):
quit. Okay, so so you have this idea and there's clearly interest and you were you doing is all by yourself at this point at the beginning or did you because eventually you had a co-founder but yeah. Yeah. So one

4 (24m 28s):
of the early conversations when I was really, you know getting feedback on the idea I was with one of my childhood friends some juice agave and he was you know, an amazing dancer. Also when we were younger, he did martial arts. He became a banker and sort of stopped doing all these things that he loved and when I told about the D i remember waking up the next morning and he had texted me like a hundred times being like hey, I want to give you money for this. Let me know how I can help and get involved and that's sort of where it started. So it first started with him wanting to invest and then little by little as I quit my job and started working on it and you know, once again, I knew he was as passionate about being active Being Fit, you know staying in touch with your passions as I was he was like, you know, what pile like I want to quit and do this with you and that's really how you know, we were always a team I'm like growing up.

4 (25m 16s):
We kind of did everything together. So that's how you know, we decided to build this together.

3 (25m 21s):
I'm trying to me. This is a story that I am almost never heard, which is somebody has an idea like this and without a deck without, you know, a business plan people were like, here's a check on give you check on give you a check and that must have suggested in your mind that this was a great idea that that if all these people want to invest and maybe I'm onto

4 (25m 43s):
something. Yeah, I mean It's actually interesting because a lot of these people by the way had also followed My Dance Company trajectory and I say that because the way I you know presented My Dance Company the professionalism the way I sold out shows I think people knew I was doing that while I had another job. So these are my friends who had been able to watch me hustle been once again able to watch me create something from nothing and when I was like Hey like okay open tables a billion dollars. I'm building a business that big they were like, all right, sign me up. You know, that's really where it started.

3 (26m 15s):
And so the idea was basically a search engine for like when you describe it, you described it as a search engine or base is open table, but for Fitness, that's what that's how you describe it.

4 (26m 25s):
It wasn't just actually just Fitness classes at the time it was active and creative classes. So we had photography and drawing and cooking on there as well. And we obviously had all the fitness classes listed at the

3 (26m 37s):
time and the idea was you would partner you would start to like basically dial-up different businesses and see if they would partner with you.

4 (26m 44s):
So at that time, And this is one of the mistakes we made what we were really interested in was the information like the schedule data, right? So what we started doing was really integrating with like the back-end apis that were integrated into the scheduling platforms these places were

3 (26m 59s):
using and you would just those are just open RSS or open feeds and you would scold about

4 (27m 4s):
100 percent. So they were open feeds we were working with like sort of scraping data if they weren't connected to something so we were really trying to master was like sort of becoming like this Google all right of class information.

3 (27m 15s):
Russian and how much money do you member racing just to get started? I

4 (27m 18s):
raised about a half a million dollars for this is before we got into Tech Stars, which was this big incubator.

3 (27m 25s):
So you have got to get some funding and you working on this idea, but you haven't launched it yet. Right. This is not this is still pretty much. Okay, right and and you get into this program called techstars, which is a like an incubator program is it like is it like the Y

4 (27m 38s):
combinator of its but yeah Y combinator and techstars are very similar and this was the second class of in City so it was pretty new but once again, you know because there weren't that many startups yet. It was a great program because I mean I got to meet every incredible founder that you know in New York City and even folks who had come by from Silicon Valley through the program because they came to Mentor right? Because the startup Community was much smaller at that time. Was anybody by the way anybody say like,

3 (28m 7s):
you know dabble just doesn't it doesn't take it doesn't doesn't speak to

4 (28m 11s):
me. Well, so in was it I think in 2011, this is before we We were in techstars. We actually had to change our name because there was a company in Chicago that started selling classes under under the name of dabble. So we actually overnight change her name and we couldn't think of anything. So we like literally were just scouring the word class with anything on GoDaddy and found class tivity. So our second name was actually class activity because it was class and activity together.

3 (28m 43s):
Yeah, it was good.

4 (28m 45s):
Aside from the fact that everyone messed up the eyes and the t's all the time like even till this day. No one spells it right. So that was a problem. But you know that's sort of where it started. It was a mouthful but we were we were we got into textures. We were our name was class tivity the search and everything was called plasticity at the time.

3 (29m 2s):
So you're working on it and and people are giving a great feedback. Right? Like most people are saying

4 (29m 8s):
this is awesome. Right because it worked for open table and it worked for seamless web and it worked for ZocDoc. Why wouldn't it work for class?

3 (29m 15s):
Asses, all right, so you I guess what you launched in 2012 you launch it you go Pub you go live go live at the end of

4 (29m 22s):
text are so June of 2012. We have our big demo day, you know, we're getting all this Tech press we launched the website and what kind of classes could you sign up for? You have photography classes on there. We had, you know, yoga classes spin classes. We had a variety of different classes. We had about a million classes

3 (29m 41s):
listed a million classes available up about a million is amazing. And all the New York presumably right all in New York, correct? And presumably you were eventually going to monetize this I guess by what like charging a transaction fee to the studios. Like if you want your class listed on the site you pay a fee to class

4 (29m 58s):
tivity, of course, right? So it was a it was a volume bet essentially

3 (30m 3s):
and like prison after you launch that you get a bigger like a bunch of press I think and like the tech press covers this it's like all over the place you do techstars. And is this just like go crazy. Like are your servers like breaking down of all the people signing up

4 (30m 18s):
exactly the opposite there was crickets meaning no one went to any classes. We had probably 10 days go by before we got even one reservation.

3 (30m 29s):
Yeah, it was it was

4 (30m 30s):
heartbreaking. It was one of those moments where you know, you start realizing all these like false signals of success, right? I was like, oh all these people who compare to the traveling cable from the be open table, right exactly and by People were coming to the website. Right? So the first thing we did was we thought like first of all we wanted to make sure all you know, the buy button was working. Obviously. That's the first thing you check your like. Is this going through. Yes something wrong. Is there a good test it and then we thought it was maybe people couldn't see the buy button so we would change the colors bigger shape. Yeah actually, so I

3 (31m 7s):
call it the make sense exact days with one

4 (31m 10s):
sign up exactly. So I call it the summer of buttons because that's like really what we did and And it was It was kind of depressing. I mean, you know we had once again like close to it this pendant by the way about close to a year and a half right? We had probably spent close to half a million dollars at this point and it's cricket and I didn't know what to

3 (31m 30s):
do. When we come back in just a moment how pile took the business in a New Direction and then several more before she finally landed on the winning formula for class pass stay with us the guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Support for NPR in the following message comes from our 2020 how I built this lead. Sponsor Comcast business will Tom's is a co-founder of wreck a space for creatives will explains why the makeup of Rex membership meant fast reliable internet was a top priority for their business.

3 (32m 13s):
So currently we have over 800 active members about 45% of them are audio creators. Those are artists or musicians or podcasters about another 25 percent or so RV. Aw craters and those are the photographers the video editors the models. So with most of our members being content creators, there's just such a high demand for uploading and downloading video files to Big format audio files and what we sometimes Overlook is the technological capabilities that underpin all that being possible. So high speed internet is just like that that beautiful powerful thing that supports all of the creativity learn more at Comcast business.com Comcast business Beyond fast.

3 (32m 59s):
Thanks. Also to Squarespace take your great idea and build a website with professionally designed templates visit squarespace.com and use the offer code NPR to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. Actors Tracee Ellis Ross is used to people talking about her age a lot and she's okay with whatever people

4 (33m 24s):
say, I'm 47 years old and I'm the most comfortable in my skin I've ever been what when we go back to being 22. No,

3 (33m 31s):
thank you. The blackest are on confronting an Aegis world. Listen And subscribe to it's been a minute from NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's the summer of 2012 pile and her team have just launched a brand new booking service class activity and nobody is signing up for it and they're racking their

4 (33m 58s):
brains trying to figure

3 (33m 59s):
out what to do. Next. We

4 (34m 1s):
start thinking about like some new marketing, you know tactics we could do. I remember, you know, we launched this promotion where we literally sent an email saying like go to For free and still no one went so that's what I was like, okay, we have totally missed this something is wrong here. And that's when I knew we needed to start iterating and changing. So the first thing we started doing was going to our studio owners, right? So what we didn't do the first time was talked to the partners, right? We were kind of behind the screens and being you know, thinking that Tech was going to fix all of this right and that's when I realized Tech does not fix it. All of this is a human behavior. I need to get someone off the couch. Likely to get them into a classroom if I can't do that by talking to them and motivating them.

4 (34m 45s):
There was no way technology was going to fix that. Right? And so we started talking to the studio owners to understand more about what bit what challenges they were facing many of them offered a first class for free right that was sort of their way of getting people in the door. And this was also when Boutique Fitness was starting to Boom. So this is when we started to focus a little bit more on going towards Fitness. Yeah, but I'm trying to figure out

3 (35m 6s):
like if I want to get an airline ticket, right, I'll go to kayak because Easier or XP was at some more of these search engines and it just seems to make sense. Like if I was like I need to do want to do a yoga class and let me just go here and sign up like what I'm not it's not clear to me why there was a disconnect between somebody wanting to go to because people were signing up for classes online.

4 (35m 29s):
So, I mean you do enjoy your guys soon.

3 (35m 32s):
Yeah. I mean I do. Yeah. I mean, I don't do it as often as I should but yeah,

4 (35m 36s):
so I think that's really what it is is everyone everyone I surveyed would if I said do you you want to do yoga class A hundred percent of people would say yes, if I told him do you want to go tomorrow at 12:00 p.m. I would get like a 1% people whoever in so that was sort of the problem. It was this it was this drop-off that was happening when people actually were presented with the information in front of them, right? It was the brain cycles of which class do I go to is this the right climate like MIT? Oh no. Oh my god. Oh and then it's $20 forget it, you know, so this was sort of a brain cycles of putting too many decisions in one place for someone. And that was not working. Right? And so something was like airline tickets like you already made the decision to go where if you're going to go eat you're going to eat eating is a utility like you're going to eat.

4 (36m 20s):
Right? And that was the difference. We're working out and going to these classes are aspirational. I had to really motivate people to want to get out of their houses to go and try these experiences. We needed to build a product and I value proposition. Yeah would make classes fun. Not an obligation or not something that felt like work and just too Review here.

3 (36m 41s):
I mean at this point your business was basically just a search engine for classes. And I guess you realize that people are not are not just going to go into a search engine and look for a class and come and sign up. And so essentially what you had to do was I guess you had to completely change what your model was.

4 (36m 60s):
Yeah year and a half and we decided to work go in a different direction. I mean, we downsize the team had to save cash and I wasn't done. You know, I wasn't done trying to solve the mission.

3 (37m 13s):
So what was it? What did you land on

4 (37m 16s):
so we started building another product called the passport and this this was a 30-day product where people could go and try these, you know, one off free classes at the studios were offering all in one place. And because we had built so many of these Integrations what was nice is at least that part was done. So all that people had to do was go on, you know, search around discover and they had 30 days right? So putting this time limit on it also. Up them say okay wait, I have 30 days to go, you know try yoga class. Try a dance class. Try a spin class. Let me go do

3 (37m 46s):
it so it was like a just just explained. It was a you would just pay how much was the

4 (37m 51s):
third is $49 we had about we had 20 Studios at the time we launched and they were of different genres. So using your past you could go to up to 10. You have to be a new customer call

3 (38m 3s):
Fitness. This was not these were not like photography and art classes just fits our these are all Boutique Fitness classes to attend classes. We had 30 days. 2p use it up

4 (38m 12s):
correctly you had 30 days you came on to the site you can see all the schedule information and you basically got to stamp your passport right with different Studios.

3 (38m 22s):
There's like five bucks a class basically, correct, but then I guess the question is why would they pay 49 bucks for it? If they could have just done it individually for

4 (38m 30s):
free. It just was an easier booking experience. Right? I mean that that's like where technology really I think in our lives started coming alive. It's like sometimes it's easier to call a cab and then Uber but you still do it. Uber because it's like in your fine, right and I think it was it was sort of that type of experience of people just saying, oh my God, this is all in one place and you know, we made it all so easy, right? Like we would give information we would get have photos. It just felt more accessible to people in the way. We were also presenting the information and it felt exciting right to say. Hey, like let me sign up with my friend and we'll vote two together for months. You know, it just felt like you were going on a journey together and this kind of brings me back to having a value proposition and not just it being

3 (39m 10s):
a Engine. So how did you do the passport

4 (39m 13s):
model? So we finally started seeing reservations which was you know, a really great was great progress for us as a company. We started, you know, having people try these classes. They loved going to yoga on Monday dance on Wednesday our studio owners though, you know, we're getting the raw end of the deal because the promise we had made to them was that 75% of people would come back to these Studios. Now what we were doing we were every single time you went to class. We collected a rating review right from you on if you liked it. If you gave a class like a four or five we would then retarget you with a package right from that studio directly. So, you know people would try these classes and they weren't going back.

4 (39m 55s):
We saw less than ten to fifteen percent of people go back to Studios and that was not fair. Right. Do you Studio owners were giving us these classes for free, but we're not getting people to come back and be Loyalists and bigger problem for me was this is a 30-day product and it's a Time purchase that's also not a great business

3 (40m 13s):
because you repeat

4 (40m 14s):
customers. Right? So the other thing we realize which was very interesting was people were buying this product with multiple email addresses and we started getting yelled at from our studio owners who would call us and say Hey, you told me like customer X couldn't come back. I saw

3 (40m 30s):
her again last week and they were using a different email

4 (40m 33s):
account. They were using different email addresses and signing up over and over again for the passport. They loved variety and that was sort of this thing. NG we stumbled upon accidentally which was this idea that people really loved, you know, having this, you know different classes to take and this motivation of I could really package my own workout routine together. So then we started thinking about what if this is something that needs to be, you know recurring every month. So we did a survey with our users where we asked them, you know, if you could go back and do this product over and over again use the passport month over month and visit your favorite Studios, you know, would you do it and 95 Percent of them said yes, I would wow.

4 (41m 13s):
So that was sort of the information and insight we need it to say. Hey, let's try a subscription. And

3 (41m 18s):
so you've got customers and were you getting a lot of customers. I mean, what was a lot was it like be getting thousands and thousands of

4 (41m 25s):
people signing up know this this was a we had a total of about 2,000 customers on the passport before we pivoted to classpath. So we're getting we're getting there like in the sense of you know, the chart was starting to go up, but we had a problem that still needed to be fixed. Even though all these, you know moments were great of people starting to talk about us and tweet about us we still needed to do more work. So this is when we started to test out a monthly subscription. So in June of 2013, we sold a class pass model where we let 50 people come on and try, you know, try this out on a more monthly basis.

3 (42m 2s):
So what was the difference in the class pass model in the past part model?

4 (42m 6s):
So the class pass model was a monthly subscription where you could go back to Any of the Studio's right up to three times a month or is still a cap on it? So you could try, you know, you can go to you know, a dance class. You have class been class. Whatever you really want to do. You just couldn't go to any one place more than three times in a month. That's when we started and it was also nine nine dollars for ten classes when we launched and

3 (42m 28s):
this was really inspired by the success of the passport model that you saw that modeling you thought this is really where we should this is what we should be focusing on like one simple idea that people can get the camera. Wrap their heads around and that's what like that's going to

4 (42m 44s):
work. Correct and it was just exponential growth after that and by month three of having the class pass out. We it took over the passport revenue and we knew that that was the model to focus on

3 (42m 57s):
so June of 2013. You launched the class pass idea. And by the way was the business still called class tivity.

4 (43m 5s):
Yes, it was so we were called that product was called the class activity class fast, right? That's a mouthful.

3 (43m 10s):
Yeah, and and it's not even bucks a month for ten classes a month a variety of variety of options in New York, which is amazing deal. Right because some of these classes could I mean that's

4 (43m 22s):
10 bucks. I'm going to classes were $30. Yeah, absolutely. And you know, we had a variety of different Studios on the platform. I mean there were certain Studios that we just put on the platform where we didn't have like full agreements with yet because we just wanted to test and you know, we started sending them so much traffic. Epic that they would call us up and say hey like, who are you guys? Can we? You know, let's chat. Let's talk about this and then we were able to you know, negotiate a better rate, but we kind of were really just testing out this idea on if people wanted to do this and as I mentioned like people would make a reservation and then we would go fulfill it all the backend. So

3 (43m 58s):
basically when someone would sign up for a class through your website, you would just go to the studios website and sign up that user and pay the fee yourself and and I guess it didn't matter whether you were losing money on it because you just you I want to see if this thing worked.

4 (44m 12s):
Yes. So in the beginning, I mean we didn't really care as we were testing the concept right we were we just wanted to prove that we could do this and get their attention, right? That's the number one thing in the beginning is no one was gonna really I mean at least the bigger Studios weren't gonna you know, pick up the phone. I mean for the smaller guys, it was actually it was fun. And we would actually, you know there were days where I would do five classes a day because the way we would really like we'd love to kind of go into these Studios was take a class with the owner and then sort of talk about class. Yes after you know, sit down with them with our inner sweaty clothes after work with an iPad and talk to them about what we were building.

3 (44m 47s):
So you were really used to be like a door-to-door Salesman like you have to go like I always think about the story Sara Blakely selling fax machines door-to-door, which is what made her into a great entrepreneur. I mean you had to do that you were basically knocking on

4 (44m 60s):
doors and saying hey get this business going to work with us. It was amazing though. I mean we had to go to class like which as you know, I think that was so important for the people, you know, we were Eating is that the we were their customers we loved going to class and so did everyone on my team, you know, and we weren't trying to you know, we weren't walking in there and suits with some like some marketing like platform for them. We were we were like, hey like we have this idea and you know that we truthfully like we did so much to understand about more about their business. So we did a lot of analysis for every single Studio because we wanted to make sure they had a good experience with us and wanted to stay with us, right. We wanted to have high retention of our Studios because that's Also, what was going to keep our customers happy

3 (45m 43s):
and how we should mention here that I think at this point. You've got this model where you're paying the Studio's like a fee for each class that your customer takes. So so your customer might be paying 99 bucks a month, but you are paying the Studio's like a negotiated fee. Every time one of your customers would go to one of their classes, right? Exactly. Yeah, but it's a little bit like going to the dentist like if I go to the dentist And I pay cash. I'm going to pay a higher rate than if I have an insurance policy because I'm going to pay a rate that the insurance company has negotiated. So it mean it's a kind of a fair analogy, right?

3 (46m 22s):
Yeah. I

4 (46m 23s):
mean the dentist feels a lot more or much more cruel than going to are you? Okay? Yes, right. But sure. Yeah, I see what you're saying like in the sense of yeah, we have a pre-negotiated price, but the whole thing is is it's the discovery side like you probably wouldn't have you ever even gone to the yoga class if it wasn't for class pass.

3 (46m 40s):
Oh, by the way, I mean you had raised about $500,000, but I imagine that money was gone by that that

4 (46m 47s):
point. Yeah, so I had by that point. I actually raised a little over a I raised another $700,000 after texts are so what was nice is, you know, I had money to get to this point. I actually remember in the summer of 2013 once classpass worked. We almost were we were getting to a point where I had about three to three months of cash left well, and so I thankfully You know raised Bridge round from actually Cyrus from ZocDoc help me raise that round which got me into got me through to January which is when I officially closed my seed round that was going to let us launch in other places.

3 (47m 22s):
This is January of

4 (47m 23s):
2014 that array of 2014, correct? So write a between that point what I really wanted to prove was getting to a million-dollar run rate, right? So that would mean that we had a thousand people paying us monthly for class which was a nine nine dollar product and that would mean that I was at a million-dollar run rate and that's like really what I I wanted to get to for January and I think you know, this was such a fun phase for the company because every day we would you know have new customers and we would be doing these crazy promotions and one of the best ways we would get customers to sign up is we did this Lululemon promotion where people would get $100 gift cards Lululemon if they signed up for class pass and stayed with us for 6 months and one day I get to the office and there's like a letter on my desk and I And it's a cease and desist from 11 God and I remember you know, my first instinct was like, oh no HIV scared, but then I was like, oh my God Lululemon knows who we are, you know, it was one of those moments where I remember celebrating kind of because we were so small right and to sort of be on the radar of a company like that.

4 (48m 29s):
It made me realize like we were really onto something but why is that not a lot? Why

3 (48m 33s):
couldn't you offer Lululemon gift

4 (48m 35s):
cards? Well, we were like marketing with like it was in our marketing

3 (48m 38s):
materials, right? Yeah. So it made it seem like it was like a partnership or something. So did you stop offering the Lululemon gift card?

4 (48m 48s):
I think we may have done it once or twice more but we weren't careful and I mean, you know at the end of the day you do what you need to write. I think that was this was like the beginning like long as it's legal as long as it's legal exactly. Like we didn't want it. We were obviously like not, you know, we don't want to you know, Lululemon's obviously a great, you know partnered us now and we've done a lot Them but it's just you know, at that time we were we were just five people in an office trying to make something happen.

3 (49m 17s):
So I love this idea. You had a very clear goal. You need to you needed a thousand paying customers a month for a million-dollar run rate, which was still not going to make you profitable but it was going to prove the concept. Yeah. And did you get there? Did you get to that

4 (49m 33s):
point? Yeah, we got there. I mean to when you look back at the curve right that we started seeing. I mean it just just the numbers were exponential right? We just started doubling and we were tripling the amount of people sort of signing up for classes talking about class pass was exponential and viral, right and all of our marketing outside of this beloved promotion really came from people telling each other about it. So we would do a lot of you know, referral tactics and referral marketing and it was very much a product people wanted to do with their friends. So it was a million-dollar run rate that we wanted to achieve by January and this is Basically the advice I received was, you know, once you get to a million dollar run rate, you'll be able to raise your series a right that was sort of what I had heard in the Market at that time because by the way, I had gone out to Silicon Valley three times already in that in the previous year yet in the previous three years.

4 (50m 27s):
I've been building my company looking

3 (50m 29s):
for cat looking for cash.

4 (50m 30s):
So I was like, I kind of remember feeling like I have to go back out there and I don't want to come back with you know, no cash right? That was that was just not an option.

3 (50m 40s):
Imagine a lot of the rooms that you were in where you were trying to raise money were were filled with men and I imagine men who perceive themselves to be powerful or important. Were you ever intimidated? And and if so, how did you find your courage?

4 (50m 56s):
It's you know, that's a great question and I feel like it's been the backbone

3 (51m 1s):
of my whole

4 (51m 2s):
life, which is I had to get comfortable being different in every room. I think being different just became something I got very used to And I think things like, you know dancing things, you know, staying in places and being around people who made me feel confident became ways for me to never doubt myself. And I knew I was smart. I knew I had passion. I knew I knew how to work hard. And so if people doubted me like that's their problem not mine and I think I would always walk into a room with a lot of confidence with knowing exactly, you know, how I wanted to present my company with, you know, all the all the you know, No, Jazz and Charisma I could and you know people didn't want to believe me.

4 (51m 44s):
It's their problem and I would find someone who was going to write and I think that it was so important to me to find people throughout my journey who understood who I was and I think everyone struggles with this I never wanted to be boxed in to any one thing right like I'm a dancer and I'm a business person. I am, you know, I am short but I am completely powerful. You know, I'm indian-american. I've kind of always needed to I've always had this sort of struggle with sort of being like in one place. In many things and everyone's multifaceted and I think when you find people who see what your magic is and can see it. It's you know,

3 (52m 19s):
okay, so it's around the end of 2013. You've hit your million-dollar run rate and at this point you start to get rid of some of your earlier products, like for example, I think you get rid of passport the $49 package, correct?

4 (52m 36s):
I remember always remember this conversation with one of my advisors and that fall And he was like pile you need to focus and get rid of the passport. It's cracked you guys it will be a chapter in your book one day and I remember like at that moment because it was like our first sort of child that had worked. I wasn't fully ready. But by you know, three months later when you know, we had crossed a thousand customers on class pass and I mean, you know 90% of the reservations were coming through the class path model we knew it was the right way to go and we luckily got the class pass to me and we got the class pass like Facebook name ID. Uni and Twitter account and in February of 2014. We finally changed her name to

3 (53m 15s):
class pass. All right, so you get class pass and up until 2 2014. You were only in New York, but you wanted to test this out and so you expand it to LA and Washington DC in San Francisco, but that presumably met over the over the course of the year, right? But that meant that you have to expand your team you to build your team out.

4 (53m 36s):
Yes, right. So in general a whence we raised our are two million dollar seed round the hypothesis was okay. Can this work in other places? Right? That was the number one thing we had to prove we needed to make sure that this was just not a New York phenomenon. And so we launched in Boston and DC and we started seeing the same traction the same growth in those markets which gave us confidence to say. Hey, let's bring those to other markets. And so we ended up, you know, hiring more people sending them out to these cities expanding the team but owes, it was heavily a sales effort, but we were able to get City Up in a

3 (54m 10s):
matter of two weeks. So you so you start to build it build it out to other cities and that year 2014. This is a kind of a pivotal another pivotal year because you have this model The $99 a month for 10 classes, which was an amazing deal. Then you kind of double down on that you made a $99 for an unlimited unlimited membership. You can go to as many classes you want for 99 bucks.

4 (54m 35s):
So it started as a summer promotion in 2014 in 2014. To continue, you know with growth we did a summer promotion for unlimited and I think the other part here is we were you know, there was no blueprint right? We didn't know how many classes people would go to with the 99 410. We were seeing our average around, you know, five or six classes per customer. We didn't know if that was right and we had people some people telling us 10 wasn't enough some people telling us 10 was too much. So it was you know, we didn't really know where the numbers should be. If that makes sense, right? We had to test different plans. And so, you know, we were And obviously heavy growth mode. So we do this promotion for unlimited summer. And at the same time.

4 (55m 16s):
We also secure like amazing Partnerships with like top to your Studios like Barry's Bootcamp flywheel with you know, a bit of a higher price, right? So we're also dealing with a little bit of our cost structure changing from more of the premium inventory. We do this a limited summer promotion. I raise my series a we announce it right on all the media blogs and literally the wolves come out the next day. I started seeing a predator in every

3 (55m 41s):
single City like local competitors, like like some company would just decide to like aggregate a bunch of Studios or gyms in a city and then offer packages to users.

4 (55m 53s):
Yeah. So now I'm dealing with multiple things happening at the same time where I can't really change my pricing because all my competitors have copied my same product, right? So everyone has an unlimited product now in the market we obviously were the front-runner because we had started Business and we were raising more money. I mean by the waste six months after my series a I raised a 40 million dollar Series be right so in there's think about how quickly that scaling and that growth is and even in terms of

3 (56m 22s):
numbers

4 (56m 24s):
when 2014 started and we started projecting how many cities we would be and we thought we'd be in eight cities by the end of the year and in September once we launched our or we announced our series a and all these competitors came out I remember Saying we need to go much quicker. This is not going to work. We're going to lose some of our markets we need to win and we started at this project as a team. We called it operation 2015 which meant that we wanted to be in 20 cities by the end of the year, right? So so this was launching 12 extra cities in a matter of three months. And so we hired like 60 people that weekend. It was absolutely like one of the quickest things we've ever done.

4 (57m 5s):
We literally like bought tickets for people to go into these cities we train them. They went in we launched all these markets and we did it by January 1st of 2015. We were in 20 markets around the u.s. And we were we had to build a protection shield essentially

3 (57m 21s):
and so that month that that summer of 2014 temporary promotion

4 (57m 26s):
became it became the product.

3 (57m 27s):
Yep. So here's here's what I'm wondering. Right and I think this is this is important important point to point out which is Even though you are getting tons and tons and tons of customers. I can't imagine that that people pay $99 a month was profitable for you because you still have to compensate the studios. And even though you were paying them less than what they might charge for full price class. I can't imagine like if somebody was going to 20 classes a month that was going to doesn't get 5 bucks of class.

4 (57m 56s):
Right? Right. Well, so we were obviously looking at the averages right and so in the beginning, you know, we started seeing the numbers go up and it was on our radar. And we also then obviously started seeing our costs go up because we started getting better inventory, right? That was the other thing that happened is we started attracting the better Studios right which we had to negotiate better

3 (58m 16s):
racer going to charge more money because they're the better Studios.

4 (58m 19s):
Yeah, because at that point we were the way we were doing a lot of the discounting was it was a 50% off of their 10 class pack rate. So it was obviously going to be higher right? So we were kind of in this jam and we started doing some price increases right because that was sort of the first thing that you know, Anyone could try and what we wanted to do is really find this really nice price point where we wouldn't have people leave right? I think the the other point is Fitness should be accessible. Right and I think that was a belief we had as a company we didn't want to have like a three hundred dollar product. That didn't work for anyone

3 (58m 52s):
you had I think at one point you tried to raise the price to about a hundred ninety a month and and customers isn't she could understand. We're like, hey what what like what gives we're paying $99 a month for this now. It's like twice as much.

4 (59m 5s):
We didn't we didn't go that high that quickly. I mean we started with doing like a 15 20 dollar increase and then it went up to around 150 when we started doing was introducing lower lower packages. And then what happened was, you know are really profitable users were obviously choosing the lower packs which made The Limited package even get worse in terms of our margin, right and the people who are sticking with that product. We're obviously the ones who are using it a lot and so over time the margin of our aluminum product. It was deteriorating as the cohorts were we're growing

3 (59m 39s):
and that puts you in this weird situation where you were kind of betting against your subscribers. Like I guess I hoping they don't go to too many

4 (59m 47s):
classes. Yep, I think for me even as a Founder, I remember, you know showing up to work one day and I was doing like a social media interview with my team and they asked me, you know pile like tell customers like how many times you work out and I was like, oh I go to class everyday and they're like, you can't say that like we don't want people to go to class. And that's when I was like wait a second. This is like not the mission we stood up for right and it was sort of a moment where I knew we needed to make a change just as hard as it was. I was like this is not going to work, you know, we're betting against our customers being active and that completely goes against everything we fought for for the past, you know, three four years where we were just trying to get somebody off the

3 (1h 0m 28s):
couch. Yeah. There's actually great Planet Money episode about this several years ago about how gyms don't want you to come there because they make Their money when people don't show up, right, you

4 (1h 0m 38s):
know, it's very true. It is sadly very true. It's the breakage model, right and that's not what we wanted to bet on here. It's the exact opposite

3 (1h 0m 48s):
and the breakage model would be that people would buy the unlimited past but really only and knocked out three times.

4 (1h 0m 53s):
Yeah, and that's not that's not the promise. You want to make two people. I mean, obviously there is a lot of data and customer testing we did and I mean we have so much data on like, you know, how many times people go to class? Yeah, how we could change it and we were trying to understand what human behavior would do, but we didn't what we didn't know is there you know, every time we would make a change human behavior would change right? And so we had to kind of do this testing while the airplane was in flight.

3 (1h 1m 21s):
So it was clear by 2015 that the Unlimited Model just was not you were increasing the fees, but the margins were diminishing it was clear to you that you just couldn't work you could couldn't offer this as a product we do that what's amazing about the stories want to pause and play this out is you this you've already had like five companies in one different one single company this point we're

4 (1h 1m 46s):
not done yet and it's

3 (1h 1m 48s):
actually really amazing because you know, that's really what I think especially as technology focused business is about it's about you don't know I mean you have this model in 2011 that was full proof that everyone said this is this is a no-brainer to slam dunk, but it And you had to shift and you're what at this point five years into the business. Yeah, and you have five different products that you that sometimes they work really well and then you kind of evolved and he realized we got to Pivot again.

4 (1h 2m 21s):
I think that's you know, really is in the DNA of our company now and I think we're super resilient and I've learned this, you know to be Mission obsessed as a founder and not product obsessed. It's not my product that makes us it's us actually Ting a solution right to the problem and as variables change whether there's things that change in the world like we're going through right now or you know things that changed in my customers Behavior. I have to be able to respond to it in a way that's aligned to the true north and that's the one thing that's never wavered in our company is what we're fighting towards

3 (1h 2m 52s):
right? So when you got rid of I mean the other challenges you offered something that people got used to and they laughed and then you say it's not going to be available anymore. So I'm assuming they were people who are not happy about this. Yeah. That did you take a hit initially from that to do people stop signing up as

4 (1h 3m 9s):
quickly or the noise was bigger than the impact it had on the business for sure. But the noise obviously still hurts right in the sense of you know, you never want you know, your customers unhappy and that was definitely a tough tough day. And you know, we obviously knew it was the best thing for the long-term or part of the business and you know, we're here today because of it and we have, you know, obviously, you know built A much bigger business since then and that's obviously because we were able to get through

3 (1h 3m 39s):
that moment. So basically you you pivot to what offering packages like, you know, ten ninety nine dollars for ten classes or you go back to that kind of model

4 (1h 3m 49s):
or what did you do? Yeah, so we have yeah, we have class tax now, right? So there's like a three pack of five pocket unpack and then you could always add on extra classes through bundles and all our cart. So we kind of made it a bit more, you know pick your pick your and why how many times you want to work

3 (1h 4m 7s):
out and it also I think it's based on credits right you get credits

4 (1h 4m 13s):
so that was another change we made I know that we've definitely made a few iterations to the company but we made that change slightly after the classes class packs was we realized that the class packs were a bit constraining and the sense that not every class was the same price and just to be clear I

3 (1h 4m 32s):
hired ticket item would be like a Sunday morning yoga a class versus a Wednesday 10:00 a.m. yoga class

4 (1h 4m 38s):
correct and my favorite thing is you can now even book like things like massages and acupuncture and other types of experiences that would have never fit into our class model before because we now have these new experiences in different cities that people can go to

3 (1h 4m 56s):
you kind of really became kind of important and as a symbol for young women who wanted to become Worse, especially women of color, you know, you launch this company this business you're getting a lot of attention. You're raising a lot of money. You were running it through the company was valued at almost half a billion dollars in 2017 and that year you decided to step down as CEO remained as part of the leadership of the company, but your business partner Fritz Fritz lanman become CEO. I mean tell me why I mean I wouldn't want to be a CEO Personally, I think it would be horrible and boring and stressful.

3 (1h 5m 38s):
I'd rather do like strategy and

4 (1h 5m 41s):
vision stuff, right? Yeah. So first I think it's important for people to understand that the role of a founding CEO significantly changes as your company Grows Right. So right what I was doing when we were five people and you know, even 50 people it's very different than all of a sudden when you have 200 300 people and I started finding that the title of CEO was defining me and boxing me in more than that me being able to sort of have the freedom to continue to do you know the creativity and the vision and the projects that I knew I really wanted to spend my time on and I realized you know what and I was lucky I had a great partner in Fritz Fritz had been working with me at this point for three years we kind of also started you know he started getting more involved and he was kind of in the day-to-day a lot more and I was working on more like

3 (1h 6m 30s):
of the strategy and the vision of the company

4 (1h 6m 32s):
and so it became pretty you know easy for us to make the shift I think like what I realized in that process is that a title like to me doesn't mean anything it's the work you do and you know it was really important for me to make sure that you know especially little girls and women know that they can be CEO yeah now the opposite side of that is I would

3 (1h 6m 55s):
not want to to see

4 (1h 6m 56s):
somebody in a role that didn't feel authentic to them right and wasn't letting them be who they

3 (1h 7m 1s):
wanted to be yeah so You step down as CEO, but obviously still very much involved in running the company and you really kind of growth going to kind of a this is explosive period of growth right? I mean you guys acquired a couple of competitors and international competitors and really growing very very quickly. And as you grew as you as expected, you also become a bigger Target as you should be as Any big targets anyone that does well is because a big Target and that's that's part of the deal. You know, that's just part of the price you pay when you have success and you start to get a lot of criticism really more visible criticism from Studios and from small business owners who had Studio saying look this is really undercutting our our you know our business because our margins are so low anyway and class pass, you know, we have to work with them because they're now the A hundred pound 800-pound gorilla on the Block and we have no choice but we're not making any money off of this system.

3 (1h 8m 13s):
And of course, I'm sure some of it you feel like is unfair, but some of it has to be a little bit there.

4 (1h 8m 19s):
So, you know, we always look at all of our partners and you know, I think it's important to understand that were two side of marketplace right? We're always trying to balance the two and be this middle man that is making both sides happy. And with that being said, you know, I think there are many studios. He's out there who've literally built their entire entire, you know businesses off of classpass, right like wouldn't be alive today without launching with us. And on the flip side, you know, I think we also know that there's companies that you know have had to deal with discounts who didn't want to you know, and I think for us we're always trying to improve we're building, you know, our our technology our algorithms are data to make sure that we're always maximizing revenue and our studios are making money when we make money, right?

4 (1h 9m 3s):
So everything is A percent aligned I do think you know Studios would love to be able to do some of this themselves. But when you really think I mean when you think about it, it's not that like I and I hate saying like it's not that they can't it's really just that the synergies right of a company like class that's being able to do customer acquisition for an entire industry right where a class is, you know, 25 $30 is just obviously more efficient when we're selling a product that has a bigger Lifetime right? We're able to put money into Google Analytics. Lytx or favorite or Facebook, you know a week they can't do that

3 (1h 9m 39s):
and I think in February of 2020 there was an article in Vice and there was a big article about class pass. It was called class pass a squeezing Studios the point of death and I know that your company refuted it you were you went out and kind of refuted what they said and let's say let's say I significant part of the article was inaccurate. I don't know. I'm not I'm not saying let's just say for argument's sake it was that article still must Stun a little bit. What do you

4 (1h 10m 6s):
saw it? 100% I don't think we're ever at a point as a company where we you know are saying like we know that were right and that, you know, we have the exact perfect way of doing things. What we're always trying to do is make the majority of our Studios happy write a majority of our customers happy on a given day. And you know, we're improving our models were improving, you know, the way our business works for all these Studios and it really comes down to prioritizations, but we're always you know once again like our teachers our product right I did I always say this it's not you know our product is not the technology we built our products is this class that someone goes to write off line it's the experience they have with our instructors in our Studios and that is the most important thing for us to protect and make sure that everyone feels like they are getting you know a good end of the deal

3 (1h 10m 57s):
I think in January this year you closed your series C round with a 1 billion dollar valuations the first billion dollar any value company of the of this new decade which is amazing and you know like many or most businesses I just talked to a Founder was on the show recently and to told me February of 2020 was their best month ever and then comes March and here we are you're at home you've got a three month old baby at home yeah by the way congratulations thank you and it's just a different world

4 (1h 11m 35s):
It's a different world. I mean these are unprecedented times and I mean Studios and our business or want, you know, one of the first things to obviously be mandated by the government to shut down. So overnight in most, you know close to I would say 95% of our markets most of our Studios closed down.

3 (1h 11m 57s):
I mean you raised money in January. So I have to imagine that that helps you because it gives you some cushion to maybe weather this storm for a while.

4 (1h 12m 8s):
Yeah, so I mean we've obviously had to make changes anyway, but yeah, I mean, we're happy we have that money, but that still doesn't mean we can waste it right. I mean this is all about survival. So the number one thing that you know, we're really focused on is making sure our Studios make it through this time. Right? I mean they are. businesses they have huge rents they you know they've many of them have had to let go of their employees you know and their instructors during this time but we want to make sure that obviously when this is over and no we don't know when that people can return to these amazing experiences and instructors that they know so what we've really been focused on is you know how do we send money to them and we have a partner Relief Fund that we've launched where customers can donate directly to their favorite Studios and on top of that that you know something which is obviously very important to us is how do we keep people active at home right today and their own spaces and so a few years ago we started working actually on a video product and you know we were lucky that you know we had it sort of up and ready it's a right when this started within like a week our entire product changed and you know our home page and everything became do these digital workouts and we've launched this live stream capability where you can use your credits to book these livestream classes too over 50,000 different workouts a week that are going on from our Studios so what were you know I say this in the sense of we're trying what we can you know we're doing what we can and our Studios obviously if you book these classes make money and that's really one of the most important things right now is for people to stay active and our partners fail to make it through yeah

3 (1h 13m 48s):
and so wonder how do you I mean it's very hard even for the most optimistic people yeah it's hard it's a hard

4 (1h 13m 55s):
moment yeah I mean you know no I think it's been really heartbreaking to see you know what this has done to a lot of small businesses and even you know for you know we've had to let go of a lot of employees I know a lot of companies have had to I think it's hard I mean we started this year being a billion dollar company right and then have lost a lot of our Revenue so we're going to have to go backwards a little before we go forwards right but I think if you have the mindset of we're going to figure it out we have a team that's unbelievably loyal we have a mission that Go away, even in Corona times, right? We're actually trying out different types of classes on there from cooking classes and and other and like comedy and things because we don't know what's going to work.

4 (1h 14m 38s):
So we're back to throwing some things at the wall again, and I think that startup blood is in our is in our DNA and there's going to be some adjustments that are going to be made and we'll have to see how customers evolve with it. You know. I think there

3 (1h 14m 51s):
are roughly two types of it me type structures, but they're roughly two types of Remembers those who really kind of deal with stomach-turning anxiety, right like bathroom floor fetal position crying freaking out is this going to work right? And then others who just actually more even-keeled like they just they're okay. They can handle it. I would put myself in the anxiety of ribbon bathroom floor crying but model to be perfectly honest, but you you just seem to me to be just I don't know you don't I think what I think

4 (1h 15m 27s):
You've been through the bathroom floor model for three or four times. You just start feeling more resilient to it and more confident in the fact that you're going to get through it that you know, we've been through so many ups and downs as a company, you know, I think there is like close to nothing so like that. I feel like we haven't been through I mean outside of a global pandemic but you know, I think that's that's really what it is is we've been through a lot, you know, and I've fought every single day to come up with a solution, you know every single time I could and and I think that's you know, the advice I always have is like as long as there's a dollar in that bank account you have time to fight and you have money to

3 (1h 16m 9s):
fight when you think about it's been 10 years since you launched this thing and it got a billion dollar valuation in January, which is incredible and we're obviously in a difficult moment now and it could last for a while, but but but when you think about the success in the trajectory of this business to you

4 (1h 16m 28s):
and I'll how much do you

3 (1h 16m 30s):
think this has to do with luck and how much how much do you think it had to do with just your insane work as I can and skill I

4 (1h 16m 37s):
think it's all about making luck happen to you in the sense of positioning your cards right right in the sense of when opportunity to sort of present themselves you either have to decide to go with it or not and I think like this is part of why to Me classes so important to people is I kept dancing and I say that because dancing connected me back to like the center of everything I was building and I really want other people to always have that Center in their life it gave me Clarity and so I think having that clear thinking help me guide my decisions help me listen to myself help me sort of put together wait like people are saying this and my data showing this so this is sort of gray still but I'm gonna go with this decision and the you know I even think about my parents like I mean parents came here with nothing, you know and literally like for them to know that their daughter built a company like this is like something that I will always feel like is the most rewarding part about this

3 (1h 17m 42s):
that's power could uh, Kia co-founder of class pass by the way, he'll still dances and you can actually see some of her incredible choreography on YouTube one of piles videos of her dancing at her wedding reception has more than three and a half million views and thanks so much for listening to the show this week you can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts you can write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to tweet at us it's a that's how I built this or at guy Roz this episode was produced by Rachel Falkner with music composed by rumty narrow Louis thanks also to Canada slim there are scales Julia Carney leave a grant and Jeff Rogers I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this this is NPR I'm Gregory Warner with NPR's rough translation so there's a holiday in the Netherlands where every year thousands of white folks wear black face some people are trying to end that tradition but in a very Dutch way you talk you talk you talk you talk you talk until you reach consensus can you fight racism in a way that brings the whole country with you that's on NPR's rough translation