1 (0s):
Before we start the show. I wanted to let you know about a short Anonymous survey that you can take to let us know what shows and podcasts you're listening to if you want to help you can go to npr.org / podcast survey won't take up too much of your time, and this is a great way to support your favorite shows that's npr.org podcast survey and thanks.

2 (26s):
We chose a llama is our in our logo kind of our mascot and we bought two Llamas on Craigslist. Wait, and we started takes a

1 (33s):
you bought two llamas like yes, you're in Salt Lake City. Can you just go on Craigslist and get

2 (39s):
a llama believe it or not? I bet pretty much anywhere in the country. You could find some Llamas on Craigslist like God really? I'm

1 (45s):
gonna go on Craigslist while we're talking here in the San Francisco Bay area where I am, let me just sign up. There you go. You can buy a llama. Craigslist 750 bucks, right?

2 (56s):
Yeah, I think we might have paid a little last night, but you're in the Bay Area. So that's probably you know, that sounds about right.

1 (1m 6s):
From NPR it's how I built this show that innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They go on Gyros and on today's show how Davis Smith launched the brand Cotopaxi two llamas two main goals to make money and to make the world a better place. Here's a story we've told many times a Founder has a great idea for a product or business. She pitches friends family VC's Angel Investors anyone who will give her the time and the message of the pitch is basically this if you give me your money today, there's a good chance.

1 (1m 57s):
You'll get that money back plus a lot more tomorrow, but now imagine a pitch that sounds something like this. I've got a great idea. I need your money to launch this idea. And eventually we might make a little bit more off of it. But initially I'm going to take a bunch of our earnings and give them away to charity and I'm gonna build a supply chain that cost tons more than my competitors, but it will guarantee a living wage for the factory workers. Oh and I'm launching this business is a b Corp, which will legally commit our company to think first about things like the well-being of the planet instead of profit. It sounds like I'm setting out to build a non-profit right except that Cotopaxi a brand that makes outdoor gear like backpacks and jackets is very much a for-profit company and the pitch.

1 (2m 48s):
I just laid out that is essentially how its founder David Smith sold the idea to investors. And as you can imagine this made raising money a lot harder, but Davis was and still is determined to make it work for two reasons. The first is that for a long time before? Or he founded Cotopaxi Davis had spent most of his career focused mainly on making money, which wasn't particularly fulfilling. The other reason is that Dave has spent most of his childhood in Latin America his dad worked for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints better known as the Mormon church and as a kid Davis was surrounded by poverty, but also conscious of his comparative privilege.

2 (3m 33s):
One of my very earliest memories actually was as the four-year-old when we first moved to the Dominican Republic and I still remember seeing children that were my age three or four years old that were completely naked on the sides of the street and having to reconcile why my life was so different from theirs and one of the things that I learned from that very early age was that I was not special. I was not better than them or smarter than them or harder working or more ambitious. My life was different simply because of where I was born and Those learnings as a young person they really shape the lens in which you see the world and so from the time I was a young kid that was this is what I thought about every

1 (4m 15s):
day. And as a member of the church was it always clear to you that you would do a mission that you would do what a lot of young Mormons do spend two years abroad and in some countries a missionary. Yes

2 (4m 29s):
from the time. I can remember I dreamed of being a missionary. I heard stories of my dad living in Argentina's. A missionary and they just seem like an amazing adventure a seem like an opportunity for me to serve others. And you know, it's a 19 and 20 21 year old like your typical thinking a lot about yourself but that experience where every single day, you know, there's a routine you wake up every single morning at 6:30. There's no days off for two years. There's no vacation time and I remember the first month being in Bolivia feeling so lonely

1 (5m 2s):
you were in we're in Bolivia where you

2 (5m 5s):
I served in a number of different. Bolivia everywhere from the Amazon basin in Santa Cruz to up in the altiplano and some smaller little tiny towns of few thousand people. There was no paved roads. There was no flushing toilets. There was no there were no telephones and you know, I spoke Spanish already when I started my mission, but it was it was very difficult and it took some time to get used to you know, when you every single day sharing something that to you means the world and being rejected over and over again having do doors slammed in your face having people yell things to you. It's a painful experience every day is hard as a

1 (5m 42s):
missionary, but I guess what makes it easier is this idea that you are there for a purpose. It's not about you or your ego or your achievements your there as fulfilling something much bigger than you.

2 (5m 57s):
Yes, and I think that is one of the greatest lessons I learned as a young missionary. It's something that I've tried to apply my life because I've just found that when I have And I'm focused on that's not about me. That is when I'm the most happy and that's when I feel the most fulfillment in life and when you come home from that two-year experience, there's a level of maturity that you have and I actually I found it much harder actually to come home surprisingly. It was the loneliness. I felt on the mission. I felt it all over again when I came home, you know, and I felt a lot of guilt, you know coming home and living in a place where I didn't have to worry about where I was going to get my next meal and was able to go into a beautiful home compared. To these places.

2 (6m 38s):
I've been living and that took a lot of adjusting and it was something that weighed heavy on me for the first few months. I was back. All

1 (6m 44s):
right, so you come back from your mission and you go to college to BYU, right? Yes. And what did you study?

2 (6m 51s):
You know, I studied International Studies. I knew that I was passionate about the world and culture and languages and politics and it just seemed like the perfect thing for me to

1 (7m 2s):
study. And and did you have this idea in your mind that you Get into business that you would start a business or or was that kind of not front and center?

2 (7m 12s):
No, I didn't really think I'd be an entrepreneur at all. I never really had thought of that. I believe that have an international career. That was something I talked a lot about but I actually read a newspaper article about a man named Steve Gibson who was a successful entrepreneur and he and his wife had sold their business. They were probably around 60 years old and they moved to the Philippines. Ins and they started teaching entrepreneurship and they were helping people get out of poverty by teaching them how to run their own small businesses and this article was oh my gosh, it was so inspiring to me and I ended up cutting it out and I put it in the face of my binder at school this clear face binder and I walked around with this article for three and a half years in undergrad and I saw it every single day.

2 (7m 59s):
Honestly, it wasn't the fact that he was a successful entrepreneur that inspired me. It was the fact that he'd he'd identified. What county had And he was using those to help other people and that's what I was really trying to do

1 (8m 10s):
and it was just some random story about this guy Steve Gibson in like the local paper.

2 (8m 16s):
There's some random story. You know, it just stuck out to me and I was actually on campus as I was finishing school for this social impact conference. And as I was on campus and I was walking in between two different sessions. I saw Steve Gibson the guy from this article he was walking into an elevator and I recognize and so I ran down the hallway. I jumped into the elevator and he was trapped. He had to talk to me, you know, and he's acting so flattered that I recognized him and he invited me to go meet with him at his office in a couple weeks. So I took him up on the offer. I've prepared a pitch I practiced in the mirror. I recited this pitch to do what well, I wanted to convince him to let me go work for him.

2 (8m 58s):
I wanted him to expand his program from the Philippines to Latin America where I'd grown up and that I loved so much. So, yeah, I gave him the whole pitch and he was smiling and nodding. The whole time and I was thinking in my head nailing it. Yeah nailing it and yeah, you know at the end he goes Davis. I love your passion around finding a way to help people. But what I see in you is you would be a great entrepreneur. You should go start your own business and you'll go find your own way of making an impact in the world 10 or 20 years down the line and that's a really the first time in my life where I thought you know what I'm going to be an entrepreneur. That's that's what I need to do. Wow

1 (9m 32s):
meantime. You you graduate Brigham Young and I should mention You got married? Yeah. Well you were bringing money. So you got married pretty unlike 21 22.

2 (9m 43s):
That's 22. Yeah, almost 20. Yeah, almost 23.

1 (9m 46s):
So what what did you decide to do? I mean what you graduated and you have this kind of inspiration from Steve Gibson. So where do you start to kind of turn to for ideas? Yeah. So, you know, I started

2 (10m 0s):
talking to my cousin and you know Kimball Thomas my cousin we were just you know, we're around the same age. And because I grew up in Latin America, we didn't see each other a lot. But every summer when we come back to the US and spend a few weeks here we'd hang out and you know, we developed a really close friendship. And so we started talking we were both in college at the time and I started talking to him about Steve Gibson and he shared this passion for entrepreneurship. And so we just started brainstorming ideas. And one of the ideas that I had was this idea of selling pool tables on the internet. How did that

1 (10m 34s):
pool tables? Like, how did you even The two of you basically said let's start something and then what you both like one on Google and just started researching what you could possibly do like, how does yeah Sables even even happen.

2 (10m 47s):
Yeah. I mean, we really were thinking all over the board. We were just trying to think of something we could do and I had a friend that worked for eBay and as he told me about eBay the eBay was pretty new at the time it blew my mind for me. It was like the invisible hand that you learn about with Adam Smith The Economist supply and demand and I love scuba diving and I thought you know, I can't really buy the gear that I'd want or go on a trip but I started going on there and I see all these people selling their gear and I found if I bought an entire set of dive gear and then I broke it apart and sold each hose and the regulator and the BC all this stuff separately. I could make a few hundred dollars. And so I did that handful of times and I just found that I really I loved it.

2 (11m 27s):
And so one night we were talking I was asking about who else is selling a lot on there and he mentioned the jewelry company and electronics and he mentioned he just randomly mentioned, you know. There's even people selling pool tables and it just clicked. It was like I could do that. I bet there's a factory in China to already manufactures pool table. So I went home that night. This is before mobile phones. And I just I had one of those discs from AOL that was like free internet for 60 days or whatever and yeah every 60 days I'd renew and get a new one and I did a search for pool table Factory China and I found some factories that made pool tables and we started selling them online

1 (12m 3s):
wait, but that's that's a pretty quickly you started. Factory that makes pool tables and how did you know pool tables were going to be a good business?

2 (12m 13s):
Well, you know, that was the cool thing about eBay was that you could actually watch other people's listings. And so I watched every other pool table that was be listed and I would just saw them being sold at a spreadsheet where I tracked every single one what it was sold for and I knew what I could sell them for and after eye contact to the factory. I knew what I could buy them for and so we just we took a risk and we filled a container 50 Pool tables before he'd even bought anything we did a test and we thought okay. Let's see if anyone buys this and created a listing on eBay and I remember watching it. We had it in his mom's basement. We're down on this computer watching this listing and the price kept getting higher and higher and I mean when it sold it sold for thirteen hundred and eighty four dollars, and I remember we were doing like we're dancing we were jumping up in the air.

2 (13m 0s):
I mean we were just like so excited and that's when we knew we

1 (13m 4s):
had something I mean, I met this guy Steve Gibson, right and he's a go out and do something good and you can make an impact on the world and I'm not trying to like this you at all because I have so much respect for you Davis, but pool tables, right? Did you ever think about I know I'm not no pool tables and change the world. It's so funny. So yeah, I have thought this in this is like honestly this is this was so

2 (13m 29s):
discouraging for me because I didn't know how to do it. It took me ten years as an entrepreneur to finally figure out how I could have an impact. Impact and tie that to a business but I honestly just didn't know how and I think on I think I really just needed to figure out how to become an entrepreneur in the first place. I had to learn some painful lessons. I had to have some success along the way but it was through those experiences that allowed me to go build. What I'm building now is

1 (13m 52s):
Cotopaxi and the commercial World get there in a bit. I'm trying to understand so this is about this is 2004 and how much was a pool table to how much does it cost to buy one for the factory depending on the pool table, but around

2 (14m 6s):
500 bucks so relatively

1 (14m 9s):
cheap. So you are you had 500 bucks purple table and your initial order was like 50 got it by the head of the cash to buy 50 pool tables.

2 (14m 19s):
Well, we you know as credit cards that you get in the mail that say like interest free for six months. Yeah. We use those we borrowed money from my grandma from you know, eventually I got my parents and my in-laws to Morgan to their homes

1 (14m 34s):
God because it started to grow. Oh so

2 (14m 36s):
fast we started growing we did. Yeah, we did a million in sales our first year in business

1 (14m 41s):
your first year witness was entirely through

2 (14m 44s):
eBay. Yeah, we started only on eBay and then we eventually within the first year or so. We opened up a store in Salt Lake City. We know we have the inventory here already. And then we also saw that we are shipping so many of the East Coast we actually had a map where we put pins every time we sold a pool table and we just saw a massive amount of pins in like the Atlanta Georgia area and then up in that you know, the Tri-state area of New York and New Jersey and so we we ended up opening up warehouses in Atlanta and in New Jersey and where we had the pool tables already. It just made sense to open a small showroom where we could set up some tables and wow.

1 (15m 20s):
So what was the name of the what was the name of your

2 (15m 21s):
business? Yeah, so it's called pool tables.com and but yeah, we ended up having a small team. We had a around 25 employees and you know as a young person in the 20s, it was a great experience. I mean, I really learned a lot through making mistakes and you know, we weathered the Great Recession that was terrifying of course selling pool tables people that buy pool tables are buying new homes or their yeah finishing a basement like that stopped overnight and it was terrifying because I could not lose my parents home. I could not lose my in-laws home

1 (15m 54s):
because they had all they'd all taking out mortgages. Yes, it is to to invest in this

2 (15m 59s):
company exactly and it wasn't even like investing they had lent us the money. It was debt, you know, so it's not like they'd taken No some ownership in the business like a venture investor Earl an angel investor and like they invested the money knowing that could be lost. I mean, they lent us the money with expectation that we'd be able to pay it

1 (16m 16s):
back. So when the economy sort of Tanked in 2008 and 2009 you started to see your business really take a hit like right away

2 (16m 27s):
immediately. We immediately saw sales just turn off and it was very very scary. So we started taking some immediate action. We went to all of our Landlords and renegotiated our leases we went through line item by line item finding out which expenses we needed where we could we save a dollar renegotiated pricing with factories. I mean we went we came up with every possible way. We could to save money and in the end we weathered that storm and it became truly one of the most wonderful learning experiences for us and while it was very stressful at first it shaped us as

1 (17m 1s):
leaders. All right say pool tables that cam what at its peak. What kind of Revenue what are you doing a

2 (17m 8s):
year? Yeah, it was I mean it was a small business. We are doing like 6 million in Revenue maybe a million dollars in ebitda. It was a small business but it was it was ours and that it and

1 (17m 19s):
it was probably sell you were you were making a little bit of a profit? Okay. Yeah a nice little profit

2 (17m 23s):
and you know to be honest like, you know pool tables. Is that something I'm like really passionate about no, but what I loved about it was it was mine. Yeah. It was ours. It was our business. It was an idea that we had ourselves that we created something that didn't exist before. Or that was incredibly fulfilling so you

1 (17m 40s):
I guess both you and your cousin Kimball decided to go to business school. As you were kind of winding this business down. Is that is that right?

2 (17m 49s):
Yeah. So the business was still it was actually was that was one of our best years ever, but my cousin and I had always talked about going to business school and my cousin just said, you know, this is the time. Let's go back like let's not be the pool table guys forever. And so I agreed and we started applying The school's I only apply to one school. I'd always known I wanted to go to the Wharton School. They had a program called the ladder Institute, which was a dual degree and MBA and an MA in international studies to get into the program. You had to speak a foreign language and an advanced level. Everyone had lived in that they got admitted to had lived all over the world. It was just exactly what I wanted and my cousin ended up going to Harvard Business School and I was at Wharton and it was a really fun shared experience together.

1 (18m 32s):
I'm just curious. Why did you think that business school was? Thing you had to do. I mean you guys ran a successful business you were doing at you know million dollars in profit. Maybe I mean, that's pretty great. I mean that's more successful than Uber which is never made a profit. Right so you weren't I mean, you know, so why business school

2 (18m 52s):
well there I mean there's a few things there. Number one. I think we always believed in furthering our education and that was really important. I think we both believe that we could either invest that money. The cost of going to school is not cheap, but we can either invest that money into the business. Work it invested into ourselves and we just felt like investing it in ourselves would be a more valuable long-term investment. And we wanted to build networks. We also saw some really interesting things happening, you know, Mark Zuckerberg started Facebook the same year that we started our pool table business and we kind of saw Facebook. I mean, this is 2008 issue, you know, we saw Facebook really blowing up and it was like, oh my gosh, that's what we could have built instead of the whole business like so, you know, there was some some Drive their of like, okay what if we wanted to build?

2 (19m 36s):
The bigger and more exciting business Court allow us to think about how to do

1 (19m 40s):
that and you kept running pool tables.com from from

2 (19m 43s):
yeah. Yeah, we kept running the business from school and and then there was a gentleman who owned a handful of domains and businesses and we didn't even put the business on the market really. We just reached out to me and said, hey, we're in business school or thing about starting something new like would you be interested in buying this business and he ended up coming back and saying, yeah, and so he bought it from us so you can Graduate from

1 (20m 7s):
Morton your cousin Trimble graduates from

2 (20m 11s):
Harvard

1 (20m 12s):
with this idea that you've both graduate and create something new the next business and you decide to create like a baby Supply Company in Brazil baby.com be our first of all, how did that idea even begin?

2 (20m 29s):
Yeah, so a bunch of my friends and business school were Brazilian, you know, I grown up a lot in America. I was in this international program the lottery Mm. I've grown up in Spanish speaking Latin America and Brazil was this large economy 200 million people more people in South America speak Portuguese and Spanish and one of my Brazilian friends in business school. He had his first child while we were all your students and grad school and he was telling me how in Brazil all the baby products are just very very expensive and that a lot of Brazilians will come to United States to buy baby products and then bring them back and when he said this it just clicked because I knew the founder Mark Lori the founder of diapers.com, you know, I was kind of sharing in the early days of the stories of the pool tables.com business and he was sharing the story of his diaper business and every time I connected with him, his business was like bigger than my business and I started thinking wow, we made a mistake like the pool table business like it's just not that big of a market the total addressable Market is way too small.

2 (21m 29s):
We should have chosen something bigger. And so when his friend was talking about Brazil, it just clicked and I thought this is a place that there's Not a lot of competition but it's growing rapidly people are online and I thought this is a place that could use e-commerce that could use a place where the moms can go buy all their baby products in one place and have it delivered to their

1 (21m 48s):
home. All right. So you decide we're going to do because because presumably by 2010 2011 when you found it baby.com BR this was already like baby.com must have must have already been a business in the

2 (21m 60s):
US. Yeah. So there was a there was definitely there were existing businesses in the US that that were selling baby products. Obviously the domain baby.com. Duppy are in Brazil was available. No one was it was just basic up. There was a placeholder on that site and we started talking to investors and should convince investors to help us raise the money to go build this business and to buy that domain

1 (22m 23s):
I'm curious. What kind of research did you do to make the case? Like what were you saying in the pitch deck? Like hey, this is an aftermarket here. Let me show you the data like what data do you have?

2 (22m 35s):
Yeah, so Guy this is what the benefit was have been in school. Like we had these great professors so they were able to help us think through the business we had access to all these studies that were done through the University Library. These are studies that normally might cost like 15 or 20 grand to buy they were free as a student. So we had all this data on Brazil on e-commerce in Brazil. We actually had paid a few hundred dollars to get a survey done in Brazil for mother's that use the internet and we ask them like 60 or 70 questions about where they shop and do. They have a how many cars did have zero one or two and we had all these questions. We had all this data that really helped us understand this market and I spent hundreds of hours on that deck.

2 (23m 16s):
I mean, I understood I think I understood the baby Market e-commerce Market in Brazil better than maybe anyone on the planet

1 (23m 22s):
in your pitch to investors. First of all, how did you even find investors who would be interested in backing this

2 (23m 30s):
so we had, you know through business school. We had a handful of friends that had raised money and they connected us with people and I One of our first pitches we were we went to New York and we met this Venture capitalists that invested quite a bit in Brazil and we gave the whole Spiel and I remember like partway through the the pitch. He was like, he took a phone call. It was it seemed like you didn't really care that much about us and it was probably an hour and a half. It was a long meeting and we went down this elevator and remember just look at each other going this is not going to work, you know, but as we're walking down the street, you know, we got an email from him and he said I'm in I want to Put a million dollars into the business and that's when we realized we had something that could work.

2 (24m 12s):
And

1 (24m 12s):
as you raised you got how much did you raise by the way

2 (24m 16s):
4.3 million?

1 (24m 18s):
Wow. All right. So you raised four point three million dollars from investors. And how do you even begin to do it's you and your cousin? I mean you have to find a place to live and an office and do either of you speak Portuguese, by the

2 (24m 32s):
way, I take it some Portuguese classes as Student in undergrad and so I had a based kind of build off of and Spanish and Portuguese are relatively similar. So I felt confident in my ability to figure out the language and Kimball had a younger brother named McKay who had worked with us in the pool table business and he was still running helping run the pool table business and when we were in school and so we told McKay. Hey, are you ready for the next adventure? And he's like, of course and so he said, would you move down to Brazil while we finish school? Well, we didn't want to drop out of school, but we needed someone on the ground getting things

1 (25m 10s):
done. But what does he know about about

2 (25m 12s):
nothing? Nothing nothing about reset

1 (25m 15s):
go down there and city of money to work with did he have? Yeah, so we

2 (25m 19s):
yes, we'd raise that money which you know, he got a little place to live with his wife and had a brand new baby. So they went down there and he's in a brilliant graphic designer designer logo to started designing. You know, what the website would look like started building these a great people person started building. UPS I reached out to probably 200 people in Brazil anyone that I could find on LinkedIn that had anything to do with e-commerce. I reached out to this like cold email and said, hey, we're starting this new business. I'd love to connect and we just started building a network

1 (25m 51s):
in a community and answer you see you graduate. You move down to Brazil with four million dollars in start-up cash you buy a bunch of what were you buying diapers and bottles and formula? Allah is like that kind of stuff baby clothes the access strollers car seats. Just whatever you could buy. And then how are you getting the word out? I mean you were to Americans moving into Brazil did that money also allow you to just put advertisements

2 (26m 21s):
everywhere. Yeah. We advertised a lot. We had a lot of PR. We are story got a lot of traction and Brazil one of our investors early investors was a Brazilian investor and he said hey, I've no the celebrity couple that Should connect with and I think it's an opportunity for you to use this woman as as a spokesperson for your brand. So we went out there met with them and they were the kindest people and we immediately hit it off. And so this woman she's one of the best known people in Brazil and so she became the face of our brand and those kind of things really drove a lot of just organic traffic to the site as well.

1 (26m 59s):
Now by the way, I've read that Brazil is like one of the hardest places in the world to launch a business. Like it's really bureaucratic is

2 (27m 9s):
that true? That is true. It took us six months to get a business license and entity set up something you can do on the internet in the US and like 10 minutes. Why

1 (27m 17s):
does it take so long in

2 (27m 18s):
Brazil? Everything is complicated. Everything is bureaucratic. A lot of times. There are bribes involved and we just made a decision from the beginning that we would not pay bribes. No matter what and so that's slowed things down for us. I remember the first month of the business. We started things really took. Off and our warehouse instantly became too small. So we cousin I went and found this new Warehouse with Ian our CEO and it was like 10 times bigger than our previous Warehouse. We thought this will be great this allows to grow for the next few years and we went and told Enos that okay. We just signed the lease like over the weekend. Let's move everything over to this new warehouse and he's like, oh we can't do that. We have to get permission from the government to move our warehouse and we're like, you're kidding me.

2 (27m 60s):
Like how long does that take? And he's like, maybe a month or two it took us two months. So I mean we used the space to have like a roller skating party once or something like we we tried to like use the space that we're paying for. It was like a hundred thousand dollars a month for this warehouse. At the meantime. We were using this tiny little Warehouse. Our buying team was ordering more and more product because we are running out and the warehouse team was rejecting shipments from the warehouse because they had no place to put it. I mean it was like it was a

1 (28m 27s):
nightmare. Wow, and I mean this is as the business is really starting to take off and and as you mentioned you got this this celebrity endorsement, Of baby.com that BR and by the way, this is like a celebrity couple who were who like what they like huge TV stars and

2 (28m 44s):
Brazil. Yeah. In fact, I remember we had a bunch of press that came out one day and then the next day we had the husband of the celebrity. That was our face the face of a brand he was maybe even more popular than her. He did a Facebook post about us and it actually crashed our website. I mean the amount of traffic that was happening the growth of the business was Crazy, I mean we went to like 400 employees with an 18 months of our launch. Wow, you know, we were doing a lot of things well and we were doing a lot of things not well, you know when you're growing that quickly, you're just trying to keep the wheels from falling off. Yeah, and this was a country that we were not super familiar with there were some unique challenges there and we were learning a lot of lessons and there were some things that we have control of other things that we didn't so

1 (29m 32s):
what I mean sounds like the businesses was great and it was it Double it was not profitable. Yeah,

2 (29m 39s):
and I think investors what they saw was a business that was growing very quickly that had built a strong brand within Brazil. They had some Scrappy Founders that had some success in the past and that were very driven and committed to the business and You know, they kept seeing opportunities again. We you know, we felt very optimistic about the business and we was growing rapidly and while we have some challenges. We also really believed in it. And so we ended up raising quite a bit of a venture capital over the over those

1 (30m 11s):
months. You left Brazil in 2014. So two years after I think after you got there if I'm not

2 (30m 18s):
mistaken. Yeah, so I actually left in at the end of 2013. So about two and a half years after we

1 (30m 24s):
arrived what What happened?

2 (30m 27s):
Yeah. So this is this is a lot of the pain that is associated with some of the you know, those memories there and you know my cousin Campbell. I mentioned that you know, we grew up together. We were best friends. We were like brothers, we built our first business together. We went to business school at the same time. We Built Homes on the same street as each other before we gone to business school if we were we were inseparable and when we were in Brazil, we started just kind of separating it made it not fun to be working together. And I know this is not a unique story for co-founders. This is maybe a very common story but for us it was very painful because we were so close and because we are family

1 (31m 12s):
always said the tension around the business started to affect your personal relationship.

2 (31m 19s):
Definitely when I left at the end of 2013. There was still a lot of optimism, but there was Tensions there around you know, who's the leader of the business we were co-ceos and we had very different management styles. My team had a very different culture than his, you know, he gave me some some feedback that you know, I wasn't great at leading people because I wasn't great at following up and holding people accountable and it actually is true. That's something that I've had to work on a lot as a leader and that experience helped you learn that but eventually I just I decided that the business didn't need both of us and it was a very very difficult. What decision I was walking away from something that I loved.

2 (31m 60s):
I was in Latin America with my two daughters and my wife and my girls were speaking Portuguese and going to an international school. Like I had as a kid like it was a dream come true for me at the same time. Like I knew I had to leave

1 (32m 13s):
what does it mean for your relationship with Kimball?

2 (32m 15s):
It was a very painful time, you know, I can't really speak to you know, exactly how he felt but probably a lot of feelings of wow, like I'm on my own now and Work together for so long and then as Brazil's imploded after after we left, I mean that was a very difficult time to be a leader of a company in Brazil. When was that? Yeah. So in 2014 Brazil basically hit a wall and there was a massive recession in Brazil inflation, you know, the currency went from when we moved to Brazil is 1.5 1.6 rails to the dollar and it went up to about four or so.

2 (32m 56s):
So everything became more expensive to buy people were out of work, you know, it became an incredibly challenging time and a time that the business was was not really prepared to weather. And so Campbell did a phenomenal job continuing to run that business as best he could but it was an uphill battle in a country that's very complicated tax system. The taxes are astronomical and a lot of businesses cheat. They don't pay their taxes. They don't report things correctly and we Willing to do that and so it put us at a major

1 (33m 28s):
disadvantage. This is I mean the two of you had some great success with pool tables that calm you go to these incredible Business Schools with a lot of connections and experience now and this was kind of a failure in this right. I mean, that's what I'm trying to say this delicately but it kind of was

2 (33m 53s):
Yes, it was a it was a very painful experience for I think for both of us and I think even more so for Kimble than for me because Kimble Stadium Brazil running that business until the summer of 2019. He spent so many more years down there trying to make this business work and when he left he sold the business to another company, but it was not a great transaction. I don't think that's ended up working out and I can only imagine how hard it was for him and for him to be there alone without a partner to kind of navigate it the whole thing. And so it was very damaging to our

1 (34m 34s):
relationship. I mean, I don't mean to make light of it but people say don't don't start businesses with your family, right?

2 (34m 42s):
Yes, you know, this is interesting actually guy. I think this is a great lesson that I've learned which is I think there's two different ways to think about the early days of starting a business you Can either find someone that you think you want to work with a close friend or family member some of the you trust immensely and together you can go find a business opportunity Gathering go pursue it and that's a lot of fun and a lot of ways the other way to do it is to identify an opportunity on your own and to go build a team around that and then to go bring in experts that can help you go solve problems that you need to solve for that specific business. And those are likely not going to be your best friend. It's not likely not going to be your cousin or your sibling or your spouse.

2 (35m 23s):
And that's a those that doesn't work. It does work. There are plenty of stories and guy you've interviewed so many that it has but I think that's a for me a better approach.

1 (35m 32s):
So you go back what to the US with your family.

2 (35m 37s):
Yeah. So I made the decision to come back and honestly, I didn't even know what I was going to do. You didn't have a plan. I did not have a plan initially, but that changed quickly. I made the decision. I was going to leave and I knew I wanted to do something that was about helping people. Story that I kept in my mind for my entire adult hood my wife easily in and I when we were in college, we did an internship in Peru. We went to a little city called Cusco which is near Machu Picchu and our first hour there we sat on this park bench. We're eating this food and all these little kids ran up to us to sell us things finger puppets and postcards but there was one little boy the sat next to me on a shoeshine kit and his name was Edgar.

2 (36m 19s):
He was nine years old. He kept sitting there and it was watching us. See and then I realized maybe he's watching us eat because he's hungry. So I offered him the rest of my food and I've never seen somebody like that. He absolutely devoured it and that night Hazel and I decided let's save some of this food and for dinner and let's go see if we can find this little boy find Edgar in this became a daily ritual for us everyday. The highlight of our day was Finding Edgar our last night in Cusco as we were walking back to our place. It was close to midnight. We saw two little boys cuddled. Against each other on the sidewalk trying to stay warm with Heather sweaters pulled over their knees we could see our breath in the air and as we got closer we recognize that one of them was Edgar and I woke him up and I asked him why he was sleeping on the street and he told me that someone had stolen his shoeshine kit and he was too afraid to go home his mom relied on him to help feed his family.

2 (37m 13s):
We gave him a little bit of cash. We had we didn't have much and the next one it got on a bus to leave Cusco. We went around the main plaza with this bus and at the stop to let some people on and if we looked out the window and we saw Edgar and he saw us and we had just enough time where we slid open the window this boss and he like rent next to it waving goodbye to us and he had a big bag of candy in one arm that he bought with the money. We gave me was now selling that candy in the streets and he's you know an entrepreneur which I just love now. So every day since 2001, I've thought of Edgar and pretty quickly. I landed on this idea of building a business that could help others. It was I was inspired by Warby Parker my classmates in school as Fired by Toms shoes, and I thought you know, this is a way I could make a meaningful impact in the

1 (37m 57s):
world to figure out a way to do something. That would like Tom's obviously one for one and Warby Parker provide a pair of glasses to somebody in need around the world for every pair sold. So this was your idea. I'm going to come up with something that will enable me to do something like that. Exactly. No before you kind of dive into this all the businesses you've done up. Up until this point where with your cousin with Kimball. Yes. Were you nervous? I mean about doing this on your own.

2 (38m 28s):
I was terrified. I was so scared. I wasn't sure I could actually manage. I was so stressed out. I was terrified that if I went into something on my own that I would fail in the everyone would look at me and say, you know what turns out Davis wasn't a great entrepreneur. It was actually his cousin Kimball. That was a great entrepreneur and he destroyed his coattails Kimball was just a great leader. And so I you know, there was a lot that I Him that I just don't have everything that he has and so those were the fears in my head and I had a lot of self-doubt about whether I could do this on my own.

1 (39m 2s):
When we come back in just a moment how Davis actually put together a team of people to build his next company and have two of the members of that team weren't even people. They were llamas stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Support for NPR in the following message comes from Dell the nation is an unchartered territory and many Americans are looking for ways to support their communities Dell Technologies is working to ensure small businesses have the right Tech Solutions Del Technologies advisors are helping small businesses stay connected and productive while working remotely with Windows 10 and Microsoft teams and are deploying remote work solutions to minimize upfront costs with Dell Financial Services Dell.

1 (40m 6s):
Standing by its customers call 877 ask Dell. The biggest story in the world is a science story and keeping up with all the latest coronavirus research. It's a lot. So on shortwave we translate the science. You need to know in two short daily episodes. Listen And subscribe to shortwave from NPR. Oh and one more thing before we get back to the show. I'll be on The Tonight Show with Jimmy Fallon this Friday May 8. So check it out. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's early 2014 and David Smith has just settled back in the US after going through one of the most intense periods in his life starting and then walking away from a business in Brazil and he's got this nagging feeling that if he tries to launch a new business without his cousin Campbell he'll fail but he also has this other nagging feeling which is that well he needs to start another.

1 (41m 10s):
Business. Yeah, so I mean the

2 (41m 12s):
idea the concept for me was I wanted to find something that could inspire people to go out and do good with us, but I needed a brand I needed a product and I'd always loved the outdoors. I spent a lot of time in the outdoors in the kid with my dad. I still go backpacking every summer with my dad and brothers and I just thought you know, there's no digitally native brand in the outdoor industry. I felt there was an opportunity to go build a brand that really connected with his young consumer this Millennial or gen Z consumer. That was very passionate about the world. And so the idea was to build an outdoor brand like Patagonia like the North Face like Columbia, like all these brands that have been around for 50 to 70 years, but to build one that was really built around this Young

1 (41m 50s):
Generation, so you all right. So you come up with this idea and this concept and you're back in Utah and how did you even begin to research this idea? And to who did you call who did you start to talk to you? I mean that you got to manufacture this stuff. You got to make it. So walk me through what you did.

2 (42m 9s):
Yeah, so The first thing I did is I decided I need a team. I may not have everything that I need to go build this but I can build it. I do know that I have a the ability to build a team of people that do and so I immediately went on LinkedIn and I started looking for award winning designers product designers a pack designer apparel designer and I started reaching out to some people on Skype and started doing phone calls and interviews with them and I reached out to a friend who Sam Brooks who was an amazing graphic designer and he started helping me think through the Itself and what it would look like and so yeah, I just started building this great team of people around me and you know, they had relationships with factories. They started designing product and we started developing what the brand would look like and feel like what it stood

1 (42m 52s):
for and and let me let me ask this question. What was going to differentiate your brand? I mean, I understand the values of patagonia's great values right incredible company. Yvon chouinard inspiring incredibly inspiring person. Was there going to be something of a design element or a an Tiant or something that you were going to use that was going to also make this different. Yes

2 (43m 16s):
what really set us apart was number one that we were digitally native. We weren't reliant on these Legacy channels that everyone else was reliant on we would sell online. So that was more of a business model Innovation. Okay, the brand Innovation was really around people all these other brands in the outdoor industry focus on the environment, which I think is wonderful. I love the environment. We need to protect it. I'm so glad that so many. About it, but what I felt needed to happen moving forward was like we need to take it a step further. We need to care about people like what about people that live in extreme poverty, you know, we have an opportunity to eradicate extreme poverty in our lifetimes and I want to be part of that. And so that was really the focus of what our brand was going to represent us and for

1 (44m 0s):
all right, you decide? All right. We're going to do this launch this company. First of all, I mean you left Brazil. I can't imagine you had a hole A lot of cash to use. Is that okay? And so you have to you decide that you're going to raise money for this company? And where did you go seeking money?

2 (44m 24s):
So originally I thought that impact investors would be really interested in this. I didn't know much about impact investors, but I'd write about them and I knew that they had, you know big hearts and they cared a lot about finding ways to innovate and help people living in poverty. So I started meeting with some of them and I was rejected instantly by all of them why they weren't used to investing in a business that hadn't done anything yet. You know, they were shocked that I was coming to them and we hadn't sold a single product. Right? So then I the other option was to go to traditional investors are not always lead with our mission and why the brand needed to exist and then I talk about the opportunity in this outdoor industry to go build a the first digitally native brand and I got rejected a lot to you know, remind me a lot of being a missionary where you get the door slammed in your face.

2 (45m 10s):
Face and yeah,

1 (45m 12s):
they were saying hey, this is great. We're really impressed with you know, your idealism but we're in the business of making money.

2 (45m 18s):
Yes, you know, one of the first pieces of advice I got was from my attorney and this is an attorney I used in the past. I told him when I was in Brazil, I told him hey, I'm going to be coming back. I want to build a benefit Corporation a business that's giving

1 (45m 31s):
back and shut for we should just be clear. This is a b Corp. It's like it's not an official designation in all states. But essentially it's it's a copy. Operates like a non-profit but is essentially a for-profit. So it's exactly it's like a

2 (45m 43s):
hybrid almost of a for-profit and a non-profit is a for-profit. But and there's some big D course, I think

1 (45m 49s):
Den own and methods soaps and there's tons of the Ben & Jerry Jerry's there. So there's lots of big companies are be corpse.

2 (45m 56s):
Yes, and the difference is that all of these companies to date had converted to benefit corporations after they had been a real business and this attorney told me Davis don't incorporate as a benefit Corporation from inception. No investor is going to want invest money in a business that's giving away money before you've even figured out what right you are and what you're doing. Yeah, that's really good advice actually, but I didn't want to take it. I didn't take it. I just felt like this is so core to who I am and why I want to build this business that it has to be part of us from inception. And you know, there were certainly investors that didn't invest in us because of that mission of us giving away money. It is hard enough to build a business a normal business, but to have a business that you're building while you're also giving away money.

2 (46m 40s):
You've made money is a challenge. And so but eventually we found investors that believed in us. We had Kirsten green LED our first round. This is an investor that she's backed Warby Parker and away and Birchbox and Dollar Shave Club and she believed in us and she believed in our mission. And so she she wrote the first check and that was the beginning of the brand

1 (47m 3s):
and by the way, how did you come up with an the name could have hack

2 (47m 7s):
see ya? So the name Cotopaxi comes from a volcano in Ecuador where I grew up as a kid and I we chose a llama as our in our logo kind of our mascot and that was actually the first place I saw llamas in the wild was in Ecuador at the base of Mount Cotopaxi. I just felt it connected back to my roots. It was connected to this place that really mattered to me that was important to me the school I went to in Ecuador was called Academia Cotopaxi named after this volcano. So that's where the name came from. All

1 (47m 36s):
right, so you come go to these investors you do actually read Is some seed money with investors, right? I think almost 3 million dollars. Yes. So the pitch was I'm going to make a pact or apparel, you know, sort of puffy jackets and clothes that you wear for hiking or running and backpacks and you know camping and stuff like that and I'm going to be really connected to the people who make this that they're going to be treated fairly and well and I'm going to enforce it. Is that was that more or less

2 (48m 7s):
your pitch? Yes, like People is one of our our core values as a brand and that included our supply chain. And so we thought deeply about how we could impact those lives. And so for example the Llama wool products and we went to these these little communities in Bolivia where I've been a missionary and I that I fell in love with and it always wanted to go back and find a way to help and we built a supply chain buying llama wool from these communities, you know, we went to our backpack Factory. This is a factory that manufactures for many of the outdoor brands that you've mentioned already as well and we just saw a massive amount of Waste from the cutting and sewing process and we also saw that the Sowers they've been there on average 11 and a half years. They it was a great place to work.

2 (48m 48s):
They're paid fairly and treated fairly but they never got to innovate they decide what people like us told them to so and we wanted to change that and so we went to them and said, hey all this Remnant material that we see all this leftover we want to use it and we want you guys to design the bags. The Only Rule is to make no bag of like and so that's been really

1 (49m 5s):
fun. What did you know about making? It's an outdoor cat mean you didn't right. It's like you didn't know anything about pool tables or baby products. You just you just figured you would learn about it. Figure it out.

2 (49m 19s):
Yeah, exactly. I knew that I had certain things that would serve me well in building a business and I do other things that I didn't have a lot of experience with and so one of the most important pieces of our success is has been finding a great co-founder right when I was moving back to the US, but before we started anything I was at a school reunions for lottery the lottery Wharton and I was connecting with one of my closest friends Stefan Jacob who is from Germany from Munich and had stayed in the u.s. To build a business himself as a CEO after business school and I was catching up with him and telling him how he's moving back. I was going to build this new brand and he was just selling his business and within 24 hours of that conversation.

2 (50m 1s):
He had committed to moving to Utah and joining me at it was crazy. And Stephane is just been one of the greatest gifts. Gifts I could have received as a Founder, especially in that time where I was feeling so insecure about myself and you know, we've worked together for six and a half years now and we've never had an argument. I mean, it's just been an amazing experience.

1 (50m 22s):
So you get these factories going. Yeah and you've got three million dollars which isn't a mean again. This is a capital intensive business because you gotta write you got a byproduct and you've gotta get designs. And so how long was three million dollars going to last?

2 (50m 39s):
Yeah, so we suspected that it would last us about 18 months executing on the plan that we had which was let's keep it simple. Why don't we just start with five backpacks? And so that's what we started with we started with five

1 (50m 49s):
back and all online all sold online all online. Okay, and

2 (50m 53s):
the one thing that was a little bit different though about our approach was that we wanted to find a way we knew that this young consumer really valued experiences more than things. And so just try to sell them a new backpack was going to be challenging but we wanted to create an experience that allowed them to connect with our brand and so Before we launch we started coming up with this idea of creating an experience an event that allowed people to go live the Cotopaxi values. So we called it the Quest level we bought two Llamas on Craigslist wait, and we started

1 (51m 22s):
take so you bought two llamas like what like for marketing. Yes, and you're in Salt Lake City can use his go on Craigslist and get a llama

2 (51m 32s):
believe it or not. I bet pretty much anywhere in the country. You could find some Llamas on Craigslist. Oh

1 (51m 36s):
my god, really? I'm gonna go on Craigslist. This while we're talking here in the San Francisco Bay area where I am and I'm just going to write down the llama and let me just find a llama for sale. There you go. You can buy a llama on

2 (51m 51s):
Craigslist. That's

1 (51m 53s):
right. Yeah a llama for sale. Yeah, 750 bucks, right?

2 (51m 58s):
Yeah. I think we might have paid a little less than that. Barry has more expensive, you know prices are

1 (52m 2s):
high. Okay, I guess

2 (52m 4s):
yeah, so we bought two llamas kodo and poxy and they become our buddies and we went around college campuses with them and the idea was if we went to a college campus and started handing out flyers people would just ignore us or throw the flyer in the

1 (52m 15s):
trash, but these are college campuses in Utah you went. To

2 (52m 18s):
yeah, so for example, we went on to BYU's campus where I'd gone to school and we should up in the middle of the heart of Campus. Of course, we didn't ask for permission because no one's going to give us an option to bring Llamas on campus, but we thought you know better to ask for forgiveness later and sure within minutes. We have hundreds of students gathered around us taking selfies with the llamas saying what are the llamas for? Why are they on campus and we say because we're this new brand we're going to be launching in two weeks. And we've got this event this 24-hour Adventure Race the scavenger hunt that were calling the quest of oil and you can When gear you can win trips with your friends you form a team and will have hundreds of challenges. You can choose from and it was a huge hit we ended up with thousands of people that showed up at this first quest of all and every one of them was with wearing one of our backpacks.

2 (53m 5s):
You got a backpack for participating for registering for the race

1 (53m 8s):
and the race was a what did you do? It's just like

2 (53m 11s):
a yeah, so we gave challenges like, you know go through this hike or catch a fish and cook it on a campfire. Koror go to service in the local community go work at a soup kitchen for an hour. There were all these quirky challenges that we gave them as well. So people were documented this all and social media. We had 30,000 social media posts the day of our launch of people using our bags out living our brand values and it was a really special way for us to go build the brand. All

1 (53m 37s):
right. So you you launch this thing and you've got these llamas by the way, where do you keep the lavas?

2 (53m 44s):
You know, we had an intern that was tasked with the This challenge of finding a place for these llamas at first. They were in my backyard for a couple days and then Stefan my co-founder had him his backyard and he was renting and he almost got his landlord came and said we are going to evict you if you have llamas in the backyard, so but this in turn went around and knock doors, he looked on Google Maps and started looking for places that had horse properties and when it started knocking doors and I think the second door he knocked on they said yeah, we take care of your llamas. They had a little 11 year. Old boy that we pay dollar a day per llama to take care of them. And yeah.

1 (54m 23s):
All right. Now this is a question. I've asked other Founders swell bottles and outdoor voices and you know away suitcases and Warby Parker. I've had them on and they're different stories. How did you get people to even be aware of the brand? I mean you having these festivals are going to college campuses primarily in Utah is not going to be enough to get critical mass of people to the website. So how did you get people to even

2 (54m 48s):
Become aware of it. So it was a combination of things. There's not one silver bullet that allows you to do this. You just have to do a lot of things really well. And so we started doing quest levels all around the country. We did them in San Francisco in Las Vegas in Denver in Boise in New York and Boston. So we're doing this all over the country. We had over a hundred thousand people participate in one of our quest of all events the same time we were doing using traditional digital marketing and then a lot of a lot of word of mouth and eventually we started getting the product into other. Retailers like REI and so people were discovering the brand through their regular retailer.

1 (55m 23s):
All right, I want to talk. I want to ask you about this benefit core side of the business. What does it actually mean? Like how what percentage of your money? Do you are you committed to giving away every year. How does it somehow works

2 (55m 37s):
or models a little complicated? It's not as simple as a buy one. Give one model. I just felt there was something that we could do that would be much more impactful. And so we identified Health Care education and Her training as the three things that we believed were inextricably linked to poverty alleviation and we started focusing our efforts on identifying nonprofits that were world-class in and how they operated and we started partnering with them. And so so we have that part of the business which is the giving and that we do through our through the Cotopaxi foundation. So we dedicate one percent of all of our sales to that Foundation, but we also dedicate money to our local Unity we have this number of refugee programs here in Salt Lake that we support.

2 (56m 22s):
We also invest a lot in our supply chain, you know in Fair Trade manufacturing and in other other activities, for example, one of our factories, we built a community garden so ends up being somewhere around 40 as much as five percent of our total sales end up getting dedicated towards impact in one way or another.

1 (56m 40s):
Okay. Now ultimately the idea is that you will make a lot of money and then you could give more money away or you could create bigger. Scaled projects,

2 (56m 49s):
right? Yeah, definitely the whole idea behind a benefit Corporation is that as we scale? Our impact is able to scale with us? And so of course in the early days, you don't make much money or you don't make money at all and So eventually as the business scales and grows and becomes more profitable, like hopefully they'll be some profit left over. So continue to invest in our growth. We don't have to continue raising venture

1 (57m 10s):
capital. Davis you obviously have a you know, a really ambitious Mission here. But here's my push back to you. There are lots of companies that say, oh we have, you know, we really kind of make sure that our supply chain is ethical and blah blah blah and this and that and then we find out that actually it's not the case. How do you know how do you make sure that a factory in the Philippines or in China or you know in one of these countries in developing world are Really actually behaving in the way that you would expect them and it and need them to

2 (57m 46s):
behave. That's a really really important question. You know, I'd say in the early days of our business. We relied on on our product team, you know, they were on the ground at factories for weeks at a time. We often times were using the same factories as other great brands that that also had similar values. And so we relied on the vetting that they did as part of that but as we've grown we've been able to invest in our own resources. We hired a someone to head up our impact work in the first year of our business before we even hired a Mart someone in marketing we Hired someone and impact and so we really started dedicating resources to making sure we were giving in the very best way and we know that we're making mistakes you're going to make mistakes along the way and I think we can't let that get in the way of us finding ways to do good.

2 (58m 31s):
You know, we look at Tom shoes for example, and I think they learned some really valuable lessons about impact and about there were some unintended consequences as they were Distributing their shoes around the world disrupting local, you know economies and they change they evolved they're giving strategy and And we watch very closely what others are doing so that we can learn from them and my hope is that young entrepreneurs that might be listening to this are learning from us. And that one day they can look at us and say wow, they did a really good job, but they could have done this better and I'm going to do that better when I build my

1 (59m 0s):
business. So so last year I read that your revenues about 30 million dollars, which is great. I mean you're getting some traction there but still I am I'm assuming that you're not totally profitable right because this is a labor and capital intensive business,

2 (59m 16s):
right? Yeah, it is a capital intensive business, you know over the last two years. Our Focus has really been on becoming sustainable and profitable and we've made some amazing progress and we're finally to the point where we don't have to raise more Venture Capital moving forward. We also knew that there was a potential downturn coming at some point. And so the last two years we've been really working towards being in a place where we could weather that storm if it

1 (59m 41s):
came and you could basically fuel the business of sales exactly. So The question what is the value proposition for investors? Because you know, they always say what's your exit? It's either go public or you sell so I mean there's a chance that your investors are not going to make a whole lot of money off of this down the road. Yeah. So our investors will have an

2 (1h 0m 3s):
opportunity. Definitely when we raise money. We understood that we we had to create a return on investment and we've built a brand that is a respected brand in the outdoor industry. It's a brand that people are talking about and you know, there are certainly opportunities. Entities for and we've had interest in larger companies that have come in and said, hey, we'd love to help be a steward of your brand as you try to grow to the next level. And as you know, I believe we can go build a billion-dollar business and that's motivating to me not because of the money but because if we could build a billion-dollar business every single year, the amount of impact that we could have on the world would be tremendous. Yeah.

1 (1h 0m 39s):
All right. So you seems like you just hit a point where you really the Tipping Point and now we're in this You are talking to me from your basement and I'm talking to you from my my backyard. What do you think? What are you thinking right

2 (1h 0m 57s):
now? I was actually in Ecuador two or three weeks ago when this all started unraveling and I was visiting some of our impact Partners there that we're supporting and I cut the trip short to fly back to the US because I saw a kind of what was what where this was headed and my first thought is how lucky we

1 (1h 1m 16s):
are. Are ya

2 (1h 1m 17s):
flying from Ecuador where people have so many people there have so little like the fact that we can sit in comfortable homes. We have food to eat. We have hopefully toilet paper, you know, we have all all these things that that we really need and at the same time it is incredibly stressful. I went to bed with tears in my eyes multiple times that week just worried about my team and thinking about how this is going to impact these people that I care about and you know, we had to close our retail. Where's our Retail Partners? Like REI and 500 other retailers all had to shut their doors. We've been deeply impacted at the same time. It's been beautiful because I've I've never seen my team rally together.

1 (1h 2m 0s):
Like it has the last couple weeks

2 (1h 2m 3s):
and that's been a really special thing to

1 (1h 2m 5s):
watch. I mean companies don't plan for this because nobody plans for zero Revenue day most companies don't have 18 months of Cash lying around. I mean you're going to have days like that.

2 (1h 2m 21s):
Yeah, these are definitely challenging times, you know for us. We fortunately have some pieces of business that are still working like the e-commerce. Well, our retail stores are shut down and other things I've shut down we still have some Revenue coming in but yeah, it's impossible to plan for something like this because in a normal recessionary period you think okay. We'll see a Slowdown will start having impact, you know, maybe sales will be impacted by 10% in a worst-case Maybe. Percent, but you'd never expect Revenue to just be completely shut down. Yeah, I read this great article about a week ago that talked about different CEOs and how they're managing this crisis. And there was this the author interview 29 CEOs the three categories that a group these CEOs and was the first was like this fear-based CEO and they were using a lot of words like government and Trump and coronavirus and covid-19 and really using words that they have no control over and Then there was this unfocused CEO, which was basically kind of head in the sand hadn't made any decisions yet was just kind of waiting to see what happened.

2 (1h 3m 25s):
And then there was the strategy focused CEO. These were CEO's that were making changes that are they were four times more likely to have already made changes in their team. There were using words like innovate and opportunity. The reason these forward-looking positive words. And so we have our team has rallied around this idea of innovating we've come up with some really fun ideas. We've created a shirt the recline. Utah and entire or donate a hundred percent of the proceeds of the shirt to support the covid-19 response here in Utah over the last 48 hours since we launched it, we sold thousands and thousands of these shirts, you know, these are really these are really hard times to prepare for and as a leader what's important is to stay optimistic.

2 (1h 4m 6s):
It's to unite your team around your mission around each other and that's what we found. It's been really interesting and I feel like I feel more connect to my team now than I and I Did before this

1 (1h 4m 17s):
crisis? When you think about you know, all the craziness and also the success you've had because you've had some significant success and how much of your success do tribute to your hard work and your intelligence and skill. And how much do you think is because you were lucky.

2 (1h 4m 33s):
Well, it's certainly a little bit of both. I mean, I can't say that that hard work and skill don't matter. Of course, of course they do but the reality is that I think most of the success that I've had is been because of luck. I was lucky enough to be born where I was born. At a time that I was that I was born in I haven't have certain skills that those skill sets may not have been worth much a thousand years ago. I don't know if I would have been a great hunter or a great farmer. So it's really luck that is allowed me to be in the position that I'm in. I feel lucky every single day to live the life that I have and I and with that comes a deep sense of responsibility and a duty to find ways to help others that that maybe weren't as fortunate.

1 (1h 5m 19s):
Let's save a Smith founder and CEO Cotopaxi. By the way, in case you're wondering whatever happened to Coto and the pack see the llamas who were the early mascots for the brand. Well sadly pakse was born with some health issues and he passed away about a year ago. But Cotto is doing pretty great. He now lives on a llama sanctuary in Utah where he gets to roam free with dozens of his fellow llamas. Support for how I built this and the following message come from Dell Technologies.

1 (1h 6m 3s):
Small business pod forints Del is committed to helping small businesses in these uncertain times with advice and inspiring content check the other episodes out at Dell Technologies pod. Forints.com. And thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can also write to us at H IB T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or add guy Roz. This episode was produced by Casey Herrmann with music composed by routine Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Candace limbs Julian Carney Neva grass, Jeff Rogers guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this.

1 (1h 6m 53s):
This is NPR.