1 (0s):
Support for NPR and the following message come from Comcast through Internet Essentials

3 (5s):
Comcast has connected more than 8 million people from low-income households to high-speed internet most for the first time

1 (13s):
more at Comcast Corporation.com Internet Essentials. Hey, it's guy here. So back in the early 1960s Gordon and Carol Siegel borrowed a few thousand dollars to open a house where store in an abandoned dumbwaiter Factory. They're going to call it barrel and Great, but eventually decided on cratenbarrel. It's an incredibly inspiring story the kind of startup story that would never happen today. If first ran in February of 2017. Hope you enjoy it

3 (46s):
every store. We opened between our opening and 62 our first built store in 65 are Plaza de la go Stones 68 are Oakbrook store and 71 every time was betting the

1 (59s):
company every And every time

3 (1m 2s):
and every time we knew if we failed the company might go down.

1 (1m 11s):
From NPR is how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm guy Roz and on today's show the story of how Gordon Siegel and his wife Carol built the house. Where's Empire Crate & Barrel from one little scrappy storefront in Chicago and how that single shop help change the way we furnish our homes and apartments. So there's probably a good chance that you have a piece of like Ikea furniture somewhere in your house or apartment and it probably looks pretty good.

1 (1m 54s):
Right, you know, nothing fancy but functional well-designed kind of european-looking and the main thing is

3 (2m 1s):
it's affordable but

1 (2m 3s):
back in 1961 if you wanted vaguely European looking furniture or plates or whatever in America you had to be rich and in 61 Gordon see Cole and his wife Carol were definitely not

3 (2m 19s):
we got married in the summer of 61 now for our wedding gifts. We really didn't get any of the kinds of things. We loved we weed shop the department stores and see beautiful Downs designs in the new Danish look and whatever and none of our relatives had the money or to taste to the bias those kind of wedding gifts.

1 (2m 40s):
So you just figured we just can't afford that so yeah, so we'll just move on

3 (2m 44s):
On that's that's right. So we got married in like I say in June of 61 and we went on our honeymoon to the Caribbean and in the Caribbean we noticed there were some really nice stores. There was one Scandinavian store in the Virgin Islands my wife picked up some of the items and said how can you have Danish 18:8 stainless at the 295 a place setting, you know, it's so much more expensive in America and the Danish Merchant there said we have salesman. Europe come here and we buy direct from factories and the very essence of that common stuck in our minds as we bought a whole bunch of things. We got back to Chicago and I was in the real estate business.

3 (3m 26s):
She was teaching school. We were both sort of board and then about in February of 62 one night. I was washing dishes and I was these dishes we had bought I said, you know Carol there had to be other young people like ourselves with good taste and no money. We should open a store and what did Carol

1 (3m 42s):
say? Well

3 (3m 43s):
she Looked at me sort of like I was crazy. I said no. No, I mean it we should open a store

1 (3m 48s):
and you were young you guys were like what 20? We were 23 and you just had you know, we bought these beautiful things he's plates and cookware the store in the Caribbean and if they can do it, why not sell it in the US

3 (4m 2s):
exactly. That's right. And what what made you think like what gave you the

1 (4m 6s):
confidence that you could pull off running a business?

3 (4m 9s):
Because you know, we had grown up her family had actually been in the retail business up. Ariel business and we're both very good at selling my family been in the restaurant business and in all of those businesses. It's all about service. It's all about selling and in a sense my you know, I grew up with an immigrant father and mother and the whole family on busy days had a work in the restaurant. So there was this background that we both had and was we loved beautiful things. Obviously, the motivation of going into business was to find beautiful. Things for other young people, but if we could buy things from Europe directly and just mark them up normally is if you bought them domestically not take a big margin, but they cast short margin we could offer dramatically better pricing at more unique product.

3 (4m 60s):
You know that people had never seen before so I mean, how did you even start we thought about it and visited trade Commissioners and we found they had all sorts of factories

1 (5m 10s):
references, which trait you want to trade conditions. Had you as you

3 (5m 14s):
Well, the Danish government would have a trade commissioner in every major city to Swedish government would

1 (5m 19s):
we went to like their offices in Chicago? And you and you were like, hey, we want to open up this Dana shop. And can we like me talk to you?

3 (5m 26s):
That's right. That's exactly what we said. Wow. They had books about the you know factories in Europe that made specific items like glassware and they referred us to some people we might want to visit and gave us names of factories and then we started you know where we're going to find a retail. Space and we were driving around looking for anything and finally it's so happy my father mentioned to us. There was an area and well Street North Wall Street where there was an old dumbwaiter Factory that was actually moving and I rented a space for three years for three hundred and fifty dollars a month.

3 (6m 11s):
So at that point, I mean

1 (6m 12s):
after you visited these Captain you decide okay. We're going to open the shop. How did you come up with the cash to do it? Did you have any you could did you guys have any money? Well, we

3 (6m 23s):
had saved made a little money. We had some wedding gifts. So we had about ten thousand dollars and we figured well, we really need $20,000 and I spent six months running around to everyone. I knew had any wealth and offering them half the business for ten thousand dollars. Hmm. There was no such thing as venture capital in those. Those days there was no such things as startups and those days. Yeah, and I literally couldn't find anyone who invest

1 (6m 50s):
$10,000 you could have bought half of cratenbarrel for 10,000 bucks and like

3 (6m 53s):
1963. That's right the end of the day the only person who gave us the money was my father went to seven thousand dollars probably all the money. He had in cash. Wow.

1 (7m 6s):
So you have 17,000 which of course I'm assuming you need to like order stuff to sell in Christ. All right,

3 (7m 13s):
so we need $10,000 for inventory and we only had seven thousand dollars for to build the store and consequently, we had to come up with a clever way and taking this dirty old elevator Factory and turning it into a Scandinavian feeling place in the walls wall torn up and damaged and we couldn't afford someone a sheetrock. And so we went out and found a lumber yard where he found creating Lumber which we knocked up vertically on the walls and cover the walls. And we literally did it

1 (7m 45s):
ourselves. And how did you guys identify the stuff that you wanted to sell? I mean, did you just go through the

3 (7m 51s):
catalogs? That's right. Each Factory a glass factory would have maybe an inch and a half two inch catalog or add Ceramics Factory or whatever and we were just ordering from these catalogs and having them shipped the stuff. Maybe we had for dinner where patterns we had a very narrow selection of merchants as we only had ten thousand

1 (8m 11s):
dollars and what like you were just like getting these huge. Crates of Staff delivered like shipped you in Chicago and and you weren't even open yet still

3 (8m 19s):
not open. It opened the 7th of December of 1962, but it took a we didn't get into the space to like November 15th. We only had about three weeks. So you were

1 (8m 32s):
like hammering boards to the

3 (8m 34s):
wall hanging light fixtures or during a sign. Were you working all night? We worked from early in the morning to late every night. And we were just enthusiastic. I mean the value of being very young is you have a lot of energy and passion and no wisdom. And so being that young was a great advantage and we were had no children. We were 23. We had all the energy in the world because we had no money for fixtures. We basically turned over to packing crates. The merchandise was coming in. We came up with a way of stacking we found a some importer who had some were uniformed crates. We had some Barrels full of China and about two weeks before we were to open.

3 (9m 19s):
We just still didn't have a name and a friend of ours walked in and looked around and I remember I was in the basement doing some paperwork and my wife came down and said our friends suggest we call this, please barrel and crate, but Gordon, maybe maybe we should call it cratenbarrel. I think that's better and proximately two weeks before we open this door. We named named The Crate and Barrel.

1 (9m 45s):
So on opening day what happened? How'd it go?

3 (9m 48s):
It was the opening weekend. And this area called Old Town had developed this over a decade this sort of week the first week in December. They called it the Christmas walk and we open that Friday of the Christmas walk and the weed forgot to buy a cash register and so we actually use the cigar box and it was until the following Monday or Tuesday that actually my father found an old old. NCR cash register the ones you used to have to crank up to open it. The the mound

1 (10m 20s):
was I was business pretty good. Like right away.

3 (10m 23s):
We had calculated that we needed to do about $100,000 to take out a hundred hours a week to live on and that first Christmas we did eight thousand dollars.

1 (10m 32s):
So you're thinking we're well on our way to $100,000 a

3 (10m 35s):
year. Yeah. Absolutely because 8 times 12 is 96. Yeah. But then January of 63 came along and we did four thousand dollars. We got a little scared and then February is 63 our members probably one of the snowiest months and Chicago's history and we had one day where we did eight dollars in the whole month was only

1 (10m 54s):
$2,000. Oh man. So were you freaking

3 (10m 57s):
out we were very scared that we would lose my father's money in our savings, but you know what when you're young, you know, you could start over. Yeah slowly that spring came around Old Town became more popular they put As lights up on the street and people said boy, did you see that counterculture store down on Wall Street, they're selling nice things out of crates and barrels and it was nice merchandise and we had ended up because he didn't know how to price merchandise about half the product we sold we sold it

1 (11m 27s):
cost. You were selling a product that

3 (11m 29s):
cost. Oh, yeah. So not only were we importing it directly the fact that we didn't know what we were doing and we were mispricing the merchandise also made it even more exciting. How did that happen? We had some major vendors who hadn't gotten this the proper invoicing so you just guessing the price. We were guessing the price and our customers loved back to

1 (11m 53s):
a stay with us. We're going to be back in just a minute with more from Gordon Siegel and how he took Crate & Barrel National. I'm Gyros and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our 2019 lead sponsor of how I built this campaign monitor the radically easy solution to email marketing with eighty percent of retail professionals indicating it as the highest driver of customer retention email serves as digital marketing's most successful Channel and with campaign monitor, that means leveraging tools to empower your brand and spread your message.

1 (12m 37s):
Try it for free @ campaign monitor.com no credit card, or Email marketing experience required campaign monitor make your emails Unforgettable. I know you have the best intentions you want to keep up with the impeachment hearings, but maybe you have a job. There will be hours of testimony from Witnesses in the impeachment inquiry this week. And the NPR politics podcast will be there every afternoon to keep you up to date on all the key

3 (13m 6s):
moments listen daily.

1 (13m 12s):
It's how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz and on the show today. We're talking with Gordon Siegel about how he and his wife Carol built the retailer Crate & Barrel. So it seems that the business kind of took off pretty quickly. Right? I mean, I mean, even though you had some tough months it kind of took off. Well the first year we did a

3 (13m 31s):
hundred thousand that we did end up at the end of the year doing a hundred thousand a second year 200 225 the third year 300,000.

1 (13m 40s):
What was it like that in those early days it was that was making you guys successful. I mean did you did you have to kind of create a market for for this stuff over or did people just come in and say oh, this is cool this buy it. Well, what

3 (13m 52s):
happened was we were very fortunate one, you know America was then getting wealthier in the early 60s 70s to to was a lady named Julia Child's that came along and made cooking fashionable 3 jet travel was beginning especially to Europe in many more. People were doing at these events for started all of a sudden making people aware of French cooking. Yeah. It was a big difference in the way, you know, they looked at dining and food was very important to chefs were important American those days cooking was at sure. It wasn't something people love to do and dining and serving in a dinner table. You know, I remember in Chicago in the early 60s.

3 (14m 35s):
We had maybe three good restaurants Boston. I remember Craig Claiborne. It was once a asked when he was up in Boston. Where do you think he was the food critic for the New York Times or times? Yeah, where do you go when you want a good meal. He says I go to the airport and they get on the first flight to New York. And so there was you know, it's hard to believe that's enough because Boston and Chicago got great restaurants because people now there's a major food culture and dining culture and that didn't exist when we were starting

1 (15m 4s):
and did you because I think I read that at a certain point you and Carol decided that instead. Instead of like just ordering from catalogs that you should actually go to Europe and visit factories. That's

3 (15m 16s):
right the first year in 1963 our first full year in business. We didn't have time to go to Europe. But 1964. We went to Europe for three weeks by then. We had two or three staff members and we left the company to them and we went and we traveled all over Europe. We started in Belgium and found a great Glass Factory. We went to the German trade fairs and cologne and Frankfurt and And all sorts of interesting products. It was incredible nothing like that existed in the United States. We spent a lot of time walking the streets and seeing special stores and looking at stores and seeing what were they doing in Europe? Why were we so excited? What was it?

3 (15m 56s):
It was the visual display. It was the way to use color. It was the way they did the storefront. It was the way they did their lighting and we became students of retail and Carol by the wave the company never would have succeeded. Seeded without her efforts. She was not only talented and helping select product, but she was very talented at Vision display and we were both very good at

1 (16m 18s):
selling. So when you are in Europe were there any like we were there moments where you know, you're because you're like in your mid-20s. Did you ever have situations where these Factory owners looked at you and said would you guys are who are you, you know, right like there were many people had doubts but you know,

3 (16m 35s):
we have letters of credit. We had ability to buy we found us an Sweden who was knew a lot of people who helped us introduce those two factories and I don't you know, they believed in us or we met torben. Ausco of in Copenhagen who introduced us to marimekko and introduced to us a lot of Danish factories and he sold us beautiful product also wooden things and textiles and leather goods and and this guy influenced our lives he and his wife will remain friends for the next 50

1 (17m 7s):
years. So how did you guys start to like really grow the business because you didn't have it outside investors at this point,

3 (17m 18s):
right? We never had outside investors until the you know, many years

1 (17m 22s):
later. So how are you guys able to expand without any outside money?

3 (17m 26s):
Well, we basically knows they should go to a bank and your borrow money. I remember first loan was $10,000. The second loan was $25,000 when we open the store and 65 through 68. We still had only one store we were doing five. $3,000 which like today is like a little store doing two million dollars that was profitable by then. So

1 (17m 47s):
when you guys decided to open that second store, this was 1968. Is that right? Right. So then you got a bank loan and in a way you were I mean, I guess you were betting the company right because you I mean with that leverage if the second store failed the whole thing would go

3 (18m 3s):
under every store. We opened between our opening and 62 our first build store and 65 are A lack of stones 68 are Oakbrook store in 71. Every time was betting the company every time every time and every time we knew if we failed the company might go down and then in 1975, we got the opportunity open our first Michigan Avenue store, and if we failed here that would certainly we had invest a lot of money take a big risk, but that store opened in 1975 and after three months we knew it was very successful. And from then on the pressure was a lot less then it wasn't betting a company because by then, you know, we were doing enough volume and creating enough profits, but we didn't want Partners.

3 (18m 52s):
We didn't want investors why not? Well because we felt they would have different motivation. We love being Merchants. We love talking to customers loved inspiring staff and we love searching for the product. Our goal wasn't to build a chain store. Our goal was to find the best merchandise at the best. Price that would excite our customers in excite our staff about what we were doing.

1 (19m 16s):
So I was reading about about the expansion of the company and I guess it took like twenty five years for you guys to go from one store to 17 stores, right which was in 1985 correct thin but then by like 1995 you had expanded to 60 stores. So what how what happened? How did you guys why did you decide to grow so much faster?

3 (19m 37s):
Well, we reached a different era where it was important to have. To do the things we had to do with buying merchandise. So you had a guaranteed to a factory you'd buy a certain amount of product to make sure we would only people in the United States that would be carrying it and you big got a sense that you needed scale to get there. And that's what we started doing in 1990. We built a flagship store in Chicago, which really helped launch our expansion because then every landlord every shopping mall wanted a Crate and Barrel build We were a big attraction because we drew in a lot of customers and what happens starting in that big expansion was landlord started paying for a lot of the build out of the store to the building of the building and whatever so our our we didn't have to take as much of our Financial Risk ourselves because the lien words built these stores a lot of these stores for us.

1 (20m 34s):
So sounds like things were going pretty well for you without having any outside investors. So what what made you decide to act? Eventually bring in outside money. Like what was your thinking when you made that

3 (20m 45s):
decision? I had thought by the time I was 65 and I was then about 60 I said, I'd probably want to retire and some intelligent guy and said, you know, if you're going to you know, sell your business to it 5 years before you retire so you can help them transition and whatever and I own the responsibility to both my family and to my staff to make sure the company was well financed and could take risks and could go through trauma and survive and I also realized that at that time the company was relatively very strong at retail but relatively weak and direct marketing which at those days was catalog catalogs.

3 (21m 26s):
Yeah, and we actually spent a year and a half looking around the world for a partner and we finally found out. Oh the Auto Group in Hamburg Germany and they were the second largest mail order company. Europe and today they're after Amazon their two biggest internet company in the world and in 98, we sold them about two-thirds of the company and the Ten Years Later and the contract was for 10 years. We sold them the rest of the

1 (21m 57s):
third eye. So in 98 you agreed to stay on for a fixed amount of time and to continue to run the company

3 (22m 4s):
exactly their basic philosophy was to acquire businesses like ours and let the management continue running. Running it and our success was we tripled the size of the company. We couldn't troubled the profits of the company and we were able to grow but more important. They after we with them a year to the said you got to really look into this internet this was that what was it? 99 2000 we said what's the internet and then they started telling us and early on than we started developing our internet business which today represents about 38 40 percent of all the sales across Barrel and the customers buy it an enormous amount of furniture on the internet, which is hard for me too.

3 (22m 48s):
And you know believe

1 (22m 50s):
so when you had to step down was that hard for you like this thing that you built? Well,

3 (22m 57s):
of course, it's hard, you know, I didn't realize I'd have that much energy left at 70 but I did enormous energy. But in the last two three years, I've been doing things in our family office of finding new young entrepreneurs we could support and when I I advise young people today. I said look at the job and say you're going to love it. And is it going to be something you can devote your life to and work 10 12 hours a day and work six seven days a week. I mean, then you'll be a success but don't go to do something because of a salary or a title and I think that's the thing we picked up from the European friends of ours who, you know have a different pace of life in a different focus. And you know, that's how it should be.

3 (23m 37s):
It shouldn't be I want to make a lot of money. How do I do it? It's What do I love to do? And if I do it really good, then we will make money how much of of

1 (23m 48s):
your success do you attribute to just your talent and your smarts and your hard work and how much do you attribute to

3 (23m 56s):
luck? Well, the lucky part was our timing and was just that the appropriate time to be going to Europe to find new contemporary design and tabletop and Furniture and Things. I think it was a talent of attracting people and making make them feel like we were all in it together that I didn't realize I had nor did I realized I was good at for many many years, but I was and I think that had a lot to do with it. I was lucky to be married to Carol Siegel who had this enormous talent and you know, we started out to create something that was going to be different and beautiful and wonderful, and this is still in the culture to company and great depth and they're still doing very well, you know, could you

1 (24m 40s):
ever have Action, like when you opened up this thing in Chicago in a disused elevator Factory with boards that you hammered into the walls that this company would be doing sales of what are creating barrels numbers

3 (24m 51s):
today. It's about 1.2 billion a year that we went from one employee and out of

1 (24m 56s):
7,000 it could you ever have imagined that

3 (24m 59s):
never never ever we didn't have a plan we had no ambition to do that. We just had ambition to love what we were doing.

1 (25m 7s):
I still have from when I graduated college I moved My first apartment my mom bought me a set of flat white cratenbarrel dinner plates. They were they were made in Japan at the time. I still have them still serve dinner on them.

3 (25m 21s):
Well, that's our problem you replace cars every two to three years you have dinner where for 20 years, you know people tell me they have product they bought in the 60s and 70s and I win yeah.

1 (25m 41s):
That's Gordon Siegel from our interview back in 2017. He officially stepped down as CEO cratenbarrel about a decade ago. And by the way, the brand is still doing pretty well despite competition from Amazon and Wayfarer and the big box stores. The company says its sales have gone up over the past few years and next summer Gordon and Carol will celebrate the 59 years of marriage. And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from one of our sponsors Google fi a phone plan by Google Google Phi is made with features that people actually want like no extra charges for data abroad and coverage with three networks in one learn more at Phi dot google.com

3 (26m 36s):
Think about pairs life kit is that friend who always has great advice about everything from how to invest to

1 (26m 42s):
how to get a great workout. We bring you tools to help you get it together

3 (26m 46s):
new episodes every Tuesday and Thursday. Listen And subscribe to life kit all

1 (26m 50s):
guides. Hey, thanks for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and today we're updating a story that we first ran about a year ago. And this one starts in Florida with Ashland cook and her dog. So my dog's name is Winston and he is a German Shorthaired Pointer. He is liver colored. Anyway, Ashlyn was working in Miami in the fashion business and she met a guy named Dean who also had a pointer. We started hanging out and running with our dogs taking the dogs to the beach and eventually Turned into more Ashlyn and Dean and the dogs Winston and Louis bonded and eventually the humans and the story started dating now things were going great.

1 (27m 34s):
But then in 2018 Dean got a job offer in Boulder, Colorado, so Ashland decided that might be a sign to get out of Miami and head to the mountains. So the four of them two humans two dogs relocated and Ashlyn had to figure out what to do next. I really wanted to do something on my own. I own I had had the entrepreneurial bug for over a year at that point. And I knew I wanted to do something with dogs, but with a little twist so we had bounced ideas off of each other for dog food and honestly, I just thought of a food truck for dogs just came out of my mouth and we looked at each other. Like is that a thing? Well, it turns out food trucks for dogs were sort of a thing.

1 (28m 18s):
There were a few scattered across the country, but nothing in Colorado, so Ashland and Dean Pull together their savings. They got a loan from Ashland's dad and they bought a custom-built trailer that looks like one of those vintage models from the 1950s. They have that iconic paint job where half of the bottom is a different color and it has that canned ham shape with the rounded edges and after she ordered the trailer Ashland got together with a local Chef to come up with a bunch of recipes for healthy dog treats with no salt. No sugar. No fillers and Mm Ashland's pointer. He was a good taste tester for us because he is a picky dog of finding out like okay, he really likes this one.

1 (29m 2s):
He didn't like this one. I remember I tried to make a dried banana treat but he would put in his mouth and spit it out. So I realized okay Winston does not like bananas, but Winston did like some of the other treats Ashland came up with pumpkin apple spice cookies zucchini squash biscuits and one of his favorites bison burger jerky it Made with just three ingredients ground bison which we do Source from a local bison Ranch cranberries and organic flax seeds. And I know this stuff sounds like food, you might order it one of those farm-to-table restaurants, right? But of course Ashland is Target demographic was just dogs and the dogs Centric nature of her business actually proved to be a problem when she started to apply for the permits.

1 (29m 49s):
She needed to launch the truck the most challenging part was defining In ourselves as a new category a lot of the Cities would say well we only allow food trucks for humans other cities would say well no one's ever come to us with that type of business before we have no idea how to define you guys. So we ended up going the route of just full on getting all the permits of a few human food truck and finally last June Ashland started parking the truck at breweries dog parks and farmers markets all around Boulder and since then things

3 (30m 23s):
have And

1 (30m 24s):
going great the treats were popular and a major sign of customer buying a lot of the dogs started to recognize the truck. Oh absolutely, they will literally jump up to the counter with their two front legs and stand up at the counter. It is hysterical. The company is called Winnie Lou its name for Ashland's dog Winston and Dean's dog Louis when we first spoke tashlin her treats were sold online and in six stores in Colorado and Day there in 150 independently owned pet stores across the country. If you want to find out more about winning a loo or here previous episodes head to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org.

1 (31m 6s):
And of course if you want to tell us your story go to build npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe at Apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcasts. And while you're there, please do give us review. You could also write to us at H IB T at NPR Org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or add Kyra's our show is produced this week by Casey Herrmann with music composed by rumty. Narrow Bluey. Thanks. Also to Canada slim. Julia car. Nissan has mesh contort Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Sequoia Carrillo. I'm Gyros and even listening to how I built this.

1 (31m 56s):
This is NPR.