0 (0s):
How I built this is pleased to have Slack as our presenting sponsor. Slack, where the future works. Let's Slack be your digital hq. It's one digital space that brings together all of your people and all of the tools you need. Having Slack makes collaboration easier and more flexible so you can be a lot more productive. Don't wait to see what you can accomplish with your own digital hq. Head over to slack.com/dhq to get started. Slack where the future works. Support for this show comes from Clavio. Clavio is the email marketing platform that brings all of your customer data into one place.

0 (42s):
With hundreds of e-commerce integrations. Clavio helps you send relevant email and SMS messages to the right people at just the right time so you can build genuine customer relationships and grow revenue as brands face a more volatile economic climate and a challenging digital landscape. Clavio's powerful marketing automations and customer first data are critical to retaining brand loyalists and increasing roi. It's time to talk to your customers like you know them because you do with Clavio. Learn more@clavio.com. That's K L A V I Y o.com.

1 (1m 22s):
Academy Award nominee Carrie Mulligan and Emmy nominee Zoe Kaison star in she said as New York Times reporters, Megan Tooey and Jody Cantor, who together broke one of the most important stories in a generation, A story that shattered decades of silence around the subject of sexual assault in Hollywood and ignited a shift in American culture that continues to this day. The film CoStar's Oscar nominee Patricia Clarkson, Emmy winner, Andre Brower and Tony winner, Jennifer l with Academy Award nominee Samantha Morton, she said is in theaters. November 18th,

3 (1m 57s):
There was an event, a McDonald's event in Madison, and a friend of mine, a McDonald's guy, came up to me and said, Culvert, you're as far as you're gonna go.

0 (2m 11s):
She had about 15, 16 locations about that time. Maybe 18.

3 (2m 15s):
Yeah, that's right. And you know, I wanted to punch him in the nose. I never said anything, but I thought to myself, baloney with that.

0 (2m 24s):
Did that kind of feeling ever motivate you that that feeling of like, I'll show you. Did you have some of that inside of you?

3 (2m 32s):
Yeah, yeah, I do.

0 (2m 41s):
Welcome to how I built this, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Ross, and on the show today how Craig Culver turned a struggling family restaurant into Culver's, one of the most profitable fast food chains in the United States. You've heard me talk about the concept known as the paradox of choice. It was first identified by the psychologist Barry Schwartz. In his book, Barry argues that the more choices we have in life and as consumers, the less happy we actually are.

0 (3m 29s):
Now apply that concept to a place like Chipotle or In and Out Burger or Raising Kane's chicken. And you understand what Barry was talking about. Burger, cheeseburger, double cheeseburger, chicken tenders, fries, slaw, toast, taco burrito, bowl quesadilla, Simple and efficient. Restaurants with fewer items can create a better economy of scale because there are fewer menu items to make and thus fewer ingredients to buy. And this is a great way to build a successful business, especially in food. Except if you're Craig Culver, he's the founder of a fast food chain called Culver's.

0 (4m 11s):
And he built it into an empire of now almost 900 stores with a menu that includes at least 50 different menu items, burgers, chicken sandwiches, fried fish, pork loin, pot roast, chopped steak, salads, soups, cheese curds, and on and on it goes Culver's, practically thumbs. Its nose at the idea that choice shouldn't be vast and abundant. Everyone should be able to get what they want. And that approach has made Culver's one of the 10 most profitable fast food chains in America on a per restaurant basis. On that basis, it's more profitable than Burger King, KFC and Taco Bell.

0 (4m 56s):
Craig Culver started Culver's with his first wife and his parents back in the mid 1980s in Soc City, Wisconsin. At the time it was one restaurant and really that was the goal in the early years, just keeping the lights on at Culver's was hard. It stood across the street from two huge competitors, a Dairy Queen and a Hardee's. But over time people discovered Craig Culver's, now famous Butter Burger and also his frozen custard. And slowly but surely, Culver started to expand first inside Wisconsin, then to neighboring states and eventually to much of the United States.

0 (5m 39s):
Craig Culver grew up in Soc Prairie, Wisconsin in the 1950s and sixties. His dad was a dairy inspector until 1961. When he came across an opportunity he couldn't pass up and bought an A and w Burger restaurant.

3 (5m 55s):
Yeah, a and w Drive in exclusively a drive-in the little shack of a building, had the bathroom on the outside of the building, gravel parking lot, five and 10 cent root beer, 15 cent hotdogs, hamburgers and french fries. We sold cigarettes of all things and CarHop service. There was no inside seating, it was all CarHop service. When the cars would come onto our lot, they'd literally park around the building with no markings on where to park. They just parked wherever. And so the CarHop would go out and she'd put a number on the windshield and take their order.

3 (6m 36s):
And, and I shouldn't say she, because we had males as car hops as well.

0 (6m 42s):
This was, I mean this was like the heyday of the car hop era. I mean, people think of the fifties, but really it's the sixties, the early sixties that they're thinking about, which is like the golden era of going to the hard CarHop and having a wait or waitress or on roller skate sometimes coming surfing

3 (6m 59s):
Food. That's, Yep.

0 (7m 1s):
You were 11 years old and I, from what I understand it was you, you had a brother, Kurt, a younger brother and a sister who's older Georgia, and basically it was a family business. You were expected to work at the a and w from the time you were 11. Is that more or less true?

3 (7m 17s):
That is very true and I compare it to farming. Everybody's expected to go to work and that's, you know, because our parents owned the place, it was okay for us to work there, but otherwise they would've been illegal.

0 (7m 32s):
Would your parents leave early in the morning? You'd, you'd make your way to school and then after school you would come to the restaurant work?

3 (7m 38s):
Yeah, it, but it was a seasonal business. So basically, oh, April 1st or so, April 15th we would open and then we'd close shortly after Labor Day. So after Labor Day, my parents then would have to get another job. Wow. To get through the winter months.

0 (7m 57s):
What was your dad like as a, I mean, cuz from what I understand he was, he could be tough, right? And tough on, on, on you guys and high expectations.

3 (8m 7s):
You're right. Dad, Dad was a tough guy and yeah, he, he expected a lot of us and we were, you know, we were just kids. But one of the things about dad was, you know, he'd get mad at you, he'd react very, very quickly and, but then it would be 10, 15 minutes later and he'd, he'd have his arm around you,

0 (8m 31s):
You know. Sounds like through most of your time in high school you were working at the family business. Yep. Do you remember being in high school and just feeling like, I, all my friends get to do this and I have to be here. Like, maybe even feeling resentful when you were a teenager working all summer's restaurant?

3 (8m 54s):
Very much so. We were working when other families were off on vacations and those families were coming to, to our place of business. As a matter of fact, we were serving them while they were, they were enjoying their friends and stuff. But, you know, saying that, I mean, still my parents, I don't wanna make them sound like they were driving us crazy with work because they were good parents. What can I say? They were great parents, so,

0 (9m 25s):
So, alright. So I guess 1968 they sell that restaurant and was there a reason behind it? Did, did they, do you know why they sold it?

3 (9m 35s):
No, I, you know, I really don't know why they sold it, but my dad was an entrepreneur and he saw something else that put a sparkle in his eye and that was a farm kitchen resort

0 (9m 50s):
That was in a place called Baraboo, which is wasn't too far from where you were

3 (9m 54s):
Now. It it's 13 miles. 13 miles on north of us. And it was at the north entrance of Devil's Lake State

0 (10m 0s):
Park. And it was a, a sit down restaurant.

3 (10m 3s):
Well it's, it's more than a restaurant. It's a resort, 24 cottages, swimming pool, you know, the shuffleboard thing, amusement barn. We had miniature golfing, horseback riding, which dad leased. Yeah. Dad leased out to other, other people in between the two dining rooms sat basically our living room because we also lived there in the winter months, again, a seasonal business. And then we had a big kitchen and everything was made from scratch. It was a wonderful place to dying. Huh.

0 (10m 41s):
And so you would work there during your, your college breaks, cuz I think you, this is when you were, you were at college, you were at the University of Wisconsin and you would go down there and do what during the, like wait tables, cook, cook in the kitchen. What would you do during the summers at, at the resort,

3 (10m 58s):
Whatever it took. Yeah, we'd wait tables. My brother and I, we were washing dishes. We'd take care of the lawns, the gardens sometimes we were cleaning the rooms out in the cottages. And I, I mean, there was a lot of work there, but you know what, I loved the place I did and I'd usually stick around the place on my, on my day off. Don't ask me why I, I guess I just, I did like the

0 (11m 26s):
Place. Yeah. And I think while you were there, you actually met a woman named Lee who would become your wife?

3 (11m 34s):
Became my first wife, yes.

0 (11m 36s):
Yeah. And, and so you were both college students at the time, I guess working there,

3 (11m 41s):
Right.

0 (11m 42s):
And you studied, you studied biology in college, was it, so, seems like you were kinda exploring things a little outside of, of the restaurant business, but, but I guess around 19, 19 73, which is when you graduated, your dad was having some health issues, I guess he couldn't keep running the farm kitchen and, and he, I guess the story is he kind of sat you down and said, Hey, would you take over, become the general manager of the resort? What, what do you remember about that conversation?

3 (12m 14s):
It's, when I talk about a great deal, it's one of the great regrets I have is saying no to my father. But, you know, I watched my parents and so many others in the industry. I mean, lots of hours. Lots of hours. And yeah, I'll tell you what, seven days a week and I just, I didn't wanna be my parents. I didn't,

0 (12m 35s):
You said no.

3 (12m 36s):
Yeah, here I am, a graduate from UW Oshkosh with a degree in biology. Seemed to be going nowhere, you know, sending resumes out everywhere, not getting much of a response from anybody. And my dad sat me down, as you said, cuz he recognized something in me that I didn't know. I had a passion for people, a passion for the food service industry. So yeah, when dad asked me to take over the farm kitchen, be the general manager, what an opportunity thrown right at me. And I told my dad, no.

0 (13m 14s):
Was your dad disappointed?

3 (13m 16s):
You know, dad and I had arguments about many things and I thought for sure he would blow up, but he didn't. And he just said, Son, you go find your dream. Then he said, I'm gonna sell the place. And I said, Okay dad, you do what you gotta do. I'll do what I have to do and you know, I love you. And it was a mistake on my part.

0 (13m 44s):
I mean a mistake I guess. Cuz it could have given you, well it depends how you look at it, of course, cuz we're

3 (13m 48s):
Talking didn't, I didn't know the future. I've gotta say this about my parents and I, I didn't realize this until years later. You know, my dad barely got through high school, handicapped with a loss of hearing in both ears, eventually goes blind. My mom, sure she got through high school, but no college. And I looked at, looked back at them and I, I'd say, Wow, mom and dad were smart people and what they were so good at in, in the business world was they were so good with people, people that know how to say please and thank you and my pleasure.

3 (14m 31s):
And it comes from the heart. That's who they surrounded themselves with. And that's what any great leader certainly wants to do. He wants to, or she wants to surround themselves with people like that. Hmm.

0 (14m 46s):
So I guess you decide to pursue your own path and you've graduated college and nothing's coming through for you. You're down in Madison, Wisconsin and I guess your sister, your older sister Georgia says, Hey, I want you to meet my friend Tom who works at McDonald's because he might have a job for you. That's right. Why don't you meet him? Is that because you just had no, you just didn't have a job. You, you didn't know what you were gonna do?

3 (15m 16s):
Well Georgia, my sister's Georgia and she knew I needed a job. Georgia said, Why don't you go visit with Tom, see if you can get a job with a McDonald's. And that's what I probably did with George. I just laughed and I said, George, you know, I don't wanna work in the restaurant business and I sure don't wanna work for McDonald's. And she said, Craig, you need a job, get over there and visit with Tom, see if you can get a job. You know. And formally we did meet and eventually they, they offered me a job as a manager trainee.

0 (15m 54s):
So you start as a trainee, a management trainee at a McDonald's location in Madison.

3 (15m 58s):
Yeah. And I became a general manager with them within a year. And you know, you think okay, McDonald's big deal. Well it was a big deal. I mean in 1973 they were the king. Yeah. And I learned a great deal and after almost four years with them, I decided I wanted my own place of business. And yeah, I had all this, these years of training with my family and with the McDonald's people I could do this and well, I kind of be, was becoming my father, I was becoming the entrepreneur that he was.

3 (16m 41s):
And I knew where I wanted to go. I wanted to move back from Madison to my hometown of Sauk City in Verde, Ssac. And by that a and w back now for the second time.

0 (16m 53s):
Wow. The one that your parents used to run. Yeah,

3 (16m 56s):
But I had no money. Yeah. So that's when I visited mom and dad said, Help me out.

0 (17m 2s):
You were, this is 1976, you're I think 26 newly married. You and Lee are are newly married at the time. And I I, I mentioned cuz she, she will factor prominently in, in the rest of the story of Culvers, which we'll talk about later. But you essentially go back to your dad and say, Hey, you remember that a and w that you sold in 1968, Why don't we buy it back and operate it? Is that, is that essentially what you said to him?

3 (17m 33s):
Yeah, I, I was li we were both living in Madison at the time, and I went over to visit and the story goes, mom's on the couch reading the newspaper and watching TV and dad's at the kitchen table playing his favorite card game of solitaire and mom's with an earshot of what our conversation is gonna be. So I sit down with dad, I said, Dad, help me out here. Let's buy the W back in Sauk City. And dad, the entrepreneur, he immediately said, Let's do it. Mom, on the other hand, not a risk taker whatsoever.

3 (18m 13s):
She was crying. Holy hell. And I, I tell the joke that we took a vote and she lost two to one. So, but the w the original place had burned down that little shack and the new prototype was built in its place, was seating for 74 inside a canopy off the back with electronic ordering stations. So we bought something different than what we originally had, but we bought it back from the same gentleman. Dad had sold the old place too.

0 (18m 43s):
Right. So, so you're now operating an NW franchise. It's burgers and shakes and sodas and stuff. And and your dad was essentially retired at that point? He was. So, so was he basically, did he help put up some of the financing and you kind of operated it? Or was he also in there running it with you?

3 (19m 2s):
Mom and dad were both in there as well, Lee too. And I didn't put up any money and you know, eventually dad gifted me a portion of it and just sweat equity type of thing. Yeah. And, but yeah, Lee and I ran the place, but mom and dad were certainly there as well.

0 (19m 23s):
And how did it do, did it do pretty well?

3 (19m 26s):
We were successful. We cash flowed immediately. And as a matter of fact, the first year we closed for six weeks in the winter months to take a nice vacation to Florida. And that was the last time we did that. We didn't, we didn't do that again.

0 (19m 42s):
Yeah. So he, this is what's so interesting about this is that history kind of repeats itself, right? Because it's a second time that your dad and you are involved with an a and w the same one. And then like six years into running this thing, once again, you guys sell it. Your dad makes the decision. You guys make the decision to sell it to some investors. Why was it, I mean, it's going well, it's doing pretty well. Why did you guys sell? Was it was just the price was, was so good that you couldn't say, no,

3 (20m 14s):
We're entrepreneurs, we can buy low and sell high. That, that's, honestly, that was kind of our mindset and we can go find something else. And we decided to sell to these two gentlemen from Madison and part of the deal was I had to stay on for two months training them in the business. And the other part was, we sold it on what's called a land contract. And that's where we're the banker in the deal.

0 (20m 43s):
You're basically giving them the loan.

3 (20m 44s):
We're financing it. Yep, we are. And so if something goes awry, well we could get it back.

0 (20m 52s):
When you'd made the decision to sell, I mean you guys had bought it for, I mean roughly how much would it have cost in 1976 to buy that? A and w Like 500,000?

3 (21m 1s):
Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no. I'm, I'm guessing maybe we bought it at maybe 200 when we sold it to these two gentlemen. I believe the number was 350,000. We sold it at Okay,

0 (21m 16s):
Got it. So a a, a nice tidy profit, 150 grand, you know, six years on and most of that money was going to your dad, but you had to find the next thing that wasn't gonna be enough to sustain you for, you know, the rest of your life. And, and I guess again, history kind of repeating yourself was you guys with your parents, you, you used the profit to buy like a little supper club once again in Baraboo, Wisconsin, is that right? Called the Ritz Supper Club?

3 (21m 43s):
Yeah. This story is full of circles and you're absolutely right.

0 (21m 46s):
It's full of circles. Yeah, it's unbelievable.

3 (21m 48s):
It's, it was called the Ritz and like all the other businesses, even the w even the farm kitchen, we always attached our last name to the business. So it was Culver's, Ritz Supper Club. And Wisconsin is famous for supper clubs, which basically are independently owned restaurants. Not fine dining, but steak restaurants, prime ribbon. Saturday night fish fry on Friday night, it's like a religion here. Salad bars, martinis, Manhattan's, and the state drink is a Brandi old fashioned suite. But yeah, we bought the, the little Ritz for the first time and we ran it again as a family.

3 (22m 34s):
It was Lee and I and, and mom and dad. And we did quite well there. And, but we only had it two years because the people that bought the a w from us were failing. And remember this was bought in the land contract, it's our money in there. And eventually one day we got a phone call saying, please take this thing back. We don't want

0 (23m 1s):
It. Wow.

3 (23m 2s):
And honestly, I couldn't wait. I wanted it back.

0 (23m 5s):
So, so basically what happened was they were paying you essentially a mortgage fee, right? Yep. You were, you were the financer and they said, we can't pay it anymore, We're done. And you guys can have it back. So it's, it's almost like they rented the business from you for two years.

3 (23m 22s):
That's true. You can look at it that way.

0 (23m 24s):
But when you did take it back, you didn't, you didn't want it to be an a and w anymore. I mean you basically wanted to like, I guess dee it right to, to kind of start your own place, your own restaurant.

3 (23m 35s):
Yes, we, we sure did. And we didn't think that we needed the a w we, we liked the idea of doing something different and you know, being independent. And so that's what we did. I I remember we got rid of all the oranges and browns of, of the w and everything became blue and white.

0 (23m 59s):
I mean, this is interesting because on the one hand of course it worked out well, which we're gonna get to. But starting a new brand Craig is really hard. That is the eternal theme on this show. Right? And and you already had a brand, a and w is a national brand. So I mean, what was the idea at the time to start a big brand? Or were you thinking this is just gonna be our next fun project, our next one-off business for the next few years? Or did you have a bigger vision at the time?

3 (24m 29s):
I'd love to tell you we had a big vision. That would be a lie. No, it was we're we get to move back to our hometown of Souk city and per ssac and get an opportunity to have the business. Hopefully it's successful and we never dreamt we could fail. That never entered our minds. We're entrepreneurs, we don't fail. Well, yeah, entrepreneurs do fail by the way.

0 (24m 58s):
So 1984, you decide, this is not gonna be a w this is going to be your own restaurant and it's gonna be called Culvers. And the basis of this restaurant was going to be two things. Frozen custard and something called the butter burger.

3 (25m 17s):
I, and here I've, I gotta tell a little backstory. One day while I was at the Ritz in the, in the afternoon, not much going on, sitting down with a friend of mine and he was from Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and he was telling me about when he was a kid, there was a, a little custard stand called the Milky Way. And they served the butter burger. And when he said that to me, man, a light bulb went off and I attached the two together. Custard and butter burgers. How can you possibly go wrong

0 (25m 56s):
When we come back in just a moment, how things in fact do go wrong after Culver's opens and how they eventually start to go right. Stick around. I'm Guy Ross and you're listening to How I built this, How I built This. Get support from Northern Trust. The landscape of modern wealth is complex. Challenges and opportunities intersect. That's why they created the Northern Trust Institute, a research center dedicated to surfacing new insights and the best financial advice of their firm.

0 (26m 38s):
The Northern Trust Institute is dedicated to helping you confidently move forward with advice that is grounded in real world outcomes and backed by proven credibility by analyzing behavioral patterns and identifying the strategies that have been most effective for their clients. They position you to take action with confidence and achieve optimal outcomes with your wealth. Whatever your ambitions, talk with a Northern Trust advisor to achieve your goals. With a bold new approach to managing wealth built on advice that is grounded in research tested and tailored, visit northern trust.com/institute. That's northern trust.com/institute.

0 (27m 21s):
Here at how I built this, we like to feature brands that are doing things so differently. They're changing entire industries. And when it comes to Furniture Burrow is setting a whole new standard with their beautiful, durable, and easy to assemble designs from stain and scratch resistant fabric to solid hardwood frames, burrow, selects materials that will stand up to everyday life. Plus every order is delivered directly to your door for free. You can now shop Burrough's New Union collection. It's their deepest, widest modular seating design to date. The unique fabric is easy to clean and stain resistant, while still super soft and comfortable.

0 (28m 1s):
And like all Burrough furniture, it's still gets shipped to your door for free and is a breeze to build. No tools required. Listeners can get $75 off their first order at burrow.com/built. That's Burrow b u r r o w.com/built for $75 off burrow.com/built. Hey, welcome back to how I Built this. I'm Guy Raz, so it's 1984 and Craig has just decided to take his a and w restaurant and turn it into his own place.

0 (28m 42s):
His new establishment has indoor dining in a carport for CarHop service. And the menu is gonna center on two things, Butter burgers and frozen custard. So let's start with a frozen custard. Frozen custard is basically soft serve but with egg, right? Like a custard based ice cream has egg in it versus a milk based ice cream.

3 (29m 5s):
It does have egg yolk added to it. You're right, there are ice creams as well. Premium ice creams that also have egg yolk added to it. Right? But not, not too many. But yes, Custard is served at about 18 degrees, has very low air beat into it.

0 (29m 22s):
So it's denser.

3 (29m 24s):
That's denser. You're right. If you take a a cord of vanilla custard and a cord of vanilla ice cream, the custer's gonna weigh considerably more because you're right, right. It it's denser. It doesn't have the air beat into it. I mean, I don't think frozen custard can be beat. I'll call it the best premium ice cream in the world.

0 (29m 46s):
All right, so you had that idea. And then Butter Burger, which was gonna be not a burger slathered in butter, basically just a buttered. The the bun had like was buttered and toasted, right? That's what a butter burger is.

3 (29m 58s):
Yeah, that's, We buttered the bun. It's a tavern burger is what it is. Yeah. We grill the bun, we use all fresh meat and we press the meat out on the grill. It's not pre-press like padded meat and we got the butter burger.

0 (30m 17s):
It's become very fashionable in the last 10 years, but what is now called a smash burger, you guys were doing it in the early eighties.

3 (30m 23s):
We did it well before any of those people did it.

0 (30m 26s):
Yeah, yeah cuz it's basically, you get the burger, the patty really thin, you get it crispy. Anyway, just outta curiosity, did you have to put a big amount of investment capital up to get the machine for the, you know, cuz if I imagine a custard machine isn't, that isn't cheap and

3 (30m 42s):
It was $19,000 back then. Wow. When we bought it.

0 (30m 46s):
It's

3 (30m 46s):
A lot today it's considerably more. But yeah, we had to, we, we sold the Ritz Supper Club to the same people that had bought the farm kitchen from us years prior.

0 (30m 58s):
So you made a little bit there. Okay.

3 (30m 59s):
Yeah, we had, we had a little money there, but we still needed a banker cuz we remodeled the place inside and out.

0 (31m 7s):
And you used, from what I understand, you didn't have a big budget, so you basically kind of used the oval of the a and w, right? Like, and you just kinda used that. You already had the oval outline of the a w in the restaurant. You just like poked out the middle and put Culvers in there.

3 (31m 22s):
That became our logo. You're right.

0 (31m 25s):
All right. You were gonna be, I guess your mom and Lee would be front of house sort of checkout and taking orders. You would be in the, you'd be cooking, you'd be, you

3 (31m 36s):
Know, primarily in the kitchen. Yes.

0 (31m 38s):
And then your dad would help out too. And then you hired some people. Of course, of course. Restaurant opens July 18th, 1984. Summertime in Wisconsin. Really nice warm.

3 (31m 51s):
A very busy highway as well. Highway 12,

0 (31m 53s):
Busy highway. All right. And, and, and that first day had a dude, was it packed?

3 (31m 58s):
No, no. Nobody knew what a butter burger was. Nobody knew what frozen custard was. So that was an extreme learning curve right across the road from us was Hardee's, 1984, the fastest growing burger chain in America. Their parking lot is full also across the street from us was the Dairy Queen. 1984 is the year the blizzard was invented. Their parking lot is full. Ah, yeah. And, and I like the joke that, you know, here we sat with two or three cars and I drive a car, my dad drives a car.

3 (32m 39s):
And so if you do the math, we maybe had one, one customer.

0 (32m 44s):
I mean, did you think, All right, well we're, but we're different than Hardee's or were you able to explain to people our burgers are different than Hardee's or our custards are different than Dairy Queens? Or, or was it frustrating cuz you couldn't get that message across at, at the beginning?

3 (32m 58s):
Well, we didn't have any marketing funds, so where that came across was if they visited our place and had a burger or had the custard because custard, again, I'll never say anything negative about any of my competitors, but Frozen custard is not, not Dairy Queen, clearly it's not Dairy Queen. Yeah. And you know, my dad and I, we are, when it comes to quality, we may have to charge more and we do at Culver's, but we're, we're not gonna cheapen something to get to a bottom line easier.

0 (33m 34s):
And by the way, at the beginning when you opened up and we're gonna, I mean the menu today is very extensive, but then was it just burgers and custard and fries or did you have other things on the menu from the beginning?

3 (33m 45s):
No, we had other things. We had an extensive menu. Chicken bone and chicken and pork tenderloins. And of course the, our cod filet sandwich, which really was a carryover from the Friday night fish fries at the supper clubs that we had.

0 (34m 6s):
That's a lot of menu items. I mean, we've done on this show, we've, we've talked to the founders of Chipotle and of raising Kanes and five guys and they don't have that many things in their menu. No, you had a lot of stuff and that's tricky. I mean that, well

3 (34m 23s):
You gotta remember where we came from. We're in a small town, small town in Wisconsin. And for example, a Taco Bell, you know, has a pretty defined audience. Yeah. Their audience is maybe 18 to 30 or 16 to 30. Well, in, in a small town you've gotta attract everybody. Young people, the middle-aged people, the seniors. And coming from the supper club business, we were used to big menus and things like that. But yeah, thinking back, I mean, I would've loved to had a simple menu like In and Out or something like that where, you know, it's just basically a, a burger.

3 (35m 4s):
Yeah. I mean it's so much easier to operate. But again, in a town of, you know, five or 6,000,

0 (35m 12s):
You had to be everything.

3 (35m 13s):
We had to attract everybody and including all those people going by in the highway. Yeah. We needed them in the worst way and we needed the townspeople as well to support us.

0 (35m 24s):
All right. So you opened up 84 and you're right across from a Hardee's and a Dairy Queen. Yeah. Which is tough because those are national brands. And so how did you do, I mean, were you sustainable by year one? Were you making a profit?

3 (35m 38s):
No. No. We lost lots of money during that first year. And how

0 (35m 43s):
Did you, how did you survive? What did, how did you pay your employees? And I mean, was it just loans, Bank loans?

3 (35m 48s):
Yeah. We had a banker that believed in us. He didn't believe in the concept of Culver's necessarily. He believed in the Culver family. He had worked with us and other businesses that we've had and he knew how hard our family worked and he knew that we would do whatever it took. But saying that midway through that first year, man, if I didn't have my family around me, I went throwing up the white flag and got out of there and done something else. But my family was there. And that second year in business is when we started to, the business started to work.

0 (36m 31s):
What changed?

3 (36m 32s):
Nothing really changed. It didn't it? What changed was we had a marketing program and you know what the marketing program was? Our guests were telling other people about this little place in Sauk City with a blue roof that serves butter burgers of all things. Hmm. And so our business started, people were coming from 50 miles around to have frozen custard or a butter burger. And it was a third year when we made money.

0 (37m 3s):
Craig, one of the things that I'm, I'm curious about was, I know there there was an emphasis on customer service. Like you, when when you go into a Chick-fil-A today, doesn't matter where you go, they have a reputation for just being incredibly friendly. Same with In and Out Burger, but having great food isn't enough like to be treated well and kindly goes a long way. And how, how did you get your team? How did you get people to understand that to, to really make people feel welcome when they came in?

3 (37m 32s):
You know, I'll, I'll take that story way back to my mother. Mom was one of those people when you walked into our place of business, she just made you feel warm and fuzzy and she made you feel like she knew you like family. Like she's, she knew you for years and years and years and what a competitive edge that is. And she set the example for us kids and for the other team members in like the farm kitchen, the Ritz, and also the guests. When you go into a restaurant and you know who the owners are, don't you watch them?

0 (38m 14s):
I do. Yeah, totally. I watch them. Totally watch them.

3 (38m 16s):
What are they gonna do? Do they do whatever it takes? Do they bend over and pick up, you know, some trash, I might be on the floor or clean the floor or do whatever. Do they carry bus tubs back to the kitchen? That was my mother.

0 (38m 29s):
It's also such an easy, well I shouldn't say easy, but it's a fairly simple hack. It's not expensive, Right. You can, if you have a restaurant that is in a competitive environment like a pizza place or a burger place, you can really differentiate it with customer service. You can really, if it's exceptional and people come in there and walk outta there feeling like they were treated really well, they'll go back.

3 (38m 55s):
Absolutely. I mean, I wanna go where I'm treated with respect and kindness and, and they fuss about you. Heck, why wouldn't you wanna go to that place? But man, if you can add great food with great hospitality, that's a powerhouse. I don't wanna compete against people like that as a matter of fact.

0 (39m 16s):
Yeah. But how do you get the people in the restaurant who are hourly workers, hourly employees to do that, to believe in that in the same way, it's very hard when it's yours. Sure. You're cleaning the floor, it's yours. It's a little different than when you've got an hourly employee who, you know, for variety of reasons may not have the same incentives to, to be like that.

3 (39m 38s):
Well the, that's why the hiring process is so important. And just to hire bodies, it's not the right answer. I'd rather go without than hire, you know, people that just don't have a heart. And then once you bring them on your team, do you have a training program in place on not only the operations but also on hospitality? Yeah. And then the leader has to set the example for everybody around them.

0 (40m 8s):
All right, so sort of a year and a half in, you start to see the light. Like you're starting to turn a corner by your three, you start to see a profit book. From what I read, there was a really important, a really important decision that you made, which was to Right. You put in a drive through that year.

3 (40m 27s):
Yeah. That was a scary time.

0 (40m 29s):
And that was something you originally did not want to do. You like the carport id cuz it was a, it was still a a like a and w style carport, right? Like you would go out and they'd take your order, they'd bring the food to you. Very nice, very personable. A drive through seems could be a bit more impersonal. Right. It was that your feeling about it, your

3 (40m 49s):
Fear? It was, yeah, it was. And it was just too difficult to have the carport and a drive through as well and the inside dining. I I just thought that would be way too difficult. So, but a friend of mine who sold us our custard mix at that time said, Craig, if you put a drive through in this business, we, I think we did like six, $700,000 the prior year. He said, if you put a drive through in, you'll take this place over a million dollars in sales. And at that time that was a milestone to have a million dollar restaurant.

3 (41m 29s):
Yeah. And so we made that decision and yes, it was a tough decision decision cuz I remember, you know, the local TV stations from Madison coming out and do stories about us frozen custard and CarHop service and all that stuff. And yeah. But we made the decision and we took it over a million dollars in sales, just like that gentleman said.

0 (41m 50s):
And so, just to put this in context, a million dollars in sales in, in that year, you still had a lot of employees, 16, 17 employees. So still a small business, but a big milestone was the, I mean, I'm assuming drive through just infinitely more efficient than the canopy in the car hops. Is that right? Is that, and you can just, you can cycle through customers faster?

3 (42m 13s):
Well, we weren't very good at it certainly to begin with. And still yet today, I mean call, we're still in the kind of the car hop service.

0 (42m 22s):
Right. You don't get the food from the window, you only get the drinks and then you gotta park your car. That's right. And somebody still brings your food to the car today, to this day. So

3 (42m 30s):
You can call that person a car hop if you want.

0 (42m 32s):
Right. But why was it so much more profitable than the canopy and car hops? Was it just because it was more efficient? Oh,

3 (42m 40s):
We were doing more business. Yeah. Just playing more business and not all through the drive-through the, the dining room became much busier as well back then. I mean, our drive-through was maybe 20% of our sales. Today it's in excess of 60% of our business. Yeah. So yeah, it energized our business even more than what it was.

0 (43m 3s):
And Craig, I mean here here's, I mean this really was, it was a family business, right? Because it was, Of course it was. It was. Your parents were involved. Yeah. It was you and Lee, your wife, and she was all, you also had kids too, and she was also working at the restaurant. What, tell me a little bit about what, what Lee was doing at the restaurant.

3 (43m 23s):
Well, Lee was a full-time mom and also working, I don't know, 30, 40 hours at least. Wow. In, in the, the restaurant. And one of the, the most difficult things and probably for any business is balance of life. And I mean, my balance was totally outta whack and Lee's was not easy. And I got three great daughters. And if it wouldn't be for Lee, you know, don't know. Cuz Yeah. I wasn't always there.

0 (43m 57s):
Yeah. I mean, as, as somebody who, who runs a business with my wife, I, it can be really great, but also tough because, you know, everything's integrated work life, It's all, it's all the same thing. And That's right. Did you, I mean, from a business perspective, I mean, you know, your dad was involved, your mom was involved, you Lee, how did you all decide who did what?

3 (44m 22s):
It just fell in place. Dad counted the money in the morning. I'd take care of ordering the provisions for the restaurant. Lee and I were both involved with hiring our staff, but dad took care of the back office with the financial stuff.

0 (44m 41s):
And you were ordering, presumably, I know you weren't ordering like pre-made patties, but probably some things are more, made more sense to have delivered frozen, like french fries I imagine, right?

3 (44m 52s):
Oh yeah. French fries weren't, it didn't make sense to us. We looked at cutting our, our onions for onion rings and flowering and batter dipping them ourselves. But other than that, I mean, you know, as far as the produce and stuff, it all came in fresh and we sliced and diced everything. We made our own soups. We made the chili, the pot roast, we used to buy inside rounds. They're about 20 pounds of big chunks of beef roast and, and we'd salt and pepper it, put onions over it, leave it in the roaster overnight and then come in in the morning and it would be at a stage where it literally would fall apart.

3 (45m 35s):
And I mean, when you came into the restaurant in the morning and you'd smell that beef roast go, man, did it smell good? But today it's different. We've got suppliers that probably do a better job at what we were doing back then than we we did.

0 (45m 51s):
So Craig, for the first few years, it seems like it was clear to you that this was gonna be a standalone family business. Culvers great, you know, community restaurant and that was gonna be it. That was it. Yep. But four years in, you did get somebody who was interested in, in opening a franchise and I guess you agreed to to do

3 (46m 11s):
It. After our third year, dad and I looked into the possibility of franchising and we hired a company outta Chicago and they got us licensed to franchise in a few of the surrounding states in Wisconsin. We really didn't do any marketing on that, but family approached us. I won't mention the town because one year later it, we got a letter in the mail from them saying, you know, we don't want to be part of this story. And

0 (46m 43s):
They could not make it succeed.

3 (46m 45s):
I won't say that. They decided they didn't want us involved in it. And in other words, they, you know, they have to pay a royalty and things like that for the name and everything else. And they decided they could do this on their own. They didn't need us. So they hired an attorney, we negotiated out of the deal and I said after that event, I'll never franchise again.

0 (47m 11s):
Yeah, sounds like you didn't get along well. You didn't see eye to eye. There was not a lot of chemistry Right. Between you and them.

3 (47m 17s):
That's the way it turned out.

0 (47m 18s):
Yes. Yeah. Okay. So you vowed not to franchise again, but of course you did in, in 1990 you decided to give it another try.

3 (47m 29s):
Yes.

0 (47m 30s):
And, and why, what was that? Because your vision for what Culver's could be changed or were you starting to think it could be a national business? Or, or, or were you still thinking no, it's gonna be, you know, maybe just a, a small number of locations?

3 (47m 44s):
Yeah, I still wasn't looking, you know, in on a grand scale whatsoever. How could you, I mean we, we weren't successful in the first one, but now we got a shot at a, at a second one. What I did learn is we've gotta put together a formal training program. If we're gonna be in the franchise business, which we really didn't have before for the first franchisee. I think we, it was two weeks. Well, you can't learn this business in two weeks. Today. It's a 17 week program at culvert. Right. And the other thing with an extended training period is you really get to know the franchisees, the trainees.

3 (48m 27s):
And that's a culture building opportunity for your company. The stronger the relationships are, the stronger your culture.

0 (48m 36s):
So, but I'm curious, I mean, you had a successful business then you've got the first successful franchise and after that you really, I think you opened many about 14 of them in the next year, 19 91, 92, but you still weren't, I mean, what was limiting your ambition and scale of this thing? Like why weren't you thinking we can be the biggest fas like today you need an entrepreneur. Right. And they'll say, and they have one shop and, and they might say, we're gonna be the biggest taco place in the world in 10 years. You know, you hear that a lot. Right? And of course it doesn't always happen, but you understand the ambition. But it seems like you were very, you, you weren't really that interested in becoming that big. Am I right about that?

3 (49m 16s):
That's true. I, and still yet today, I mean, yes, we continue to grow and I know growth is important, but you know, I'll never forget one of the things my dad said to me early on, he said, Craig, it's not important how many restaurants you have. What's important is how many good restaurants you have. And you need strong leadership in every restaurant to make it work. And Yeah. You know, so early on, yeah, we did grow by about 14 restaurants and in a year's time in the early nineties and, and we couldn't handle that growth. It was too much for us. We didn't have the infrastructure in place, meaning we didn't have the people in place to open those restaurants to train those people.

3 (50m 3s):
But so what happened is we decided to close down franchising for about a year to get the infrastructure in place. And what I found out was when you tell somebody that's interested in a franchise that they can't have one, they want it even more. Yeah. So when we finally reopened about a year later, I mean we had a lineup of people that wanted a a Culver franchise.

0 (50m 34s):
When we come back in just a moment, how somebody from McDonald's belittles the business and how that just motivates Craig to grow faster. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This. My schedule is pretty busy so I don't have a ton of time to do the things I wanna do, like reading, which is why I love Audible. Audible offers an incredible selection of audiobooks across every genre. From bestsellers and new releases to celebrity memoirs, mysteries and thrillers, motivation, wellness, business and more.

0 (51m 21s):
All Audible members get access to a growing selection of audiobooks, audible originals and podcasts that are included with membership. You can listen to all you want plus more get added every month. Lately I've been listening to the Company by Robert Little. I've been listening while I work out and do chores around the house. And it makes the time fly by really quickly. Let Audible help you discover new ways to laugh, be inspired or be entertained. New members can try it for free for 30 days. Visit audible.com/built or text built to 500 500. That's audible.com/built or text built to 500 500 to try audible free for 30 days.

0 (52m 2s):
audible.com/built.

5 (52m 6s):
Save home stuff you really need and stuff you bought for fun stuff you've always really wanted this holiday at Amazon. Stuff that is discounted if you are naughty or you're nice stuff to buy. Your grandma who drinks her Chardon nail. Nice stuff to make you big and strong stuff we can made in this summer stuff for long decking, all save big on stuff at

0 (52m 46s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's the early 1990s and after one bad experience trying to franchise Culver's, Craig decides to try it again.

3 (52m 59s):
Franchising is a quicker way to grow and it's not all your money going into each location. Yeah. In order for us to grow that way, it would've been very slow and eventually we, we would've probably had to go public to Yeah. To get more funds

0 (53m 18s):
Or take on a lot of outside outside money. Yeah.

3 (53m 21s):
Or and really be leveraged. And that wasn't how we thought. And we assumed, or I assumed back then that franchising is easy. You just find somebody like yourself and you know, and it, it'll work well that's not, that's not how it works. The first franchise experience we have was went sour and yeah, it isn't as simple as just finding somebody like yourself that's gonna work every freaking hour of the day. You know, just doesn't work that way.

0 (53m 52s):
This is the thing, right? Because you're running your own restaurants at the time and that now you're starting to franchise in Wisconsin and then throughout the nineties more and more even outside of Wisconsin now you are the, the mayor of a city, right? Essentially you are, Yeah. You've got a constituency of franchisees who have their own views on how things should run. And I now it's just not just you and Lee and your mom and dad in the kitchen. You've got a lot of cooks in the kitchen. You've got all these franchise owners saying, you know, down here in our part of the country, people don't want this. Or Cheese curs don't work here. Or I mean, you must have started to get some of that

3 (54m 30s):
Early on. Had a gentleman from Chicago that he wanted to change the name of the Butter Burger to the Better Burger. You can't call it the Butter Burger. My God, what do you think? And he said to me,

0 (54m 43s):
Trans fat butter, butter fashion at a certain

3 (54m 46s):
Time. Yeah. And I remember that meeting finally I slapped my hand down on the table and I said, We're not changing the name of the Butter Burger to the Butter Burger. It remains and will retain the name Butter Burger. And he stormed outta my office and eventually they, they sold short time later and, but I wasn't gonna change the name at the Butter Burger. No way. Boy, I'm my glad I did.

0 (55m 17s):
Yeah. But I mean, it requires a lot of handholding, a lot of management, a lot of, presumably a lot of travel too. Like now you are running a network of Culvers, you are in charge of preserving the brand integrity. Did you ever go into any of the restaurants early on, you know, in the nineties and, and just get frustrated, like, no, you're not, this is not right, This is, you're doing this right.

3 (55m 44s):
Of course, of course. And yes, that's, that's very frustrating. But today, and I visit a great deal of restaurants and I'm not going in there to be an inspector. I'm a cheerleader, but obviously if I see something that's definitely wrong, I'll change it on the spot. But that's not why I visit the restaurants. That's the job of other people in our organization. They're the so-called inspectors. But yeah, it's a partnership, it's a collaboration between everybody in our organization.

0 (56m 21s):
How did you, I've, I've read that you have said in the past that your approach to the business was early days or earlier, you know, you focused really on the customer, the customer was king, which is, you know, certainly not a bad way to approach it, but, but you realize ultimately it was your employees who had to come first. I mean, it sounds like that maybe there was a, you know, it was a hard lesson to learn that maybe you were not focused enough on your employees as much as you should have been Certainly in the early days.

3 (56m 56s):
That's correct. And I think that was a mindset of most people back then. The most important person in your business, it's the customer stupid. It's the cus No, it's your team members. And if they know that they're that highly regarded, they're gonna take care of our customers or our guests as we like to say, as if my mother was taking care of them. So yeah, I learned that after enough people tapped me on the back and said, I'm going someplace else to work or gonna go do something else. I always hated that tap in the back because I knew what it meant.

0 (57m 39s):
Craig, the business really begins to take off in the nineties. Right. And you know, I wonder when, when it started, cuz you know, now we think of Chipotle or Five Guys or Shake Shack as just these ubiquitous brands that have been around forever and they haven't. But I wonder if, as you were expanding in the nineties, do you remember ever getting any skepticism from the bigger players in the industry? You know, the kind of thinking or maybe kind of signaling to you that like, hey, don't, you know, don't get ahead of your skis here. You're you're still small potatoes.

3 (58m 11s):
Yeah, there was an event, it was a McDonald's event in Madison fundraising event for the Ronald McDonald House. And I went, and as I was exiting that evening, a friend of mine, a McDonald's guy came up to me and said, culvert, you know, you're as far as you're gonna go.

0 (58m 36s):
And when was this roughly?

3 (58m 38s):
Probably 93, 94, something like that.

0 (58m 41s):
Had about 15, 16 locations about that time. Maybe

3 (58m 45s):
18. That's yeah, that's right. And, you know, I wanted to punch him in the nose, but I, I never said anything, but I thought to myself, baloney with that will be just fine. And I'll never forget that. I, I'll never will.

0 (59m 2s):
Did that kind of feeling ever motivate you that, that feeling of like, I'll show you. Did you have some of that inside of you?

3 (59m 9s):
Yeah, yeah, I do. Yeah, I do.

0 (59m 19s):
So Craig, did you have a, a particular strategy about how you expanded? I mean, presumably you start in Wisconsin because it's, you're known there and then was it okay then we'll go to the next state, then we'll go to Minnesota and we'll go to Illinois? Like, or or was it just whoever wanted a franchise?

3 (59m 38s):
We did have our, a philosophy on how we were gonna grow. And it was kinda like within the 50 miles of the last restaurant that we opened. And we stuck to that until we opened in Texas. And my sister wanted to open a restaurant in the Dallas area, and another gentleman who was originally from Chicago was living in Austin. He wanted to open a Culver's there. And me forgetting how big Texas was, said, Okay, if I got two, two, we can do this.

3 (1h 0m 18s):
Well, it's so difficult when you don't have any scale. So I made that mistake many years ago. But we continue to grow in concentric circles, so we take our brand along with us. And that's very important because that takes a lot of the risk out of, out of it for the, that operator opening just outside the last restaurant

0 (1h 0m 42s):
As you really start to expand rapidly. Right. In the nineties and in the two thousands, I imagine you were on the road all the time. Did you go to pretty much every new franchise opening?

3 (1h 0m 53s):
I did.

0 (1h 0m 55s):
I I know that by 2012 you had something like 470 locations, 20 states mainly in the middle of the country and of the United States. And, and this important Craig, you know, we talk about everything on this show because what happens in business has an impact on personal life and professional life and Yep. And oftentimes they're intertwined. And I wonder, I know that you and, and Lee split around this time and, you know, she helped you build this business up For sure. And I wonder if, I mean, there are always personal sacrifices that happen when you, when you pursue your work. Right. And, and I don't know. I mean, were you on the road all the time? What did it mean that you in some way, some senses couldn't focus as much on family?

3 (1h 1m 40s):
Balance of life was very difficult for me because my life was Culvers, Culvers, Culvers, Culvers. And yeah, you know, I wasn't the best spouse and I probably wasn't the best father either. In order was I probably as good to myself as I should have been. And I also talk about spiritual life as well. Hmm. I believe it's very important to find time for your spiritual life. And I'm not saying don't work hard. Yeah. But I, I find if you can find more balance in your life, you're gonna be better at all walks of your life.

3 (1h 2m 20s):
I believe that. And so I probably should have stayed home more than what I did. I should have told my wife I loved her more than what I did. I should have gone to more of the volleyball games and soccer and stuff with the children. You know, I can't take it back however, but I can be a better person going forward.

0 (1h 2m 49s):
Yeah. It's interesting cuz the way you talk about your dad, right? I mean, your dad was always working and he was not around all the time, but you talk about him with incredible fondness. He was tough on you, he was tough on your brother, but it's also almost as if your memories of him have changed and shifted as you've gotten older and you've kind of seen life through your prism and understanding his better. Am I right about that?

3 (1h 3m 18s):
Yeah. Yes. I mean, Dad and I and, and mom too. I mean, we were business partners. They were my parents, but we were also great friends. I mean, we'd get together at least once a week. So, you know, dad mellowed as he got older, Mom was always as sweet as she always was and had a lot of, lot of great times together.

0 (1h 3m 46s):
Craig, you eventually got remarried and, and then came another major change in, in your life in 2015, you stepped down as CEO of Culver's, meaning, I know you're still involved with the company, but, but how much, I mean, have you, have you slowed down or, or is your day still kind of focused around Culvers?

3 (1h 4m 6s):
Ask my wife that question. Okay. She says, I've failed miserably at retirement. So I guess that's the answer there.

0 (1h 4m 17s):
This was a entirely family owned business. And by the way, over the years, you must have gotten a lot of offers to buy you out or to just take it over or private equity coming in, seeing the success of this business kind of happening under the radar.

3 (1h 4m 33s):
Yeah. We've had many, many offers and people calling and where you're going as we sold 30% of the business to work capital minority share family still has 70%. So we truly own the company,

0 (1h 4m 49s):
But you decide to sell a percentage of it in 2017. And that was because I guess you couldn't really take money outta the business. Too much money outta the business until that point. Well

3 (1h 5m 0s):
It was, it was taking some money off the table, not that we needed to do that, but I'm glad we've, we did it and I'm glad that we did it with Rourke.

0 (1h 5m 12s):
They own a bunch of, I think they own parts of Jimmy John's and they have stakes and Arby's. Yeah.

3 (1h 5m 17s):
They own only a lot of our competitors as a matter of fact. But I'll tell you what, they're a silent partner and they're a great partner.

0 (1h 5m 25s):
Hmm. The pandemic happens, right? Comes down. You're not obviously the ceo, but still very much involved. I'm assuming the, you were anticipating this is gonna be like 2009 or worse,

3 (1h 5m 39s):
Didn't know what to think. Nobody knew what to think and I think the first thought that went through many people's minds was, we gotta lay everybody off. And I thought about that for a day or two and I said, Wait a second, we can't do that. We gotta keep our people. We have to, for one, we gotta keep 'em working. But the other is we've gotta drive through and let's take care of our guests going through our drive through as if they were coming in into our dining rooms. In other words, hospitality, Let's keep our hospitality going strong. And like most people in the QSR segment, we had positive years.

3 (1h 6m 21s):
We, we were up during the pandemic, we opened 101 restaurants and we were up a combined like 26% in comp sales. Wow. And I think, I think most of our, most of our competitors would probably tell you similar stories.

0 (1h 6m 41s):
Craig, over the years you've seen other chains, qsr, quick service, restaurant chains, flounder and some disappear. I mean, Hardee's was a huge threat to you earlier in your career. And I don't even know where Hardy's is today. I mean, steak and shakes or disappearing, there's a bunch of 'em, right? Sure. The Burger Chef used to be one of the biggest chains in America, doesn't exist anymore. So taste, tastes do change, right? I mean, of course there are, you know, McDonald's around Burger King is around, but tastes do change and chains, even big chains can go out of business. How do you make sure that you guys are innovating and, and staying competitive? Especially when you see, I don't know, people moving, for example, to like chicken's really taken off in the last 15 years, right?

0 (1h 7m 25s):
With it Sure has with raising canes and Chick-fil-A. It's a huge, I mean, even Taco Bell now has chicken, like everyone's doing chicken. So how do you, how do you stay innovative and, and make sure that that doesn't happen to you?

3 (1h 7m 38s):
It certainly is. Innovation is, is very, very important. But just because you bring in a new product doesn't make your business necessarily stronger. New things. I mean, it, it's great if you hit a home run and it's on your menu board forever or whatever, but usually give it six to eight weeks and it loses interest. So innovation is important, but being a leader in the business that's far more important and continuing to attract the right people to your organization, that's far more important as well.

0 (1h 8m 14s):
All right, Craig? So Culver's has, I think they're like 850 more than that locations in, in 25 states in the

3 (1h 8m 21s):
8 83.

0 (1h 8m 22s):
8 83, Okay. As of this recording, probably more once

3 (1h 8m 27s):
True,

0 (1h 8m 28s):
You started this business with your, your dad, you know, really 1976, sort of. And you know, it came from a tiny place in Wisconsin and here you are, the guy who's started this business with eight, almost 900 locations, one of the most profitable quick service restaurants in, in the US on a per restaurant basis. High demand to open new ones. And it's made you very wealthy, you know, whether you had anticipated that or not, I mean, it's, it's a pretty, pretty remarkable right, especially given that you came from a tiny place and some butter burgers and frozen custard and turns in, turns into a national chain.

0 (1h 9m 11s):
Yeah. How much of, of that, of, of everything we've talked about do you think has to do with just how hard you worked and how much you grinded away and how, how much of it do you think is connected to just getting lucky and just the world being what it was at the time and, and it kind of bringing your business to cruising altitude?

3 (1h 9m 33s):
There was a lot of work, a lot of hard work, a lot of care, a lot of love. Lucky I'll take lucky anytime. But you know, as the golfer says, you know, the more I practice the luckier I got, it's the same thing in the business world.

0 (1h 9m 50s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 9m 51s):
I take our business so personally because I do love it so, so much. But I, I think if you don't take it that way, you may not care as much about it. So I can't just let it go. I can't. It's who we are, who I am, who my family is, and, and yeah, I have sleepless nights. I had a sleepless night last night. As a matter of fact, I'll always have a fear of it going in the wrong direction. I will. That's just who I am.

0 (1h 10m 25s):
That's Craig Culver, co-founder of Culver's. By the way, the restaurant's fans are pretty serious about their cheese curds. Last year as a joke, for April Fools Day, Culvers announced a new menu item called the Curter Burger. And the response was so huge that Culvers actually made it a reality. For one day only at Culvers, you could get a burger topped with a massive fried cheese curd, and they sold 136,000 of them, and most Culvers sold out of Curter burger's before lunch.

0 (1h 11m 5s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you enjoy our show and wanna show your support, please spread the word. Tell a friend about how I built this or send out a message on social media. If you want, contact the team, our email address is h I t id.wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this, and mine is at Guy Ross on Instagram or at How I built this. And I'm at Guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by Alex Chung with music composed by a bluey. It was edited by Niva Grant with research help from Sam Paulson and technical assistance from Patrick Murray.

0 (1h 11m 45s):
Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, Josh Lash, Liz Metzker, Carrie Thompson, Katherine Cipher, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris and Carla Estevez. I'm Guy Ross and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey everyone. So I wanted to make sure you knew of all the different ways you can listen to how I built this.

0 (1h 12m 25s):
The show is always free and available wherever you listen to podcasts, whether it's Amazon Music, Apple Podcasts, or wherever you're listening right now. But if you wanna listen to the next episode of How I Built This Today, one Week Early, you can do that on Amazon Music or you can listen to it early and add free by subscribing to Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts or on the Wondery app. So please do follow us on your podcast app so you always have the latest episode downloaded and get your How I Built This merch and gear@wondershop.com. Another way to support the show is by filling out a survey at wondery.com/survey.

0 (1h 13m 10s):
And thanks. Hey everyone, it's me and I've got a really exciting announcement. I have a brand new podcast, It's called The Great Creators. And don't worry, I'll still be talking to founders of some of the world's best known brands on how I built this. But on the Great Creators, I'm interviewing your favorite actors and musicians, filmmakers and other artists, and talking about where their creativity comes from. In our conversations, you'll hear a side of people you've never heard before, people like world-renowned comedians, Stephen Colbert and Nick Kro. Chart topping musicians like the Chainsmokers and Bjork and revered actors like Adra McDonald, Andy Garcia and Zoe Des Chanel.

0 (1h 13m 52s):
Follow the great creators with Guy Ross on Amazon Music, Apple Podcasts, or wherever you are listening. Right now, you can listen to new episodes of the Great Creators one week early on Amazon Music or early and ad free by subscribing to Wonder Plus in Apple Podcasts, or the Wondery app.