0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, Spectrum Business. Small businesses need to find the best value. When it comes to your internet and phone, Spectrum business

1 (11s):
Provides fast speeds and reliability for up to half the price you are paying now. Call (855) 204 9977. We heard about this other trade show and got two feet of table space in a shared booth. So we stood in the aisles, just we made a wall and it was me, my dad and my brother and my girlfriend at the time. Now my wife and nobody got through the wall without tasting some coconut chips,

0 (29s):
People would just touch them in their mouth and say,

1 (32s):
They say, dang,

0 (33s):
Dang. This is a great, I

1 (34s):
Say, dang, these are really good.

0 (42s):
From NPR. It's how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built. I'm guy Roz. And on the show today have Vincent Kitirattragarn took a simple Thai ingredient, a toasted coconut chip joined up with his brother to build dang foods and Asian American stack. Brad now sold thousands of stores across the country. I spend an inexcusable amount of time in grocery stores.

0 (1m 23s):
I stroll up and down the aisles, looking for interesting things to try. Last week, I bought a box of frozen plant-based chicken nuggets. I don't even like plant-based chicken nuggets, but the brand leaped out at me covering nearly 80% of the box, eat giant rooster head being fed a plant-based chicken nugget. That alone made me want to buy it. I'm a soccer. What can I say? But really what I do when I buy these products is show a kind of silent appreciation for their branding, a really good design or logo that pops suggests that the people behind the product have thought very intentionally about what it is they want to convey to you.

0 (2m 7s):
The person who passes by thousands of items at the grocery store, there are lots of choices, lots of plant-based nuggets, but one has a giant rooster being fed a nugget on the box. Anyway, today's story is in some ways about branding, because even if you haven't heard of dang an Asian inspired snack brand that makes coconut chips, rice chips, and energy bars, even if you haven't heard of it, just keep it in mind. Next time you walked down the snack aisle at whole foods or target or Kroger, because you will see it dang in bright greens and oranges and reds. Even the name dang as in "dang, that's good,"

0 (2m 50s):
which happens to be their tagline jumps out at you. The company was founded by two American brothers tied to set. They named it dang after their mom. Dang is actually her nickname. Today, you can find their products in more than 10,000 retailers across the us. And even though the type of snacks they sell are among the most popular in parts of Asia, getting Americans to pick toasted coconut chips and Sriracha rice chips over Fritos and lays. Hasn't always been easy. Dang is still a relatively small brand compared to others we've had on the show, but the founders, Andrew and Vincent Kitirattragarn managed to get it on the shelves.

0 (3m 39s):
Thousands of stores without any connections, money, or industry experience at the start to aim was primarily older brother Vincent's project. In the early years, his brother Andrew joined full time in 2013. So you'll hear more from Vincent in the first part of this interview, Andrew we'll pop in more towards the middle Vincent and Andrew's parents both immigrated to the U S from Thailand in the late 1970s. So their dad Vance could attend graduate school. Once he finished his degree, the parents launched an import business in New York, selling products like wooden baskets and silk flowers made in Thailand. The brothers were born in New York and spent their summers visiting family back in Bangkok. But the parents' marriage ended when Vincent and Andrew were young and their dad moved to New Jersey to start a new import business selling candles.

0 (4m 27s):
Their mom eventually got into real estate and for the brothers having divorced entrepreneur parents meant that they were often home alone, where they learn to rely on each other.

1 (4m 39s):
I I'd say we did everything together. We went, we played, we had a chess tournaments together. We played little league together. We played baseball. You know, we were always making up games around the house. So I remember yeah. Growing up in an apartment building on the 23rd floor, luckily we've lived here a big park. So Andrew and I went out to the park to play a lot.

3 (4m 58s):
Well, it's interesting as I think back on it and all of the sports that I played Vincent played before me, like, I know it's funny and chess too. Like we both picked it up together. We happen to like a lot of the same things with sports and without an, even with academia. And I was like, if I'd had a different brother, maybe I would have liked a completely different set of things.

0 (5m 19s):
Did your parents have a difficult relationship when you were growing up?

1 (5m 23s):
With each other, they had a very tenuous relationship. I, you know, I remember multiple times where they were in the same room and there were screaming matches. And there was one time where I was helping my dad at a trade show at, you know, at his booth. And afterwards we went to go get dinner and we went to a Thai restaurant near the trade show and my mom was there and she was sitting eating at the same restaurant. You know, there was, there was a fight and there was a beer thrown on somebody. One of them threw a beer on the other.

0 (5m 54s):
So when your parents split up, you guys ended living with your

1 (5m 58s):
Mom? Predominantly. Yeah. I mean, we'd go visit our dad on weekends

3 (6m 2s):
Every other weekend, every Wednesday. And

0 (6m 4s):
He was in New Jersey and your mom was in New York city, right?

1 (6m 7s):
Yeah. And you know, she's, she was a busy, single working mom and we both had to kind of figure out how to feed ourselves sometimes because she was too busy to cook. I remember, you know, we could either order McDonald's because they deliver it at the time or we could learn to cook. And so I think some of my early memories about cooking came for cooking for my brothers, cooking for Andrew cooking for other brother.

3 (6m 36s):
Yeah. It's funny that we ended up in the natural food industry because we were ordering McDonald's, like, Domino's all this stuff when we were growing up and loved it. Like, I remember what we had, like had them on speed dial.

0 (6m 50s):
Yeah. I loved McDonald's when I was a kid, I love to say, I love the sweet and sour and barbecue sauce. I would dip my nugget, my McNugget in the sweet and sour and then the barbecue sauce

3 (7m 1s):
Just took over the world for us,

1 (7m 3s):
Sugar, fat and protein.

0 (7m 5s):
Tell me a little bit about sort of the culture at home. Your parents are from Thailand. They were born in Thailand, but their parents or grandparents actually came from China. So tell me what that meant at home. Did you have Chinese traditions in addition to Thai traditions at home, or was it primarily sort of Thai food and Thai cultural traditions that you remember?

1 (7m 31s):
I want to say it was a blend and each parent kind of treated it differently. So, you know, at our dad's house on lunar new year, Chinese new year, you know, we would kind of get together and have a meal. And sometimes we were red and collect hongbao, which is these, you know, money in envelopes from relatives. And so I think he was keen on keeping some of those Chinese traditions alive. And at the same time, you know, when we went to his house, we would eat Kanchi in the morning, you know, which is, there's a lot of Thai, Chinese cuisine that we grew up eating. And I remember there was a fourth grade school project where we had to bring in a dish from your country, your family country of origin.

1 (8m 16s):
And so I brought in my mom helped me make chicken satay, which is like grilled chicken on sticks with, with peanut sauce. Yeah. And I remember bringing it in for all the parents to come and eat and looking around and seeing that my tray was the first one that was completely empty. And I had so much pride. I was like, oh my God, everybody likes my chicken satay. And you know, when you move to a new country, you lose a lot of stuff. So you might change your name and you might change the way you dress and you might change the way you talk because you have to learn a new language. But I think food is that one thing that sticks with you the longest.

1 (8m 59s):
And even though I didn't grow up in Thailand, I have so much affinity for Thai food because that's what I ate growing up.

0 (9m 8s):
So, so Benson, I want to fast forward just a bit, cause I know, I know you went off to college and, and eventually finished a master's degree at Cornell in engineering and, and management and, and around I think 2009, you were living in Washington DC and working at, I guess like a sustainability nonprofit. Tell me about it.

1 (9m 32s):
It was a nonprofit and they had a program that helped large institutions create and implement environmentally preferable purchasing programs. What does that mean? So large institutions have to buy a lot of stuff. Right. And they have policies on what they have to buy. So universities, cities, states, some of them have policies that say, okay, if you're going to buy a vehicle, you have to buy the most fuel efficient vehicle available. So what we would do with this nonprofit, it was create guides on how to create these policies. So I was the manager of this, this program

0 (10m 12s):
And, and why you were there, you also, I guess start working at a Thai restaurant in, in DC, right?

1 (10m 19s):
Yeah. So had an inkling that Thai food in the U S punched above its weight. There's so many Thai restaurants, but generally too, they had the same dishes, which were Americanized Thai dishes, like Pad thai. Right. And there's nothing wrong with Pad thai, but you know, it's the way that it's served in America typically sweeter than the way it stamped in Thailand. And you know, Andrew and I traveled to Thailand. We have a lot of family there. And every time we went there, you know, we were like, Hey, the food here is so different, you know? And, and so I was like, you know, there, there has to be something else you could do here and bringing all these dishes from, from Thailand to the U S and I remember telling my friend, Hey, I think there's some opportunity in Thai food.

1 (11m 1s):
Maybe I'll start a restaurant. He was like, you should probably work in a restaurant before you start a restaurant.

0 (11m 6s):
You worked at a, at a place called Thai X-ing, which is for people from the DC area. It's like one of the best known Thai restaurants in the city and very acclaimed Thai restaurant. But you weren't doing this for money, right. I mean, you had a, you had a full-time day job.

1 (11m 19s):
I had a full-time job. We did have reduced schedule. So I worked four days a week. And with my extra days, I went and helped out at Thai X-ing, but you're right. I definitely didn't do it for the pay. And yeah, I think after that experience, I was like, no way.

0 (11m 36s):
What, what was it about that experience that I dunno, like quashed, that, that, dream?

1 (11m 43s):
I mean, the hours, the you're on your feet, you know, for half of a day, at the end of the night, it didn't feel like I had accomplished something. It felt more like relief that I got through it. You know, I just didn't want that lifestyle. I knew that from the outset.

0 (12m 1s):
Alright, so you're living in the DC area, doing a stint at a Thai restaurant. And then in 2010, you moved to California to the bay area for different job. This startup was called Good Guys. Yup. And let's go, let's go. Now I want to go back to you, Andrew, because now the two of you are living in the same place. You went on to university. I think you went to UC Santa Barbara and you ended up becoming an accountant, right?

3 (12m 30s):
I majored in business economics with an emphasis in accounting, but the short form of that is economics and accounting and joined a firm called KPMG right after school.

0 (12m 42s):
Were you perfectly happy working as an accountant? I mean, was it, you know, you're probably getting paid pretty well. And I imagine you were doing some travel, was it, was it pretty good?

3 (12m 53s):
I think I saw an opening at Santa Barbara to go into accounting and then get into a big four accounting firm. I think a lot about risks. It provides a lot of downside protection, like in the event of a recession or anything. I could always fall back on being an accountant.

0 (13m 8s):
There's always a need for accountants. Always

3 (13m 10s):
a Need yeah. Always a shortage.

0 (13m 12s):
So. All right. So you are now both in San Francisco and the bay area, and meantime, Vincent, did you, you had come from DC where you were working at a kitchen, clearly thinking about maybe doing something in food. Did you continue to think about that when you moved to the bay area or you now full on in this startup, thinking that maybe this is what I'm going to do?

1 (13m 35s):
I think for the first six months, I was very focused on the startup that I was in. I think after about six months, I started, you know, kind of keeping an eye open for what else I could do. And Andrew and I lived in this seven bedroom house in Chinatown, in San Francisco with a bunch of roommates. And I remember we used to have like monthly dinners. So I'd cook these, pretty big elaborate dinners for large amounts of people and just love creating food for people. What

0 (14m 5s):
Were, what kind of food were you making? Yeah.

1 (14m 7s):
So from the Thai X-ing experience, you know, working in a restaurant, I remember cooking dishes like red duck, Gregg Curry with duck. And I made that, you know, for, for my friends and

0 (14m 20s):
By the way, Andrew, are you a good cook? No.

3 (14m 23s):
Okay. It's funny. I actually am really good at like three dishes and I only cook those three dishes.

0 (14m 30s):
Meanwhile, Vincent, you are getting more and more into the food scene in the bay area. And I guess you, you started actually cooking. There's like a, pop-up like this, this is a big thing. There were these underground farmer's markets and like food markets that would happen in cities. I remember those a bunch in LA and in New York and in the bay area. And there's one called the SF underground market. What was it? How did you even find out about it? Tell me the story.

1 (15m 0s):
Yeah. I found out about it. I want to say through a friend who knew that I liked to cook and it was, it was a group that got together at a nightclub and created a night market. And they got around your food safety regulations by having people sign a waiver at the front saying, if I get sick, it's not your fault.

0 (15m 22s):
And what would happen? They would just, there would be tables inside the nightclub of different foods.

1 (15m 26s):
Exactly. Yeah. And they had an audition. So you had to bring a dish to an audition and you leave the dish there and they judged it. And they either told you, Hey, you're in, or you're not in. What'd you bring? I made a chicken satay burger. And before the event, the New York times had written an article about this event. So I thought it was going to be way, way overpopulated. And they told me to make 150 servings. And I was like, no, you know what? I'll make 400 servings because I think it's just going to be nuts, like way, way too crowded. So I bought organic chicken thighs at Costco, boneless, nice and pandesal, which is a Filipino bun.

1 (16m 13s):
Yeah. Marinated the chicken. So I have all these buckets and coolers just filled with chicken that's marinating and coconut milk and all these spices all over my house. And I remember opening up shop and starting to serve people and then realizing, wow, there's not as many people here as I thought there would be. And as it turns out, there were a lot of people, but they couldn't get in. There was a line around the block, but the place only held a certain amount of people and it couldn't allow in everybody.

0 (16m 45s):
So after you, you successfully sold the satay burgers at the San Francisco underground market. Did you say all right, I want to come back next week. What what'd you do? What'd you do next?

1 (16m 55s):
I think two months later, I was like, all right, let's, let's give it another shot. And my mom gave me an index card with a recipe on it. And it was for a Thai lettuce wrap called Miang Kum. And she said, when she was in college, she would race out of her classes to this one vendor on the street, because it's so good. And it's made of these six or seven ingredients: It has peanuts, It has ginger. And I was like, okay, I'll do my own spin on it. I'll do it with like braised short ribs instead of dried shrimp like they do in Thailand.

0 (17m 29s):
And that was the idea that the next time you wouldn't do satay burgers, but you would do these, these raps.

1 (17m 35s):
Yes. And she said, one of the ingredients is toasted Coconut. Now you can't buy toasted coconut in the US but what you can do is go buy shredded coconut and toast it

0 (17m 46s):
Yourself. Just unsweetened coconut?

1 (17m 48s):
I couldn't find unsweetened. So I bought sweetened coconut. And the traditional way to do it is you put it in a, a wok turn on the heat and you start stirring. And the moisture evaporates, and it turns golden brown. And what she didn't tell me was it creates this amazing smell. And because I was making 20 pounds of this stuff and multiple burners going the entire house smelled like toasted coconut. And it's filling the house with like a sweet nutty aroma. And we had multiple roommates, seven roommates, and they all came out of their rooms saying, "what are you cooking? The smell is amazing." And they started just dipping their hands in the pan and eating it.

1 (18m 33s):
And I was like, first off, get your hands out of this pot. You know, this is gross. But secondly, this is really interesting that, you know, all of these friends of ours love to eat this toasted coconut straight out of the pan.

0 (18m 46s):
All right. So you're making this cause you need it for the next iteration of the underground farmer's market. But you're thinking, wait a minute, maybe there's something with these coconut chips, this shredded coconut.

1 (18m 57s):
Yeah. So I was so captivated by everybody's reaction to just the toasted coconut that I was like, Hey, maybe we could create a product. That's just toasted coconut.

0 (19m 9s):
So, all right. Now let's just to be clear, right. Because when people think shredded coconut, I think certainly in the United States, they think of like coconut macaroons, right? Like shredded sort of syrupy, kind of trickily sweet coconut product, or like an almond joy, right? Like shredded coconut. You're talking about like shaved coconut, right? That's that's what you were working with.

1 (19m 33s):
Yeah. Long strips of shaved, coconut toasted until crispy. It tasted and felt like, like a crunchy sweet chip.

0 (19m 42s):
Just from that experience, you start to think this could be like a snack food. This, these coconut shavings like could be something that people just munch on

1 (19m 53s):
Yeah, because people want it to snack on it at my home kitchen. Why wouldn't they want to snack on and buy it at a, at a supermarket. And I remember I called Andrew who was in Thailand at the time and asked him, Hey, have you ever seen any toasted coconut snacks or chips? And they shipped me a box. And then we identified the sample that we liked and talked to the manufacturers And it was already

0 (20m 17s):
Toasted. You didn't have to do anything. Correct.

1 (20m 19s):
But I kept some of that sample the samples from the box. And I heard about this food show, trade show called the fancy food show, which was at DC that summer. And I was like, you know what, I'm going to bring some there. I don't know anything about this industry. I don't know anyone in this industry, but if I can get people to taste it, maybe they'll tell me if it can be a product or not.

0 (20m 41s):
Hey, hang on for a sec. I just, I'm just trying to, I'm just trying to understand this because I would not have had the foresight or the competence at that point in my life to think about something like a food show, because you had no experience in the food world.

1 (20m 55s):
I remembered back to when I was a kid and my parents would take me to trade shows. They take them to a gift

0 (21m 0s):
Shows.

1 (21m 2s):
And that's where the entire industry goes in order to find new items and talk about them and get business. Right. So I was like, all right, well, what's the big trade show in food and decided to book a flight from San Francisco to DC. And we took some of the samples from the box that I got sent. And I put coconut chips into these little plastic souffle cups and put a lid on it and put a sticker on it that said, dang. And we called it dang because my mom's name is dang. And when you eat it, it's it's dang good. Like

0 (21m 38s):
Here, like, dang, this is good

1 (21m 40s):
Saying these are,

0 (21m 41s):
Dang is such a, it's a w my kids use that word. So it's like, I remember saying it when I was a kid, it's a

1 (21m 47s):
Euphemism,

0 (21m 48s):
Right. Say, dang, it's like fudge say fudge. So, and dang is like such a great word, but your and your mom's name is dang.

1 (21m 57s):
Yeah. So everyone in Thailand gets a nickname, right? Like a short nickname. And so hers is dang. So people always call her P dang or new dang. And yeah, we just, I, it just, it came to me on a run and I was like, all right, let's, let's put that as our logo.

0 (22m 11s):
So, all right. So you're, you're to, you've got the chips. You're going to go to this trade show and you've got the name. And so did you get a table, like a booth at this fancy food show?

1 (22m 24s):
No. So we didn't want to spend more money by getting a booth and we didn't have a product. You know, we had chips in these little cups, but I did want to get feedback on the product, which is the chips, like just, just the coconut chips. And so I filled these souffle cups, probably a couple hundred of them with coconut chips, and then put a sticker on top with my contact info. Right. And the dang logo,

0 (22m 52s):
Just to be clear, when you went into the trade show, cause you did not have a booth, you just burned a huge duffel bag with you. Like you would just go hauling this huge bag. And like, nobody was like, they're okay with that. They're like, yeah, come on in. You can just,

1 (23m 6s):
I don't think that they allow that, but nobody stopped us.

0 (23m 10s):
Okay. I'm here, I'm done. You're hauling a giant duffel bag full of samples. And you're just walking in and, and that was it.

1 (23m 17s):
Yeah. So I walked in with a messenger bag with samples and the first person I saw getting out of the escalator had a Whole Foods badge. And I was like, great. And I stopped him. I was like, "Hey, can you try these coconut chips? And let me know what you think?" And he was nice enough to stop and try the product which I learned later on. Like, that's not a good way to approach a buyer. And he stopped and tried the product and said, "Yeah, this is really good, but you don't really have a product. You have chips in this little cup. I need to see pricing and I need to see packaging." And I thought to myself, great.

1 (23m 57s):
Like, all I need to do is create a package and then we can sell this product. It was enough to give me the confidence to take the next step.

0 (24m 7s):
When we come back in just a moment. Have Vincent decides to turn those coconut chips into a product and how a lucky break from a certain word Kardashian sister helps to spread the word, stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this. This message comes from NPR sponsor, Wix. Where do you go? When you want to create, manage and grow your business online Wix, a leading website creation platform create a site with designer made templates that can be customized for your business and looks great on all devices.

0 (24m 50s):
Reach new audiences with intelligent SEO tools designed to get you found on search engines and manage it all from one place. Join over 200 million people already doing it and head over to wix.com to get started.

4 (25m 4s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor USA facts, working to make government data easier to access and understand on their free website. Chief product officer Richard coffin shares the inspiration behind their founding

5 (25m 19s):
USA. Facts was founded in 2017 by Steven Connie bomber, who really wanted to understand where government was spending money so that they could, they could fill in the gaps. And after a couple of years of painstakingly going through government data, we realized that just should not take this long for people to understand the state of their country and numbers

4 (25m 36s):
Learn more, go to USA facts.org

6 (25m 42s):
This week on the StoryCorps podcast from NPR, we're remembering the final hours of Dr. Martin Luther king Jr's life through the stories of the people who were there. There's still,

7 (25m 51s):
It gets to me when I share it, even though it's over 50 years

6 (25m 55s):
Ago, listen, wherever you get your podcasts.

0 (26m 7s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2011 and Vincent is sold on the idea of making a coconut chip brand, but he won't be shaving the coconuts himself in the bay area. He needs to import the product from Thailand. And thankfully he knows some people.

1 (26m 27s):
So I asked my family like, Hey, is there anybody that can help me? And one of our cousins, you know, became our supplier manager.

0 (26m 36s):
You had a cousin there who could be on the ground, find the suppliers for you. And which is obviously hugely because you couldn't, you couldn't be there yourself.

1 (26m 47s):
Exactly. So we talked to all these manufacturers figured out the one that we liked the next step for us was, Hey, testing it with consumers. So I think we went to Thailand that Christmas. And then I brought back with me a duffel bag full of, I think it was one ounce bags with stickers on them because I wanted to have, show consumers, what a product would look like with this.

0 (27m 13s):
When you came back to, I think it's now January, 2012, you still, you're still working for the startup right at the time. But it sounds like you've got the wheels are in motion on this thing. And you want to test this out because you had some success at the trade show the previous summer. So who are you going to test this out on? I mean, you had, you're still packaging them yourself.

1 (27m 39s):
Yeah. So we packed them in these foil bags and each of these, you know, now it's a product, right? So we have, you know, coconut chips in a bag with a sticker on it. And it says toasted coconut chips on it. And it says, dang. And it has a picture of coconuts. And I found a consumer show called the new taste marketplace, which is like a artisanal market in St. Gregory's church in San Francisco. And we did pretty well. And that's where we really learned how to talk about the product and say, Hey, you know, these are coconut chips, they're a healthy snack. They've got all the health benefits of coconut oil and you can put it on your salads or your ice cream or your yogurt. And so that's where we really kind of got the pitch down for how to sell coconut

0 (28m 21s):
And this, yeah, this was probably right around the time when coconut water was starting to blow up.

1 (28m 26s):
Yeah. At this time, coconut in general was very trendy. And so that became our anchor. When we started talking about it, we said, Hey, do you like coconut water? Hey, do you like coconut oil? Like you probably like our coconut chips.

0 (28m 40s):
Yeah. And coconut oil also, by the way, around this time, 2000 10, 11, 12, because those are also concepts of this whole paleo keto kind of craze. It blew up. Not really crazy. Cause it's still around. And a lot of people are getting into healthy fats, like coconut oil.

1 (28m 58s):
Yeah. That became part of our

0 (28m 59s):
Pitch. And I think trader Joe's trader Joe's was selling coconut oil

1 (29m 4s):
Also came out with a coconut chip around the same time we did, which I thought was bad because I was like, I thought we were going to be the first, but it turned out later that it was actually a good thing because trader Joe's stays in trader Joe's. Right? Yes. So it actually helped us with this education component of people not knowing what a coconut chip was and people who shop at trader Joe's are also going to shop at whole foods and other stores. So it actually helped us a lot.

0 (29m 28s):
And then by the way, were you talking to your dad or mom? Because they were both entrepreneurs. I mean, did either of them say, yeah, go for it. This is, this is exciting or where they're like, not sure.

1 (29m 38s):
Well, I think before we even started it, I remember talking to both of them. My mom said, Hey, you're really good with food. I think you should do something with food. And my dad said, if you're going to start something, you should utilize our family in Thailand because we have this huge network there that could be a competitive advantage. And then I ended up doing kind of a combination of the two, which is food with family and Thailand. So they didn't say specifically, Hey, this is a good idea to do this, but they kind of gave me a larger framework to think about how to start a business. All right. So,

0 (30m 10s):
Oh, you you're clearly Vincent. I mean, tell me, take me to like 2012, the first sort of five, four or five months of that year, is this all you're thinking about? Cause you still have another job. Like you've got a day job working for the startup.

1 (30m 26s):
I was definitely on a kind of adrenaline rush for the first few months of just thinking about this. And I was pretty committed to making it a company at that point. And we heard about this other trade show in March, 2012 called the expo natural products expo west. And I didn't know about it until a month before. And I was like, oh wow. Maybe we can get a booth, but they ran out of boots. So what we did was we got two feet of table space in a shared booth with dozens of vendors. And we somehow fit four people into a two foot tablespace at one behind the table and three in front of the table standing the aisles.

1 (31m 9s):
So we stood in the aisles, just we made a wall. And in order to pass through that aisle, you had to go past one of our, our people. And it was me, my dad and my brother and my girlfriend at the time. Now my wife and nobody got through the wall without tasting some coconut chips,

0 (31m 27s):
Just tuck them in their mouth and say, Hey, say, dang, dang, this is a great,

1 (31m 32s):
I say, dang, these are really good.

0 (31m 33s):
Cause you were getting business cards from buyers for large and small.

1 (31m 39s):
Yeah. So we had connected with a few whole foods regions with HEB, which is a big grocery store, Texas. And then also all these smaller independents in the bay area that you know, are very progressive and are kind of the leaders when it comes to new products. So Bi-Rite grocery and rainbow, grocery Berkeley bull. And you know, those were some of our first customers and that was like, okay, maybe we can make this a real thing. Let's order a container load.

0 (32m 10s):
All right. So when you came back home after the show, what did you do? Did you start to email all the people whose cards?

1 (32m 17s):
Yeah, exactly. So, you know, I remember meeting people at the trade show and asking them, Hey, do you want to get a cup of coffee? And you know, sitting down, I remember one guy at the trade show. He was like, oh, you got business cards, let's go through them. And he helped me go through a stack of at least a hundred business cards and would pull that ones and be like, this is worth following up on, like, you don't want to lose this card. That was huge. Like he helped me kind of figure out the lay of the land. And so when we, when the first container landed in July, we had a bunch of customers who had committed. So we started shipping it out directly to grocery stores.

1 (32m 58s):
Yeah. Like HEB was what, the biggest one at the time,

0 (33m 1s):
Meantime from understanding you were laid off from your job in April of 2012.

1 (33m 7s):
Yeah. So the startup I was working at had to do layoffs. And so I got laid off in April, 2012.

0 (33m 14s):
It doesn't sound like you were that sad.

1 (33m 17s):
I had to decide whether or not I wanted to go full-time into dang and really work on it or not. I mean, I think I was probably happy that I got a little severance package, which helped me kind of bridge the gap to start the company. All right. Let me,

0 (33m 32s):
Let me try to, I want to try to understand something. You have your blade off, right? You're now trying to get these chips into retailers. You get an order from HEB, a Texas chain. And I remember how big, how big was it ordered? 10, 20, $50,000. Do you remember?

1 (33m 50s):
Probably $10,000.

0 (33m 52s):
Okay. So they order $10,000 of the product. How were you financing that? Because I'm assuming when you're an HEB, you cannot pat, you can't hand a pack each bag. Now you've got to professionalize the operation or am I wrong where you hand packing them?

1 (34m 8s):
No. So we had to professionalize and the manufacturers that we worked with were the ones to pack and ship the product to us. So we designed the dang, the first iteration of the dang label. And it was still stickered. We, we did stickers at the beginning print on the bags, but you know, I, I, I use $23,000 of savings to buy the first 20 foot container in July. Will you

0 (34m 35s):
Stressed out or was it exciting? What do you, what do you remember?

1 (34m 38s):
I remember my girlfriend at the time told me you're always working. You don't do anything else. And those first few months were, you know, we're starting to ship product and you know, I'm worried about setting up the company by myself, working out of my bedroom. I feel like it was just a blur because I would just work a lot. And I remember going to a class on how to start a food business. And they were telling us about all the costs involved with slotting and trade spending and just like all the, you know, the cost of doing starting a business and thinking to myself, oh my God, this is going to be way more expensive than I thought it would be.

1 (35m 19s):
And it was just me. And it was really lonely. Like when you're starting something and doing it all by yourself without anybody to kind of go through it with it, it felt like I was kind of alone on doing it on my own ship, in the middle of the sea.

0 (35m 33s):
I think later that year in 2012, you managed to get into some Safeway. How did you even get on their radar?

1 (35m 40s):
I still don't to this day. I don't, I'm not a hundred percent, but I think if they sell us in a store, I don't know which store. So they called me and they're like, Hey, you know, can you come present to our produce team? And I remember going in there as a huge conference room and I gave my, my presentation about dang and our coconut chips. And they said, we love this. And we want to create a premium snack destination in the produce department in all of our stores. So they quickly put us into about a thousand Safeway stores with like large displays in the produce section, which is the front of the store. 90% of the people walk through that area.

1 (36m 20s):
That was a game changer for us. Because up until then, it was just small stores here and there, small orders from HEB. But that's when that's when I called Andrew and I was like, I need help.

0 (36m 32s):
I need help because I cannot do this by myself. Exactly. And Andrew, were you still working at your accounting job at KPMG? At that point?

3 (36m 41s):
I was working with KPMG, but actually I, I had quit that summer of 2012 and then I started working with my father in his candle business. Vincent, I think you and dad had some behind the scenes conversations and you effectively like, traded like that. Like, okay, I'm going to give Andrew to you cause you could dang needs, dang needs the help. And it's funny. Cause I think at the time I think Vincent was what you needed was he w he needed someone that had a very different skillset from him. Like the opposite skill set of him as a partner. He also needed someone that he could trust.

3 (37m 26s):
And he also needed someone that he couldn't afford to pay in the near future.

0 (37m 33s):
Perfect business partner. I'm not going to pay you. I need all this skill. I need this skillset. Don't have all your time and all your time. And are you in, are you in,

3 (37m 42s):
It's interesting because I remember being in Thailand, having some conversations about equity split up, like, how are we going to split up this

0 (37m 49s):
Company? Because Vincent owned a hundred percent of it

3 (37m 51s):
Because Vincent own a hundred percent of it. And, you know, I started, I would think I was all in helping out for like a month or two. And then I was just like, oh, it's a brother. I'm just gonna go all in because it is. And then we're eventually like, okay, what will the equity split up be? And I remember being on the call and Thailand, and like, I think you initially proposed a 80, 20 split was like, yeah, like, it's interesting because you could peel back like, oh, I'm not gonna do this for 20%. But I also, like, I had no experience in food, like very little experience

0 (38m 21s):
It's running and everything from 2011.

3 (38m 25s):
Yeah. No. And I remember hanging up the phone and I think I cussed him out. I was like, I hate you. And then he called me back like the next day. And he's like, listen, I, I really want you to be part of the company. I think it would be really rewarding for us to go through this together. I'll give you 20% and you'd earn it over three years. And then later that got modified even higher later as I I've been with the company longer.

1 (38m 48s):
I actually have a very different memory of that conversation, please. Okay. All right. I remember talking to you and asking you what you thought was fair. I remember you saying I should get one fourth of what you have. And I think that was probably misconstrued, you know, like that even like one fourth of what you have, maybe one fourth of the company, like, I feel like there was a miscommunication there that led to this tension, which is why, you know, we had to kind of have multiple conversations to kind of patch things up. And I also remember that being one of the, one of the first conversations that we had that had tension because we kind of grew up as brothers, you know, like we didn't really, like we fight, but later on in life, we wouldn't fight as much.

1 (39m 32s):
And we would just, we got along well, but this is kind of the first time we had to be a little bit more combative, I would say. And I remember it being very awkward.

0 (39m 40s):
So you finally agree a split, Andrew, you join full full-time and now you've got to fulfill this big order from safe. I think it was a $50,000 order. Is that, is that right?

1 (39m 52s):
Yeah. It was $50,000 of coconut chips going to their thousands thousand stores,

0 (39m 57s):
But really that's just the beginning of a long journey because you want them to keep ordering, which means you got to sell the coconut chips and you guys, I imagine didn't don't have any marketing budget. How are you going to get people to even be aware of, of this product and try them?

1 (40m 13s):
So at the time, this is 2013 and these are the early days of Instagram. And my phone started blowing up and I was like, why are all these people texting me? They're like, <em></em> check your Instagram. So Courtney Kardashian had found our product at an airport because we were selling at a few airports stores and put a post of it on her Instagram with the caption flight sack and our website traffic just spiked. And that's when I realized, wow, like social media is becoming a big marketing tool, right. And this is the power of it. It's funny because the week before we were in the New York times, I had sent samples to a bunch of different food editors.

1 (40m 53s):
And then I got a call from Florence fabric and who does the front burger section? And she was like, Hey, I think I want to feature your coconut chips,

0 (41m 1s):
Florence fabric cats. Yeah. She's famous for, yeah. Wow. I'm more impressed with that than Courtney Kardashian myself.

1 (41m 10s):
I was too. And I remember, you know, after that, I was like, oh, this is pretty cool. And I remember looking at our website traffic and it was like up a little bit, but then after the Courtney Kardashians post our website traffic spike, like,

0 (41m 21s):
And that was just, that was just pure luck that Courtney Kardashians, but then on Instagram,

1 (41m 26s):
That was luck you, we happened to be selling at the right time in the right place, which is at an airport near,

0 (41m 32s):
But still, I mean, you're in safe ways. And probably most of those people in Safeway had not seen Courtney Kardashians, Instagram posts. How are you going to create awareness among those shoppers? Because you needed them to continue ordering your, your product. Right? You wanted them to sell. So how did you, what was the plan?

1 (41m 53s):
Yeah. So how do you get attention? Right? When you're in the store, you have less than a second to grab someone's attention. I think the best way to do that is to create a good package. And there's a saying that your package is your product. It's not what you sell in the bag. It's the bag itself, because that has to do so many things. It has to educate someone on what's inside what to expect, what the nutritionals are, you know, attributes like Keno, paleo, and, you know, for, from the beginning, I knew that we had to capture people's attention with the name, dang, cause you know, the logo, we always put that front and center in a very big font, but then also visually we had to illustrate what to expect in the bag without actually putting a window.

1 (42m 37s):
So I remember buying coconuts in Thailand when we were there and they were cheap. They were like a dollar for like five of them, you know, setting up a photo studio and taking pictures of coconut chips spilling out of the coconut. So you knew that it was something, you know, a natural product that came actually from the coconut itself. Yeah. We also wanted to illustrate that it was a natural product without saying the word natural on it. So we used all these earthy tones, like tan and green and brown, basically things you would find on a coconut tree.

0 (43m 7s):
So 2013, it just sounds like you need a lot of help and your brother comes in and he is, how do you, I mean, what's the, the idea of Vincent you're going to be the CEO and Andrew you're going to be the operations guy. It was that sort of how you, you divided responsibility. Yeah.

3 (43m 25s):
I think, I think that from the beginning it was Vincent was really like the front facing visionary handling sales and marketing and product development. I was handling ops finance and accounting, and it still has held to that

1 (43m 39s):
To this day. And our company was a mess at the time. I don't have a finance background or an operations background. So, you know, our books were a mess and our products were not shipped in a very efficient way. So we had a lot of things I needed to attend.

0 (43m 54s):
All right. But you had one product line and, and you cannot build a company on coconut chips alone. Right. And you knew that you, you knew that that was not going to be possible. You had to, you had to expand beyond that. So what was the next product you were going to put out into the world?

1 (44m 12s):
And we slowly built out the line of coconut chips because people were telling us they want it with the coconut sugar or they want it without sugar at all. So we actually had to create a facility to make an unsweetened coconut chip. But then I was on a trip to Japan and I saw these onion chips in the supermarket. And I was like, oh, this is really cool. It tastes like caramelized onions, which is delicious.

0 (44m 34s):
They were just what they were like fried piece of onion.

1 (44m 37s):
Yeah. You're using a technology called vacuum frying, which didn't, you know, it took out all the atmosphere pressure so that it doesn't collapse when you fry it and it, it, you can spin out most of the oil. Okay. So it's like light, flaky, crispy, like onion pedal.

0 (44m 51s):
Oh, so it wasn't, it wasn't a ring. It was, it like a pedal.

1 (44m 54s):
Exactly. And I remember we tested it and people loved it.

0 (44m 58s):
Yeah. And it crunches like a, like

1 (44m 60s):
A chip, it crunched like a chip and it was like light. It wasn't too oily.

0 (45m 4s):
It's just onion. That's it just onion and salt,

1 (45m 7s):
Just onion and salt. And I was thinking, I remember thinking to myself, oh, we can go after Funyuns.

3 (45m 12s):
Yeah. What happened was that at the, like, we were going around the trade shows, these were vacuum fried onion chips that were pretty clean. And when people tried them at the trade shows, people loved them. And I remember, I remember one of our industry friends tried it and he liked looked up in the air. He was like, oh, dang. They did it again. Like, wow.

0 (45m 33s):
These were going to be like organic Funyuns. Exactly. Aren't really onion. They're just puffed corn flavored like onions. We were so excited about it.

3 (45m 43s):
Like they were getting so much positive feedback from the community just as we did with our coconut chips. We're like, okay, this is going to be a winner. This was going to be the big thing. So it failed miserably.

0 (45m 55s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Andrew and Vincent learned the hard way that the best snack foods have to be addictive. And maybe they shouldn't give you onion, breath, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Wix. Where do you go? When you want to create, manage and grow your business online. Wix, a leading website creation platform create a site with designer made templates that can be customized for your business and looks great on all devices.

0 (46m 35s):
Reach new audiences with intelligent SEO tools designed to get you found on search engines and manage it all from one place. Join over 200 million people already doing it and head over to wix.com to get started. This message comes from NPR sponsor Epson just in time for the holidays. It's the Epson EcoTank cartridge free printer. Say goodbye to panic freak outs. Like when you're halfway through printing your holiday cards and those pricey ink cartridges run out of ink at the worst possible time with Epson EcoTank you can kiss expensive cartridges. Goodbye. This printer stores a lot of ink in its large tank. So you can just fill and chill all season long.

0 (47m 18s):
Now that's married. Learn more at epson.com/build. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's several years into dang foods and Vincent and his brother, Andrew, think they have the best snack ideas since Funyuns a vacuum fried onion pedal chip, but despite some dang good initial feedback from people in the industry, customers, it turned out didn't quite agree.

1 (47m 51s):
They would eat a few bites, but they would just kind of let it sit, I think, and they couldn't finish it. And when you don't have a snack that you can finish, then you don't go back and buy it again.

0 (48m 1s):
But why was it too much? Like sounds really light and flavorful. What was the feedback you were again?

1 (48m 8s):
One thing that we didn't anticipate was that people would be worried about onion, breath about getting onion on their breasts. And they didn't want to walk around smelling, like, like they just ate onions. That's something that nobody ever told us when we were testing it out. People don't snack on onions.

0 (48m 24s):
How long did it take you to discover that this was a failure

1 (48m 28s):
Because only a month or two that was

0 (48m 30s):
Fast. So was a fast

1 (48m 32s):
It's supermarkets. Don't give you a lot of time. If you're not,

0 (48m 36s):
Well, you weren't thinking, oh, just give a time. People have to come around to it. You were thinking, this is a failure, six weeks in. We've got to pull it.

3 (48m 44s):
I have to say that there was other considerations. Like the biggest driver was that it wasn't flying off the shelf. I think from the beginning guy, there was margin concerns. Like we were looking at. I mean, there were some tariffs associated with this onion from Vietnam. I think when we first launched, I think we were looking at something like 20% margins and we're like, listen, we can do this because this is going to get as big as Funyuns. Yeah. Like when we sell up to 10 million and we get to scale to the next level, those margins will hit 30 and then it'll hit 40 and everything is going to work itself out. If the velocity comes the velocity, didn't didn't come. The velocity didn't come at all right. They were yellow flags in the process. Maybe even red flags and the processes of launching this, I think there was so much pressure from the market and from, from the industry to be like, Hey, we need to launch something new and it needs to be dang good.

3 (49m 34s):
That like that, like the pressure, I think override road, those yellow flags in the

0 (49m 41s):
Process. Did you take a financial hit? Oh yeah.

3 (49m 44s):
I think it was about all in all. I don't know, $2 million.

0 (49m 49s):
Wow. That's

3 (49m 50s):
Hard. We had just gotten a venture funded and so for about $4 million and about one and a half to two of the million dollars went to the onion chips.

0 (50m 1s):
It didn't work. It didn't work. So let me, let me ask you about venture funding because the first three years it was bootstrapped and at a certain point, you either many companies, especially in the food business, it's very rare to be able to continue to do it on your own. Some have done it. Cliff bars is a good example, but many of them either sell to a bigger multinational or go for outside funding to, in order to scale. And you guys sounds like you had to get outside funding if you want it to, to scale.

1 (50m 33s):
Not only that, but we weren't paying ourselves for the first three years. So we had to get outside funding to make a living, you know, up until then we put every penny of profit back into the company because we wanted it to grow because we believed it would be worth something someday. But after three years of that were like, it's too risky to keep going this way.

0 (50m 52s):
Yeah. When, when investors, cause I'm thinking if, if you came to me then and you said, Hey, we were looking for capital. I'd say, well, what are you? I mean, coconut chips alone. I'm not sure. Did you start to think about your company differently? Did you start to say, you know what, we are a snack food brand or did you say we are an Asian American snack food brand? How did you begin to think about what you want, what you want, wanted your story to be?

1 (51m 19s):
Yeah, I think it was an evolution. So we started out with, Hey, we're a better for you snack company that takes, you know, whole foods that you can identify and turn them into snacks that you can eat. But then looking at it later on, we were like, there's nothing ownable about that. Like that could describe any number of snack companies. And so later on we realized, okay, how do we make it different? And like, we had to look at ourselves and say, how are we different than everybody else out there? And one thing that we always relied on was, you know, Asian flavors and ingredients. And so we changed that over time to an Asian American snack company that stood for bringing ingredients and flavors from Asia informs that Americans understand like chips and later on bars.

0 (52m 6s):
And when you went to raise money, were the investors saying you're going to have to become something bigger than just coconut chips. You're going to have to have lots of product lines, man. Ultimately coconut chips may not even be the thing that is your primary source of revenue.

1 (52m 26s):
I think we heard actually the opposite also, which was why don't you just focus on coconut chips, make that as big as coconut water. So after we got an investment, we try to follow that model of hiring a big field sales team to go into stores. And we thought that that was going to bring us to this next level of growth with coconut chips and the onion chips, but it didn't work out like we didn't grow.

0 (52m 50s):
So it's interesting because you had this money to hire sales people, but why, what was the disconnect? Why weren't they effective?

1 (52m 59s):
I think, you know, hiring a field team first off people are expensive, right? So each person, maybe $70,000, right in salary. And that's in that payroll, you have to basically sell half a million in order to get that 70 K contribution that pays off that person's salary. So, you know, going into store by store and selling displays in like, how many of those do you need to get a half a million of revenue? It's a lot.

3 (53m 31s):
I also think it's like, I think that works well with the people. I talk to the industry on a high margin, high velocity item. I think our item was relatively moderate to high margin and velocity, but then a lot more competition started coming in 2016 onwards with coconut chips.

0 (53m 49s):
So you've got some capital and, and one of the, one of your investors and he raised about $4 million and, and one of your investors is a bigger food brand. This is interesting too, because I think they actually helped you get even wider distribution, which you need to succeed. You have to be everywhere to actually scale a company. Was that investment you got, that was that the, that the catalyst had helped you get even more distribution.

1 (54m 20s):
So they did a couple of things. First. They taught us how to think like them and as a big stack company, you know, they're interested in what they call stomach share, which is literally getting more of a share of America's stomachs. And to us, you know, kind of running this small stack company, we never really thought in terms like that. But then, you know, after a while it kind of just started to sink in like, oh yeah, we need to who's our cohort. Like who's actually buying dang. We'd never really had good information that data about our consumer before, but they came to us with loads of data, say, Hey, your consumer is, you know, highly educated tends to be female lives on the coast.

1 (55m 2s):
You know has pretty decent household income. Oh. And by the way, you index really high with Asian Americans. Right. But then they also helped us get into some new distribution channels that we had never considered before. Like the convenience store you can,

0 (55m 17s):
As the onion chips didn't work out, but you tried other things with coconut chips, right? You, you did like a bunch of different flavors, like bacon and chili lime. And we did like dark

1 (55m 29s):
Chocolate milk, chocolate,

0 (55m 30s):
Dark chocolate coated. I think today you've got three types of coconut chips, right. Salted and the original recipe, which is, has some sugar and then an unsweetened and unsweetened. Okay. So what happened at those ones? The other ones just didn't take off.

1 (55m 45s):
Yeah. I mean, we tried a lot of different things and at the end of the day, we kind of learned that people kind of want a less adulterated coconut. Yeah. Kind of similar with coconut water. Like they don't want flavored coconut water. They just want coconut water. So that's what we have today. And we've tried so many things that failed, but we had to do that in order to figure it out.

0 (56m 7s):
One of the things, cause it sounds like, I mean, you were trying out a bunch of things. I mean, you were experimenting and you were failing and you were experimenting and you were failing until you actually hit on a hit, we land on a hit, which I think is one of your, these products they, which are the, those

3 (56m 23s):
Rice chips. Yeah. It's the Thai rice trackers. We, I left the airport in Bangkok and we saw a lot of specifically like Chinese tourists walking out with like 10 different at the time in the cartons of these little rice crackers. And he looked at the, what they were buying. They were buying like very flavors that were, were good for their market, like crap Curry. And we thought that it could be an opportunity. So we contacted the supplier, we had a lot of credibility and going to other suppliers in Thailand and having a conversation with them about what it would be like to reintroduce a similar product in America.

0 (57m 8s):
This is, I guess, for people who haven't tried it, it's, it's basically sticky rice, which is a type of race. This is amazing steamed and then soaked in watermelon juice and then puffed and dried. So it's like a crispy, am I describing it correctly? More or less.

1 (57m 27s):
Yeah. And that's the way that it's cooked. Traditionally as a, as a snack, like on the streets in Thailand markets, it's called Catan and they traditionally have to use watermelon juice. Cause they, they need to make it sticky and stickier. Like the sticky rice, they have to make it stickier. So they need like a slightly sticky, sweet solution. And watermelon juice has just the right amount of stickiness to create these disks.

0 (57m 55s):
So you now have a bunch of flavors. I think Serratia is your, is the biggest selling one of those, right? Yeah. So that's, that was a hit. Right. And, and was it clear right away that that was a hit or, or, or was it to take some time

3 (58m 9s):
T take a little time, but I'd say that we knew off the bat. I think we were so sensitive to what happened to the onion chips that were like, how, like we got to have more evidence of proof of concept before launching,

0 (58m 21s):
Did you change your, your process to make sure that a new product would work? I mean, you, you saw people buying it, but what did you do? I mean, you, how did you test it before you decided to go all in? So,

1 (58m 36s):
So we have the family that was helping us with coconut chips. We called them and were like, Hey, this is a picture of this package that we bought at the airport. Can you go find out who makes it and go talk to them? And they set it all up for us. So they met with the owner and told them who we were. And he shared with us how much that they sold in the airport, which was 10,000 boxes a day, which is crazy. Yeah. And, you know, we told them, Hey, like, we want to bring your product to the U S and you know, put it under the dang brand and, you know, help work with you on seasonings. And he loved it. And then for testing, we did a lot more consumer testing with that one today,

0 (59m 18s):
You're in the energy bars space too, which is a tough one. We've done energy bars in the show, done RX bar, we've done a Lara bar. We've done cliff bar. It's a really crowded space. Tell me about, about the thinking behind energy bars. Why did you get into that space?

1 (59m 35s):
The people that were buying our unsweetened coconut chip, which is just made from coconut and assault were telling us they need more snacks like this because it's perfect for their keto diet. And I looked at the bar space and I was like, nobody's doing a keto bar. Why not? And you know, we have all this credibility from coconut chips, you know, it's high, fat, low carb. So we developed a line of keto bars using cocoa butter and Asian ingredients like macho. And we're like, all right, we're going to put our, our brand spin on it by introducing matcha to that category and other Asian flavors. And yeah, we started showing it to like, you know, whole foods bar buyer. And they were like, all right. Yeah.

1 (1h 0m 15s):
Let's, let's try it out. Let's bring it in. So we went national in January, 2019 at a whole foods.

0 (1h 0m 21s):
They're all, they all have some kind of Asian influence there's lemon, matcha, as you mentioned, toasted coconut, obviously the almond cookie has one of those almond cookies that you sometimes get in Chinese restaurants. Right? Yeah. And then there's crazy rich chocolate.

1 (1h 0m 39s):
Yeah. Which we couldn't figure out how to make chocolate Asian, but this was right after crazy rich Asians came out and Andrew had this idea of like, why don't we just call it crazy rich chocolate because it's rich.

0 (1h 0m 50s):
So this bar does pretty well think by the end of 2019, apparently is one of the best-selling energy bars in whole foods.

1 (1h 0m 58s):
We were the best-selling bar at whole foods in 2019 in terms of like unit velocity. So units sold at per store per week. And we were just riding high because we launched this new thing. And it finally, we finally got something that like worked really well. All right.

0 (1h 1m 13s):
So this is great. You're doing well, you're this, I think in tweet, your sales are just really beginning to grow. Then COVID hits 2020, and energy bars are re you know, connected to, to gyms and working out. Did you start to see your sales take a hit?

3 (1h 1m 32s):
Yeah. Was pretty drastic. I think the data was about 50% drop in our category, sales pre and post COVID lunch. The thing was that dang bars was supposed to be like the biggest growth driver for our brand in 2020. Like it was like our shining star who was like supposed to be the driver for most of our growth, but became the driver of our decline for that year.

0 (1h 1m 58s):
Tell me what happened to the company as you guys have to do later.

3 (1h 2m 5s):
Yes. I, I think it was also, we were in a lot of with our coconut chips or rice chips, we were in a lot of corporate accounts. Yeah. Like we have this pretty fanatical backing at like Google and Facebook and a lot of those tech companies,

0 (1h 2m 19s):
These were snacks available at Google snacks

3 (1h 2m 20s):
Available for, you know, for free at those companies. And because of the state home, they, those sales dropped about 90% pre and post COVID. And even now they're not fully back. So what happens in our industry, probably in a lot of other industries is, you know, you start to have sales, declines. We couldn't raise money. Our burn rate was like, like $400,000 per month in the beginning. And we had to get to,

0 (1h 2m 47s):
So how long did it take you before you guys were able to maybe breathe a slight sigh of relief that you're going to be okay. Earlier

3 (1h 2m 55s):
This year we got to break. Even I've been, we've been like checking the number, like the first thing we do, like the beginning, it's just check, check a profitability, seeing where we're at. We got to break even after being from a 400 kid burn rate. And that's a huge sigh of relief for us because it's like, Hey, like the company isn't going to go under in a couple months, if we don't do anything about it, like we've built a bunch of runway from that. That was a big accomplishment. I ha I would say that we haven't exhaled because right after that we had these supply chain issues whereby our ocean freight containers have been delayed about seven weeks on average.

0 (1h 3m 38s):
Wow. Still to this day,

3 (1h 3m 40s):
To this day, to this day,

0 (1h 3m 41s):
You guys are now. Well, I think, I think you're now in an over 10,000 stores across the U S does that sound about right? Yeah, roughly and I I've noticed that the product everywhere, every time I go to a big grocery store, a small one, so you've got a brand out there. It's been a tough pandemic period for you for a variety of reasons, but she came out of it and battered and bruised, but you can have it and you're still fighting your way out of it. How are you feeling about the next 12 to 18 months?

3 (1h 4m 14s):
I am a little bit more cautious. I've always been more cautious, always. Like it's not just thinking about those containers coming in and what that's impacting our profitability. I think it's just been hard because we've been through so much, especially in the last couple of years that I think I do feel a little bit battered. Yeah. But I do believe in what we've built and what we stand for.

0 (1h 4m 34s):
What about the relationship between the two of you? Because I understand that there was a point where the, both of you had to go talk to not had to, but chose to, to talk to a therapist together or maybe separately. I'm not sure. Cause there was some tension between the two of you. What w two, what was the tension?

3 (1h 4m 54s):
I think he kind of stemmed from me. I, our parents had a pretty hard breakup. Yeah. And I didn't really process any of that until I started going to therapy. And it's interesting because I think a lot of people, I mean, I've heard your podcast, a lot of there's people that talk about like how like in a partner and a co-founder relationship, it's important to get a coach. I think for my specific situation with Vincent, like it was important for me to get a therapist because what would happen was that a lot of tension would come up with my brother. Like I remember getting really, really angry at him when he wasn't being defensive with me, like up against like a sales broker that we were working with.

3 (1h 5m 39s):
And I remember getting really, really, really angry at him. And it definitely caused rifts in our relationship. Yeah.

1 (1h 5m 47s):
I think it's funny. I'm the older brother, but Andrew's always kind of been a protector. And for that, I'm very, very grateful, but I also feel like, you know, some of that, you know, typically as an older brother, like that could be a role for an older brother. And if I, I wasn't able to do that for him, like at a time where he needed it. Right. And for me, you know, whenever we had these conflicts and you know, Andrew would get upset, I like closed up. I felt like I couldn't think straight. And it wasn't, I just didn't feel safe. And so one of those things that we had to work on was how do we manage conflict? And then how do we both feel safe in order to resolve it and to move forward?

3 (1h 6m 31s):
You know, Vincent, we don't really talk about this, but like, I feel like we're closer. I feel like we're closer now than we've ever been before.

1 (1h 6m 38s):
I agree with that, I feel like we've gone through a lot together.

3 (1h 6m 41s):
Like it's kind of like, we gone through that. And, and like we, we mentioned earlier that like, we were very, very cooperative and I think there was this, all this stuff that wasn't processed. And then when, when you get into a startup with someone as their partner, you're like literally spending 40, 50, 60 hours together. And it almost forced us to untangle this stuff more intensely. And I think we've come through in the other side. And I think like our friendship and our bond has never been stronger.

0 (1h 7m 13s):
This is a complicated moment to ask this question, but you know, the question coming, how much of, of where you are today, do you think it has to do with, with luck? How much would you attribute to just the grind of what you and the work you put in?

1 (1h 7m 27s):
I would say a ton of our early success was attributed to luck. For example, the timing of coconut chips. If we had waited another year to launch coconut chips, it would have been too late. And if we had gone earlier, it would have been too early. So we launched right at the right year and then getting on the radar of retailers and influencers. Like we didn't know that was going to happen. That, that, that was lucky. Also launching at a time where coconut was on trend. Like that was lucky, but more recently, you know, we have more to lose if we make mistakes. So we have to put forth the effort to ensure that we're successful. So we test products many times before putting them out in the world because you only have one chance to earn a customer. They don't give you a second chance,

3 (1h 8m 9s):
Andrew. And my response would be in line with that. I'd say 70, 30 luck effort in the early years. And more recently, it's been seven days 30 effort.

0 (1h 8m 21s):
And would you like to reverse that again? Yeah. In the last

3 (1h 8m 25s):
That's only you pay such good attention. Yes.

0 (1h 8m 29s):
But she you'll take the luck. You'll take the luck.

3 (1h 8m 32s):
Oh, I think the luck when it comes,

0 (1h 8m 35s):
That's Andrew and Vincent kitty rusher guard, brothers and co-founders of dang foods by the way, influencers aren't always so influential back in 2019, the brothers released a seaweed flavored rice chip within weeks, the unofficial mayor of Twitter, herself, Chrissy Tiegen posted a photo of those chips with her personal endorsement, Nikita rusher garden brothers couldn't believe their luck. One of the biggest influencers out there loved them. And yet even Chrissy Teagan's love wasn't enough. The seaweed chips never took off and were discontinued, but it's all part of, dangs try lots of things out and fail fast strategy.

0 (1h 9m 21s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week, please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded. If you want to contact us. Our email address is H ibt@npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this in minus at guy Roz. Our Instagram account is at how I built this NPR and mine is at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by Liz Metzker with music composed by REM teen era bluey. It was edited by Casey Herman with research help from Claire Marie Shima. Our production staff also includes Neeva grant, fairer safari, JC Howard, Julia Carney, Carrie Thompson, Elaine coats and Harrison BJ Choi.

0 (1h 10m 1s):
Our intern is Margaret Serena. Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Ross, and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.

8 (1h 10m 21s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, Yogi tea, uplift your spirit with Yogi sweet Tangerine, positive energy tea blended with energizing Yerba latte and bright and delightful Tangerine support your wellbeing with Yogi tea.