1 (0s):
Hey and happy New Year, everyone. Okay, now just for a moment think of yourself at the age of say 21 or 22. Maybe you're just out of college or you're in the first few months of a new job. You've got a roommate or two. You're trying to save a bit of money. Whatever. Okay now think about Michael Dell at the age of 21. He was already running a company that was making like 60 million dollars a year, which every time I say this just still seems crazy to me. I mean 21 years old. Sixty million dollars and that was just the beginning for Dell computers this story of how Michael built his company. It's a kind of thing that makes you feel like almost anything is possible this episode first ran in January of 2018,

2 (48s):
you know here I am supposed to be going to college and I've got this thriving business in my dorm room. I was buying computers and suping them up with more, you know. Bility and then reselling them so I advertised I bid on state

1 (1m 7s):
contracts. How did you learn to do all that?

2 (1m 10s):
You know, I don't really remember how I figure that out, but I somehow figured it

1 (1m 13s):
out from NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built I'm guy rosin on the show today how a college freshman turned a dorm room side hustle into Del one of the biggest computer makers in the world. Long before anyone heard of the tech wunderkinds like Mark Zuckerberg or Evan Spiegel or Katrina Lake back before it was fashionable to drop out of college to pursue your startup, even before people use the term startup back in the ancient days of the 1980s the dorm room Miracle story you'd have heard of was Michael Dell's now today.

1 (2m 13s):
The company is enormous. It's beyond enormous worth billions of dollars. Dell has sold more than 650 million computers since Michael Dell founded it in 1984. And what's amazing about this isn't the money it's not even the idea. What's amazing about all this is? Well Michael Dell because he's not a back-slapping sales guy. He doesn't come across as particularly charismatic. He's actually on the quiet side. Maybe even a little shy Michael grew up in Houston in the 1970s. This was Just as digital technology was taking off in that City with companies like Texas Instruments.

1 (2m 53s):
And then later Compaq. His dad was a doctor his mom was a Financial Consultant. And the expectation was that Michael would become a doctor like his dad. But even from a young age Michael Dell felt pulled in a different direction. He was into

2 (3m 10s):
numbers. The I remember when I was a small child. My dad had this adding machine is a Victor adding machine. This is before the Trying to calculator and I was just fascinated that you could add up numbers with this machine and really big numbers right now. It's and so and it would just end it would make this like mesmerizing sound every time it did it and I just kind of love that and then I remember when I was about 7 or 8 years old. I bought a calculator it was at the first semiconductor-based calculators and I was fascinated that this small machine could do complicated math problems.

2 (3m 52s):
So yeah, I got I got very interested in this stuff. It also turned out that about equidistant between my junior high school and our house. There was a RadioShack store. And so when I was riding my bike home, I could stop by the RadioShack store and see the, you know early forms of the of the personal computer and hang out there until they kick me out of the Store and what are you

1 (4m 20s):
you know, like kind of entrepreneurial as a kid?

2 (4m 22s):
Yeah, I kind of liked business and I had all kinds of businesses, you know selling baseball cards had a Stamp Auction. I got a job at a gold coin and jewelry store and I was to negotiate with people that were selling things and buy those things. The lowest possible price because the owner gave me a percentage of the

1 (4m 52s):
cut and I read that you also worked for the local paper for some time.

2 (4m 56s):
Yeah, so I got this job working for the Houston Post newspaper. It doesn't exist anymore. Now, they think they combined with user Chronicle and my job along with hundreds of other mostly, you know teenagers was to call random people on the phone and try to All them subscription to the Houston Post newspaper, right and I observed three things. The first thing I observed is that if you sounded like the people you were talking to they were much more likely to buy the newspaper from you

1 (5m 32s):
like like you you put on a text like a heavy Texas accent.

2 (5m 36s):
Yeah. I'm not going to do it for you here, but I think you can you can use your imagination. Okay. So second thing I observed was that people that were getting married were much. More likely to buy the newspaper. And then the third thing I observed is that people that were moving into a new house or residence? We're also far more likely to buy the

1 (5m 59s):
newspaper. Well, how did you know who is getting married and who is moving

2 (6m 3s):
in? Well, you talk to him you strike up a

1 (6m 5s):
conversation you just call people and say and ask them about themselves. I guess. This is like at that time people were perfectly happy to tell strangers personal details,

2 (6m 14s):
right? Yeah, so I observed this and I figured out is that in Texas when you as this is true in many states when you want to get a marriage license, you have to go to the county courthouse. Ah, it turns out this is public information, right and among the information that you give to the county court is the address that you want the license sent to so with this information. I devised a direct mail program where I sent letters to all of the people that had applied for marriage licenses in a 16 County area surrounding Harris County, which is where Euston Texas is and I hired a bunch of my high school Pals to go out to all these County courthouses and type the names into small apple to computers and I sent you know massive Direct Mail.

2 (7m 18s):
In to all those people that were applying to get marriage licenses, huh? And there were also at that time in Houston. There was a building boom and there were these very large apartment and condominium complexes that were going up and so I would go to these buildings under construction and sort of figure out who was in charge and say hey, I'm from the Houston Post newspaper and you know, we've got this great offer where your new Residents can get the paper free for two weeks. And all you do is fill out this little

1 (7m 52s):
form. You are a high school student when you're doing this. Yes, how much money did you walk away with?

2 (7m 57s):
I think I was about 17 years old and I made a little over 18 thousand dollars that

1 (8m 3s):
year. This is like freakishly precocious of a of a high school senior. Like that's it's just weird that you would even know to think of doing those things. I mean, don't don't you think I didn't really think about it

2 (8m 15s):
like that. I just did just seemed like Like a good idea. So I was pursuing it and it was working. I did plenty of things that didn't work. But that worked so I kept doing it

1 (8m 28s):
$18,000. What did you do with that money? I mean that must have been more money than you'd ever seen in your life.

2 (8m 35s):
I bought a BMW as I wanted. I wanted to BMW. What did the other students

1 (8m 43s):
think of you did what did you have this reputation as like at the business? Whiz kid in In high school or like what did they think about

2 (8m 51s):
you? You know, I don't really know and I didn't really care so I was sort of keeping to myself and you know, I had a few friends but I wasn't the most social of kids

1 (9m 5s):
but you must have been somewhat social because you were going out and selling stuff to

2 (9m 10s):
strangers sure social enough to make the sale. Yeah.

1 (9m 15s):
So you were on the one hand doing this entrepreneurial stuff and then I You were also just really into computers.

2 (9m 21s):
Yeah, you know the original computer that I got my hands on at home was the same one everybody else had which was the Apple to

1 (9m 31s):
the Apple II. Yeah.

2 (9m 32s):
Yeah and one of the beautiful things about the Apple II was that all of the circuits were discrete circuits that you could understand so you could go in and start to you know, play with those and modify them and reprogram the BIOS and upgrade the system and take it apart put it back together. So and something happened here around 1981 IBM introduced the IBM PC and that was sort of a very important moment because if you dial back the clock to the late 70s and early 80s, you know this company IBM had a leadership.

2 (10m 18s):
Of the part of the economy referred to as information technology unlike any other company at any other time in history. Yeah, they were by far the dominant company. So when IBM introduced the IBM PC this to me seemed to be a very important moment, so I try to understand everything that was going on about that. And so when you took apart this IBM PC that was selling for about $3,000 is As far as I could tell it was about six hundred dollars worth of

1 (10m 51s):
Parts. Wait, you bought one and you took it apart just to check the insides out. Sure. Yeah, what else

2 (10m 57s):
would you do? So yeah, you got you got to take it apart. How can you understand it if you don't take it

1 (11m 5s):
apart, but like most people buy computers to like, you know, at that time, I guess to do basic, you know, accounting and word processing you bought it to take it

2 (11m 12s):
apart. Well, I wanted to understand it and you know to understand it you have It apart, huh? And I remember in 1981. I was 16 years old. I had just gotten my driver's license and they had this thing called the national computer conference in the Astrodome in Houston. And I you know soon as I got out of school, I would rush over there and they had all of the computer companies of note in the world in the Astrodome and they were showing off their computer Chrome. Owen and that's

1 (11m 48s):
amazing coincidence because you went to that convention which happened to take place in Houston that

2 (11m 54s):
years happened to be in Houston that year and it just happened to occur like a couple of months after I got my driver's license. Yeah. So yeah, I mean there's there's definitely some

1 (12m 4s):
luck involved here, right and that convention not only were you there but Rod Canyon went there to who went on to start compact. I mean Compaq and Dell came out of that

2 (12m 16s):
convention. Yeah well and I remember in my chemistry class in high school. The guy sitting next to me was telling me that his dad had just left Texas Instruments to go start this new computer company and you know, he was one of the early guys that

1 (12m 37s):
Compaq something amazing. So you see you obviously you graduate high school and then you go to university to UT Austin, right?

2 (12m 47s):
Yes, I was there. A pre-med major and you know some of this was the programming from my parents because my father was a doctor my older brother was a doctor and I always thought I'd be a doctor and and when I started going to school, you know, my parents weren't around all the time, right because I'm in Austin there Euston and you're pretty far away. So you got a lot of free time on your hands. So I start Exploring this whole computer thing further and one of the things that I noticed about the computer business was that it was very inefficient.

2 (13m 29s):
It took a really long time for the technology to get from the people that made it to the people that were buying it and it was actually rather expensive and slow to occur and to me that was sort of frustrating.

1 (13m 44s):
So you are a you're a student at UT you're Supposed to be doing pre-med training, right and you start to think hey the PC market like there's an opportunity here. Is that what what you start to

2 (13m 56s):
think so I was in this mode of buying computers and souping them up with more, you know capability and then reselling them and it was just sort of a fun thing to do way to make some money. I love the computers. It was actually working. Not great. What would you do you would go and find

1 (14m 21s):
like secondhand computers and take them apart and rebuild them and then sell them to

2 (14m 27s):
people no. No, I was buying new computers. Okay, and I would upgrade them with more memory and actually the main business became putting hard drives in those machines so back then the original IBM personal computers had no hard disk drives. So what I would do Ooh is I would buy a couple of these disk drives and by a controller card write some software and make some cables and make a hard disk drive system that you would put inside an IBM computer and then instead of 260 K or 320k floppy disk drives.

2 (15m 7s):
It would have a 10 megabyte hard drive right which at the time was something amazing, right? Yeah sounds ridiculous today, but 10 megabytes then was that was like

1 (15m 18s):
Unbelievable. How long would it take you to upgrade one computer? For

2 (15m 22s):
example? Oh didn't take that long, you know depending on what you were doing, maybe 30 minutes 45 minutes something like

1 (15m 31s):
that. So you can say you could do a bunch of computers everyday. Oh

2 (15m 34s):
sure. Yeah, no problem in between classes,

1 (15m 36s):
but you really weren't studying you weren't there's no way you were doing your schoolwork.

2 (15m 41s):
I was I was definitely slacking off on the schoolwork during that time. Yes,

1 (15m 45s):
but who would you I mean, how did you Customers there was no Craigslist. It was no, I mean you were 18 or 19 years old, I guess. I mean, how did you even know who to sell these to

2 (15m 57s):
I advertised in the in the local newspaper? I bid on state contracts and it's kind of funny the the state office that was responsible for buying computer equipment and everything else was about three or four blocks from my dorm room, so I could just like walk over there and they would give you all the The dockets for all the things that the state wanted to

1 (16m 21s):
buy. How did you even know how to do that? You know? I don't

2 (16m 25s):
really remember how I figured that out, but I somehow figured it out and you know, but my my biggest customers were universities in the area doctors lawyers Architects things like that students weren't really buying computers at the time and most of the students that I knew they weren't. We interested in computers at the time that sounds like crazy right now. But this is back in 1983 and 1984 there weren't very many people that had personal computers at the time.

1 (17m 0s):
Okay. I am hoping that I don't sound like a broken record, but I'm just I'm just thinking Michael like here you are you are an 18 year old kid. I mean you probably looked like a baby and you were going around Hawking computer. So like why would these architects? For businessmen are lawyers have taken you

2 (17m 20s):
seriously. Well, I guess they figured I do what I was talking about. Nobody ever said, well, I'm not going to buy from you because you don't look the part or something. So I think the early adopters of computers were sufficiently Technical and geeky that I was able to relate to them in a way that that resonated and so I didn't have any

1 (17m 45s):
problem and how much money were you making at the

2 (17m 48s):
I was doing about 50 to 80 thousand dollars a month. Wow, in business when I was in my dorm room

1 (17m 57s):
that I mean, that's just an insane amount of money. I mean, did you tell your parents that you were that you were making this much money?

2 (18m 7s):
No. No. I didn't now that you know, they they eventually going back to late 83, you know, they became very upset with me. And said, you have to stop this and focus on your studies. You got to get your priorities straight. You know, what are you doing with your life and all that stuff and you know, I agree to do that, you know, it was like going cold turkey or something. It just lasted about 10 days and I actually realized that this was more than a hobby or a nice way to make some extra cash on the side while I was going to school but Lee something I was very passionate about so during those 10 days.

2 (18m 51s):
I sort of mapped out, you know, the beginnings of how I was going to you know, finish up my freshman year, but then launched this as a real official business and you know, I eventually made a deal with my parents that if it worked out I would continue and if it did not go back to school.

1 (19m 12s):
I mean, it's I can just imagine how exciting it was you're 18 and You're selling you're starting a company basically without even realizing it I guess what was it? That was more exciting was it all this money that was coming in or was it just that you were just selling a bunch of

2 (19m 28s):
computers? Well, it was probably a whole a little bit of everything. I mean the opportunity for you know, what became Dell computer Corporation was more and more apparent and you know while you couldn't see out three or four years, you know, you can see far enough. Out that you know, you keep going

1 (19m 51s):
so you were I guess for the first couple of years or the at least for the first two years you were just buying off-the-shelf computers and making them better.

2 (19m 59s):
That's right. You know what we started upgrading other people's computers and then we started making these hard disk drive upgrade kits that became the main business of the company selling hard disk drive subsystems and memory kits to upgrade the computer when

1 (20m 17s):
you Say Michael when you say we who were the we and you started this by yourself in your dorm room. And then who did you bring on to help you?

2 (20m 26s):
Well, always say we because that makes it sound like there's more of us, but what I started don't we was just me, but I hired about one person a week every week, you know for the first year or so and then it became more and more. Yeah, and remember one time. We had this customer who wanted to come visit. It was Martin Marietta, which is now part of some much bigger company and the guy wanted to buy like a hundred and fifty of these kits which was you know for us at pretty enormous order and he wanted to come to Austin and see our Factory right operations.

2 (21m 7s):
Yeah, and so this was a little bit scary because it's sort of look like a massive dorm room, you know, there's it was it wasn't the most put together. Lace, this is this is

1 (21m 19s):
not an actual dorm room. Right like you you had by this point rented out an office

2 (21m 23s):
space. Yeah. Yeah, we're growing quickly. And so we you know, we tried to clean this space up and put on some semi respectable business attire. Yeah, so the guys going through and we're showing him here's how we format the hard drives and here's how we ensure the quality controls and we're sure we can beat your demand for this order. Units and he says what are those and I said, well, those are the computers that we have to format the hard drives and by this time we had actually been assembling our own computers just to format the hard drives kiss it became too expensive to buy them from other people and he said well, why don't you sell those and I was like, oh that's a great idea.

2 (22m 15s):
I should have thought of that we were So busy making these hard disk drive kits that we hadn't really thought to make our own computers

1 (22m 26s):
when we come back in just a moment how that idea launched Michael down a path. That would make Del one of the biggest computer companies in the world. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible first to Squarespace. The website builder dedicated to providing customers with easy-to-use professionally designed templates join the millions of graphic designers Architects lawyers and other professionals using square space to promote their business visit squarespace.com NPR for a free 14-day trial and when you're ready to launch use the offer code NPR to save 10% off.

2 (23m 18s):
First

1 (23m 18s):
purchase of a website or domain thanks also to First Republic Bank whose first and only business is client service. They work with you to create customized Financial Solutions that support your unique needs and goals reach out today and you'll be connected with a dedicated Banker who will always be your first point of contact with the bank because they understand your total Financial picture. They can recommend the services and products that are right for you or your business to learn more visit First Republic Dot. cam Mary Supply Here host of shortwave the daily science podcast from NPR listen for new discoveries every day Mysteries and the science behind the headlines all in about 10 minutes every weekday.

1 (24m 4s):
It's a great addition to your daily listening whether you're a science nerd or you know, just a little science curious subscribe now to shortwave from

2 (24m 12s):
NPR.

1 (24m 19s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So normally at this point in the show, we start to talk about the slow and steady growth of a business and the early struggles and all the hard work that went into getting it off the ground. But in the mid-1980s pretty soon after Michael hired his first Engineers to start making the first Dell computers from scratch. They were selling so many computers so fast. Italy started to compete with the biggest name in Computing

2 (24m 51s):
IBM IBM at the time had a six megahertz 286 computer that they sold for $3,995. Yeah. So we introduced a 12 Mega Hertz 286 base computer and we sold it for 1995 dollars, huh? So our computer was twice as fast and was half the price.

1 (25m 17s):
How are you able to do that what we still made a

2 (25m 19s):
decent margin selling them and I think one is we had some clever engineers and we had this great supply chain that we created. And so when we would sell let's say 200 computers in a day, you know, we would give that signal back to our suppliers who would everyday or every few hours deliver parts. To our Factory. Yeah, and then we would you know ship those computers out to the customer. So we had a unbelievably efficient supply chain that we created out of necessity because we had no Capital that also meant that we had the freshest Parts at the best cost and as the cost of the materials were coming down we benefited from that and we could get the latest technology to the customer faster than anybody else and you didn't you you are

1 (26m 15s):
direct to Mercy company you didn't retail shops were not selling Dell computers, right? You had to call Dell or fax tell and order a computer

2 (26m 24s):
at the time. That's right, except most of our business wasn't to Consumer it was to business. It was two businesses, right? But that's what you just said is actually a common misperception. A lot of people thought. Oh only consumers buy from Dell. Yeah, that's actually not what was happening. We were selling to all sorts of companies and governments and small and medium-sized businesses. That was most of our business even from the

1 (26m 49s):
beginning and at that point like the late eighties. What did you have in mind for the future? Like what was what were your Ambitions for the company?

2 (26m 59s):
Well, we had some pretty big aspirations. The first one was we said we want to expand globally. It was pretty clear to us that you know, if you were only successful the United States, that wouldn't be good enough. The second was that we had to go after selling to big companies because if you didn't sell to the really big companies and the biggest governments in the world. Well, you weren't going to be irrelevant company. Yeah, and then the third one was we said we had to differentiate on the basis of service and we created this thing called on-site service and today would be a very common thing but Back then, you know if your computer broke you had to put it in the trunk of your car take it back to the computer store and then they would take it and then they ship it off somewhere you'd wait weeks and weeks and you supposedly get it back.

2 (27m 60s):
And so we came up with this program where you you know, call us on the phone since before the internet and if you had a problem we'd help you resolve it on the phone and if we weren't able to resolve it on the phone, we send a technician. Mission with parts to your location to fix your computer on site and we did that all across the United States and you know, we thought the minute we announced this our sales will double you know, because it was like so much better than what we were doing before and they didn't double instantly but after about three months a double so

1 (28m 35s):
well, I want to I want to put this into perspective because you know, we think about like really young entrepreneurs and we think Many people think Mark Zuckerberg or the guys who made Instagram. You are 21 years old. I mean you're that time Dell was already doing like multiple like what ten twenty Thirty million dollars in sales a year.

2 (29m 1s):
I think it was 66 million that that year. I was 21

1 (29m 5s):
66 million dollars. I mean just for a moment, you know have an out-of-body experience for a moment and don't think about you but think about this 21 year old. Named Michael Dell who's running a 66 million dollar company. I mean it is unbelievable. Right? I mean, it's almost impossible to imagine that that

2 (29m 26s):
happening. Yeah, certainly some but I was more focused on the future and thinking about how do we become three times larger or ten times larger? What new products are we going to launch into do we have the right Talent? How do we expand and You know get more sales people and

1 (29m 48s):
what was your lifestyle like at that time? I mean did it change where you still living like a 21 year old or all of a sudden did you start did you buy a giant mansion and kind of the change the way you

2 (29m 59s):
lived? You know, I wouldn't say massive changes. I did buy a nice house. I wasn't, you know wanting for things but I didn't really have a lot of time to consume things and wasn't really Focused on

1 (30m 16s):
that. I mean, it sounds like you were so busy that you were just your whole everything that you were doing was this was this job? And I mean, I'm assuming you didn't even have a personal life at that time. Probably you were just working all the time.

2 (30m 28s):
Yeah. That's a that's a valid assumption. I did a couple years later, you know take a little time off and you know managed to find a fantastic partner and get married again and you know have kids and all that. It's been an amazing part of my life and I was actually motivated to do this in part by Steve Jobs and Bill Gates. Really? Yeah, and the reason I was motivated to do it because of them was because they were not married, huh, and they were about 10 years older than I was and having had the experience that I had as a child with my family.

2 (31m 11s):
That's what I wanted. I wanted that family. I wanted that experience and I didn't want to be a single guy in his 30s or beyond that didn't have that

1 (31m 25s):
what would stress you out at that time? Because it seems like you're so even-keeled that you don't actually sound like you get stressed out, but I have to imagine there were things that would stress you out. Well, we

2 (31m 36s):
had plenty of stresses. I mean, I remember one time we got this letter from something called the Federal Communications. Commission the FCC and apparently, you know computers fall under something called the Federal Communications Commission Class B device, which means they have to be approved by the FCC. So I did not know this, you know, they basically said you have to stop making these things. Wow.

1 (32m 6s):
When was this?

2 (32m 7s):
This was back like in 86 87. So if we had followed their instructions, you know, we wouldn't Beyond this podcast today, so

1 (32m 17s):
yeah the business yeah.

2 (32m 18s):
Yeah, so fortunately I had some pretty smart, you know guys who sort of said well, what you need to do is call this lawyer in Washington and he's going to help you fix this so I called up this guy and he'd been one of the prior commissioners of the FCC and he said okay, here's what you need to do. You need to go down to this test range. You test your computer's immediately and you need to submit an application right away and Make sure they comply by the way and so we did all that and then he went to the FCC and said hey, you know, these guys are honest forthright people. They just didn't know and now they filed their application.

2 (32m 59s):
They want to do the right thing and here's what we're doing and we were able to work through it. So yeah, I mean in the first three four five years there were actually several things like that. And remember there was a thought at the time that oh, Oh, wow, IBM is going to take back this whole idea of the personal computer and it won't be an open ecosystem anymore. And you know, we could all you know, poof be out of business. Well, that didn't really materialize.

1 (33m 31s):
So you guys decide to go public I guess in 1988 you do an IPO and raise the tons of money and why did you why did you decide to do that? By the way? Because at that point you I guess owned the entire company.

2 (33m 45s):
Well, we needed the capital. We were growing at like 80 percent per year and you know, the company was only four years old and we were expanding into all sorts of new countries. We were expanding into new product line. Since you know, and we also wanted to be more of a pure with our customers and being a public company somewhat enable us to do that because customers could look and see that we were you know, a real legitimate company. Yeah, you know that that was helpful at the

1 (34m 18s):
time. Well, here's what I think it's harder to for lots of people to wrap their head around which is you were expanding by an order of magnitude every year you there was huge amount of Revenue coming in but yet that That wasn't enough cash and capital for you guys to

2 (34m 34s):
expand sure all the revenues not profit. We want to we weren't a software company. And so we did need some Capital to finance the the growth of the business and hire more people open new offices open new factories build, you know it systems, you know, we absolutely needed some

1 (34m 53s):
capital and by getting that money, were you able to say, okay now we're going to beat IBM we're going to be bigger than IBM

2 (34m 59s):
well, We definitely wanted to to be the biggest and I would say it changed a little bit in that timeframe to competing with Compaq and one of the things I think I learned along the way was that if you obsess on the competitors, you could be making a really bad mistake, huh? And I think you know that was definitely true in the case of those two in the sense that we had a better business model. And if we were trying to you know, just look at them. We would miss opportunities by not listening to our customers.

2 (35m 40s):
And how did we get from a company that started in a dorm room to having a half a billion dollars in sales. Well, we did it because we listened. Yeah and we learn

1 (35m 52s):
so I guess by the year 2000 and of 2000. So 2000 one Dell computers. ECS becomes a number one brand by sales by market share more than compact more than IBM. Yes. What did you do? Remember finding that out?

2 (36m 12s):
Yeah, you know, we sort of have this celebrate for a nanosecond, you know, sometimes a little longer but you know, we were focused on how do we keep growing? How do we expand into servers and storage and services and software and how do we solve? The next unsolved problems and 2001 we would have been thinking a lot about China and India and the emerging markets and yeah, so there wasn't a lot of dwelling on any particular

1 (36m 46s):
success. So I mean the company, you know, the story of Dell is just pretty remarkable because it seems like from the moment you started selling PCS out of your dorm room until 2001. It's just success after success. Success after success like there was no moment of failure. There was no there was no real struggle. Is that true? Is that is it

2 (37m 9s):
right? No, that's not right at all. There were plenty of struggles in certainly if you go back and look at the history there, you'll find all kinds of missteps along the way and dead ends and mistakes.

1 (37m 23s):
You know, what was the dumbest mistake you did you make because it doesn't I mean Michael I'm being honest with you. It doesn't sound like you made any mistakes. It sounds like you were. Preternaturally gifted as a high school kid to Now understand business and then you understood computers and then you just start of the successful company. So what was it? What was a mistake you made?

2 (37m 43s):
Okay. So 1989 we created something called Dell

1 (37m 49s):
Unix which was which was a

2 (37m 51s):
software. Yeah, you know this this was sort of prior to the whole Linux way. Yeah, and Unix was a well-used operating system. Um in mid-range computer systems, you know turns out we were really early at that and that was a that was a really bad idea that it was a kind of a horrible misadventure.

1 (38m 13s):
Okay cost the company money. Did it affect a stock price?

2 (38m 16s):
Sure. Yeah all that, you know around the same time. We also had a wildly ambitious engineering program that our team it cooked up and it was too big of a technical leap and the Project failed. There was a project called Olympic we had problems with our inventory control early on you know, we had all kinds of mistakes fortunately. None of them were fatal and one of the things I learned a long time ago, you know, when you find a problem fix it as fast as you find it and look when you're pioneering in a new area with a new business model.

2 (38m 57s):
There's no Playbook. There's no you know, you have to Just learn by doing and you have to into it and experiment your way through the problem.

1 (39m 8s):
I'm curious about 2004 because you'd step down as the CEO of Del. I mean the company is just it's a obviously a Fortune 500 company has been already for more than a decade huge revenues. Did you just think? Okay. I've made it. I'm 39 time to move on and start a different phase of my

2 (39m 27s):
life. Not really, you know, I didn't really think about it is stepping down. I Had this partner in the company Kevin Rollins who was the president of the company he and I were running the company together and I decided okay you be CEO for a while. I'll be chairman. I'll still be very involved and after about two years, you know, the industry started changing pretty rapidly and the board, you know came to me and said, you know, hey, we think you should go back to being

1 (39m 60s):
CEO. Yeah. Yeah, and I mean what what happened during that time because by all accounts that I've read there was a decline. I mean be 2004 Del starts to lose market share and then a couple years later HP becomes a number one PC seller and then you come back in 2007. So what was going on in those three

2 (40m 20s):
years? Well, I think the market was changing. I think there were new things starting to emerge the cloud what people call the cloud. A you know, we're starting to show up. I think we weren't being aggressive enough in changing the business given the shifts that were happening. Yeah, you know, it's a change or die business. It's a quicker dead business and the board asked me to come back into the CEO role and I was happy to do it.

1 (40m 52s):
But I've read that that like around that time the the quality in the service of Dell was was in Decline with the company was getting a lot of heat. And I'm sure you saw that criticism. So, how did you how did you deal with that?

2 (41m 7s):
Look I think I think you can in any anecdote, you know extrapolate but there were definitely some areas where we could have been investing more in Innovation. And we change the focus of the company starting around 2007 to understand what we needed to do to be, you know, an important and relevant. And Company in the future and so look I I felt then and feel now deep sense of responsibility and commitment to the company and I'll care about the company after I'm

1 (41m 43s):
dead. What does that mean? I'll care for the company after I'm dead.

2 (41m 47s):
It means that you know, this is a lifelong Pursuit for me in terms of you know, helping the company reach its full potential and certainly my dream is that the company persists well beyond my lifetime. Which you know still pretty young guy so that I think that's a many years away.

1 (42m 7s):
I wonder Michael how much of your success has to do with, you know, your hard work and your brains and you know intuition and how much of it is

2 (42m 17s):
luck. Good question. I don't really know. You know, I'm sure there's some you know element of luck there. I probably lucky a lot. You know, I feel like I was really lucky. To be born in the United States. That's probably the biggest Stroke of Luck right there because I think in the United States when you're 20 years old and you show up and you want to sell something to somebody, you know, they don't look at you too funny. So I think that was my biggest Stroke of Luck was just being born here in this country and having the opportunity in the freedoms that that's afforded me.

1 (42m 59s):
That's Michael Dell and if you still think of a computer as the nerdy John Hodgman character in those PC versus MAC commercials Dell computers have actually been used by the good guys in the Jason Bourne movies and Spider-Man Captain America. Even Mission Impossible. In fact a few years ago in 2016 Dell was the number one brand featured in movies more than Sony more than Mercedes Benz or Adidas. And yes more than Apple

2 (43m 25s):
Macs.

1 (43m 35s):
And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from one of our 2019 lead sponsors of how I built this hiscox who understands every small business is unique and Taylor's its policies to your business has very specific needs get a quote or purchase a policy at H is co x.com hiscox business insurance

2 (43m 60s):
experts.

1 (44m 3s):
Planet Money is the man who popularized recycling by making a deal with the mafia. It's the bedroom beats maker making hits for Drake and Nicki Minaj and the woman trying to get her money back from venmo planet money from NPR. Hey, thanks for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and today we're updating the story the first round about a year and a half ago about two sisters in Lynn, Massachusetts who had perfected a family recipe. I make the stuffings. That's Casey white and I make the dough and that's her sister Vanessa and the doe and the stuffing they are for pierogies was polish dumplings filled with cheese and potatoes.

1 (44m 44s):
Sometimes sausage their grandfather used to sell them at the family Deli in Western. It's and middle school. I would go there on Saturdays and help pinch pierogies. And and we always have them in our freezer kind of like our Kraft macaroni and cheese except they were we just had a frozen for a he's and when Vanessa and Casey went off to college their mom would bring them coolers full of pierogis from the deli. And by the time they graduated they were still eating them and their friends were to ensure they could get pierogies Trader Joe's or wherever but who wanted those there wasn't really anyone making pierogies. Like families to make and we finally said it was one of those ideas where you're like someone's definitely going to do this and then we realized after a while that no one was really don't maybe we should do it.

1 (45m 31s):
Maybe they should make pierogies and sell them. Okay. So at this point he was 2015 and Vanessa and Casey's grandfather was no longer alive, but he had written all of his recipes out by hand. So they went to the deli and they got them we brought them back to my house and Caked my table in flour and so began the Pierogi making for 10 hours every Sunday. Vanessa would do the dough and should be not too thick not too chewy and Casey would do the feelings. We started with three flavors potato and cheese the pineapple and cheese and sweet potato caramelized onion. Wait, I do not believe they grow pineapples in Poland.

1 (46m 13s):
It is very strange. Yes, definitely not something you would find back in the old country, but it actually Was one of their grandfather's recipes anyway, every weekend Casey and Vanessa would make the pierogies freeze them and then sell them at the farmers market in Melrose Massachusetts doctor first farmers market with about 50 boxes and sold out in an hour and realized that there was a market and one reason they were selling so fast, I think dumplings are the ultimate comfort food whether it's ravioli or its empanadas or its Asian dumplings. It's a very nostalgic food. So anyway all that Year Vanessa and case Would make and sell pierogies on the weekend and then go to their office job during the week, but there is a point where we had to go to the next step because we were just making only you know, we could only make so much in that that long 10-hour day.

1 (47m 2s):
We couldn't grow it unless we kind of took the leap of faith. So we quit our jobs and after taking that leap the sisters moved their pierogi operation from Vanessa's house to a commercial kitchen in Gloucester, Massachusetts. They hired a few people to help them make more pierogi. Keys, but Vanessa she is still doing the dough stretching it out running it through the dough sheeter, and then cutting those circles thousands of circles a day for the rest of our staff to fill in pinch Vanessa. And Casey called our company judge you pierogies charge you is the Polish word for grandfather. And since we last talked to them, they've shifted their business from retail to wholesale which means they're focusing on large Distributors, like stadiums and grocery stores.

1 (47m 46s):
In fact, they're about to launch in their first grocery stores. Next month with fingers crossed on a possible contract with a stadium coming up and by the way that pineapple and cheese stuffing they no longer make it apparently people don't like pineapple with their cheese. Like we went to Poland a few years back and neither of us a pineapple on any menu. If you want to learn more about Judge you pierogies head to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org. And of course if you want to tell us your story go to build npr.org. And thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe at Apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcast. And while you're there, please do give us a review.

1 (48m 28s):
You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or add guy Roz our show is produced this week by run Abdel fattah with music composed by rum team Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Canada slim Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers are in turn is Sequoia Carrillo. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to How I built this this is

2 (49m 4s):
NPR.