0 (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How I, Built This Early, and ad free Right. now join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts.

Pipedrive (10s):
This episode is brought to you by Pipedrive, the easy and effective CRM for closing more deals and driving small business growth New year. new Targets. Pipedrive allows you to automate your sales process so You can focus on your other business priorities. in 2024, With Pipedrive You can stay on top of your sales activities so you never miss a follow up. So, sign up today and get a special 60 day free trial now at Pipedrive dot com. With the code built terms and conditions apply.

Rocket Money (43s):
If I asked you how many subscriptions you have, would you be able to list all of them and how much you're paying? If you would've asked me this question before I started using Rocket Money, I would've said yes. But let me tell you, I would've been so wrong. I can't believe how many I had and all the money I was wasting. Rocket Money is a personal finance app that finds and cancels your unwanted subscriptions, monitors your spending, and helps lower your bills. Rocket Money has over 5 million users and has helped save its members and average of $720 a year with over 500 million in canceled subscriptions. Stop wasting money on things you don't use. Cancel your unwanted subscriptions by going to rocket money.com/ Wondery. That's rocket money.com/ Wondery rocket money.com/ Wondery.

Discover (1m 35s):
You know, in today's world, it seems the best treatment is reserved only for a few. Well, discover wants to change that by making everyone feel special. That's why with your Discover Card you have access to 24 7 live customer service as well as $0 fraud liability, which means you're never held responsible for unauthorized purchases. Finally, no matter who you are or where you are in life, you'll feel special with Discover. Learn more at discover.com/credit card limitations apply.

0 (2m 9s):
Hey, it's guy here. So our team is taking some well-deserved time off during the holidays. We'll be back in the new year with a bunch of brand new episodes of How I Built This and How I Built This Lab. And let me just say we have some great guests lined up for the coming months. I cannot wait for you to hear them, but in the meantime, we thought we'd bring you this episode that we first published back in March. It's a conversation with Wes and Allyson. Felix. You might recognize Allison's name because she's the most decorated American track and field athlete of all time, male or female. Allison's success as an athlete is incredible enough, but she and her brother also have an amazing story of how they built a shoe company called S that Designs shoes specifically for Women's Feet.

0 (2m 54s):
So stick around. You're gonna wanna hear this one for sure, and on with the show Hello. and welcome to How. I Built. This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. Allyson Felix is one of the greatest athletes of all time. In fact, she's the most decorated American track and field athlete in history. And yet when she ran in the Tokyo Olympics, she did so without a shoe sponsor. And it happened because her previous sponsor, Nike offered Allyson a contract that she felt was a low ball. And so Allyson decided to do something totally unconventional. She made her own shoe and she became the first Olympic athlete to run in a shoe that was her own brand.

0 (3m 37s):
The idea came from Allison's brother and business partner, Wes Felix. And now they turn that single idea into a shoe brand called s. It's a lifestyle and running shoe brand that is designed specifically for Women's Feet. And you might be wondering, wait, aren't all women's athletic shoes designed for women's feet? Well, the answer actually is no. And you'll hear why in a moment. Allyson and Wes both started track and field as teenagers and it wasn't long before their talent and effort led them to much bigger competitions. Wes, you were really the the first track star in your family. 'cause from what I, I understand Allyson, you didn't really start running track until you got to high school and and Wes, you went to u s C on a track scholarship, right?

2 (4m 23s):
I did, yeah. Yeah, I went to SC on a track scholarship and you know, Allyson and I always kind of joke that like it went from when we were younger, people would come up to her and be like, oh, you're Wes' sister. Right? And you know, and then real quick it like switched and it was like, you're Allison's brother. So it was something Allyson and I really were able to share together, yeah, this love for the sport, this, you know, this kind of passion to, to try to excel in it. She just, you know, a whole lot better.

0 (4m 54s):
Allyson you decided your senior year of high school to go pro, which I was, I guess was kind of controversial at the time because you were offered, obviously every school wanted you on their team and, and including u s C where Wes went. But you decided that you would sign a, a deal with Adidas and become a, a professional athlete and still eventually go to college and, and do your degree. But, but that was kind of like a, as I say, it was kind of a controversial decision at the time, right?

3 (5m 25s):
Definitely. It was something that in the US to my understanding, no one had done before. And so, you know, people had all their thoughts on it. I remember watching one of Wes' track meets, it was like the u s C UCLA dual meet and it was on tv. And so I am, I'm watching in the broadcast and somehow like my name comes up and they start talking about this decision. And if I go pro, it's the worst decision in the, in the history of high school athletics. And so it was just, a lot of people had different thoughts on it, but for our family it really came down to a timing thing. You know, Wes was at u s C and I understood like to be a collegiate athlete, like NCAAs came first.

3 (6m 10s):
You do all of the events, it's about points and all of those things. Yeah. And at this time the Olympics were gonna be the next year,

0 (6m 16s):
This is Athens 2004. Yeah.

3 (6m 19s):
Athens 2004. And so it was like, if I'm going to try to make that team, I'm really gonna need to focus in on one event peaking at the right time and giving myself the best shot. And so ultimately that was kind of the decision maker

0 (6m 32s):
And that was a 200 meters.

3 (6m 33s):
Exactly, yes.

0 (6m 35s):
So as a result of that, you would not, you were, you couldn't get a scholarship and compete at the collegiate level, but obviously you wanted to compete in the Olympics, which you, you did, you won a silver medal in 2004. And in this sort of parallel world, Wes, you are, you've got the successful career at u s C, pec 10 champ in the a hundred meter. I mean, but also it sounds like Wes you, you were also really focused on just college and getting a degree knowing that probably this was not gonna be your career.

2 (7m 7s):
Yeah, definitely. I like never thought about it as a career. I knew I wanted to work in sports and entertainment, wanted to, you know, do deals and didn't have this like full master plan of what that would look like. But at the time it was just, let me, let me run fast and work hard. And it was what was paying for college and, you know, and also like, I was running well, winning felt good, and my dad said, you know, if there's an opportunity to continue running, why would you not take that? You know, like school's gonna be there, your mind's gonna be there, but this opportunity to run professionally to go and sign a sponsorship deal, that's, that's only there for a little bit.

0 (7m 53s):
And you did, after you graduated, you did become a professional athlete for, for a few years and ran for Nike. I mean, it, it sounds like you were trying, I mean you were sort of the, there was a goal possibly that at least compete for the Olympic trials, but you, I guess you, there was a a, a detour that, that you took as a result of, of an illness, right?

2 (8m 14s):
Yeah, totally. I had a liver virus. I just was in practice and just felt really tired, couldn't hit times, you know, and my coach was kinda like, what's going on? You know? And I was like, I'm not sure. And he's like, are you getting your rest? Are you doing all the things? And I'm like, I'm doing all the things like nothing's changed and went to the doctor. And so we start the test and, and they run through and see like, yep, your liver enzyme levels, liver function levels are like off the charts. Something here is wrong. And probably a good six months of just in and out of the hospital constantly taking tests, liver biopsies.

2 (8m 54s):
But ultimately we got to a point where the doctor just said, you know, we're, we know that there's something wrong with your liver. We know that there is at at least a minimum a virus attacking your liver. We think that you need to stop competing. And so stopped competing and yeah, and I think in a lot of ways it was like, it was really hard, but it was probably the best, best gift I could have gotten.

0 (9m 18s):
Hmm. Meantime, Allyson, you became a student at u s C, and I guess you weren't on the track team, you were, you were a competing at the international level, but you weren't, you were, you were a student at u s C studying education.

3 (9m 33s):
Yeah, I was studying education. I was a normal student, but I was also a professional athlete at the same time. Wow. And I was, I was having a really tough time like my freshman year because the way that track and field works is the majority of your competitions are overseas. And so here I am, like, you know, in Switzerland racing and trying to explain to my professor why I need to take like a final on the road. And they're like, but you're not on the track team, you know? Yeah. So it was, that first year was really, really bumpy.

0 (10m 3s):
You would go to the Beijing Olympics and compete again, and, and once again, you won silver in the 200 meters. The, the team won gold in the relay. In meantime, Wes, you kind of knew that your career as a runner was over. And so what did you, what did you decide to do?

2 (10m 25s):
Yeah, I knew that I was really interested in, in business. And so I called one of my friends and I was like, Hey, I think I'm gonna start like a fake business. Like, I just wanna practice, like to just see like, what are the steps? How do I build it? Like what do we do? And, and he was like, yeah, that doesn't sound like a good idea. Like why don't you just actually start something? And I was like, yeah, I have no idea how to do that. And he was like, well, I think you could figure it out. And so I had this idea that was a online women's fitness email newsletter, and I like learned how to code and, you know, like took this idea and, and built this website and built out an email newsletter, subscription service.

2 (11m 8s):
And, but along the way, you know, I also was talking with Allyson and was just like, yeah, I don't know, I'm like kind of, I'm getting into this thing, like building this thing, but I've always wanted to, you know, do deals for athletes and what if we worked together? Like what would that be like? Yeah. And we started this conversation of, of just exploring it, you know, and what would that even mean? What would it look like? And I remember that, you know, Allyson had like her contract with Adidas and it was this really great deal, really, really incredible opportunity for her, a really big deal in the sport. But I looked at what she was making off the track, I was looking at, you know, those sponsorships that she had outside of Adidas.

2 (11m 51s):
And we kinda looked at each other and I was like, I think I can do that. I can go scrape up that much money. And I was like, in worst case, you know, then it doesn't work and you go back to, you know, a more traditional agent in the sport, but what if it does work and we get to do it together? And Wow. So I remember I wrote her a letter, and this was after our conversation, and we should look for this one day because it was probably so ridiculously formal trying to be professional at 25 years old and sent it over to her and said, you know, basically, dear Miss Allyson Felix, I think we can partner up and I think we can change the world a little bit.

2 (12m 31s):
And yeah, she was sweet enough to say, yeah, I think we can.

0 (12m 36s):
So you, you basically become your sister's agent at this point. Yes. And one of the cool things that you did, I think it's so important for anyone who, who's going into any field to think about doing exactly what you did, was you reached out to Serena Williams, agent Jill Smoller, you didn't know, you had no connection to, I guess you got to her over Facebook and you said, Hey, can I like hang out with you for a little bit of time just to learn from you? Yeah,

2 (13m 4s):
Completely. I, I thought there is a whole lot that I don't know, but I also knew that kind of this, this dream or vision that I had for my little sister was bigger than just what I had seen in track and field. And I thought, okay, if we could build any sort of business around a female athlete, who would I want her to be? And I was like, well, Serena. Yeah. You know, and, and I was like, well, who helps Serena do what Serena does? And looked it up and, and found Jill's name and got her phone number and called the office and got to her, her assistant and tried to set a meeting and couldn't get a meeting, couldn't get a meeting, couldn't get a meeting, right. And finally I was like, I'm just gonna try on Facebook.

2 (13m 44s):
And I had no idea if she would be on Facebook. And sure enough, she was sent her a message, she wrote me right back and she said, what are you doing? Why didn't you call my office? Set a meeting like a normal person. And I was like, I've been trying to get to you, like through your, through your office, it's not working. And she was like, all right, come in tomorrow. So I came in tomorrow and she's like, so what are we talking about? And I just pitched her what I thought Allyson could be and she said, I really like you and I really like this idea. And I think Allison's incredible. Let's do it.

0 (14m 15s):
Yeah. So what did that mean? I mean, 'cause being an agent, right? Like there's a certain kind of approach you have to take. And so how did you learn, what did you learn from her about how to do deals and how to represent Allyson the best way you could?

2 (14m 31s):
Yeah, totally. And I would say like, what Jill taught me right away was first humility. And she said, you know, there's gonna be days, you might be on a private plane with the CEO of some big company and there will be days you're gonna go and you're gonna run and you're gonna grab your client water. You need to be exceptional at both of them because the job is both. And she was like, you are never that important to not go and run and get the water. And I was like, okay. Wow. And it was, that was easy with my sister, right? Because like if she was thirsty, I wanted her to have water. But the other thing she said she taught me was how important information was. And she was like, A lot of people are gonna come to you with opportunities and that's great.

2 (15m 13s):
Yeah. She was like, you don't, you don't need me for that. What you don't know is how much other people are getting for that same opportunity. And when she said that, it fully clicked and my trust for her like grew even more. And people would come to me and they're like, you've got the biggest athlete in the sport. Why do you have this, this talent agency? Why are you doing that? You know, like the deals are gonna come to you, why would you split the commission there? And it was because somebody can come with a 10 cent offer, but it's really a dollar deal. And that's what Jill helped me with. Yeah. And I learned really quick, they saw Allison's brother and that was a, that was an opportunity to take advantage of us. And as soon as I brought Jill in, then it was, I've gotta get it together.

2 (15m 56s):
The numbers have to be right, it has to be fair. And so the issue wasn't could we get the deal or not? We could get the deal. We just couldn't get the deal for the right money. And Jill made sure the money was right.

0 (16m 8s):
Wow. Okay. So here you are, the two of you are building a business around Allyson and her incredible talent. And, and I guess shortly after launching your own agency and, and becoming Allison's agent Wes, you secured a new sponsorship deal for Allyson. So leaving Adidas, signing with Nike, and then two years later in 2012 Allyson, you get to the London Olympics, you finally win the gold in the 200 meters, which that must have been an incredible moment for you.

3 (16m 39s):
It was, it felt like such a long time coming. And when Wes and I started to work together, it was like this sense of relief because it was just like, okay, I can fully trust this person. I can put my head down and do what I need to do. And so I remember going into the London Olympics and obviously now the pressure is even more because it's like, I've tried this twice before, I don't wanna wait four more years to have another opportunity. And I just had this sense of calm, I remember like getting to the starting line and I looked back at, I log every workout, I write everything down, I remember like just going back over it and I was like, I'm ready.

3 (17m 20s):
Like if this is for me, it is going to happen because there's nothing else I could have done in preparation. And I remember just giving my all and then finally, you know, looking up to the scoreboard and seeing my name come up there. And it was just like, it was, I think the relief was bigger than the joy, if that makes sense. It was just, yeah. And I think I also had just built it up. Like I thought like once I got this gold medal, like everything was gonna change. Yeah. Like I just, this is what I've been like aiming for. And then I remember like coming home and being like, oh my gosh, I feel exactly the same.

3 (18m 2s):
Like what happened here? And I, I think the lesson in that was just really like, instead of just this one goal that I've been aiming for, like the beauty has been along the way. Yeah. Like that was the magic. And I had to just like look back and say like, the next time I have like a defeat or a failure, like I'm gonna Embrace it, I'm gonna, yeah. Like go, I get another opportunity. Like I'm just gonna have a different mindset.

0 (18m 30s):
Meantime, from a business perspective, what other things were you guys thinking about to kind of build out the business? Were you already thinking about, Hey, maybe we can do a line of apparel or maybe we can work with a beverage company? Were, were either of you thinking about starting something yourselves or was it mainly focusing on endorsements and partnerships?

2 (18m 51s):
Yeah, it was really focused on endorsements and partnerships. I think that like everything that we had seen was this like constant reminder that the individual athlete, it's not really about that. It's about the big brand that You can help sell their product. And the goal is have the best brands. Yeah. And if you have the best brands, then you'll have the best brand too. And so I remember us really focusing on, on the blue chip sponsors, you know, make sure you have Visa, Proctor and Gamble, Nike, Gatorade. Like these are the ones that if you partner with those companies, you know, they have a similar type of storytelling and that's what allows you to become Mia Ham, Serena Williams, Michael Jordan, it's the sponsors that do it.

2 (19m 45s):
Yeah. You know, and so it was this idea that like our job is work really hard. Allyson has to win on the track. I have to go find the sponsors and then make sure that there's a cohesive story. And if we do that, then you know, everything else like comes into focus and it all takes care of itself.

0 (20m 10s):
We're gonna take a quick break, but when we come back we'll hear more about Allison's Olympic T triumphs and the contract renewal offer from Nike that changed everything that's ahead in just a moment. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This lab.

ZipRecruiter (20m 28s):
Whether you are a small business owner growing your team, or an HR director hiring hundreds of people across the nation, you have one of the toughest jobs there is. But what if I were to tell you that there's something that can make your whole hiring process faster and easier? It's ZipRecruiter. And right now You can try it for free at ziprecruiter.com/built. Instead of you doing all the hiring work, ZipRecruiter works for you. Once you post your job on ZipRecruiter, it sends it to more than 100 job sites. So You can reach more of the right people. It'spowerful technology scans thousands of resumes to identify people whose skills and experience match your job hiring heroes. Let ZipRecruiter help make your job easier. Four out of five employers who post on ZipRecruiter get a quality candidate within the first day. See for yourself. Go to this exclusive web address to try ZipRecruiter four free ziprecruiter.com/built. Again, that's ziprecruiter.com/built. ZipRecruiter the smartest way to hire.

Chomps (21m 36s):
Okay, I'm a low carb type of person and so I have very little time often to eat snacks. But between juggling school dropoffs and sports practices and doing the show, I often grab a chomp snack stick. Chomps makes snacking simple. Each delicious Chomps meat stick has the protein your body needs over nine grams per stick. They're low carb, keto friendly, allergy friendly, and don't contain any fillers. Chomps are simply made with natural ingredients You can feel good about. With thousands of five star reviews, snackers around the world have satisfied their hunger cravings. With Chomps even better, You can order online and have them delivered straight to your door. Right now Chomps is offering our listeners 20% off your first order and free shipping when you go to chomps.com/built. Go to chomps.com/built for 20% off your first order and free shipping. That's C-H-O-M-P s.com/built. Don't forget to use R link so they know we sent you.

2 (22m 50s):
Welcome back to How I Built This Lab. My guests are Wes and Allyson.

0 (22m 53s):
Felix. Alright, so the two of you are building Allison's track career around sponsorships with, with big brands. And I guess this was sort of the typical playbook for an Olympic athlete and, and, and Allyson. You would go on in the real Olympics in 2016, I think to win a silver medal and two gold medals that year. And then the next year, 2017, you are up for renegotiation with Nike to renew your contract. And, and I guess they came back with a, a surprisingly low ball offer. What do you remember about that?

3 (23m 29s):
I remember when Wes called me and he told me what it was and the number was 70% less than what I had been making. And I remember just feeling like somebody had just like punched me. And at this point that World Championships that we just came off of, I think Wes, correct me if I'm wrong, I think I had become the most decorated athlete at world championship history. Yeah, that's right. Yeah. So it was like this moment of like a high, like we were celebrating like, this is great. Like for me, I had been happy at Nike and I was just like, okay, cool, I'm gonna sign, you know, this will be my last deal, I'm gonna end here.

3 (24m 9s):
Like, I didn't think yeah, anything more. So then when it came back it was just like, oh my gosh, they don't believe in me anymore. And for me, like that is just huge. Like, I tried to be a good partner, you know, go above and beyond whenever there was calls, you know? Sure. I remember getting a call like my 30th birthday that I had like planned for like a year and you know, I got a call like, well, can you be here like somewhere across the world? And I'm like, yeah, I guess I have to cancel my birthday party. You know, so it was just very hurtful. Yeah.

0 (24m 40s):
And at that point, as you mentioned, you had, you were the winningest track and field athlete in the world, like you'd won more medals at at world events, which is amazing. But this is a thing like, you know, it, it doesn't matter how, how often you go to the meetings and how often you show up at headquarters and how many times you say yes and, and, and all the people there who love you and work with you. Like at the end of the day, like it comes down to a renegotiation and none of that seems to matter and it's crazy, but it's, it's like how big corporations work.

3 (25m 13s):
Yeah. And I think that's, you know, that like you said, that's how it works. And I was like, okay, I guess I'm at that age where, you know, it's up and it's, you know, it doesn't matter that my performance hasn't gone down. It's just like, this is what happens at this time period and it's business. And I Okay. But then at the same time I had been putting off like my real life stuff that I wanted to do. Yeah. Because I was like, well, you know, my job is to win medals, I have to be focused on this. And so that's when all of that shifted and I was like, okay, well if they're offering me this, they think I'm done. I've been waiting to like, you know, I, I wanna have a family, like do all these things.

3 (25m 57s):
I, I've just, why am I waiting any longer?

0 (25m 60s):
Yeah. So you ran unsponsored because you were in these negotiations with Nike that would last about a year and a half, but meantime you became, you, you were married and became pregnant with your, with your first child and you were worried about anyone finding out that you were pregnant while you were training, so you would train in the dark to hide your, your baby bump.

3 (26m 27s):
Yeah, so this was like something that had happened in track and field and I was naive to it, you know, when I was younger, you know, I'd been in the sport since I was a teenager and I kind of heard whispers and saw different things. And then as I got older I really understood what it was. But women really struggled through pregnancy and motherhood and track and field. And so what they would do is if they were like in between contracts, like I was, they would hide their pregnancies, they would sign new deals and then they would carry on, or contracts would be paused, athletes would be reduced. Yeah. And so there was just like all of this struggle that would happen.

3 (27m 8s):
And so I was just, I had so much fear around Because

0 (27m 12s):
You were still negotiating with Nike in the hopes of resolving this.

3 (27m 15s):
Yes. It was the worst timing ever. And I told Wes, I was like, I've been the best client up until now. I'm now I'm making life really hard for you. And so even where we started off those negotiations, we didn't have anything on paper yet. So the fear really was that even that 70% less would be taken away once they found out that I was pregnant. So that's when I started to say like, okay, I'm just gonna do what everybody else has done until I'm ready to see something on paper and disclose my pregnancy. And so I trained at four o'clock in the morning when it was dark. Wow. I went on for a time period where I was competing and I was pregnant and nobody knew I wore baggy clothes.

3 (28m 2s):
I rarely left the house like this whole time period that like I had dreamed about and that I was so excited about that should have been celebrated, ended up being the most isolating, dark and lonely and just really difficult time period in my life.

0 (28m 22s):
You also had preeclampsia, which I'm very familiar with. 'cause we, my my wife also had it our with our first child. And so you gave birth at 32 weeks to Cameron, to your daughter.

3 (28m 36s):
Yeah. I mean it was crazy. And being an athlete, I think I took my health for granted. I just never imagined I would be in that scenario. And there was points where, you know, when I called my family, you know, they weren't sure if what they were coming for, you know, were they coming because I wasn't going to make it. Were they coming, you know, to meet granddaughter, niece? Like, it just, it was very scary. Yeah. And, and then I think it just made everything feel so heavy because we were going through still this just brutal renegotiations and then this like real life event happens where it's like, does any of this even matter?

3 (29m 18s):
You know? Yeah. I just want my daughter to survive. I wanna be able to leave the hospital. And it was just, it just felt like too much. And in my mind I had this like plan before any of this happened. I was like, okay, I am gonna have this baby. I'm going to come back in four weeks. I am going to train. Like this is what I know how to do. I'm just gonna get it done. And then everything went out of the window. I, it, it took much longer than I could have ever imagined. And I remember my first workout back, my coach, he gave me a treadmill workout that was a 30 minute walk. And by the end I am just crying because I just, I can't fathom how am I going to compete with the world's greatest and I cannot even get through a walk.

3 (30m 7s):
Wow. And so it was a very humbling beginning to the journey back.

0 (30m 14s):
You are still in negotiations with Nike in 2019. Wes is, you are very much involved with these conversations with Nike and I guess they're, they're not budging, they're not going anywhere. Right? Wes, what do you remember about Nike? Nike just wouldn't move on their offer.

2 (30m 32s):
No, they weren't, they weren't moving, you know, and I think that one of the things that I would always try to do is let me put myself in their position. How would I look at this if I had their job instead of mine? And it was, you know, You can do what feels right and fair or You can potentially get a top athlete for a whole lot less. It wasn't that they didn't think she deserved more money or that they didn't have more money to give her. It was on their end a smart business decision. They looked at her age and said, you know, even if she goes and she can win more medals, she's got four more years left. Is another company gonna spend this kind of money and then also try to rebrand her?

2 (31m 17s):
No, we don't think so. And there was an angle of this where we started to really fight for maternal protection. And it was because we said to them, you know, you're already offering her 70% less. We were able to get it from 70% less to 60% less. So clearly You can see how great my negotiating skills were. So we get it to 60% less, you know, and then we go through this process of, you know, disclosing the pregnancy to them. And for us it was really important that we had the offer on paper. We wanted that in writing, but we were never, for us just morally, we felt like it wasn't right to sign that contract without telling them that she was pregnant.

2 (32m 0s):
And if they decide they don't want you because you're pregnant after they already offered you a contract, then they can deal with whatever the consequences of that are. But we'll give them the out, we'll tell them we're not gonna sign it and then tell 'em after the fact. So we told them she was pregnant, but we had the offer in writing. If they wanted to pull out, they could have pulled out. But then what we had to address next was the way that these contracts are set up, you get a bonus if you win a medal, you get a reduction if you don't win a medal. Right. So here was gonna be Allyson, you know, 10 months after giving birth and she would need to go to the world championships. She would need to win a medal.

2 (32m 40s):
And if she didn't, she'd get hit another 25%. And for us that's where it was just like, no, that doesn't work. Like that's the line in the sand where that's, that's not okay and that's not okay for Allyson, but that's not okay for any woman. She's having a baby.

0 (32m 59s):
Yeah. Alright. May 22nd, 2019, you kind of dropped a bomb on, on the world. You decided to write an op-ed in the New York Times about this experience being pregnant while negotiating a, a contract with Nike. And I guess it came out of stories of other women athletes who were also dropped by Nike and essentially made the point that like, you know, Nike talks about women's empowerment and markets to girls and, but, but when it, when it comes time for the rubber, you know, to meet the road here, like they don't, they're not supporting female athletes who become moms.

3 (33m 40s):
Yeah. So what originally happened was I had two teammates who were working on this story with the New York Times and Wes was actually involved in it because, you know, he had done all these negotiations and so he was working kind of like anonymously with them and we were kind of sharing different things. And the idea was just that that's what that was gonna be. You know, it was never going to attach a name to it. It was just that. And then the Women's World Cup was coming up and I remember like this very vividly, I was sitting in Cameron's nursery and I get a call from Wes and he has, he's like, don't shoot the messenger, but Nike wants to know if they can use your image in this campaign.

3 (34m 23s):
I think it was a a in a commercial, you know? Yeah. For the Women's World Cup. And literally that was the moment that, that just changed everything. 'cause I was just like, what? Like, you know, like everything I had been through, you know, and then the birth experience and I'm fighting my way back to get in shape and just like all of these things. And I knew he was working on the story and I was just like, okay, I need to be a part of this story. And wow, we have to do this. We have to put our names to this. And I looked at my daughter like that was the reason why, because I wasn't gonna let Cameron and her generation deal with the same thing. And at that point it was kind of like, if I lose everything, then that will just be what it is because yeah, this has to come out.

0 (35m 10s):
Wes, when Allyson told you she wanted to do this take on the biggest athletic company in the world, how did you respond? Were you, were you immediately supportive or was it part of you nervous?

2 (35m 23s):
No, I was really supportive. And now I say it in a really calm way. Like I was, you know, there were, there were definitely racing thoughts, but I remember I called up the editor at the New York Times and where, where I live, you lose cell service from the house until you get like down the hill. And I remember I, I called her at the house and I said, all right, let's go. And then got in the car, I drove down the hill. When I got down the hill, maybe three minutes, I had an email from Nike and it was no words, just a contract that they sent via DocuSign.

2 (36m 7s):
And I called the New York Times editor and I said, wait, hold on, hold on, hold on. Did you already, did you already publish it? They just sent me a contract. And I think like in that moment, and you know how Allyson remembers her moment of sitting in the nursery with Cameron, I remember for me pulling off to the side of the road, shaking as I'm holding my phone going through and looking at the contract and saying like, they had to have changed it. And I go through and I read through the first time, don't see any changes. I read through again, don't see any changes. I'm on my phone, I'm trying to figure out how do I search the document so I can just do like a keyword search to just search for pregnant pregnancy, baby maternity.

2 (36m 53s):
I'm just not seeing it. I read through it probably about 11 times and I just didn't see it anywhere. And I was like, I have to be missing it. Wow. There's no way. I just got the same contract. Why would they send it? What's the, what are the chances? You know? And I called the editor back and I was like, I read through it 11 times, there's nothing any different. And she was like, well, how do you feel? And I was like, yeah, let's go. Like, go ahead and publish it and put my phone away and, you know, drove away and remember thinking like, what are we doing? Yeah. But there was still this calm, I think I remember calling my dad and just telling him, you know, here's where it's at. And he just said like, You can be proud of this, this is the right thing.

2 (37m 36s):
And kind of held onto that and yeah. And then we, we let it out to the world. And, and I remember seeing the New York Times News alert come through and just like that moment was, it was terrifying, but it was also, I don't think I've ever been more proud of anything that, that Allyson has ever done or that I've ever been able to do with her.

0 (38m 7s):
We are gonna take another quick break, but when we come back more from Wes and Alice and Felix about how their experience with Nike inspired them to start their own footwear company s which makes shoes specifically designed for Women's Feet stay with us. You're listening to How I Built This Lab.

Squarespace (38m 28s):
I've talked to hundreds of founders on How, I, Built This, and I've heard time and time again how important it is to have a strong web presence in order to really grow a business. Squarespace is an all-in-one platform for building a brand and engaging customers online. Squarespace lets you easily create a dynamic website and sell anything your products and services and even content you create. Squarespace makes it really easy to get started with best in class website templates for all types of businesses that can be customized to fit your specific needs. Squarespace also provides the tools you need to run your business smoothly, including inventory management, a simple checkout process, and secure payments. And with Squarespace email campaigns, You can build a community of email subscribers and customers. Start with an email template and customize it by applying your own brand ingredients like colors and logo. And once you send built-in analytics, measure your email's impact. Go to squarespace.com/built for a free trial. And when you are ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

MasterClass (39m 37s):
If you know anything about me, then you know, I am generally the chef in my family. Not only has Masterclass helped me sharpen my cooking skills, but I've been learning a lot about the way food impacts our overall health and wellness. Recently I took a class with New York Times bestselling author Michael Pollen, who for years has been researching our food systems and the way humans eat. I learned a lot about how our human bodies interact with everyday foods and the kinds of foods that my family and I should eat to be as healthy as we can be. If you know someone who wants to learn something new or improve a skill masterclass would be a meaningful gift this season because with Masterclass, You can learn from the best to become your best memberships. Start at $120 a year for Unlimited access to one-on-one classes with over 180 masterclass instructors. Learn how to negotiate a raise with Chris Voss or manage your relationships with Esther Perel this holiday season. Give one annual membership and get one free at masterclass.com/built. Right now You can get two memberships for the price of one at masterclass.com/built masterclass.com/built offer terms apply.

2 (41m 0s):
Welcome back to How I Built This lab.

0 (41m 2s):
I'm talking with former Olympic Track star Allyson Felix and her brother and business partner Wes. Alright, so you release this op-ed in the New York Times, which details your experience with Nike and that was the moment that you probably didn't realize it quite yet, but that was a moment that would've of course changed the trajectory for both of you, right? Leading you from this business model that was about endorsements and sponsorships to a totally different model where you would do your own thing, you would actually make a product and that product would be shoes. At this point, Allyson, you were planning to be in the Tokyo Olympics in 2020, which of course happened in 2021. Obviously Nike was not gonna be your sponsor.

0 (41m 46s):
And tell me how the two of you started to think about, wait a minute, why don't we just make our own shoe? Like why do we actually need a Nike or Adidas on, on Allison's feet? Like why not make it ourselves?

3 (41m 60s):
Yeah. It started kind of with first I got a, a new athletic apparel sponsor with

0 (42m 6s):
Athleta.

3 (42m 6s):
With Athleta. Yeah. They actually, they had never sponsored an athlete before. They read the op-Ed, and they were just like, let's just have a conversation and, and see where it goes. And, but I would say that that relationship really changed my mindset because I, I felt like they empowered me. They wanted to celebrate me as an athlete, but also as a mother and support the advocacy work that I had started to do. And so it was like just this different experience. And so that set us off in the path of, okay, let's try to find this in a footwear company. Like, I love how this feels, it makes me feel good at this point. I'm like, I see so much more value than just financial value.

3 (42m 48s):
So let's focus in on this and let's find it. And so at this point I'm still competing. So I'm, I'm wearing Athleta and I am actually wearing like Nike shoes and I would just like peel off the Nike sign and that's kind of what we were doing. And then I'm talking to Wes after like, we're doing this search of like trying to find, you know, this potential company and I just got to this place where I'm like, I'm tired. Like I am so exhausted of asking these companies and like begging them to see my worth and my value. And it's like, how am I in this place? You know, I'm, I'm trying to compete for my fifth Olympic games. Wow. And I am out here like hustling and grinding, like taking meetings and trying to sell myself to have like a shoe sponsor.

3 (43m 35s):
And Wes, he's, he's always been the, like, the one with the big ideas and you know, the visionary very like hopeful and optimistic. And I'm like, very much so the opposite. And so we're having this conversation and he's just like, well, why don't we just like do this ourselves?

0 (43m 52s):
I love that so much. Wes, how did the idea come to you? I mean, it, it seems so, so plainly obvious but also so insurmountable a shoe, right? But, but But of course that made perfect sense. How did you, how'd you land on that idea?

2 (44m 7s):
Yeah, guy, this moment is probably gonna be as I share this with you, what's gonna keep me single forever. But it was the pandemic. I was sitting there, I was building Legos and I just, I remember thinking like building stuff. It's like so cool. Like, I wonder what other stuff we could build. And, and that's how I kind of thought of it, you know, was like, huh, I wonder if we could build a shoe. And it wasn't a serious thought. I wasn't thinking about a business or anything like that. But then when Allyson called and she kind of, she speaks to that frustration and at times that kind of gets me to like, you're just, you're being negative. Like there's hope here somewhere.

2 (44m 48s):
But in my own frustration, I said to her, well, why don't we just build our own? And you know, she, she says back, like, build our own shoe company. And like older brother, I doubled down and I'm like, yeah, yeah, why don't we build our own shoe company? And, and she's just kind of quiet and then she comes back and she's just like, well, yeah, put together a plan. And I was like, wow. Oh, okay, okay. And I put my Legos down and I, I actually started thinking about it. And again, like it's the beauty of building something is you don't quite know what you're building.

2 (45m 31s):
You just start with the first step. Something I tell myself a lot and try to share with people is, you know, it's not about 10 steps, there's just one step 10 times. And I just thought through like, what's the first step? And I went back to her and told her like, I think this is the first step. And she was down to take it.

0 (45m 51s):
Wow. Alright, so let's start with the nuts and bolts here. You, you know, you wanna do this, but first Allison's got the Olympics to prepare for and you wanna design a shoe and presumably you want this shoe ready in time so she can run in them in Tokyo. I mean, first of all, you guys had some sponsorship money, so did you have enough to at least finance like a prototype?

2 (46m 17s):
Yeah, we were able to, yeah. Self-funded and we said we knew that if we were gonna launch this, you know, it started with the shoe she runs in, in the Olympics. Right. And at that point we were just thinking, if we make the shoe she can wear in the Olympics, we think other track kids, college kids, high school kids, they'll buy this. What

0 (46m 37s):
An, I mean, what an incredible platform right. To to for runner to be wearing her own shoes in the Olympics.

2 (46m 44s):
Totally. We were like, yeah, we we're gonna be able to sell like a thousand of these or maybe like even 5,000, like, we're gonna be able to sell these shoes. You know, like, and, and I remember talking with a developer that we found and, and and asking her like, here's what we wanna do. Do you think it's possible? And she's like, I mean, it's possible, but, but it's gonna be really hard. And I was like, okay. But, but also like, how expensive is it gonna be? Because, you know, during that whole fight, Allyson didn't get paid for almost two years, you know, so there was, there was fear and stress around is this the right thing to do? Is this a good use of of money? Are we just doing this 'cause we're frustrated?

2 (47m 25s):
Like, but we worked through the process and, and got an idea of how much it could potentially cost. But in that process, there was something that Tiffany Beers, the developer that we worked with, said to us that changed it all.

0 (47m 40s):
What'd she say?

3 (47m 41s):
She was like, well, you know, shoes are not made for women. And I think we're like, oh, okay,

0 (47m 48s):
Yeah. What does that mean? Yeah.

3 (47m 50s):
What does that really even mean? And I'm like, no, we've all been to like Foot Locker. Like we see Sure. We see what's that wall of shoes on that side, you know, the pinks and the all, all of those ones. And she's like, no, like they're not made for women. A shoe is made off of a lass, which is a mold of a foot and it's a man's foot that has been used to make women's footwear. Hmm. And that just like, it took a while to sink in and then it just kind of like blew us away. We're like, well, so what is that wall? And eventually we understood like that wall was just marketing. There's nothing different about them. And then that's, that changed our whole course of how we were going about all of this.

2 (48m 35s):
And that was because then all of a sudden that feeling that we felt there, it mirrored exactly what Allyson felt when she got that offer of 70% less. It was, you have been so loyal to this company and they're totally taking advantage of you. They're taking you for granted. And we looked at that thought of that wall in Footlocker of women's shoes by the major, you know, footwear brands. And we said, if that's marketing, women are coming in, buying those shoes, not knowing their men's shoes, they're buying those shoes because they believe they're women's. And it, it just helped us to see there was a much, much bigger problem.

2 (49m 17s):
And the bigger problem was that women were being overlooked by the brands they're most loyal to.

0 (49m 25s):
Yeah. The idea that all shoes are basically designed from men's feet is just weird to me. Right. And so this idea of building a shoe around a woman's foot, it's almost shocking to imagine that that's, that was revolutionary, right? I mean, both of you sound like you were shocked when you discovered that.

3 (49m 43s):
I mean, I had been a, a runner for, you know, 18 some years at this time and I had no idea. And then we learned that there were molds of like women's feet, right? Yeah.

2 (49m 54s):
We learned that like, you know, as we talked with the last makers as we went to go and build shoes and, and you know, we said, okay, we have this idea, you know, and, and what we're hearing is it's not out there, but we wanna build a last based on women's feet. And the guy's like, yeah, you want the model AJ nine, whatever, whatever. And I was like, wait, what? You have it? And he was like a last based on a woman's foot. I was like, yeah. And he's like, yeah, yeah, we've been studying feet for the last hundred years. Like yeah, we have a last based on a woman's foot. Yeah. And you know, inside I'm like, okay, well how did we miss this? The whole thing is crumbling. Like this was a stupid idea. And I was like, well, who uses it?

2 (50m 34s):
And he was like, nobody. And I was like, why would no one use it? And he was like, you know, probably money. And he's like, you'd be making two shoes instead of just one. And I was like, huh. And we had still never made a shoe yet. So that kind of made sense to me. If I have a business where I make a hundred million pairs of shoes, right, you're burning through molds and no one's asking you for a different shoe. Women aren't saying we're unhappy with our shoes, make one for me. 'cause they think they already have one for them and they don't have anything to compare it to. They've never put on a shoe made for a woman.

0 (51m 10s):
So you, you guys are fully committed to building the spike shoe for Allyson to compete in the Olympics, but it seems it so, so com complicated and challenging. I mean, you obviously found the designers and they were willing to sort of work with you on this and I don't know with sort of the understanding that maybe they'd work with you on, on, on the, on the project in a bigger way on on this shoe brand.

2 (51m 35s):
Yeah, I think like one of the things that we found were we had more friends at Nike than we realized. And when that op-Ed came out, I think there were a lot of people who said, thank you so much because I've had a hard experience and maybe my voice wasn't as loud or maybe it didn't feel comfortable to speak out. There were a lot of people that that really respected what what we had done around the op-ed. And as we reached out to our developer, she was former Nike, she reached out to a designer who was also former Nike who then said, yeah, we're in. They said, you know, we built Michael Johnson spike in 1996, the most iconic spike ever made.

2 (52m 19s):
You know, we'd love to help. We, we believe in what you're doing, what you're standing for. And you know, we worked with Mike Ton on this spike and you know, Mike was one of Bill Bowerman's original proteges. You know, he was there in the shed with the waffle maker like putting shoes together. He is this master pattern maker. And he said, oh, this is exactly why we started Nike at the very beginning. It's lost its way, but this is why we started it. And, and he was like, I would love nothing more than to be a part of it. And wow. So we were able to have the best in the world working on this shoe and you know, they, they did it and, and definitely delivered on an unbelievably iconic shoe for a woman and, and the first shoe to win a gold medal by an athlete who owns the brand too.

0 (53m 18s):
Wow. So you, last year I think you closed a series a round $8 million. Athleta was an investor and you now have two lines, the sage one and the sage two, you describe them as lifestyle shoe. So they're not designed necessarily for running, but you're Designing a specific running shoe as well right now.

3 (53m 39s):
Yeah, so our sage one is lifestyle, you know, it's great for walking, it can do a workout really well. I mean, I participate in all the wear testing and I, like, I go in on 'em, so it, it is possible. But yeah, so excited. Like the shoe that obviously has been, I, I don't know if I should call it my baby because I actually have a baby, so I probably shouldn't say that. But just, you know, really what I'm passionate about is this running shoe and yeah, really giving women something that they haven't felt before and not for the woman who is like trying to, you know, break the marathon world record. 'cause I just don't feel like that is every woman, but you know Yeah.

3 (54m 21s):
The woman who is doing all the things, I'm, I'm really excited to bring this into the world.

0 (54m 26s):
Yeah. You know, one of the smartest things that, I mean in some ways it was the luckiest thing that happened to you, that what happened with Nike, because one of the smartest decisions you guys made is from a business perspective was you depersonalized your business. Your business was built around Allison's ability to endorse and to win races. And now you've built a brand using Allison's expertise, Wess your expertise as runners and a business that you know can live beyond the two of you that, that you've built.

3 (54m 59s):
And that's what's most meaningful. Like, I want this to be so much bigger than myself. It is about women deserving better, and that's our mission. Like, that's our purpose. And we are all so aligned by that, and it is, it should go so much further than just myself. And so now as I've transitioned from track and field, like right into this business that I, I love and believe in, I love that it's centered around that very core message.

0 (55m 30s):
Yeah. And Wes, what, when you think about, I mean, you know, just two years ago you're like, let's make a shoe, and your sister's like, what? And then now you've got a shoe and you get a brand. So I mean, tell me about the vision. I mean, obviously this is, so much of this is about women and creating products for women. When you think about what Sage will be in 10 years, how would you describe it?

2 (55m 54s):
Yeah, 10 years from now, I hope that s is a brand that, that women feel really gets them a brand that they are really proud of, that they know, sees them and works really hard to know them. We've talked a lot about how we celebrate women holistically. You know, we have a maternity returns policy where if you're a woman who, whose foot changes size while you're pregnant, I can't imagine like all of a sudden waking up and my foot's a different size and hmm, now I need to throw out every shoe I ever had. So, you know, for us, I, we feel like our contribution to you doing the most incredible thing on the face of this planet, we can send you another pair of shoes in your, in your new size.

2 (56m 40s):
So I hope that like we are a brand that can meet women exactly where they are for everything that they need from us. And if we can do that in footwear, then we don't wanna stop there. We wanna ask women what else is broken? What else are you realizing? Is it made for you? And we want to do our best to look for other things that aren't made for women. And then we wanna show up and provide those products for women and, and make sure that they continue to feel seen and known by us

0 (57m 10s):
Wes and Allyson and Felix. Thank you so much. Thank

2 (57m 13s):
You. Thank you. This was incredible.

0 (57m 17s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to How I Built This Lab. Please do follow us on your podcast app so you always have the latest episode downloaded. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at How I Built This and mine is at Guy Raz. And on Instagram, I'm at Guy Raz. If you want to contact the team, our email address is HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com. This episode was produced by Chris Maccini, with editing by John Isabella and researched by Lauren Landau Einhorn. Our audio engineer was Alex Treki. Our music was composed by Ene Arablouei, our production team at How I Built This includes Alex Chung, Casey Herman, Elaine Coates, JC Howard, Liz Metzker, Sam Paulson, Kerry Thompson, and Kiro Wakim.

0 (58m 3s):
Neva Grant is our supervising editor. Beth Donovan is our executive producer. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. If you like How I Built This You can listen early and ad free Right. Now by joining Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts, Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon music. Before you go, tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Legacy (58m 34s):
Everyone leaves a Legacy. I like Mr. Gorbachev, we can do a business together. For some, the shadow falls across decades, even centuries. It's unacceptable to have figures like roads glorified, But it also changes. Reputations are re-examined by new generations who may not like what they find. Picasso is undeniably a genius, but also a less than perfect human. From Wondery and Goal Hanger podcasts, I'm Hirsch. I'm Peter Franco Pan. And this is Legacy, a brand new show exploring the lives of some of the biggest characters in history To find out what their past tells us about our present. Nina Simone was constantly told to sit down and shut up. You're the angry black woman. The name of Napoleon still rings out in the pattern of the guides who thrive on the tourist trade. Follow Legacy now wherever you get your podcasts.