1 (2s):
In the early days, believe it or not, we'd actually go to the wholesale clubs. So BJ's Sam's club and we would buy the diapers

2 (10s):
And you were just paying full price for these diapers,

1 (13s):
Full price, no discount.

2 (15s):
Then you got to mark it up on the website. So why would somebody buy them from you on the website?

1 (20s):
We didn't mark them up.

2 (21s):
You didn't mark them up?

1 (23s):
No, we just lost more money to you.

2 (26s):
You were basically losing money to make it more convenient for people to get diapers

1 (29s):
As one investor, like to say, let me get this straight. So you're selling a dollar for 90 cents

2 (40s):
From NPR. It's how I built this show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm guy Roz. And on the show today, how mark Laurie took an idea guaranteed to lose him money, selling diapers online, built an e-commerce giant, sold it to Amazon, and then went head to head with them by building an even bigger business check.com. Lots of stories we've told on the show are about consumer brands that succeeded not by creating something entirely new, but by taking something old or unremarkable and selling it more cheaply or efficiently or seamlessly than others, Michael Dubin took the frustrating experience of buying men's razors at the drug store and turned it into an easier and less expensive one by creating dollar shave club, same story with Warby Parker and frame bridge.

2 (1m 50s):
These companies offered their customers pretty much the same type of glasses and the same type of picture frames you could buy anywhere else and just figured out how to make them easier and cheaper and even slightly cooler to buy online. And that basically is what mark Laurie wanted to do with one of the most essential products ever invented diapers. He wanted to sell them online easily, cheaply and effortlessly, except that unlike glasses or razors or picture frames, the margins on typers suck. In fact, diapers are a loss leader. Most stores that sell them don't make money on them.

2 (2m 32s):
They make money by getting you into the store to buy other things. Baby wipes, pacifiers, clothing, strollers, and more. And mark Laurie believed that he could pretty much do the same thing except without the costs of a brick and mortar operation. So in 2005, he launched diapers.com with a partner and by 2010, his company became the biggest seller of baby products on the internet, which was great, but it also caught the attention of one notable and powerful competitor. And that competitor, yes, it was Amazon would end up acquiring diapers.com, which as you will hear was not a happy moment in mark Laurie's career.

2 (3m 18s):
So a few years later he started another e-commerce site or retailer that went head to head with Amazon and mark called it jet.com a business that would eventually be acquired by Walmart for around $3 billion. As a kid, mark, Laurie grew up in New Jersey. His dad ran a computer consulting business and his mom was a personal trainer and a bodybuilder.

1 (3m 45s):
So that's kind of fun. You know, I was probably a junior in high school going to my mom's body building competitions, but she did well. She, she won a couple competitions and things. It was fun, but really inspirational as a kid, you know?

2 (3m 59s):
Yeah. My mom's a bodybuilder. There's my mom, my mom, she's a kick your butt.

1 (4m 5s):
She used to squat like 350 pounds when she was like 110 pounds. Yeah, that's

2 (4m 11s):
Insane.

1 (4m 12s):
I know.

2 (4m 13s):
I read that. Like when you were in middle school, you got into, you know, different businesses and stuff and you started like selling baseball cards in high school. And did you make money where you, where you good at like buying cars for cheap and selling them for, for more expensive?

1 (4m 27s):
Yeah, I would say we did. Okay. I did it with very close friends. Lax Ciadra big part of the business was grunt work. We would buy cases of baseball cards that weren't sorted. And then we would basically sort them into full sets and then sell the sets. And the sets were sold at a premium because somebody had to sort them and put, so we would do that all summer, but I also did every possible sort of job. A kid could possibly do everything from, you know, newspapers, recyclables, washing cars, mowing lawns, picking weeds, anything to make a buck. Yeah.

2 (5m 3s):
How were you at school as a kid? Were you good in school?

1 (5m 6s):
No, I wasn't good at school. I definitely had some, you know, my parents used to fight all the time. It was like, it was rough growing up. I didn't focus on school at all. My parents, I was the first person to go to a four year college. And my parents didn't really know much about school. My mom went back to get her high school diploma. You know, they got married when my dad was 20. She was 19 had me less than a year later. Yeah, it was. I, I, I didn't do homework. I didn't pay attention in class. I was the class clown. I would just didn't take school seriously. And there was no repercussions at all. In fact, when I was a sophomore in high school, I remember somebody asking me, Hey, so where are you going to go to college?

1 (5m 50s):
Are you thinking about college yet? I said, I don't know. I'd probably just go to Harvard. And they said, Harvard, you can't get in Harvard. What do you mean? And I said, what do you mean get in? Like, don't you just say where you want to go and then you pay and you go like, no, it doesn't work like that. You have to actually get into the school. They have to accept you. This is literally the first time I ever understood or knew sophomore year in high school that you had to get accepted. And so that was sort of a wake up call then. And then junior year I did start like applying myself and did better.

2 (6m 22s):
Yeah. It sounds like it wasn't particularly stressed at home that like you had to do well and make good grades and stuff.

1 (6m 27s):
Yeah, not at all. But I was mathematically gifted, like gifted in math.

2 (6m 32s):
Math was just one of those things that just came easy easily to

1 (6m 34s):
You. I think so when I was a little kid as a soothing mechanism, you know, I used to count. And then eventually when I got a little bit older, I used to do multiplication problems in my head and big stuff like that. Yeah. It was just, it just, I guess it was just natural.

2 (6m 50s):
You ended up going to Bucknell university in Pennsylvania and I guess on a track and field scholarship. Right? Like you, that was why you ended up going there because as a kid, you were like a pretty gifted athlete, like a high school state champion.

1 (7m 6s):
Yeah. So w it wasn't, they don't give scholarships, but it was what helped make it into that school because I didn't have the grades to get in. But when I got there, I didn't realize this. But when I got there, the coach sat me down and he said, okay, you know, you basically on academic probation, the day I got there, they said, you know, you need to get certain grades to stay on this team. And I said, well, you know, I want to be the Catholic, which is 10 events. And he said, no, you're not gonna have time to train for that. You need to focus on school. If you're going to stay on this team and stay in the school, I'm like, wait a second. I just got here. So that kinda got me fired up. And I told the coach, I said, all right, well, listen, how about this? If I get straight A's first semester, then I'm good.

1 (7m 47s):
Right there, no train me. And he laughed. And he told the team and he said, oh, mark just made me a bet. You know, I gotta train him for the decathlon if he gets straight A's. So I was like, okay, fine. And then I got straight A's the first semester.

2 (8m 0s):
Wow. What, what did, what did you, what explains that? Did you, was your classes more interesting once you got to college? Were they easier or what?

1 (8m 7s):
It was more just first of all, I was challenged by the coach and I felt like, you know, I think he thought I was just not smart or something, because the way it started off,

2 (8m 17s):
And by the way, did you think you weren't smart?

1 (8m 19s):
No, no. I knew I was smart. Yeah.

2 (8m 22s):
You knew you were smart.

1 (8m 22s):
Yeah, because if I ever had to turn it on, once in biology class, I got the lowest score in the class and it was like a seven or something. And I didn't study. It was really embarrassing because he, this teacher, Mr. Menotti would announced the lowest and the highest score. And it was just really embarrassed that he was like the lowest grade. He would do it in a really condescending way. And everyone laughs it was his fairy back at imagine them doing that today. But anyway, after I got the lowest score, I studied for the next exam and he announced my name again, this time, it wasn't the lowest score, the highest score. I, I knew that if I had to turn it on, I could,

2 (9m 1s):
It sounds like what drove you was a competitive spirit, right? Like you wanted, if you had to and to prove yourself, you, you, you were going to be the best.

1 (9m 11s):
Yeah. It also is just, probably just based on growing up, my dad, you know, was not completely present. And the only way to get my dad's attention was to do something extra ordinary. So it's sort of programming as a young kid, like to associate doing big things with feeling love basically. Hmm. I didn't realize that growing up, obviously it's only with therapy and, and shirts and adults, you're thinking back to that stuff, but that is ultimately where my drive came from. It, it didn't come from a healthy place. It's wasn't healthy, but I've turned it into something more healthy today.

2 (9m 51s):
So it sounds like you were a talented track and field athlete and you studied, I read you study business and economics. So was it kind of in your mind that, and given that you had some like strengths in math that you would go into something around finance out of college? Was that in your mind?

1 (10m 8s):
Yeah, when I was in middle school, I started reading books. Like in seventh grade I started reading books on derivatives. Like when it came to learning about how to, how derivatives work I could get into that book and read it, cover to cover. No problem. No,

2 (10m 22s):
That sounds so unbelievably boring. Okay. Keep going.

1 (10m 27s):
Yeah. So now, so I would, I would literally read books on read with any book I can get. So when I graduated from Bucknell, I wanted to get into derivatives. Basically, even though I was very entrepreneurial, I didn't even know that was an option. The idea that you could be an entrepreneur at that time.

2 (10m 43s):
So you, I guess you graduate in 1993 in your first job at a schools with bankers trust in New York city. And I guess your goal was to work at the trading desk.

1 (10m 53s):
That's correct.

2 (10m 53s):
Did you enjoy it? I mean, you you're in New York city or on your own, you're independent. You got your own apartment. Like, was it exciting or were you always working? What do you remember about that time?

1 (11m 4s):
Yeah, no, I, I, I loved, I didn't enjoy college as much as other people I was ready to get in the work world start have a job and make money. I was, I grew up basically a mercenary as I call it. You know, it was growing up in a household with my dad, always talking about, you know, making money and my uncles making money and going to Atlantic city and trying to beat the house at black Jack and going to the horse track with my uncles and trying to make a buck. It was like everything was about making money and that's, that's what I call mercenary kind of attitude. And when I got into banking, all I wanted to do was make money. I put a, I put a sign on my cubicle that said goal six figures by 26, 7 figures by 37, 8 figures by 48.

1 (11m 46s):
And that was it. The goal was to make money. And I basically worked as hard as any person could possibly work. I was always the first one in the office, the bank, the last one to leave. It'd be eight o'clock at night and, you know, ask, what else can I do? You know, like I was just trying to do whatever I could to get ahead and, and make more money basically, and get promoted.

2 (12m 9s):
And this is kind of a rapid rise. I read that like from, you know, 93, cause you're just out of college through the nineties, you really got some really big promotions. I mean, within seven years you were like the head of the risk management division at San Juan bank.

1 (12m 27s):
Yeah. I was the executive vice president, which was by far the youngest executive vice presidents,

2 (12m 33s):
30 or 29 or something, right?

1 (12m 35s):
Yeah. I was 28 when I got the job. Yeah.

2 (12m 39s):
So you were just, you were just grind in there and by the way, just to add one more thing, I believe that in 1996 in the midst of all this, I can't even believe I'm. What's about to come out of my mouth. You qualify for the U S national bobsled team.

1 (12m 54s):
Yeah. There's not a lot of people know that, but yeah, that's true.

2 (12m 58s):
So my extensive knowledge of bobsledding comes entirely from cool runnings. And I know that they were, I in that movie, they were track and field athletes. And that's why they were good at bobsledding. Is that how it works? Like if you're a really good, real fast runner, like you can become a good bobsledder

1 (13m 12s):
If you're not only fast, but explosive legs and speed. So it's sort of like if you could squat and broad jump and high jump from a standstill. So the way this all happened, do you want me to tell you the quick,

2 (13m 26s):
Yeah. I mean, you're a banker in New York and you qualify for the U S national bobsled team. That's going to the Olympics in 1998.

1 (13m 34s):
This is case,

2 (13m 35s):
How do you, how does that happen?

1 (13m 36s):
I did. Okay. Yeah. This is the story of how it happened. So having lunch down at the world financial center, and I see that there's a like bobsled track set up and there's like a tent, basically like five bucks come down, push the sled and they'll time you on how fast you push the sled. That was fun and interesting, but more interesting was the thing that said the fastest time of the week, they'll invite you to the training camp. Wow. So the next day I brought my sneakers and I pushed the sled and the guys there were like, whoa, that was the fastest. We've seen anybody push the sled so far. And so it turns out I had the fastest time of the week and I did get this call and they said, Hey, do you want to come up to lake Placid?

1 (14m 20s):
It's basically like people get invited up there and they, they take a test, strength, speed, explosiveness, broad jump, high jump. And they scored me and I said, Hey, you got a great score. This is pretty amazing. Would you want to train for the next month? Because we have, at the end of the month, there's the tryouts to make the team, you know, push the sled. And, and I said, sure, let me see if I can get a month off from work. And I got a month off. And I lived up in lake Placid and trained every day, 30 days on how to push the sled and all kinds of other techniques and things. And then at the end of the month, they had like the time trials, this, he makes the Jewish national team and they were going to take 13 people.

1 (15m 4s):
And I finished 13th.

2 (15m 7s):
It's like a movie story, right? It's like that movie rookie of the year where the kid throws the baseball back and he's got this amazing arm and they joined the Chicago cups. You know, you're just having lunch at, in downtown. And he pushed the sled.

1 (15m 19s):
This was perfect for me. Yeah. I, I I'd still been working out. And, but I did when they told me that I was invited to go train at the lake Placid. It was like a few months from the time they were at the world financial center. So at those few months, it basically just push cars around every day after work, I would go to a parking lot, empty parking lot, push cars,

2 (15m 41s):
Push cars, and put the car in neutral and just push it a retro.

1 (15m 46s):
Yeah.

2 (15m 46s):
Basically, I don't even know where you're finding empty parking lot Manhattan, but you clearly did.

1 (15m 50s):
This was a

2 (15m 51s):
New Jersey. Gotcha. Wow. But, but I guess ultimately you decided not to take the spot on the, on the team, right? Because you would have basically had to quit your day job to train for the Olympics.

1 (16m 2s):
I don't have to travel around the world with the team for two years before the Olympics

2 (16m 6s):
And Bob sledding is, is not really super lucrative

1 (16m 9s):
And I was driven to make money. Remember I'm a mercenary. So at that point in my career, I was humorous.

2 (16m 15s):
All right. So you're back in New York, not on the bobsled team and the story I've read. And I, and I'm sure there's more details to it. It goes something like this. You you've got this great career in finance here in your late twenties, but it's just something about, about, it's just not fulfilling you. And you are watching all this.com action going on and you want to get in on it. Like you decide, I got to get out of this and get in on this thing. Is that what happened in 2000?

1 (16m 42s):
Pretty much. I was watching all that stuff happening. I was making a half a million a year at 28. Wow. And at that time I was married and had just had a baby. And I felt this desire to want to be an entrepreneur like, Hmm. You know, I wanted to be a farmer when I was four years old and I wanted to be that for four years, my grandmother would ask me what I wanted to be. And I'd say that, and she didn't understand and used to laugh. And I said, but Nan, they grow stuff from nothing. And now I get it. You know, I just wanted to grow stuff. And the other thing that was happening at the same time was I hated the culture in the bank. I hated the way people were treated.

1 (17m 24s):
Yeah. It wasn't very diverse. It was very condescending toward women. And it was very harsh. There was no empathy and kindness didn't play a role and keep in mind, you know, I was kinda torn. So I was, I grew up in this mercenary household, my dad and uncles and stuff. But then, because I was, my parents were so young when they had me, my mom used to leave me with her parents, which I called big Nan and big pop. And they were the complete opposite. You know, my grandfather came over from Italy and had a job working on the railroad and used to say that he had the best job in the world, lay in railroad ties and was literally serious. Like he, he used to say that he was the wealthiest man in the world and he would count all of his grandkids and children as a million bucks.

1 (18m 9s):
And he was just like the complete opposite and the classic missionary, he was driven by a higher purpose. And I was always drawn to that. But each year I was only in banking for seven years, you know, before I quit and something was really missing, something was wrong. I didn't feel fulfilled. And I felt like it seemed like a road to nowhere.

2 (18m 30s):
So you, you decide to quit, which is a big deal. I mean, you had a big paying job and to go and start a business with a childhood friend of yours, Veneet Bharara, is that, am I pronouncing his name? Right?

1 (18m 44s):
Yep. Vinny Vinny. But yeah.

2 (18m 46s):
And, and where was any part of you nervous about, about doing that?

1 (18m 51s):
Yeah. I also, I had a newborn baby at the time, so yeah, it was and actually did it with Vinny and lax Chandra. So we were all, three of us were best friends and laksa did the baseball cards with both of my childhood friends, childhood friends, since I was 10 years old.

2 (19m 9s):
But by the way, what was the enterprise that you were going to do? What was this business idea?

1 (19m 13s):
This was like basically a sports stock market. We use baseball cards as a proxy for the athlete, but it was much more of a stock market than it is anything to do with baseball cards. People would have accounts, they'd have build a portfolio. There was a ticker that was market makers. There was bid offer spreads who was meant to be a stock market for sports players.

2 (19m 34s):
So this is going to be a marketplace for, I still don't fully understand it. I mean, it's just a marketplace to sell sports collectibles online. Is that

1 (19m 44s):
No, it was, if you imagine a baseball card that you never take delivery of, it sits there as a proxy for the athletes. So you'd buy the cards. Did they go in your account? The price would go up and then you sell them and the money would go into your account and you'd buy and sell and trade. And so actually it felt much more like a stock market. Like we would watch the games and if player did well, the stock would go up to bad. The stock would go down and people were trading pretty aggressively during the games.

2 (20m 14s):
And you raised some money, right? You guys raised, we

1 (20m 16s):
Raised $5 million all from 60 angel investors

2 (20m 21s):
Who really believed in this side, because I'm just thinking today, if you pitched me that idea, I would be very skeptical.

1 (20m 26s):
Well, here's the unit. This is going to sound like I'm absolutely crazy, but I'll tell you this. But I invested 390,000 of my own money to the company. And you know, the investors, the angel investors said, we're not sure about this idea, but wait, I see here, mark, you invested 390 grand. It's a lot of money. You know, you're not that old Y 390. Why not? 400. And my answer was because that's all I had. So I literally had 390,000 in the bank. And I think the investors saw that and they said, well, this guy has got a lot to lose. So now what I recommend this, no, I wouldn't recommend you take every dollar that you have, but I'll tell you what if I didn't do that?

1 (21m 9s):
Wouldn't I got the investment dollars. Well, wouldn't have worked either because it really felt like my life was on the line.

2 (21m 17s):
All right. So you, and by the way, this is called the pit, right? This wasn't the, so you get the money and you launch this in 2001 and it's a

1 (21m 26s):
Thousand,

2 (21m 26s):
2000 and it's a website. It looks like a marketplace with a ticker going across the screen and stuff like that.

1 (21m 32s):
Yup. Yeah. It's just look. Yeah,

2 (21m 34s):
Exactly. And did you get like some media attention for this and yeah.

1 (21m 39s):
And we got a lot of customers. You've got

2 (21m 40s):
A lot of customers.

1 (21m 41s):
Yeah. We had a lot of people came on, there were trading. They would send checks for 10 $50,000 and start trading.

2 (21m 48s):
And how would you guys make money? What was the revenue model?

1 (21m 51s):
We made money on the bid offer, spread and commission.

2 (21m 54s):
So you launched this thing, you're getting some traction. Was it, did it show promise? Did it look like it was going to,

1 (21m 60s):
It was, yeah, it was really working the first 10 months we were doing about 10 million in transaction revenue. Wow. It was so scoring really good. But then about 10 months in the NASDAQ crash, this is when the monster monster crash.

2 (22m 15s):
Yeah. That was the beginning of the bubble bursting. And you immediately felt the results of that.

1 (22m 20s):
Yeah, because we needed to start raising money and it was just ghost

2 (22m 23s):
Town. There was no money,

1 (22m 24s):
Zero.

2 (22m 25s):
And so I guess you, because I'm wondering why this happened, but you basically 10 months in you sell the business to Topps the baseball card company. Yeah. For 5.7 million, which is not that much more than what you raised.

1 (22m 37s):
That's right. And believe it or not, everyone got their money back and a little bit more. And they said, you know, it's the best performing investment in our portfolio.

2 (22m 46s):
So

1 (22m 47s):
Yeah.

2 (22m 48s):
So everybody gets their money back in a little bit of change on top and tops. Now the biggest, one of the biggest, maybe the biggest baseball card company in the U S owns you and you go, you and Vinny become tops employees. Right?

1 (23m 1s):
Yep. And lacks all three of us. And then Vinny went on to become the general counsel of tops, Inc. Lax ran the pit. And I went out to Seattle to run a game company called whiz kids, which was acquired by tops as well.

2 (23m 16s):
And just to be clear, they didn't make computer games. Right. Wiz kids made like physical games that you play

1 (23m 22s):
Physical games. Think about like little miniature figurines that have stats and things almost like Dungeons and dragons, but like with miniature figurines and you would collect the figurines, the figurines were collectible.

2 (23m 34s):
All right. So you ended up working under tops for two years and you decide that you want to start something new. Is that, is that what happened?

1 (23m 44s):
Yeah, I was a bit, it was tough. Like I was probably the after I was there for two years, I'm now 10 years at a school. I'm like 32, 33 ish. I had ambitious goals and dreams for my career and things. And I'm basically one day I remember it was like after hours, I'm sitting, started getting into this dungeon and dragons and sitting around with a bunch of gamers at night and at this 20 sided die in my hand. And I'm rolling it, just thinking what happened, you know, I was like on top of the world at 28, the fastest EVP making all this money, you know? And then here I am at 32, well, on the 20 sided die, you know, it was just, I don't know.

1 (24m 28s):
It was like surreal. It was like that didn't feel right the bank and didn't feel right, but also didn't feel right. Just run a game companies, you know,

2 (24m 37s):
We're not going to go back into finance. That was

1 (24m 39s):
Definitely not going back in to fight.

2 (24m 41s):
So I guess around this time, you and Vinny start talking about doing something new, a new business. And we now know that this would lead to two diapers.com, but I want to understand what, what was going on. Did you guys start to have conversations? Like, you know, what can we do and what opportunities are out in the world? Like how did you even start? What was the conversation?

1 (25m 4s):
Yeah. We'll tell you exactly how it started. This is even before talking to Vinny, but I would just go on Google and search for random words and see how many times they were searched in the search engine. And I remember searching the word diapers, why? Well, I, I was doing a lot of diapers the time you

2 (25m 22s):
Were changing a lot of diapers,

1 (25m 25s):
Buying them and changing them. And yeah, but I put lots of words and I mean, I don't know, hundreds, maybe a thousand different things, just getting the brain going, just

2 (25m 33s):
Looking for what people are searching online.

1 (25m 35s):
Yeah. Just some nugget of like, what are people searching for? Just try to get ideas, brainstorming basically, you know, not knowing what you'd find no idea, but put in door diapers. And I remember it came up 200,000 times in a month searched. I'm like, that's really interesting because you can't buy diapers online. Not even Amazon at the time. Could you buy them

2 (25m 55s):
In 2004? You couldn't get

1 (25m 57s):
To it. Might've been 2003, 2004, somewhere around there. And you could not buy diapers at a normal price. They were like, prices like Jack to ridiculous levels. It just wasn't a thing. Nobody bought them online. Then I went to Vinnie and I said, Hey, Finn, what do you think about this idea of like selling diapers delivered them like overnight to moms and dads at normal Walmart prices? I think we said Walmart prices. And they started to talk it through and thought, yeah, there's something here. When we would ask people though about whether this would work. People that knew it as something they said, that's silly idea. There's no way to work because don't, you know, that diapers are loss-leader for these brick and mortar stores.

1 (26m 39s):
They drive traffic. And so they lose money on them. And if you're going to pay for shipping and fulfillment, you'll lease it for more money. There's no way can work.

2 (26m 45s):
And, and just so I understand is the reason why diapers didn't, nobody wanted to sell them online was because once you paid for shipping, you weren't actually making, you were not going to make money off them. Even if you were able to get great prices from the manufacturers, it would still be hard to

1 (27m 2s):
Not even hard. It was impossible because there are loss leaders. So this there's very little margin and diapers and yeah, the cost to ship because they're heavy is really expensive. You were definitely going to lose money on diapers.

2 (27m 14s):
But what I'm trying to say is why are diapers? Why do diapers lose money? I mean, everybody was a kid is going to buy diapers for two to three years. So that seems to me that there's a lot of money to be made there. W how is it that that's not the case?

1 (27m 26s):
That's not the case because all the co the retailers compete for people looking to buy diapers and they'll keep lowering the price to try to

2 (27m 34s):
Drag race to the bottom. Yes.

1 (27m 36s):
Basically,

2 (27m 36s):
It's a race to the bottom. I got you. So the retailers are pricing it down just to get people in the door to buy other stuff.

1 (27m 42s):
Exactly.

2 (27m 43s):
But you must have figured this out pretty quickly that you're not, you can't make money off diapers. So I'm thinking if I'm talking to a friend about a business idea, we're like, all right, we looked at that, let's go to the next idea, but that didn't happen. What, Y

1 (27m 56s):
'cause I think we saw the bigger vision, which was wait a second. These things were a lost leader for a reason. They drive traffic to the store and online, the difference between a brick and mortar and online is online. You can sell so many more things because the unlimited shelf space. So we thought, okay, great. So let's drive people. You know, we're going to lose more money than a brick and mortar dozen diapers. Cause we have to pay for shipping, but that's okay. We can sell even more products and more high margin products in stores, cat.

2 (28m 26s):
So you guys start working on this. And I guess initially it's not called diapers.com, right?

1 (28m 30s):
It's called it started off 1-800-DIAPERS. Cause we couldn't afford diapers.com domain.

2 (28m 35s):
And you guys, I guess, kind of relocated to New Jersey where both of you grew up, right?

1 (28m 39s):
Yup. Clare, New Jersey. Yep.

2 (28m 41s):
And what did you, I mean, you have to build a website, you had to get inventory. Let's just break this down because building a website in 2004 and server space was really expensive, right?

1 (28m 54s):
Yeah. We had our own box physical box. There was no cloud.

2 (28m 58s):
And you guys put a man, imagine you are putting, you put all of your money into this.

1 (29m 2s):
A lot of it. Yeah. It wasn't 390,000 this time. But it was.

2 (29m 7s):
And what, like, I guess when, when you started calling up manufacturers to buy their diapers, was it just like, was everyone just like, this is a bad idea. Like selling diapers online is just crazy.

1 (29m 18s):
It was crazy. So crazy. I guess that Procter and gamble. And can we Clark the two big diaper manufacturer that make Pampers and Huggies, they refused to sell us diapers. They said they just don't want to waste their time on a business. That's never going to work.

2 (29m 35s):
When we come back after the break had to turn a big fortune into a small fortune by selling diapers online and how mark and Vinny eventually figured out how to turn things around, stay with us. You're listening to how I built this from NPR Support for how I built this and the following message come from Culturelle, who wants you to know that an estimated 45 million Americans may have IBS according to the international foundation for gastrointestinal disorders, cultural IBS, complete support is a medical food for the dietary management of IBS.

2 (30m 21s):
It's designed to relieve symptoms like abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhea, and constipation in a safe well tolerated. Once daily dose save 20% with promo code radio@cultural.com.

4 (30m 38s):
I'm Yohei Shaw

5 (30m 39s):
I'm Kia. Miakan the teas.

4 (30m 40s):
We're the hosts of the NPR podcast. Invisibilia

5 (30m 43s):
You can think of, Invisibilia kind of like a Sonic black light.

4 (30m 48s):
When you switch us on, you'll hear surprising and intimate stories,

5 (30m 52s):
Stories that help you notice things in your world that maybe you didn't see before.

4 (30m 57s):
Listen to the Invisibilia podcast from NPR.

2 (31m 7s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Ross. So it's 2005 and mark Laurie and his co-founder Vinny have just launched their website, which at the beginning is called 1-800-DIAPERS. But as customers start to find out about the site and start to put in orders, manufacturers refuse to sell them any diapers. So the two co-founders have to figure out how to get them.

1 (31m 34s):
And the early days, believe it or not, we'd actually go to the wholesale clubs. So BJ's Sam's club Costco, and we would buy the diapers.

2 (31m 43s):
You would go with like a shopping cart and just bloated with diapers.

1 (31m 47s):
At first, we go with a big shopping cart and then we would make a deal. They would load them up with their, you know, Pal. Yeah. They'd move the pallets and put them on truck. We'd rent like an 18 Wheeler would come and they put the pallets on the 18

2 (32m 2s):
And they do they ever ask, Hey, what are these diapers for?

1 (32m 5s):
No, they're just, they love getting the sales. And they were quite happy to sell them. We had a little arrangement where we'd leave them some diapers for their other customers. And in return they put them on the truck and eventually we were clearing out like multiple clubs at a time.

2 (32m 21s):
And you were just paying full price for these diapers,

1 (32m 24s):
Full price, no discount.

2 (32m 25s):
All right. So this is, I'm no business genius, but I'm thinking if you buy the diapers for full price, then you go to market up on the website. So why would somebody buy them from you on the website?

1 (32m 38s):
We didn't mark them up. You didn't

2 (32m 39s):
Mark?

1 (32m 40s):
No, we just lost more money.

2 (32m 42s):
So you were basically losing money to make it more convenient for people to get diapers

1 (32m 46s):
As one investor, like to say, let me get this straight. So you're selling a dollar for 90 cents.

2 (32m 53s):
That's what you were doing. You were buying the diaper for it. Let's say a dollar and then to compete against BJ's and Costco. You were selling it for 90 cents

1 (33m 1s):
Basically.

2 (33m 2s):
Yeah. And paying for the shipping costs

1 (33m 4s):
And pay for the shipping and fulfillment and credit card fees. Yeah.

2 (33m 7s):
Yeah. That sounds like a crazy business. I mean, I read that within like a year after you launched, you did $11 million in revenue, but that probably means you were still because you were losing money.

1 (33m 19s):
The more revenue we had, the more money we lost. That was the problem.

2 (33m 22s):
So how are you financing the loss before you even raised any outside investment?

1 (33m 27s):
That was all main Vinny. You

2 (33m 28s):
Were just watching your money being burned out of your bank account.

1 (33m 32s):
That doesn't sound smart.

2 (33m 34s):
Doesn't it? It sounds nuts.

1 (33m 35s):
We had, we had a plan. We had a vision

2 (33m 37s):
And your vision was going to be okay because we're going to figure this out. We just need to get customers first.

1 (33m 43s):
Yeah. Mean, I think the learning, you know, just, it still stands today. It's the idea that as long as customers love the service and they're repeating and they give you good marks that you had something, you had something that was valuable, you had a brand and there was lots of ways to solve the economics is what we thought. It felt.

2 (34m 3s):
How many people did you, were you able to hire before you got outside capital

1 (34m 8s):
At 11 million in sales? It was basically just me and Vinny. We hired another woman to like help us with customer care and some of the fulfillment. But we got up to 11 million in sales with two people, three people, basically, it was really hard.

2 (34m 23s):
And you were still only selling diapers. Right. And the first couple of years

1 (34m 26s):
We were selling diapers, wipes and baby formula and some other things. But yeah.

2 (34m 31s):
All right. I guess in 2006, you were able to raise some money to $4 million in venture funding. And you started to get around that time, Proctor and gamble, Kimberly Clark, and a few others agree to start directly selling to you.

1 (34m 45s):
The only reason why they did, by the way, it's because we changed the rules with the wholesale club. You know, we used to leave them some diapers. And then we said, you know what, when, what happens if we take all the diapers, maybe they'll get mad. And they'll like call P and G. And so, so we tried it and it actually worked. We went in there, we took all the diapers. They said, you know, a deal was we load the truck up and you leave us diapers. And we said, okay, well then you don't have to load the truck, but we're taking all the diapers and like, whoa, whoa, whoa, you can't do that. And like, I think we can. And we were just like any other customer. And he's like, well, yeah, I guess you can. I guess you can. But then we said, Hey, the only bud is pleased. Please call your Procter gamble and complete Clark, you know, rep and tell them to just sell us direct.

1 (35m 28s):
And then we're done. We're out of your hair. Won't take all the diapers. And very soon they did that. And we got a call from Proctor and gamble and parking almost said, Hey, we're doing a favor basically for a very important customer of ours, who would like us to sell you? We don't believe in your business model. Nothing's changed on our side, but, but we're going to sell you.

2 (35m 49s):
All right. So by 2007, this is now about two years, two and a half years after this idea really launches. You become diapers.com. You buy that domain name and you become diapers.com. What was the pitch to your investors? Did you say to them, like, what was the vision you laid out for them? Was it like going to be an everything baby store? It was going to be your one-stop shop for all things, baby strollers and car seats and everything. That was what you were saying,

1 (36m 15s):
Clothes and everything. Yeah.

2 (36m 17s):
And I guess while you were in finance, there was a guy that you had worked with named Lev Lev <inaudible>. Is that right?

1 (36m 25s):
Yes.

2 (36m 25s):
Yep. And he was like a genius or is maybe he's like a PhD in nuclear physics. Is that right?

1 (36m 31s):
Yeah.

2 (36m 32s):
And I guess you kind of recruited him to help you figure out a way to make your business more efficient. Cause he was like such a smart guy. What did he figure out? What did, how was he going to make the business more efficient?

1 (36m 49s):
Well, there's a little technicality on, on how you figure the price of shipping. Mostly it's based on weight, but at some point, if the box is big and it's not that heavy, you'll get charged for the actual cube of the box instead of the

2 (37m 4s):
Weight dimensions, not the weight, the

1 (37m 5s):
Dimensions. Yeah. The dimensions instead of the, sort of the weight. So we noticed that there was still a lot of empty space in every box. We put diapers, we put formula, we put baby food or whatever. And then you look at what percentage of the box with those products actually taken up. It was like maybe like 40%. And so we thought, what if we had 20, 30 different box sizes and we could build what we call box them was basically a way to figure out exactly what box certain items can fit in. So you pick the box as soon as you knew the items and what configuration they need to be packed in the box to fit.

2 (37m 45s):
So the idea was if we can be super efficient with the way we package things and then how we ship them, we actually might be able to make money even off diapers.

1 (37m 57s):
Nope. No could not make money on diaper. You knew that you

2 (37m 60s):
Couldn't.

1 (38m 1s):
Yes,

2 (38m 2s):
But,

1 (38m 3s):
But you could make money because the way shipping works is if you're shipping a box of diapers to someone and you have empty space in that box, the marginal cost to ship, the next thing you put in the box is very, very small, right? Very low. Like it might be you put something that weighs a pound into that same box. It might cost you 10 cents of incremental shipping. So the margin on the margins was great.

2 (38m 26s):
That means you had to encourage consumers to buy more for every order. Is that, is that right?

1 (38m 32s):
That's exactly right. Yeah. Buy more stuff by baby clothes pacifiers.

2 (38m 37s):
So how did you do that?

1 (38m 38s):
I think we just built a really good user experience online. We had everything that mom and dad could possibly want for their baby. They were all first party. So it was, we didn't have third-party sellers. Like everything was handpicked by us. And we had all the products that moms would want. And we organized in a really convenient way. Everything was covered.

2 (38m 60s):
How are you getting the other stuff? The clothing and the other products. Was it were, were retailers coming to you and saying, Hey, no,

1 (39m 8s):
No. Once again, much harder than you possibly could imagine trying to convince retailers to sell you product. I didn't, I had no idea. I was never in retail and we had to fight really hard to get manufacturers, to sell us products.

2 (39m 23s):
One thing I'm wondering about, cause I'm trying to put myself in your shoes. Right. And our listeners know, and anyone who knows me is that I have probably more anxiety than you do, but, but maybe you do too. And you just kind of hide it better. But I would be worried if I was like in my mid thirties and I was like watching all my money, go down the tubes. Like I wouldn't be, yeah, I'd be nervous about me. I'd be nervous about the people who came to work for me and whether they were going to have the jobs. And like they depended on me and their families depend on me and like, yeah,

1 (39m 52s):
No, I had a seven year old at a four year old. And I had all my family and friends invested in the business losing money every day. And I just always thought like, what do we need to figure out? What do we need to do? What's the problem? What's the next hurdle? Like what do we have to do? And, and that was like, motivating me, you know, it was, it was sort of like a challenge we always came down to like, are we gonna be able to make payroll? Like, so it was, it's never been easy. Yeah.

2 (40m 16s):
Yeah. But it sounds like it didn't, I don't, you didn't get that like horrible, sick feeling in your stomach about that possibility. Maybe the way you're wired. It just enabled you to kind of feel like it's going to be okay.

1 (40m 28s):
Yeah. I like to talk about this sixth gear because that's the only thing I can, I can say is that I didn't know it at the time I was working in banking and working really hard working really long hours, but I never got out of fourth gear. It's only when you have your life on the line and you can't afford to lose. Can you find the sixth gear? And when you're in that sixth gear, at least for me, it's like a out of body experience. It is like, you don't have time to worry. Think, be anxious, just have time to do.

2 (40m 57s):
I think what's so fascinating to me about everything I've been reading about diapers.com is it was like multi-pronged or your strategy was multi-pronged. It was like, okay, we're going to diapers will be the entry point. We'll sell a bunch of stuff. And then we'll be super efficient. We'll be really efficient. And that's where we'll make our money. We'll squeeze this, get rid of any waste. We'll put warehouses in very targeted, specific places. Like I read that you had warehouses in camp hill, Pennsylvania, sparks Nevada and Lenexa, Kansas. Cause those were the most efficient and strategic locations to enable you to save money.

1 (41m 35s):
Yeah. We had to, we had to have every cost advantage we could find, but the vision was even bigger than just selling everything for that moms and dads would want for baby. It was we're going to sell parents everything. So we, we launched another website that was wagged.com for pets. Right? soap.com for household supplies. Yeah.

2 (41m 54s):
Drugstore.com, which was makeup and cosmetics. Right?

1 (41m 58s):
Yep. Yo-yo dot com is toys. casa.com was home. We had like 10 websites.

2 (42m 3s):
And this is where you kind of started to operate under the parent named Quincy.

1 (42m 7s):
Yeah. Quidsi we changed the corporate name to Quincy, but we wanted to keep the specialty stores because we felt that was sort of the magic as opposed to just a mass merchant where you sold everything. Right. But we had one shared shopping cart. So you can shop on diapers.com, add stuff to your cart. You can click on the wag tab, turns to wag.com. Now it feels like a pet specialty shopping experience. But you add into the same cart you check out. Yeah.

2 (42m 31s):
All right. Now we're going to get into the chapter of your life, where you begin to encounter Amazon. You know, you guys were, I think by the end of 2010, you were on track to do 300 million in revenue. You still not get profitable if a fem. Right. But there was a path to profitability. It started to clear

1 (42m 53s):
Exactly

2 (42m 53s):
That that was going to happen. And as you grew, you obviously became a guide on the radar of Amazon. And the reason why I know about this is because there's a book about Jeff Bezos and Amazon written by a reporter named Brad stone. And he devotes quite a bit of it to the story of Quidsi in diapers.com. So I want to, I want to dive into this a little bit, because I know that from what I've read as early as 2009, Amazon approached you guys and said, Hey, we'd like to acquire you. Is that right?

1 (43m 29s):
No, we had a discussion with them, but they didn't say we want to buy you.

2 (43m 33s):
You say, would you consider selling the company? Something like that just to fill you.

1 (43m 37s):
Yeah. Like they said, if you were ever opened to selling it, like let us know.

2 (43m 41s):
So from what I understand, not long after that Amazon slashed its diaper prices by like 30%. Let's just say it was coincidental, but is, is a

1 (43m 51s):
Time. Yeah, it wasn't coincidentally. It

2 (43m 53s):
Wasn't.

1 (43m 54s):
No, it was unheard of at the time, the idea that a commodity product that already lost money, it's already a loss leader that you would lose another 30%. That's unheard of unprecedented in the history of retail.

2 (44m 7s):
Did that have any quick impact on diapers.com on your business?

1 (44m 12s):
Definitely slowed our growth rate. You would have thought it would had a much bigger impact. Like we would actually shrink in size, but all it did was slower growth rate. The customer base we had was very loyal and we didn't lose many customers, which I think was surprising to Amazon.

2 (44m 28s):
So that didn't make you nervous when that happened. You thought we're going to be fine. No.

1 (44m 32s):
I mean, when you say nervous, it was definitely something that we had to seriously focus on, figuring out how we were going to combat that. Anytime you have a company that size that's targeting you. Yeah.

2 (44m 46s):
So it seems like this is 2010. It seems like your only option at that point, I'm thinking is to go out and raise more money. And is that what you tried to do?

1 (44m 55s):
Yes. We had only raised 50 million, $55 million up until that point, which was pretty modest amount of money raised compared to today's standards. But we went out and we needed another a hundred million to keep all the websites going and to really blow it out. It started putting some fields around the market, but everybody said, Hey, listen, Amazon's coming after you were that's that's too risky for us.

2 (45m 19s):
By the way, by 2010, when you're doing roughly 300 million in revenue, how many employees did you have?

1 (45m 25s):
Maybe like 300.

2 (45m 26s):
Right? So there's a lot of people involved at this point. What are you telling yourself? What are you saying? Okay. Maybe we tried this, what was that? This that you would try next?

1 (45m 35s):
Yeah, it was, it was really like, we were gearing up to battle a raise that money. But at the same time, Amazon had asked us to go out to see them in Seattle. So we did that.

2 (45m 48s):
They asked you to go see them and you knew it was going to be about potential acquisition.

1 (45m 52s):
I think we had a hunch. Yeah. It's hard to remember. Exactly. But yeah, I think

2 (45m 56s):
Before we get to that meeting, because I think this happened in September of 2010. I mean, I imagine that that within your business, there was a big dark board with AMA know with Amazon on it. I mean that, that they were the enemy.

1 (46m 9s):
Absolutely. Yep.

2 (46m 10s):
So when they contacted you and said, Hey, come out here. What do you remember thinking about, about that offer?

1 (46m 16s):
We were just like, yeah, they're coming after us. They're clearly targeting us now. They want to talk. Or they soften us up to, you know, before, before the surrender, you drop a couple, couple of bombs and then have the talk, you know, that's rendering. It felt like that. That's what it felt like.

2 (46m 33s):
All right. So you go to, to Seattle, to me, with Amazon, from what I've read about Amazon in the book by Brad stone on September 14th, 2010, you guys go to Amazon headquarters to meet with them and they to discuss a possible acquisition. What happens at that meeting?

1 (46m 50s):
Yeah. Now you just sparked my memory, but that's when they told us that they were launching Amazon mom, which was a program designed to get moms into their membership program. And it was really driven by diapers.

2 (47m 6s):
From what I read it would've meant that like, if you guys@diapers.com sold a case of Pampers for 45 bucks, you could get it for $30, the same product for $15 less. I mean, there's no cup, there's no competing against that.

1 (47m 20s):
That's exactly right. That is 100% correct.

2 (47m 23s):
So, I mean, it sounds like we know what happened. You eventually were acquired by Amazon, but it sounds like you were left with no choice. You had to agree to that acquisition.

1 (47m 34s):
Yeah. It's even even worse that we got a higher offer that we didn't take

2 (47m 39s):
A higher offer from.

1 (47m 41s):
I would just say, I don't think I've ever publicly disclosed this and I don't think I can,

2 (47m 47s):
But you've got a competing offer from somebody else.

1 (47m 50s):
Yes. For a hundred million more.

2 (47m 52s):
Why don't you take that offer?

1 (47m 53s):
Because Amazon very clearly stated that if we took that offer, they would do even more to harm the business.

2 (48m 4s):
And listen, let's just be honest. This is how a lot of big corporations operate. They shouldn't, but they do. It sounds like a mob shakedown

1 (48m 11s):
Felt like it.

2 (48m 13s):
What did they do it with a smile on their face? I mean, these are people from the Pacific Northwest. They're very friendly. How did they, I mean, how are they presenting this to you

1 (48m 21s):
In a pretty aggressive way?

2 (48m 23s):
They said, Hey, you got to accept this acquisition offer or else we're going to crush you. We're going to bury you.

1 (48m 30s):
They said, what the hell? We're going to take the price of diapers to zero. And we're going to, you know, then they made some analogies to some other use explicit language. And it was a pretty scary stuff. I'll just leave it at that.

2 (48m 42s):
So you, you sell it to Amazon, you sell the business to Amazon, they buy it for 550 million or something like that. That's a pretty good return. I mean, you raised 50 million, so, but of course you were losing money every year, but did that mean that your investors, you know, it sounds like they came out. Okay.

1 (48m 59s):
I mean the early investors, actually, all the investors did really well, but they're only investors made a huge return on their investment. Yeah.

2 (49m 8s):
So now you're an Amazon employee. You are running quizzy but now under the corporate umbrella of Amazon, and I'm just thinking if it was me, it would be a little weird here was this business that was kicking me in the butt for two years that I could not compete against because they were just so much bigger and they were going to crush me and I surrendered. I had to with a great outcome financial outcome, but now I'm working for you. How are you able to, you know, two weeks later, a month later, it's just like become an Amazon employee. Was that hard for you?

1 (49m 46s):
Well, let me just say me. One thing we didn't talk about@diapers.com was just how Vinnie and I really set that culture up and that value system in a way that the culture was everything. Our mission was to make lives easier for, for new parents. And that was really important to us. And we brought these people into this organization and we felt a responsibility to the employees. And one of the, my personal core values is fairness. And I felt like, even though I maybe wasn't happy about how that went down, you know, we did accept the offer for 550 million. We did sell the company and I just felt the right fair thing to do was to give it the best we, we got for both Amazon and the employees, more importantly.

1 (50m 36s):
And so that's kind of the way we looked at. So there was definitely like, wasn't happy. So we were went the day we sold the company Vinnie and I, you know, you might've thought would go out and like have a drink to celebrate. We were depressed. We went to,

2 (50m 47s):
Even though that day was going to be transformed national for you.

1 (50m 51s):
Yeah. Basically I think it was like 40 years old at the time and we didn't have a lot of money saved either of us. And so it was a never need to work again kind of moment. And we couldn't even celebrate.

2 (51m 3s):
Yeah.

1 (51m 3s):
We had a vision for what we wanted to create. We put our heart and soul into it and then our dream was sort of done like Amazon didn't, even when they brought us in say, Hey, we want you guys to run the mom, baby parent category within Amazon. They said, you know what, just keep doing what you're doing. Just continue to keep competing with us.

2 (51m 21s):
Wow.

1 (51m 22s):
That felt terrible.

2 (51m 23s):
So you were still competing, but now it was all part of the same family.

1 (51m 28s):
Exactly.

2 (51m 29s):
I understand the disappointment for sure. I think some people listening would say, but maybe, you know, mitigated by the money, but it doesn't sound like it was entirely mitigated by the money. Is that right?

1 (51m 41s):
Oh, for sure. Definitely. Wasn't yeah. If I was still in my mercenary mindset, I might've felt differently, but I had made the transition by this point to be a full fledged missionary, I've gone all the way from one side already to the other. And I was driven and motivated by the bigger mission. Yeah. We didn't want to sell the business at that point. We definitely didn't want to sell the business. We basically sold out

2 (52m 5s):
When we come back. And just a moment, Tom mark took the hard lessons he learned from competing against Amazon the first time and decided to launch yet another business this time with an even bigger e-commerce idea, stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick, thanks to our sponsor, LinkedIn, helping people find qualified candidates with LinkedIn jobs today. Many small business owners are busier than ever because they're so focused on managing and growing their businesses. They can't always spend the time they wish they could on recruiting.

2 (52m 49s):
That's why LinkedIn jobs has made it easier for everyone on LinkedIn to leverage their connections and the broader LinkedIn network to reach qualified candidates. Now, LinkedIn members can create a job post for free and display it at the top of their profile page. Then share it to their feed. They can also add a purple frame with the hashtag hiring to their profile photo. So people on LinkedIn can see who's looking to expand their team. All of these new features were designed to make it easier to find and hire qualified candidates. So small business owners can spend more time growing their business to get started on your free job post visit linkedin.com/built.

2 (53m 40s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Ross. So mark is running quizzy at Amazon, but it's not a super happy period in his life. And after around three years, he decides to leave. Now at this point, mark has enough money that he never needs to work again in his life, but still can't quite shake the idea that there's more to do.

1 (54m 7s):
I just felt like there was unfinished business, meaning we had a vision and it got cut short. And so that vision we had, the mission that we had set out was still alive. Like we wanted to give it another shot.

2 (54m 24s):
All right. So you start to noodle on an idea around e-commerce again, talk me through what this idea was going to be in your head before you, you decided to launch it. What were you thinking about doing?

1 (54m 37s):
I just still continue to think that there was room in the market for another e-commerce player. Amazon didn't have any real formidable competition at the time and felt like I saw an angle. I saw the inefficiency that was brought about by people, shopping on Amazon buying things and you know, one unit at a time having it shipped across the country and things, and a lot of expense in that and came up with this idea that, you know, what, if you empowered customers to and gave them the information to shop smarter, to save money,

2 (55m 11s):
Meaning that you were able to encourage people to make, to buy more things at one time, instead of just like a, one-off

1 (55m 17s):
Not only more things at one time, but more things coming from the same location. So they could ship in the same box. A lot of Amazon's packages will ship from different locations. Like what if somebody's building a basket of product and they're about to put a product in the basket that would not be available in that same warehouse to ship in the same box, but what's on the other side of the country. You could give the option to the customer to substitute that product for a product that was in the warehouse. They could ship in the same box. They could save $6 in shipping and give $3 back to the customer. And so we built this real time smart pricing engine that showed customers lower prices on things that would pull costs out of the supply chain.

1 (56m 1s):
And so actually, if we did have scale, not Amazon scale, but enough scale by having a more efficient supply chain, you can actually have lower, lower prices and lower costs, but it assumed that you got to some level of scale. And so you needed to raise money, enough money, a lot of money to help bridge to that level of scale.

2 (56m 22s):
And this was for what will become jet.com.

1 (56m 24s):
Yes.

2 (56m 25s):
Check.com. And how much did you raise

1 (56m 27s):
In total? About 750 million.

2 (56m 30s):
Wow. And so this was going to be, if I'm right, kinda like initially like a hybrid between an Amazon and a Costco, which was for 50 bucks a year, you got a membership and then you would be offered the lowest prices on like 10 million items, more or less initially, that was the accident. And, and I guess like Costco, because Costco really doesn't make money off the stuff they sell. They make money off selling memberships. That was the idea that you would make the money from all those people paying 50 bucks a year.

1 (57m 1s):
Absolutely. Correct.

2 (57m 3s):
So with that $700 million, I mean, you had to build warehouses, you had to create the supply chain. I mean, you now had considerable experience in that space, but God, it just sounds like a huge undertaking.

1 (57m 18s):
It's massive. Yeah. It all comes down to what I call VCP vision capital people. We had the vision, we needed to raise the capital. We need to hire the very best people in the world. And it was the people that made the difference. The people we hired were incredible and empowered them, gave them the information and let them run as fast as they could run. I mean, we got to a billion run rate in revenue within 10 months of the business launching, which was, I think probably unprecedented at the time.

2 (57m 50s):
Now I have a feeling, I know how you're going to respond to this. But I mean, if you were being truly honest, intellectually honest here, I mean, it sounds like anybody hearing this story is going to say, okay, Amazon really was not pleasant when they went after Quidsi. So mark goes and works for them for a couple of years after the acquisition, but then he leaves and he basically decides to compete against Amazon. I mean, I know at the time you were quoted saying, no, it's not about, you know, them versus us. It's just something I want to do. But that had to have driven you to some extent, because you've talked about being a competitors, Natalie, to competitor in the math test, when you get the worst score in the biology test, you want to get the best score that's inside of you.

1 (58m 33s):
It wasn't about beating Amazon. It was about, you know, a big, massive market that was growing fast. And I was very excited to start a new culture and a new business with all the learnings from previous businesses. And we've really honed a lot of the core values in the culture at jet, like in really cool ways. And I'm super proud of, you know, the transparency of, of salary. So everybody could see what everyone else was making. The fact that everybody in the company at the same level made the exactly the same amount, you know, to really prevent unconscious bias from creeping in and things like that.

2 (59m 8s):
How did you, I mean, you knew what Amazon was capable of doing. They could say we're just going to cut the price of diapers by 30%. And we don't care if we're going to lose a lot of money because we are going to win this battle. I mean, Amazon is a very smart company. What was going to prevent them from doing the same thing this time around.

1 (59m 26s):
So a little bit different because we weren't like had one product where we're so single threaded on, you know, diapers was such a high percentage of our sales in such a low percentage of their sales. So, you know, we would go in mass, they weren't going to be able to cut prices and everything.

2 (59m 41s):
And your model was that the more you bought, the more you actually saved.

1 (59m 47s):
Yep. If you bought stuff that can ship from the same warehouse in the same box, that's absolutely

2 (59m 51s):
Correct. And so different customers might pay different prices for the same products depending on, on where they were when they bought it, how much stuff they put in their basket.

1 (59m 60s):
Yeah. I mean the base price wouldn't you never pay more. It was always just like, here's the price. But then as you shop in a smarter way, we'd share the supply chain savings with you and fabric customer. Yeah. That would be different depending on how they're shopping, where they live and stuff like that. So the savings would be different, but the original price never changed.

2 (1h 0m 17s):
So I guess like three months into launching jet.com. Cause I remember those seen those ads everywhere, all over the New York subways. I was, they were everywhere. I mean, you guys put millions of dollars into marketing this, but three months in you drop the $50 a year membership fee. Was that because I just was not going to be a smart way to make money.

1 (1h 0m 38s):
No, I still continue to think to this day that that would have worked well. The problem was that started to, we knew we had to do a big round of financing and starting to read the tea leaves from investors who said, you know, this membership, they really want to see what the retention rates going to be. If people buy the membership, do they stick with you? Do they renew and sort of got spooked by that thinking we're not going to have enough time to prove that out. Yeah. But at the same time, we're also seeing great traction without it. And so we sort of pivoted the business model in such a way that the math worked without a membership, but didn't necessarily mean that that wasn't the right strategy for the business.

1 (1h 1m 19s):
Had we had the capital and had the time.

2 (1h 1m 22s):
So the site launches in July of 2015 and you knew that it was going to lose money for at least five years. That was part of the plan that you showed to investors. But then there was going to be an inflection point where it would turn around. You would.

1 (1h 1m 36s):
Yeah. I told the investors we needed, we were going to lose $3 billion

2 (1h 1m 39s):
Before you started making money. That's

1 (1h 1m 41s):
Correct.

2 (1h 1m 42s):
And what did you have to do to what, like, what was the plan? What was going to happen to start turning around and becoming profitable?

1 (1h 1m 49s):
Just e-commerce is all, it's a scale game. You build the infrastructure, build the technology, get the people, and then you just need enough sales because the margin, the variable margin on sales is pretty low. And so you need a lot of sales to cover your fixed expenses.

2 (1h 2m 2s):
I have to imagine that you knew you were going to burn through cash, but you were not worried about this because this was part of the plan you had predicted this and you were okay. And with the money raised the 700 million, how much runway did you have? How much time did you have before you actually had to either raise more money or shut down?

1 (1h 2m 19s):
We're burning about 40 million a month. But the real key was raising. We did a $618 million series a, so he'd raised some money before that. And then we had the 600 million series a, that was a really tough round to get done. That was, at that time we had negative gross margins. It was going up against Amazon. You know, we needed to raise $600 million to get through the next, you know, 18 months basically.

2 (1h 2m 48s):
What did investors who decided not to invest? What the skeptical ones, what were they saying to you?

1 (1h 2m 53s):
Yeah. It always came down to whether or not you can raise the capital. You needed to create a really big business because you're going to burn a lot of money competing against Amazon until you got to scale. And so 3 billion was what I said. It could have been more and they didn't know whether or not we'd go out and be able to raise 3 billion.

2 (1h 3m 11s):
Even with your track record at this point. Cause you'd already, you were still getting lots of notes even with what you've already been.

1 (1h 3m 17s):
Oh yeah. Way more nos than yeses. Of course. Yeah. But I always had a great experience with venture capitalists. I think they added a lot of value to the company outside of capital of one of these entrepreneurs that says, you know, raise as much money as you can get the best venture capitalists, the best people that can help you around the table. I never worried about control and all kinds of other things that people worry about. You have to trust people. I think people start from a place of distrust too much. And it's funny, the more you're able to let go and trust the less work you do just have a lot more bandwidth to do a lot more. And I do that in my personal life and it's, it gives me an extraordinary amount of time, just straight up trusting people.

2 (1h 4m 0s):
I was talking to somebody who's been on the show about a year and a half ago. He's a really wonderful entrepreneur. We're just chatting. And I said, do you have any resentment or do you have any, do you hold any bad feelings against the people who doubted you or who turned you down or do you remember them or do you not take any personally? He said to me, I remember every single one. I take every single one personally. And I learned that. That was very honest. How about you?

1 (1h 4m 27s):
No, I don't know. I just feel like it's, you know, usually good reasons. Like I don't, I definitely don't take it personal. It does feel good when there's a big exit and investors say, man, I should have listened to you. I can't believe I didn't invest. You know, that definitely feels good, but it doesn't feel like I'm not, I don't have anything. People make different decisions based on what's right for them. And at the time, and I accept that.

2 (1h 4m 53s):
So jet.com, I mean, it's, it's burning through 40 million a month, but it sounds like with what you have, I mean, you could last a year and a half, but a year in you get an offer from Walmart, an acquisition offer. Before I ask you this, this is sort of strange. I'm gonna ask you why, but then I'm going to say the price, which was $3.3 billion. It was, it was the highest anyone had ever paid to acquire e-commerce startup in the us at that point. So imagine that was an offer. You couldn't refuse.

1 (1h 5m 25s):
It depends. So I think we could have refused it, but again, tying back to what I said before, about mission and values, it was the conversation that I had with Doug. McMillon the CEO of Walmart on a whiteboard in his office that sort of made the decision really easy for me. He basically said, listen, like, first of all, I, a lot of trust was built between us from the very beginning of every conversation. He did always did exactly what he said. And we also shared a similar vision of what we wanted to achieve in e-commerce Walmart had any e-commerce site. Jenn had an e-commerce site and we felt, Hey, if we could bring the assets of both companies together, sort of the people in technology that we had built a jet with the capital resources to stores of Walmart and merge it together, wow.

1 (1h 6m 15s):
We could really, really become a formidable competitor. And this is where I say, it's the difference between selling out and selling the company? We didn't sell out. Yes, we sold the company, but the mission was very much intact and everything we had set out to do was now with a higher probability of success and we had more capital to do it. We're going to get there faster.

2 (1h 6m 38s):
Were you surprised how quickly that happened? I mean, a year after you launch,

1 (1h 6m 42s):
I was surprised, but at the same time I got it. It made sense. And when Doug said, mark, we want to give you and your team, the keys to sort of pull this all together and run this and take us to the next level that was empowering. Now I wanted to give Doug Walmart and the board the very best I've got, because it was very different than the Amazon experience. Didn't feel like selling by the way. Yeah. It was very motivating. It was like, wow, now we have, we've got, you know, it's sort of like, we're, we're fighting there with guns and then, you know, all of a sudden you see like the big tanks in it. You're like, yeah, give me the tanks. I want the tanks. I want the air force, you know, coming to back us up here.

2 (1h 7m 23s):
So how was it going to work? I mean, was the idea that you would run jet.com, but also turn walmart.com into a more formidable player?

1 (1h 7m 33s):
I mean, yeah. The Walmart was the number one responsibility. I think we basically took all the best people from jet and put them on Walmart. We took the technology, we took the fulfillment center. So it was, I think the, the goal was really clear. Like let's turn walmart.com into a formidable e-comm player and use all the assets available to us. It didn't really make sense to have to mass market sites because we wanted to merge the best talent and put them on Walmart.

2 (1h 8m 0s):
It wasn't the brand they needed. It was the technology and it was the people that just sticks and the people. Yeah,

1 (1h 8m 6s):
Exactly.

2 (1h 8m 6s):
What was it like for you? I mean, and this is now the third time you were acquired, right? You'd gone to work for top. She'd gone to work for Amazon. Now you're working for Walmart, but you know, you're an entrepreneur. It has to be a little bit stranger hard to all of a sudden work in an environment where you're not totally calling the shots.

1 (1h 8m 29s):
Yeah. It was very challenging, very challenging. I mean, I had already had experience working inside Amazon so I knew what to expect. And so I wasn't surprised by anything. In fact, I was probably pleasantly surprised, you know, at the culture of Walmart and the ability for me to make the moves we made with speed, but still, it's just hard. I mean, anytime you're in a big company like that, there's so many people to get on board to convince and you have to educate people and you have to bring them along. And it's not the entrepreneurial way. The entrepreneur way is, you know, you just go and you can't do that.

2 (1h 9m 5s):
But compared to, to your experience at Amazon, it does seem like you had a better experience with Walmart. I mean, they, they actually made you a head of e-commerce and, and in that role you did some kind of interesting things like you think in 2017, you acquired Bonobos. She had Andy Dunn, the founder on the show a couple of years ago. And that was a pretty big deal, right? I mean, when people were like, wait, but no bows and Walmart, but presumably that was part of your strategic plan around e-commerce.

1 (1h 9m 33s):
Yeah. The high levels, the most strategic part of the plan was to change the narrative. I knew that we didn't have the talent inside of Walmart at the time to do what we needed to do. We had to attract the best people in the world. And at that point, you know, honestly that wasn't the place, the best people in the world wanted to go. And so I knew we weren't going to go anywhere unless we changed the narrative, unless the people thought that Walmart was now going to be a contender and buying Bonobos as part of that strategy, because that was a cool, modern brand focused on millennials that was more premium product. It basically opened people's eyes and made them look at Walmart differently. And that was certainly not one thing alone, that one move, but it was all the moves that we made together.

1 (1h 10m 18s):
It all started to compound. It, it really, in the last couple of years, it really started to come together.

2 (1h 10m 23s):
You, you recently announced that you are stepping down after four years at Walmart,

1 (1h 10m 29s):
Four and a half, four and a

2 (1h 10m 30s):
Half. From what I understand, Wal-Mart's e-commerce business is still not profitable, but it's a much different place, right? The market cap of the company is much higher than it was when you joined four years ago.

1 (1h 10m 42s):
That's basically double. I'm not saying that's all e-commerce but certainly played a role there.

2 (1h 10m 47s):
Do you feel like you accomplished the things that you promised you would accomplish and that were expected of you?

1 (1h 10m 54s):
I do. I do feel good about it. What I've liked to done more gone faster. Sure. But if I just take a step back, did we change the narrative? Yes. Did we dramatically accelerate top-line sales? Yes. Did we create an incubator? That's now building startups that could shape the future of retail. Yes. So all things considered given the size of the company and the fact that it's an aircraft carrier, not a speed boat to move it the way we did. I feel proud of that. And I think that experience is going to make me a better entrepreneur going forward too, which I really appreciate

2 (1h 11m 34s):
You are either almost true. We're already 50 years old. I think

1 (1h 11m 40s):
I'm 49. Yep. Okay.

2 (1h 11m 41s):
So sorry.

6 (1h 11m 42s):
I'm sorry.

1 (1h 11m 44s):
It's a scary number. It's a big

2 (1h 11m 45s):
Number. And you've got a lot of experience behind you, but you're at an age where people have come for some CEOs. You've done it at least three times. There's no question that you're going to do something else.

1 (1h 11m 60s):
That's true. People find this sometimes hard to believe, but I have more drive now than I ever have. At any point in my life to do a startup,

2 (1h 12m 9s):
What would it be? Give me a sector or industry. Give me a place that needs that needs to be improved.

1 (1h 12m 15s):
I mean, there's opportunities in retail there's opportunities in healthcare opportunities and NG. I'm involved in a flying car company called Archer. It's urban air mobility. I should say Archer, which I think could trip the future of transportation. I see opportunities in every sector. I think the wins, why I'm so excited to have so much drive now is because I do. I've learned a ton about how to create a culture business, have access to capital access to great people. And I'm in a place now where I can really do something really disruptive that can, can have a lasting impact on the world. And that's what, that's what gets me fired up.

2 (1h 12m 53s):
When you, when you look over the course of your career so far, how much of your success to attribute to how hard you worked and how smart you worked and how much do you think happened? Cause you got lucky.

1 (1h 13m 4s):
I think it was a combination of all three. I could think of things that, where I did get lucky where things could have gone a different way and I've been really screwed, but at the same time, the drive to keep coming like the Terminator, I wouldn't accept failure. You know, I just would keep going and going and going until, until the luck turn my way. So I happened to get lucky. Cause I think things could have been a lot worse, but I also don't accept the fact that if I was unlucky that I wouldn't have just kept coming at it until I got lucky,

2 (1h 13m 42s):
You know, your, every story is different, right? And every journey is different and you know, you're still going. I mean, I can talk to you in 20 years and there may be, we may talk about none of this. So we just talked about, and I wonder when you think about your trajectory, you are a crappy student and had a rough childhood. And, and if, if you knew that we were going to have this conversation, then when you were 18, 19, and you would say, oh my God, look at me now, would you w what would you think you think, man, I made it. Would you have been satisfied and impressed and happy? What do you think you'd feel if you had that crystal ball?

1 (1h 14m 20s):
I think it'd be happy. The path to get to where I am today was not a straight line. Like I said, you know, I'm in my early to mid thirties, you know, playing Dungeons and dragons, you know, that, wasn't what I had set out to, to, but once I made the transition from mercenary to missionary and I really let values create the value, that's what happened. Values created the value. And, and like, I feel in a great place now. And I feel like I'm set up, like you said, the next 20 years are going to be, I think, are going to be a lot better than the last 20

2 (1h 14m 55s):
That's mark Laurie co-founder of diapers.com and check.com. By the way, even though Mark's career as a founder and executive has been wildly successful by any measure, it's like competitive athlete in him still can't help wondering what might've happened. Had he chosen a different path? Does you ever kind of wonder what would have happened or maybe you shouldn't, you should have just bobsled it.

1 (1h 15m 20s):
Oh, absolutely. Yeah,

2 (1h 15m 22s):
Absolutely metal or something.

1 (1h 15m 23s):
It's possible. It's very possible.

2 (1h 15m 29s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you're not a subscriber, please do subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us or email addresses H ibt@npr.org, if you want to follow us on Twitter or at how I built this, or at guy Ross, and on Instagram, you can follow at how I built this NPR or my account at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by Casey Herman with music composed by Ramtin bluey. Thanks also to Janet UHG. John Lee was Metzker Farah safari, Derek gales, Julia Carney, Eva grant, and Jeff Rogers. I'm guy Ross. And you've been listening to how I built this NPR.