1 (0s):
So really quick before we start the show, I want to let you know that there are still a few tickets left for our live show in Boston. It's happening at the Back Bay Events Center this Wednesday. I'll be talking with New England Natives and founders of Luke's Lobster Luke Holden and been conniff two guys who literally met on Craigslist. So come join us Wednesday night in Boston for a live taping of how I built this. It's super fun and I hope to see you there and one more quick thing. You can also join us for our last how I built this live show of the year in Denver later. This November. I'll be talking with Kurt Richardson founder of otter the company that makes the OtterBox phone cases. You can get tickets for both our Boston and Denver live shows supported by American Express at NPR presents dot-org.

2 (52s):
We were 13 or 14 million dollars in debt and they were trying to force us to pay that off. And of course again being a little bit stubborn. I'm Michael just go to another bank. Well, that's when the banking crisis was starting to get. So by the time we did all of our paperwork and everything and had one or two banks that were interested all of a sudden everybody just tightens up all the doors shut no money. Yeah, everything started going upside down.

1 (1m 26s):
From NPR it's how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They go I'm guy Roz and on the show today biologists Kirk Jones dripped ice cream into liquid nitrogen and turned it into Dippin Dots the novelty ice cream brand sold at stadiums malls and theme parks around the world. So if I were to distill the show down to a single phrase, it would sound something like future entrepreneur identifies a problem and decides to solve it. Right? That's what got us lift and Air B&B and Dyson vacuums problem solution, but in the world of ice cream, especially by the end of the 20th century You could argue that there wasn't really much of a problem to solve.

1 (2m 20s):
Yeah, you could make more interesting flavors, maybe use higher butter fat milk, but reinvent it I mean, where would you go beyond Scoops and soft serve and Shakes and popsicles and ice cream cakes and cookies sandwiches, right? I mean, how do you out innovate all of that? Well the short answer with a lot of liquid nitrogen, which is really where the story of Dippin Dots begins. It was 1988 and Kirk Jones was working as a biological researcher and in the lab were Vats of liquid nitrogen. She may know pretty much freezes anything it touches almost instantly Kurt also happened to be a guy who like to make his own ice cream and one day hanging out in the lab.

1 (3m 5s):
He wondered could I use that liquid nitrogen to re-invent ice cream. So a few weeks later he brought in a jar of ice cream base basically sugar cream and some vanilla. He gently dripped a bit of it into the liquid nitrogen and instantly those droplets froze into teeny tiny ice cream beads. Now, they didn't look like ice cream but once Kurt tasted them he knew he was on to something and those ice cream pellets got him. So excited. He quit his job to turn that little experiment into Dippin Dots the ice cream of the future and it would soon spread to shopping malls theme parks and eventually sports stadiums now today Dippin Dots is a brand that does a reported.

1 (3m 53s):
Million dollars in annual sales except it's also a brand that no longer belongs to Kirk Jones and a brand that didn't actually make him Rich which means that unlike any of our other episodes. This one is almost a cautionary tale about how you can lose the thing you built and the thing you loved but for now, let's start at the beginning in rural Southern, Illinois where Kirk grew up on his family's farm with his mom dad Grandpa and two older sisters.

2 (4m 27s):
I remember driving a tractor for the first time from one Barn to the other when I was seven years old and you know, I played Sports and stuff in school but always felt like when I got home I had to work, you know to help, you know, feed the pigs and do things like that. So it's kind of a very early age, I guess learning that responsibility but it you know looking back. I'm glad I grew up the way that I did. I have no regrets at all is really a good way. Good way to grow

1 (4m 48s):
up. Did it feel when like when you were a kid did it feel like your parents? Old to keep food on the table or was the farm pretty prosperous.

2 (4m 59s):
Now, it felt like a struggle you're exposed to all the talks about, you know, if it doesn't rain by Friday, you know, we're you know the crops not going to get made or you have diseases that can get in your your pigs that kind of thing. So but you know, we never went hungry or anything like that, but we always knew that we were dependent on a lot of factors that were actually out of our control, you know, like weather and things like that. So I think I just may be that was good in a way. I kind of learned to live with risk a little

1 (5m 31s):
bit. Yeah, I'm given that your family didn't always have a lot of money around where their ways that you kind of figured out how to earn extra money for yourself when you were a

2 (5m 43s):
kid. Yeah. I mean when my dad had a radio and TV repair business and so we had all these old tubes laying around and so me and a friend of mine actually start our own little Repair business probably in grade school. I like 50 or sixth grade and then me and him also decided to get into the chicken business one time. We ended up what he had ordered a hundred chickens to put on his farm and I ordered a hundred on mine and we were going to go together and gather eggs and work together on it and then me and another friend had a straw business we called it which is where you take wheat straw and Bale it and we sold that to a lot of the people that worked on roads because they would do their Landscaping when they finished a project and they put they chop up strong and put down over the grass seed.

2 (6m 27s):
And so there's always coming up with some little way to make a little extra money. Did you

1 (6m 33s):
would you sort of look at you thought you your family's situation, you know the whims of the weather

2 (6m 40s):
or

1 (6m 41s):
of whether there was market demand for corn and soybeans or whether there was a some kind of disease that you know, and and did you ever think I want to have a different life I don't want to do. As a

2 (6m 54s):
grown up. Oh, I think so when I went to school, I studied microbiology because I really was interested in farm-related things like making ethanol from corn and you know, just things like that, but at the end of the day, it allowed me to get a job that actually had a salary which which was really felt pretty good because I saw something steady there and I did enjoy the steady paycheck. Yeah when I had it so you I guess you spend

1 (7m 24s):
like six year. I spent six years getting your ba and your master's degree in microbiology you graduate. I think this is around 1986 and you get your first job with a company called alltech biotechnology.

2 (7m 38s):
Yeah, just outside of Lexington in a little town called Nicholasville and we lived in Lexington about eight or nine miles from where where I went to work at

1 (7m 48s):
him. What was that company doing? What was there was their business?

2 (7m 52s):
What they were starting to get off into the animal feed business making bacterial cells that can actually be put back into the animal feed. So in other words, you know, if we eat yogurt and it has lactobacillus in it and that's good for us. They call it probiotics sure. We would concentrate those down we would freeze them and then we would freeze driving into a powder. So that's kind of how I Got Started With All Tech was in the animal feed side, which is what they really grew with over the next several years and to be clear. I mean, why

1 (8m 22s):
were you freezing these cultures it was it so that like they essentially don't die so that they would keep their

2 (8m 28s):
potency. Yes, and you want to freeze them as quickly as you can because if you ever notice like an ice tray and you put it in the freezer and you come back 30 or 40 minutes later, you'll see little needles across the surface. That's from freezing something very slow. If you freeze that very fast those ice crystals are smaller. So if you freeze the bacterial cells quickly, you get tiny ice crystals. And then there's a good chance that those cells can come back to life. So I started playing with liquid nitrogen, which I had never really worked with before but I knew that it was very cold. It was 320 degrees below zero fahrenheit. And I found that it you could pour the nitrogen into the cultures and freeze a Big Blob or you could pour the cultures into the nitrogen and freeze a Big Blob, but I found that if you dribbled it in a little at a time that you could actually form pellets.

2 (9m 20s):
It's kind of like freezing rain drops and

1 (9m 22s):
words. So you still have the active probiotics in these pellets. Let me let me just ask you about about liquid nitrogen for a sec because the freezing point right for liquid for Waters 32 degrees zero degrees Centigrade, you're talking about something that is minus 300 degrees Fahrenheit. I have to imagine that working with liquid nitrogen is very dangerous. It would be it's like the it's like the equivalent working with lava. Right? Right

2 (9m 50s):
just in the opposite way. Yeah, it is dangerous. But what I tell people because we've had a lot of people that worked around it over the last 30 years, but I tell him it's just like it's kind of like handling boiling water. I said you have to treat it with respect, but everybody works with boiling water if A cook but the other danger that you have with liquid nitrogen is if you're in a very closed in area, it can displace oxygen. So you're not getting enough oxygen you'll enter your lungs. But other than that, it's a lot like hot water. You know, you wouldn't want to fall in a vat of hot water either a so

1 (10m 20s):
anytime. We're foreshadowing a little bit here.

2 (10m 23s):
You used

1 (10m 24s):
to churn homemade ice cream, even like as a teenager like on the farm, right? And this is before we had like

2 (10m 32s):
One Touch button

1 (10m 34s):
electric ice cream makers right. This is I'm assuming this is like salt and rock salt and I stand just turning and turning, you know, Churn ice cream maker

2 (10m 44s):
right now. Our family ice cream maker was a exactly that it had a little handle that you turned on a gear and it would turn the middle container, you know through the ice and you can kind of feeling when you're cranking it'll get a little harder to crank and yeah, but yeah, it's great when you open that up and see all that firm ice cream in there. You know, it's that's a good feeling

1 (11m 2s):
and I guess I scream like making Just continued on like in through college and you would just make ice cream. Yeah, it's

2 (11m 10s):
time. We got together like my wife and daughter we would make ice cream on a weekend and invite the neighbors over and I think at some point we actually had an electric maker. But I do remember still having a hand crank even with my with my wife and daughter

1 (11m 25s):
and did you start to think a this this process of nitrogen liquid nitrogen and the bacteria seems kind of cool. I wonder what would happen if I use an ice cream was it was it that linear

2 (11m 36s):
almost but not quite it still took me a month or two to really have that idea. I actually started playing with other things first. Like I was interested in freezing things like watermelon, and you know

1 (11m 46s):
when you by the way when you when you drop a slice of watermelon into liquid nitrogen and you pull it out, what is it? Like is it like a piece of like steel? It's like an anvil like how hard

2 (11m 57s):
is it watermelons actually a little bit different than like a great because of the surface area of the watermelon, but but yeah like if you were to Grape in there you could I mean you could basically drop that grape and it would shatter. I mean wow, that's what it would be

1 (12m 11s):
like and how long does the grape standards for a instantly drop it in and pull it out? Oh

2 (12m 16s):
a few seconds. You can actually watch it it it's like introducing heat. So you'll see this nitrogen just boil like crazy and then when it's when all the heat has been extracted you'll see it just kind of fall to the bottom and it's as cold as it's going to get. All right,

1 (12m 32s):
you're working on this animal feed project on the side. You're just kind of having fun. At what point did you think? Hey, maybe I should drip melted ice cream into this

2 (12m 43s):
will really my first thought to be honest with you was how can I make this ice cream churn colder? And so without even thinking about liquid nitrogen and I started thinking about what if I put dry ice in here instead of ice will dry ice is a hundred nine below zero into your ice cream

1 (13m 0s):
maker, right?

2 (13m 2s):
But at some point, you know, my mind finally went to we'll wait a minute, you know, you know even quicker way to freeze it would be using liquid nitrogen and I reason I remember that is that for about the next two or three weeks? I thought about what it would be like to make Turn ice cream in the bees and the next opportunity. We got to make ice cream. I told my wife I'm going to take about a quarter this out and I'm going to actually make some ice cream out of an individual's

1 (13m 27s):
I said, I think this is like 1987 you take you take like a cup of of the mix that you were going to churn for the ice cream before you turned it and you take it back to your office or to the lab at all taken you what you start to drip it into the nitrogen the liquid nitrogen. Yeah, and I actually had a

2 (13m 46s):
childhood buddy of mine with me that Sunday when I was telling him that I want to go try something. So we grabbed about them I think is a little quart mason jar of the mix and drove out to the lab and I pulled out a probably about a half a gallon of liquid nitrogen into I am a cylinder and I took a pipe it and I took some of the ice cream mix and I dropped it in, you know, drop by drop and probably after a hundred drops or something like that. I said, well, let's let's try it now and I meant let's let it warm up and try it but I but both of us were so interested in and we grab some before they really warmed up enough.

2 (14m 27s):
So that's that was something I learned very early on as you don't want to throw it in your mouth right after it comes out of liquid

1 (14m 32s):
nitrogen because it's right. It's like but it's like probably burns the inside of your mouth, right? Oh, yeah. Well it will it

2 (14m 40s):
actually will weld your tongue to your cheek. For example a guide it just sits there and sizzles for a minute how so you know once we learn not to burn our taste buds and once we let it, you know kind of warm up to 30 or 40 below zero, it was really really good. It was and what I what I was really hoping to find out was to see if I could detect any ice crystals in there, you know with homemade ice cream. You had that realize he tastes. Yeah, and the first thing I notice is that when I bit into the little beads it was a totally different

1 (15m 10s):
texture smooth and creamy. Yeah, you say that for for a few weeks. You have been thinking about testing this out and he were getting increasingly excited about the prospect of turning ice cream into into pellets. But right I'm just curious why I mean ice cream is pretty great. So what was it about pelletized ice cream that you thought this is gonna be amazing whether

2 (15m 40s):
there were two things people like Haagen-Dazs like Ben & Jerry's they get to very smooth consistency in a couple different ways. If you add butter fat that basically masks the fact that you have ice crystals on your mixer. I see so you can add Butter fat or you can add are and both of those dispersed ice crystals. So if you go to the Dairy Queen, for example, you get a very smooth creamy taste because it's got not a lot of butter fat but it's got a lot of air

1 (16m 11s):
are yes, it's like a lighter fluffier ice cream. Yeah. So can I not

2 (16m 16s):
add any air and not have a super high butterfat concentration, but then still have a smooth creamy taste and that's what I found. I used to 10 percent butterfat and mix because you have to use it. At least that that time you had to have at least 10 percent butterfat to call it ice cream, right? So I was pretty excited because now you're going to get a very dense flavor, you know from that because you're not diluting it with anything, huh, but to be honest with you, what was the most exciting is that it was just a new way to consume something and that's what I really want to find out. I want to find out what is this really intrigued people. I had no idea if it would really catch on but that was the initial seed of excitement is that it had the possibility to catch on.

1 (16m 59s):
So when you brought this home to your wife and she tried it what what did she say? Well, she really

2 (17m 6s):
liked it. The thing with my wife is that I think she knew when she you know, kind of saw my excitement. It was guy. Oh, here we go here, we gonna happen next

1 (17m 18s):
right because she knew that the gears were turning in your head. Right? And you had this steady job and a child

2 (17m 25s):
right now as much as I like my job. She knew that I was also growing a little bit frustrated because it was a very fast growing company and it was a very demanding job. I mean, I was working many many hours a week and even she was a little bit like wow, I didn't know I signed up for this but I wasn't just looking to quit my job right away. In fact, I took the idea to my boss and said, you know, is this something you'd be interested in know? You're not in the food business, but he he said well, you know, it's a cute idea, you know, basically get back to work, you know, we're doing something else. So yeah, he didn't really have an interest in it. But at the same time I knew that for me it was something that would percolate my mind for a while and it did for about six months until finally I told my wife one day I said, you know, this is really not all I think about it.

2 (18m 14s):
It's really something that I think I'm going to have to try and she says well, I know that she said, you know and you do whatever you think I tell people sometimes I said, you know, it was probably the perfect time for me to start a business because I think we had maybe ten thousand dollars of savings and I sometimes say if we'd had a hundred thousand dollars in the bank. We might not have wanted to risk it but I felt like if it didn't work, I was still young enough that I could probably still get a job somewhere and I don't know for me. It was just like, you know, if I'm going to do this I got it. Try 200 percent to give it a chance and you know, my wife was very supportive of it. And she knew that we would get by somehow.

1 (18m 54s):
See you quit your job. 1987. Yeah, you see you. Tell your wife you quit and you say I'm going to go for this. I'm gonna I'm gonna go for it. I'm going to start to to do this. So what you do? I mean you had you mentioned you had $10,000 in savings, right? But that was all everything you

2 (19m 11s):
hat. Well what happened? I knew that we had the $10,000. I knew that we had a second vehicle that we could probably get by with one vehicle and we did sell that our second car. We got $4,000 for it. And before I quit my job it was during a period of time where we were just starting to get these mail outs from credit card companies. Hmm. Well we ended up I think getting like five or six credit cards and Max them all out within the next year. So that's like that's like $5,000 limits or something like that. Yeah. I mean we had at one point. I think we had between 30 and 40 thousand dollars in credit card. It with you know with a night with a business. It wasn't making money. So we were we were struggling, you know, what the first few years we struggled quite a bit

1 (19m 56s):
but you thought with this $10,000 and with this car sale the 4000 like I can start this business. I can start this liquid nitrogen ice cream business.

2 (20m 4s):
I really thought so, yeah and During that time, we collected some business cards of people that found it interesting and there's one guy left his business card. He was from Indianapolis. He said I'm putting one of my stores. He said there's a space open next to me. And if you want to hire me as your contractor, I can build out the store and we can get you into the ice cream business and I thought okay. Well, maybe it's time to do it. I think that was even part of my reason for quitting my job in November because he thought we could get open before Christmas which is a horrible time to start an ice cream

1 (20m 37s):
business. Yes, right,

2 (20m 39s):
but told well, I was in

1 (20m 40s):
Lexington it's

2 (20m 41s):
cold, right and as it turns out this Center that he was talking about it. It did have about 20,000 cars a day that drove by but that's exactly what they did. They drove by there was not a good way to get in and so, you know, we made a lot of mistakes in the beginning but the first mistake we made was working with this guy because he was basically somewhat of a shyster. He basically took it down payment which we didn't have a lot to work with anyway. But about a month after I quit my job thinking we'd be open by Christmas. The the store still wasn't finished and I was starting to get contacted by some of the subcontractors that they hadn't been paid yet. And so we found out that this guy had skipped town with our money, but we were able to locate him and kind of got we basically got control of our store again.

2 (21m 29s):
We paid our subcontractors off and we start, you know, finishing out the store herself, but we did not get that store open until March until March of 88, right and so we were about four months with no job and all of our savings pretty much tapped out by the time we open the store. Where are you stressed out to say the least? Yeah. I was a little stressed. What were you doing during that four month period where you

1 (21m 51s):
just constantly chasing contractors and subcontractors or were you also still experimenting with the product that you would sell at that

2 (21m 59s):
store? Oh, yes that was very much doing all of that. I was experimenting with different pieces of equipment to make it, you know to make it on a little bit larger scale. I was working on The Branding when I quit my job. We really didn't even have a name for the product yet. And in fact when we were going home for Christmas, we ended up having a naming party with some of our friends back in Southern Illinois, you know actually came up with the name Dippin Dots during that time. Someone had written down dip and Dot like two characters, but I heard it as dipping without a g in my mind and that to me that was like the perfect name for because I was wanting to describe the product just a little bit but yet have a very fun

1 (22m 38s):
name. What was the name before dipping does

2 (22m 41s):
well, we had you know yogurt was very popular at the time like TCBY. We are very popular. And so most of our flavors were actually yogurt flavors and we actually we're going to call it the yogurt shop. They killed glitch up. Yeah, which you know yoga being a piece of yogurt basically like

1 (22m 56s):
yogurt and tell it right

2 (22m 57s):
yo Glatt and yeah, I don't think my kids would be running to

1 (23m 1s):
the yogurt stand at the baseball stadium,

2 (23m 3s):
right? Yeah. So does Astro averted

1 (23m 6s):
their yes or Dippin Dots? Becomes the name and you open the store in this little shopping center in Lexington, Kentucky in May of 88. And what's the reception do people line up their lines out the door is is it empty is a cricket's what's going on?

2 (23m 24s):
What's pretty much crickets? Because remember we had no money left to do any advertising with fortunately during our little test Market we did. We got a little newspaper article. And so when we open the store, we actually had a local TV station within a week or two. Yeah, but basically the first customer that came in we gave her a sample and she asked if she could buy a Coke and so we sold the coke was our first sale and my wife always tells the story but but not too many customers later someone came in and they said well, you know, I don't get it. I want my ice cream to be soft. Yeah. I said, oh I can make it soft. And so I went back and I actually took the bees and I added some ice cream mix and I basically made her a Kind of soft serve and my wife just stared at me.

2 (24m 12s):
Like, you know, we didn't open the store to make soft serve ice cream. And so I kind of learned my lesson, you know to stick with what we had and you know it but what we found over the next few days, especially because we open on a Friday night, so we weren't very busy. But Saturday, we got a few customers in and then when the TV spot ran it was totally different. We had people kind of coming into the shop and actually trying it.

1 (24m 36s):
How are you making enough of the price where you literally like manually dripping the ice cream mix or the yogurt mix into liquid nitrogen yourself?

2 (24m 48s):
Yeah. Well during that time when we were waiting on the store to be built. I divide assigned a piece of equipment that could be described as a large cylinder it probably held 30 or 40 gallons of liquid nitrogen. So I pumped the ice cream mix with a little peristaltic pump. Basically squeezes a hose. So it never comes in contact with the product you basically use a hose and I would run a two and a half gallon bag, which is pretty standard in the restaurant industry of a mix that I had made from a local

1 (25m 23s):
Dairy just like cream and milk and sugar and yeah,

2 (25m 27s):
okay and we would just add flavorings to that and then we would pump it let it drip through and so after I ran two and a half gallons, I would take everything loose and I would pour it into a bigger container and then scoop it into like or containers but in the freezer,

1 (25m 41s):
right? Okay. So so as a somewhat is it says something of a Dippin Dots kind of sort myself an expert with two children. I know about the different flavors what you know, you have the rainbow sherbert and you've got the Banana Split which has some chocolate and banana and vanilla beads in there and cookies and cream with different kinds of beads in there. What flavors were you serving? Well in the beginning

2 (26m 7s):
Scream it was vanilla chocolate strawberry Neapolitan, which is a mixture of all three. We had a peanut butter mint chocolate but we also had a lot of yogurts. I think we had a strawberry cheesecake yogurt. We had a piña colada yogurt and of course vanilla and chocolate. So almost more yogurts an ice cream when we first got

1 (26m 25s):
started. So how did the store do it didn't do that. Well, we ended

2 (26m 30s):
up on the wrong side of town. Remember we had taken the advice of this guy that was ended up being kind of a shyster. Yeah, but you know, I think our total sales for that whole nine month period was like 52 thousand dollars. And of course we had more than fifty two thousand dollars in expense. I can assure you. So even though we did all the work ourselves. I think we did hire, you know, just three or four like part-time employees from time to time for weekends. But for the most part we had was you it was you and your wife. Yeah and my five-year-old daughter she a she would run the cash register for sometimes and she take a nap in the corner sometimes but yeah, so we ran the store.

1 (27m 8s):
Can you remind me what your wife's name

2 (27m 9s):
is? It's okay. Okay, right.

1 (27m 11s):
Okay. So it's the three of you it's UK and your daughter running this storm or less nine months. You close it down. It's not working. You cannot keep

2 (27m 23s):
up. Right?

1 (27m 25s):
What was your financial situation? Like at that point?

2 (27m 29s):
I was pretty not very good.

1 (27m 32s):
So your instinct was not to walk away from Dippin Dots entirely but to stick with it. Yes. I mean at that

2 (27m 40s):
point I knew that we had had enough positive reactions that it had a chance to work. I mean, we had a few other things going on while we run the store like we took it to the state fair up in Illinois and gave out samples up there and got reactions and So eventually we started doing a few little fairs and festivals and we start talking about theme parks. And of course we thought well, there's no way we can get into a theme park. Nobody knows us or what we're about but my sister Connie, she's a long call around a couple. So you see actually called down to Opryland theme park in

1 (28m 11s):
Nashville. It was like a country music theme park. Right?

2 (28m 14s):
Right, and it was a very nice park so she called down and she got ahold of the Food Service supervisor and she described what we had and he would add it's almost funny to hear her tell the story but he would ask her questions like well, why long has it been around? Oh, it's brand-new. Well, well, how do you do sales? Oh, well, we don't sell very much of it ever question. He asked it was she didn't have a good answer for it. And then she knew that we weren't going to get an appointment. But then the very last he said well, why don't you guys come down and see us, you know on such and such date.

1 (28m 45s):
So this is I think around but 1988 or maybe early 89

2 (28m 50s):
exactly and so they actually agreed to put the product into the

1 (28m 53s):
park. We how did you how did you convince them? You you took samples down and you got a meeting with them and you explain what it is and everything and I was it. Yeah, they look for new

2 (29m 3s):
things and they really like the taste of it and they got Excited about it. They were building under a new ride in the park called chaos, which was an indoor roller coaster and they wanted to feature it in this and they started doing these projections about how much they would sell they estimated. They would sell a hundred gallons a day and my little machine would only make four gallons an hour. So I figured okay. Well, we're gonna have to go into the ice cream business. We're going to actually build a bigger machine. And so we made the decision to kind of move back home because we had a little two acre piece of land that my dad had given all this kids two acres of land and we put a trailer on there when we got married and then of course my daughter grew up there the first four years and that we had built a garage on that piece of land.

1 (29m 51s):
This is this is back in Southern Illinois

2 (29m 53s):
on the farm right on a family farm. Yeah, we decided that we were going to convert this little garage into an ice cream plant and Supply Opryland with

1 (30m 1s):
it when you got when I peel and said, yep, we want to we want to do this with you want to partner with you? Did they give you like a cash advance? I mean, how did you finance because you're gonna have to make a lot of ice cream ahead of the you know of your opening at Opryland hoof. How did you finance that?

2 (30m 20s):
Well? No, they did not give a cash advance. And what happened is my dad and my mom said, you know, we want to we want to try to help you raise a little bit of money and and see if we make this thing work and so they went to the bank and the value of land at the time wasn't really really strong but it was strong enough that we could get a thirty thousand dollar loan. And that was really my wife and I already run out of money and we were in credit card debt and by then we were all kind of partnered together my dad and my sister had a little bit ownership in the company. And and so we started converting this this little garage into an ice cream plant and we're expecting to make all this cash, you know from Opryland, but it didn't work out that way.

1 (31m 2s):
Yeah, why what

2 (31m 4s):
happened when Opryland opened up in 89? Fine, they had to rush to get their ride done. So our concession area that that we had been shown got changed. And so there was not near the demand for our product and back when people got to our little stand they thought they were getting ready to get on the rise and nobody would buy anything. And so these hundred gallons a day projections ended up being more like two gallons a day or something like that. Wow. So when it didn't do real well the first year, of course and then the second year came around they still like the product they still liked us. So this year we want to get your product out closer to where the customer is where they don't think they're getting on a roller coaster ride.

2 (31m 45s):
So this is when we kind of jointly came up with the kiosk concept, which you see in many theme parks today. It's a little stand alone ice cream stand where someone stands behind and sells

1 (31m 57s):
it. Hi because up until this point they were just selling Dippin Dots where they were also selling chicken fingers and Burgers and

2 (32m 4s):
Fries. Yeah cotton candy and everything

1 (32m 6s):
else see Wouldn't really even know what it was. You wouldn't ask for it. Right? So we were

2 (32m 11s):
excited again. We'd already kind of went through one year of failure there. But again, they weren't ordering very much product. So about halfway into the year. I was starting to inquire about well, how come we're not selling very much. They said well and they were very honest with as they said we get busy. We only have so many employees. So we don't even open the Dippin Dots stand we put them wow, and I said, so in other words, it's only being open like on a cloudy or rainy day or when you don't have a lot of people in the park and they said yeah, unfortunately, that's the way it is. And so at the end of that year, we got a nice letter from them basically saying, you know, we really like you guys we love your product but we just haven't had success with it. So we need you to come and pick up your equipment.

2 (32m 52s):
Well this was that kind of lowest point because you know by then we'd pretty much spent the money that my dad went and borrowed on the farm and it was pretty low Point. Well, what happened though is that there was a guy Mine was Kenny Perry Poli and his father was actually the general manager of the park and I never really met his father. Anyway, he told me while I was picking up the equipment. He said hey, you know what? I still think this could work. He said we're actually getting a new food service supervisor and he's coming from a different side of the park. It's where they do the games and stuff and I think he might be open to doing something a little bit different. You should come down and meet with him. I said, well, I'd love to so we got me a meeting and when I went down and talked to him, he liked the product he said well, I understand it's not done very well here the last two years I said, no, it's not I said, we've had success other places though, and he said, well, it sounds like maybe we didn't do a very good job with it.

2 (33m 47s):
And he said I'll tell you what if you can come up with a little bit of money to remodel this building. We have a building over by the petting zoo. If you want to turn that into an ice cream shop will let you run it and just pay us a percentage of sales. I said well that would be very interesting because we love to have access to all these people but I didn't really know where we would get the money. And my sister and I went to a bank and we found a kind of a young loan officer and we we were given him samples and tell them about what we had about our experience and he said there's no way I should really do this, but I'm going to recommend that we get you alone and it was we had to have $20,000 because that's kind of what the remodel is going to take and and a few other things we had to buy but he helped us get that loan.

2 (34m 36s):
And then the same time my dad was able to get an additional 18 thousand dollars on our land because land prices are going up that year

1 (34m 45s):
and and I mean all these things that happened. I mean obviously a series of Lucky breaks, but with all that money like you guys had a like you have a lot on the line

2 (34m 54s):
there, right? I was very nervous during that period of time because mainly because we had put our family farm up for mortgage and I knew how hard it was to get the Family Farm even halfway paid off, you know. I think I think because of that though, it's kind of like when you hear the term vested interest. I mean I had a very vested interest to make this work somehow and that's kind of what kept me going. And we opened this ice cream store in Opryland on a weekend and the temperature was what it was snowing the night before we were putting up the menu board God, but even with that the next day though, we sold almost $300 worth ice cream, which was higher than any day that they had done in the previous two years.

2 (35m 40s):
Wow. And so when we finally got good weather the following weekend. We were actually doing close to a thousand dollars in sales. I think on one of the days so we were off and running.

1 (35m 53s):
In just a moment when we come back how Dippin Dots spread well beyond Opryland, but eventually faced a meltdown brought on by dead recession and a whole bunch of lawyers. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the

2 (36m 21s):
Walton Family Foundation

1 (36m 23s):
where opportunity takes root more information

2 (36m 26s):
is available at Walton Family Foundation

1 (36m 28s):
dot-org. Starting College can be overwhelming everyone from almost every background has that fear that they got in here by accident? That's scary. NPR's life kit is here to help make your freshman year a little easier. Listen to NPR life kids new guide on college or subscribe to light kit all guys for all the episodes all in one place. Hey, welcome back to how I built this. I'm guy Roz. So it's early 1990s and Dippin Dots are doing pretty well at Opryland in Tennessee and Kurt start selling them to a few other places. If you restaurants even a video store in all of the dots, they're shipped in dry ice from his little Factory in Illinois, but one day two women show up and they want to sell the dots way up in Minnesota and they asked hurt if you can make them a machine to make their own Dippin

2 (37m 27s):
Dots and I said well gosh, I don't know. I mean, I guess you could I said this one's got of a manual machine. I can probably make one. That would be a Our automated and well anyway, long story short after a couple months of talking with them. We actually sold up a piece of equipment to them and I think the total sales like $20,000 by the time we installed it

1 (37m 49s):
now, here's some curious about I mean, it sounds alike. The value of your product was really in the IP you had invented this product and yet somebody wanted to make it themselves and you just sold them on machine without any concern that they would go on and just kind of rip you

2 (38m 8s):
off. Well, we we actually had a lot of concerns but I think sometimes you're just in a position where you have to say, you know, well, I've got to take a risk because we need the money, you know. Yeah, and that's not where we were at that time. Now, that's the only time we ever really did that. Yeah,

1 (38m 24s):
and I think

2 (38m 26s):
I like what you just said because I think a lot of people do look at me sometimes and think I was almost naive and some of the things that I did and some of the things I tried but I try to tell people like if I'm talking to a group of college kids or something like that. I'm like, you know, I really wish that business going forward there would be more trust because Sometimes you just have to trust and and and give things a chance and you will get burnt a lot of times but you have to stay open-minded to get to the next level as well.

1 (38m 55s):
So it's sort of the early 90s you start to find your footing at Opryland. Do you remember like by what point did you start to see some money coming in? Like where were you thought hey we're going to be okay. Well, it would

2 (39m 12s):
have been 1991 that we would have started getting some actual income from Opryland. I think that first year we ended up doing three hundred fifty thousand dollars in sales.

1 (39m 23s):
Wow, and then I guess like right around that time you guys started to get into a few more theme parks. Right?

2 (39m 30s):
Right. We ended up getting into the Kennedy Space Center in the in the summer of 1992. Wow, and my wife and daughter and I drove down in a basically an Old Farm pick up that we use to deliver product in and we put a kiosk and it was a blue and white. Kiosk and they wanted it to say they didn't want to say Dippin Dots. They wanted to say spaced dots and so we had come up with the term ice cream of the future the year before

1 (39m 58s):
I scream of the future,

2 (39m 60s):
right? So we've come up with that term and it worked you got people to stop and see what we were doing. And so I was setting it up one morning. We were trying to get open like it is around 10 o'clock in the morning and one of them came over close to where I was at and I said, how's it going I said, are you are you sampling and she said no. She said people have just lining up to buy it. Wow, and I said, what do you mean that's how I've never seen that before and I went over to where the kiosk was and sure enough. We had like seven or eight people in line and I thought holy cow, you know, this is amazing and all of a sudden we went from telling them how much they'd have to sample to. How are we going to keep enough product down here

1 (40m 40s):
Lau is that because people wanted to try the ice cream of the future. Yeah. I think you know, it was just the perfect.

2 (40m 46s):
Environment for you got this bright blue and white kiosk the says, you know spaced Dots ice cream of the future and somehow it just clicked and so they started going through where we're Opryland had projected one time to do a hundred gallons a day. They were almost doing that much. I mean they were

1 (41m 3s):
at the Kennedy Space Center, right? And as you are kind of growing in the mid-90s, where were you were you in k your wife, were you guys mainly working at the Opryland kiosk or did you just start to travel around various kiosks that we're selling Dippin Dots? Well during the theme park

2 (41m 23s):
months. We ended up renting an apartment in Nashville, and we would take other people down with us because it took several people to run the park. So sometimes we would have six or seven or eight employees instead of putting them in hotel rooms. We rented one apartment and my mother was a nurse and she would get these things. We called eggshell mattresses. That were little foam rubber things, you know, like once they were used and they threw him away she would grab him bring him home and we would use those for bids for people to sleep on hmm. It's okay and I were typically in Opryland most of the time dry summer.

1 (42m 1s):
And what about the revenue, you know by the mid 90s was Revenue pretty good. Did you were you able to kind of pay back the loans where you mean? Were you making a lot of money at that point? I was still kind of touch and

2 (42m 16s):
go well by the mid 90s. We were starting to make a little bit of money. So within five years or so, we had reached a million dollars in sales on a wholesale level and then in addition to that we had the retail profits from Opryland, which it was starting to become profitable and then of course the park shut down unfortunately because it we just got it figured out how to make money

1 (42m 36s):
there, but we're starting to get some

2 (42m 38s):
revenue and not rolling in the dough by any means because when you host sell a product and you start getting customers you Have to kind of bring up the back end like we had to figure out how to make kiosk we had to figure out how to keep freezers in stock. And we had to build you know, we went from like the garage to a 2000 square-foot building that needs to be built that so you're always spending pretty much what you made but we were starting to generate some income at least in the mid-90s.

1 (43m 6s):
I guess by the late 90s you decide hey, you know instead of selling the wholesalers and then they have kiosk less franchise this thing. Let's get people to take on a franchise and set it up set it up in shopping malls

2 (43m 18s):
and wherever

1 (43m 20s):
and how many how many people signed up to become franchisees?

2 (43m 25s):
So we had a hundred and five of our dealers sign our franchise

1 (43m 29s):
contract? Okay, and then when what were the terms they have to buy obviously by Dippin Dots from you at wholesale price is right, right. And then what was your take from from that from the

2 (43m 40s):
sales? We actually lowered our price when we convert it to a franchise K. We did start collecting. Four percent of their sales for percent of your

1 (43m 49s):
annual sales would go to Dippin Dots, which is a pretty good deal. Actually, it's not it's not bad at all. Right. How do you by the way? How do you account for that? How do you make sure that people are actually giving you four percent of their annual sales?

2 (44m 3s):
Well, that was a real problem because these folks were out doing fairs and festivals handling a lot of cash. We knew that we weren't getting all of our our royalties at the end of the day, but we pretty much knew how much product we were selling and we could estimate what we should be getting back and eventually many years later. We actually kind of change the way that we collected. We actually start building the franchise fee into the product. It's kind of like you pay for the product and you paid an additional ten cents a bag for the franchise royalty if you will and then we collected like a penny for the advertising fund and you know kind of set it up did it that way and it actually made it better for

1 (44m 38s):
everyone. Do you remember what your annual annual sales were at at their

2 (44m 43s):
Peak at the peak? That would have been 2006 we did 40s almost 47 million in sales. I think of right at 47 million. Wow, and that was wholesale sales.

1 (44m 54s):
Wow, you know, I'm sort of curious because I read that you know, you also had some competitors people who were trying to do what you were doing. There was one in particular called Mini Melts and I guess this guy was making it in Texas and was it was a product pretty close to to yours to Dippin Dots, right? And this actually turned into this like very complicated legal battle the like lawsuits and Cara lawsuits and like lasted for like 10 years and cost you like 10 million dollars. Is that right?

2 (45m 24s):
It is and you know, I think at the time I probably was naive. I thought that I really thought that our legal system and I don't want to sound wrong, but I really thought you you would get just as if you will and her and and all we really wanted the guy to do is to stop what he was doing because we felt like he was infringing of The patent right the first name that he used when he was just directly infringing every step of our patent was where we were I Dippin Dots ice cream in the future the name of his company was dots of fun. Wow, tomorrow's ice cream today. Wow, you know, so totally playing what we were doing and so we were suing him for I think around 16 million dollars.

2 (46m 9s):
Will he countersuit us for ten million dollars and ours was based on infringement his is based on antitrust because he one of the defense's you have if you're being sued for patent infringement and you're caught red-handed is you can say well we want to see if the patent is valid. So my patent basically got put on trial and what they ended up doing is they said that our patent was going to be invalidated because of fraud that me and my patent attorney back in 1988-89 perpetrated on the patent office. Well, there was no fraud But the when it came down they basically said well you're going to lose your patent that was hard enough, but then the judge said well because we proved that there was fraud.

2 (46m 57s):
Yes. You should have your attorneys fees pay so all of a sudden we were stuck with a six hundred thousand dollar bill. Well, well then the attorneys from Dallas that had been in all this time. They said we want our attorneys fees paid. So we ended up having to come up with basically four million dollars at the end of this lawsuit. So we had spent six million we end up spending for on them and I had to spend an additional $750,000 to appeal this decision to get my name cleared that I had not committed fraud but we did not get our patent back. It's ridiculous to be honest with you. But

1 (47m 34s):
I mean, I'll say it you have to say Kurt at the end of the day. The only winners are lawyers.

2 (47m 40s):
Well, you did say in you're exactly right and looking back, you know lat some people ask me so well. What would you do different if you you know, if you look back down and I suppose the correct answer is like well, I would have settled and then it wouldn't have cost me 10 million dollars, but my answer is that I probably would do the same thing again because your built the way your milk, you know, yeah.

1 (48m 4s):
Here's here's what I'm wondering 2007 a couple things happen sales start to slow. You've got to pay this all this money for lawyers and you've got to pay the lawyers of this other of the other side of the lawsuit, which is crazy. And then 2008 financial crisis. It's like a perfect storm of just bad news. Do you start to feel the impact on the business pretty quickly?

2 (48m 31s):
What we do, you know in 2007 we actually had almost identical sales that we had in 2006. I mean within a hundred thousand dollars, we had another decent year in sales, but it was actually different for us because we were used to Growing every year. So right it was kind of a level in it and there was a little concerning but but the real concerning part was the fact that milk prices have gone up 34% that year gas prices are going up. Yep a lot between 2006 and 2007 and then our liquid nitrogen cost went up like 10 percent. And so all of a sudden on almost the same sales we had went from like a net of two or three million dollars in profits to a loss actually and we're looking at it thinking wow.

2 (49m 18s):
Well, you know, hopefully it's a one year thing. Nobody really thought about I mean the recession had really started yet. Yeah, in fact someone in our accounting department contacted our local bank they said hey, you know, we're A rough year, we might not be able to pay this down the way we normally do or we want to talk to you about restructuring something and the local Bankers Leo. Yeah, we're familiar with your business. You guys. Are you have 40 million dollars in assets. And so they said, you know look will we know you just spent a couple million dollars on your plant doing some things. Well, we'll look at all your collateral basically. Don't worry about it that will just give you a three-month extension. The bank said this the make said this but on the day that that three-month extension was do we got an email that said you're in default because you have not paid your credit line down this puts all of your term loans in default as well.

2 (50m 12s):
Wow, and of course again being a little bit stubborn and I'm like, well, we'll just go to another bank. Well, that's when the banking crisis was starting to hit somebody time. We did all of our paperwork and everything and had one or two banks that were interested all of a sudden no, but everything started going

1 (50m 27s):
upside everybody just tight everybody tightens up all the doors shut. No money, everything freezes. No one wants to give you money. So you have you've got this 13 million dollars in debt. And I guess from what I read your creditors kind of also devalued your assets. And so it meant that there was a point where it Dippin Dots is a company owed the

2 (50m 48s):
creditors more than you actually owned assets. Yeah, and that's the sad part about the way that this all works because fear comes into the play, you know, a lot of things happen to where all of a sudden yeah, we were upside down. I mean, there's no other way to to say it. So you start this now

1 (51m 6s):
what's going to become a multi. I think a three-year kind of standoff

2 (51m 11s):
with your creditors trying to restructure these loans

1 (51m 14s):
meantime our sales declining continuing to decline

2 (51m 20s):
They are and that that's the part that really I mean part of our standoff in part of our strategy was that is that we know what pick right back up and we're going to have a good sales next year, you know, he's got to survive till next year, but I don't think anybody saw the recession that we had at that time. I don't think anyone knew how bad it was going to really be and yeah, like I said fear sets in because I'm thinking we can sell our way through it. But you know, I think a lot of our franchisees and just everybody kind of wants to kind of hide under a rock till the storms over and so less product is sold and before long you've got a negative Trend which you know doesn't doesn't work out for you. What about your personal finances

1 (52m 1s):
were like, what were they in trouble at that time, too?

2 (52m 5s):
Yeah, you know, I mean we could have taken the position of well, you know, here's the keys of the building you you know you Bankers come in if you're out of work it and we could have walked away and been okay, but you know, we we also had 200 employees. And by the way, I grew up on a farm in the second poorest county of the state of Illinois right next to the poorest county and I knew growing up that you know the job that you get in that area if you weren't farming where you could be a teacher or you could work at the prison and that was you know, there was a few other little factories and things around there but not much and we had provided, you know about 200 jobs for that area.

2 (52m 47s):
I guess we were just thinking, you know, hey, we just got to get through this and everything's going to be better. I mean, I just kept that going and then you know 2008 comes 2009-2010. I mean, it just keeps going on and on and on and and it certainly affected us. Personally quite a bit you essentially get to a point where you

1 (53m 11s):
you know, you can't the banks are just not going to refinance this and you got to figure it out and you got to the point where you had to file for bankruptcy for chapter 11 bankruptcy at that point was the idea to restructure the company and come back to fight another day or or did you think it was going to be the end of the road?

2 (53m 31s):
Well, I always thought that Dippin Dots would survive. It's such a strong brand and Yeah, we actually felt like we're going to dig our way out of this. We just really need to work out some with the bank. Well, it ended up, you know, when you when you go into a bank and somebody want your business. They're you know, they're friendly just like anybody else trying to make a sale. But when you get on the wrong side of the bank, it's like you're dealing with well. I don't know how to describe it, but you're not dealing with the same Pleasant salespeople that you signed up with. Yeah. So this meeting ended up getting a little bit heated and they actually said well, we're glad you could come up and meet and unfortunately this isn't going to work out but by the way, we've actually already filed foreclosure papers on so we call them make a meeting in good faith.

2 (54m 18s):
And while we're on our way up there, they're actually putting foreclosure papers together. Well, the only option you have at that point. If you don't want somebody coming in and running your business the next day is that you can file for bankruptcy and I learned more about bankruptcy and those next few hours driving home than I ever knew. And so the idea is that yeah, well will file for a chapter 11 because we knew if we could just restructure the debt we could get somebody in there which is work with us. We could figure out how to make everything work. So the idea was you'd

1 (54m 47s):
restructure and then come back and see if you could get it off the ground again, but it would happen was somebody came into and made an offer to buy

2 (54m 58s):
Dippin Dots was

1 (54m 60s):
May of 2012 Chapel. I think it's pronounced Chapel energy Scott Fischer his dad Mark Fisher made an offer bot Dippin Dots. And that was it. It was no longer

2 (55m 14s):
your company.

1 (55m 16s):
Will you sort of in a position where you were kind of felt like you had to you had to you know choice you had to sell not not

2 (55m 22s):
exactly. I mean the white the way that that happened and was about three days after we had filed for chapter 11 course this hit the Press, you know, Wilshire and I got an email from the Fisher's I don't know what I said in the initial email is basically, you know, are you looking for an investor and I thought you know, yeah, I wouldn't why not either Yeah, we thought well, hey Leon Lett. Yeah, let's just be partners, you know, and we kind of structured up or kind of had kind of a deal that we kind of put together. We thought would work for each entity. And so unfortunately in doing that though, I kind of put my eggs in their basket. Yeah, and I don't want to be very negative here because I don't know everything that happened on their side, but basically my deal with them kind of kept getting worse and worse to where I ended up with really no ownership in the deal.

2 (56m 12s):
They basically bought the company for the debt. They kept me on a CEO for three years and I was supposed to be able to earn back into the company, you know based on performance and we did have good performance. Once we got the bank out of the way and yeah with very little money being put into the company. We got our sales up 16% you know the rest of 2012. We went up twenty two percent the next year and then about 25% in the third year, but there was a point in there to where it was an Actually renewable agreement, but it could be terminated by either side and they dealt me out of the Dippin Dots.

2 (56m 52s):
Basically, I don't know what the reason was exactly. They just said, you know what I think we're going to not renew your contract and we're going to run it ourselves. And so basically we were kind of left on the

1 (57m 4s):
street and and what you walked out of there with nothing.

2 (57m 10s):
Well, I stayed there for three years and I'm I miss Ellie's in salary and we cooperated during that whole process of that six-month period of backing things out of bankruptcy and and bringing in new owners because we thought we would always be a part of it at some level, you know, that those are things that we we might not have done a lot of the things we did, you know, had we known how things are going to turn out. But again, we don't have any regrets. I mean Dippin Dots Was great for over 25 years and so we're not complainers where you know, we've I understand what we've learned to do is just accept it, you know and you get up and you fight the next day and you do something, you know, I always say to my wife I said, okay fortunately we've been able to keep our health through all this and we all know how to work and you know, we started this new coffee company and it's kind of like we're back in 1988 again, to be honest with you that's kind of where we've been the last year or two.

2 (58m 10s):
Just trying to take something that we know and do something similar to what we

1 (58m 16s):
did which I guess we should mention that over the past few years, I guess two or three years you started this company 40 below Joe which is a mix coffee dot so like, you know, like kind of Dippin Dots but for coffee like I shot a caffeine, right? Yeah, and I started playing

2 (58m 33s):
with them freezing espresso right out of the espresso machine with liquid. Nitrogen and part of my thinking was that I'd always heard people like Baristas at Starbucks and different places say, you know, you really want to use your espresso shot immediately because within seconds it starts breaking down, you know, and so I thought well what if you captured it right when it was made and froze it and then kept it at a very cold temperature would it would it would it change and in doing some experiments? I found that it didn't, you know, not only could you bring it back to life a day later? You could bring it back to life a month.

2 (59m 13s):
Later.

1 (59m 15s):
This this new Venture the 40 below Joe. Maybe it may take off. But either way your legacy, you know, your story is a story of incredible success and in the the odds were against you and you kept coming back because you believed in this thing and you got it to be a 40 million dollar a year company, right which is extraordinary and then obviously, you

2 (59m 40s):
know, we

1 (59m 42s):
know what happened later, but when you think about it, do you feel like that success was the product of luck or do you think that success came primarily from how hard you work? I

2 (59m 54s):
think luck always has a little bit to do with something that but I think it came and not just me. I mean believe me I had you know, a lot of family members and a lot of other people, you know, they were close to the company in the early days at work really really hard. But no, I think luck always plays a little bit of a roll but I think most of it is just from perseverance that we all had in the belief that we had in it because it's funny, you know Dippin Dots is just one of those things that when you get around it and you're working with it, it kind of takes on a life of its own. It's kind of like a magical thing and we don't really know what made it that way. If you told me to go invent a product that all kids would like her majority of kids will like I wouldn't know where to start it just one of those things that happened.

2 (1h 0m 40s):
Yeah and as much as we talked about how much we don't like the way the American legal system is I really believe in America because you know, you have opportunities to do anything you you can dream of and I think I'm a perfect example of that.

1 (1h 0m 56s):
Drink all of these points where like you almost failed you ran out of money. You went back you raise more money you ran out of that money then then you get a lucky break and then you had some success Decay ever say in at any point. Hey Kurt, like you have a degree in microbiology. Like let's let's get out of this hamster wheel. They let's just just get a job with a paycheck. Let's just let's just stop doing this.

2 (1h 1m 22s):
No she did she never did and you know K are high school sweethearts. We went together for five years and have been married almost 40 years now, but I think she just knew what she got, you know, and and she kind of knew my personality and she's been with me every step of the way and is agreed with decisions at that. I've met you no, right or

1 (1h 1m 42s):
wrong sounds like there's a probably the greatest decision that you made.

2 (1h 1m 47s):
Yeah, I think so because we certainly been through a lot together and we are closer today than we probably ever have been and it's just an Chapter of our life and what do you see where it takes us?

1 (1h 2m 0s):
That's Kurt Jones founder of Dippin Dots and his new company 40 below Joe which is now available in about 200 locations. And by the way, you can also enjoy 40 below Joe in fully melted form. Chris says that K actually likes to heat up the Frozen espresso pellets in the microwave and a bit of water and hazelnut creamer and voila. She's got a hot cup of hazelnuts show for breakfast. And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from one of our 2019 lead sponsors of how I built this hiscox.

1 (1h 2m 45s):
Hiscox. Taylor's its policies to fit every business has very specific needs which may explain. It's 97 percent customer service rating get a quote or by at H is co x.com You probably know a lot about former Vice President Joe Biden, but what you might not know is how his faith was tested when his wife and daughter were killed in a car accident

2 (1h 3m 12s):
God my God why I got really angry. I shouted out why me. Why would he do this to me? How can you be a God let this happen

1 (1h 3m 21s):
Biden tells that story and explains his Run for the presidency in an exclusive interview with the NPR politics podcast

2 (1h 3m 29s):
subscribe.

1 (1h 3m 34s):
Hey, thanks so much for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that this week. Our story is about snacks the majority of snacks that we eat in the US are made of three things. They're made of corn wheat and rice, but Nadine Abaya thinks Americans should you know Branch out a little there are so many beautiful ingredients that exist in the rest of the world that we just don't know about yet and they didn't actually discovered one of those beautiful ingredients about three years ago when she was hanging out with her friend pre all who just come back from a trip to India. She pulled out this bag of these homemade snacks that at first glance looked like popcorn would look like popcorn to Nadine were actually popped water lily seeds popped white fluffy seeds harvested from lily pads that grow in Northern India and people there have been snacking on them for centuries.

1 (1h 4m 31s):
It has a very beautiful smokiness to it. It easily sort of dissolves in your mouth and almost immediately Nadine kind of got addicted these crunchy little Puffs and you remember saying to pre all you know, what I bet we could sell these things. Yes. It was that immediate. We looked at each other and we thought this is something we have to bring to the US market how conveniently for Nadine she was in business school at the time and she started to do a little research on water lily seeds. They have about 50% more protein than popcorn. They have fewer calories and fat and my favorite part is that they actually have no Colonel so there is nothing to get stuck in your teeth.

1 (1h 5m 13s):
Anyway, Nadine decided to experiment with her own pops. She went to an Indian specialty store near her apartment in Boston. She bought a bunch of pups seeds and made them with all different kinds of seasonings cheeses Indian spices sriracha, and she started giving out samples to classmates and complete strangers asking every question. She could think of They would buy it how much they would buy it for what kind of flavors they wanted what kind of texture where people are looking for and they deem got enough positive feedback that she and pre all decided to order a half of a shipping container full of puff seeds from India and then they started to look for a co-packer who could roast and season them and so we called tens of hundreds of different co-packers to try to see if somebody would be willing to work with our product.

1 (1h 6m 4s):
But the second that somebody heard seed from India, they were like nope, and they team was actually sympathetic to why the co-packers were saying no to her an Agricultural Product from India. You need to be very sensitive with because the quality standards are not the same as they are in the US but eventually Nadine's partner pre all was able to work with Indian Farmers to make sure the seeds were top quality and the two of them were finally able to convince a Becker to start roasting the snack they called it Bo Hannah and last April they launched we definitely didn't know how people were going to take it.

1 (1h 6m 45s):
We just kind of hoped that people would love it as much as as I did and so far so good after about nine months in the market bohanon snacks are sold online and in about a hundred and fifty grocery in specialty stores across the Northeast and the brand is made about a hundred thousand dollars so far and they Dean says they are no longer. The only puff water lily seeds on the market. The snack is actually becoming a thing. We're seeing the same kind of thing happen with this ingredient around the world in the same way that we saw quinoa or acai or Chia happen here in the US. That's Nadine have by AB of bow Hannah and if you want to find out more about the company or here previous episodes head to our podcast page how I built this to npr.org.

1 (1h 7m 33s):
And of course if you want to tell us your story go to build dot npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe at Apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcasts. And while you're there, please do give us a review. You can also write to us at H IB T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or at Harrah's our show is produced this week by James Della who see with music composed by rum Tina Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Julia Carney David Johnson has Mexican porn Eva Grant and Jeff Rogers. I'm Gyros and even listening to how I built this.

1 (1h 8m 15s):
This is NPR.