0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR, sponsor, CarMax, imagine buying a car the way you want at CarMax, you can buy a car online. You can buy on the lot or a combination of both. Imagine that CarMax car buying re-imagined.

2 (19s):
I remember we had a meeting, you know, we, we told her to bring your ideas. And so we're just going around the room. It was just the classic. What F me, what if we did this, this programmer, Steve Cheskin and he said, what if he said, you know, how independent TV stations have like Marilyn Monroe week or John Wayne week pieces? So they have theme weeks and he's just blurted. I said, what if we had sharp mic? And we kind of all said, yeah, you know, they all kind of looked at me and I said, I think it's a great idea. The idea was as simple as that, but as profound as that, you know,

0 (1m 3s):
From NPR, it's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Ross. And on the show today, how John Hendricks broke into the cable industry with no money, no content and no carrier launched discovery channel, grew it into one of the best known brands on television. About seven or eight years ago. I interviewed the writer, Elizabeth Gilbert on another show I was doing at the time. The theme of the conversation was passion. As in follow your passion.

0 (1m 44s):
It's advice. Many of us have heard before, especially when we're trying to figure out what to do with our lives. Just follow your passion. Someone will say anyway, but Elizabeth Gilbert kind of blew that whole show apart when she stated in no uncertain terms. That for lots of people, that idea is horrible in part because some of us may not have a passion that is remotely connected to making a living and some people, well, they don't have any passions at all. And that's okay. So instead, and I will never forget this because this might rank among the best pieces of advice I've ever heard on one of my shows, Elizabeth Gilbert recommended not to follow your passion, but to follow your curiosity.

0 (2m 33s):
And that is precisely what our guests today, John Hendrix did. He was, and is an intensely curious person, the kind of person who would pour through volumes of the encyclopedia Britannica as a kid, he loved science documentaries that aired on public television shows about the earth and outer space and history. In the early 1980s, John was working as a consultant, helping universities write grant proposals. It was around this time that cable television was just starting to take off. The early stations are ones we know today. CNN, MTV, HBO, ESPN, and John Hendrix ever curious, started to wonder what about a station that was all about knowledge, a channel that could produce and distribute the kinds of science documentaries he loved.

0 (3m 27s):
Now trying to launch a cable channel today is daunting. But back in 1982, when John first had the idea, it seemed insurmountable unless you were well connected and had access to lots of capital, just to get your signal onto a satellite cost upwards of $350,000 a month. And that's after the millions of dollars, it would take to generate the content. But at the time John had neither the connections nor the money. He had no background in the broadcast industry and had never produced any content in his life. And yet he set out over the next four years to convince investors, satellite companies, content providers, and cable distributors, pretty much all at the same time that they should take a risk on him.

0 (4m 19s):
And his idea and idea to build a cable network called discovery today, the discovery channel is among the most watched cable networks. It reaches hundreds of millions of people around the world and is single-handedly responsible for making sharks. One of the biggest draws on television, but as you will hear the road to getting, there was a slog and in 1986, discovery was literally days away from collapsing under the weight of mounting debt. But before any of that happened, John was growing up in Huntsville, Alabama in the 1950s and sixties, his dad was a home builder and his mom worked as an accountant for college.

0 (5m 4s):
John went to the university of Alabama where he majored in history

2 (5m 9s):
For me. I mean, I just, I felt like, you know, you're going to be in college for four years. Why not read about things you're interested in? And I was always interested in history, you know, by the time you're a senior, you need to of course pick your major European ancient history. So mine was kind of a hybrid of American history and the history of science and technology.

0 (5m 31s):
So I've read that while you're in college, you had a job like the AAV center and you, one of the things that you had to do was to get films for, for professors, you could get them like these sort of 16 millimeter documentaries, or films that they were going to show in their classrooms, which clearly was going to plant a seed in your head.

2 (5m 50s):
Yeah, it did. I just became aware of all these documentaries from the BBC, from encyclopedia Britannica films, Time-Life films, and many others that made a big impression on me. And I just had the simple thought. So I must've been all of 21 years old, but my thought was, why can't this be on television? And, you know, from that, I make two phone calls, one to a local broadcast station and they were just definitely not interested. And there was cable was around the, this would have been probably around 1972 or 73, but cable was really a community antenna.

2 (6m 32s):
There are a lot of places in America that couldn't receive a good broadcast signal either. They were down in the hollows or they were in urban areas where large buildings would, would block that. And so there were cable operators and in Alabama, there was the teleprompter cable system. I think it was the general manager actually talked to him and he said, son, this is a good idea, but you gotta understand. We can't by law provide any content other than the retransmission of broadcast signals.

0 (7m 2s):
Well, that's what cable did. I just retransmitted whatever was already being broadcast. Exactly. Cable was literally a cable that enabled people to see existing television. If their antennas couldn't get the broadcast.

2 (7m 16s):
Exactly. Yeah. It was a large community antenna CATV and then from that community antenna, they would string coaxial cable to people's

0 (7m 27s):
To their homes. Yeah. Yeah. You actually, while you're in college, you did a research project for the, I guess, for the Tennessee valley authority. And it actually got published, which I guess kind of led to your first job after you, after you graduated at the university of Alabama, they, they hired you and sent you to Washington DC, right?

2 (7m 49s):
Yeah. So the fact that the Tennessee valley authority published my research paper that I did that summer. I was a published author. I mean, I got, it was registered in the library of Congress, for example. And so it got the attention of the president of the university and he wanted someone to go to Washington, write grant proposals and bring back money to the university.

0 (8m 10s):
I know I'm, I'm gonna, I'm gonna sort of fast forward here for, for a little bit, John, because I know that that job, you, you did that for a brief stint, and then you essentially did the same thing at the university of Maryland cause you already in the area, and then that led you to start your, your basically your own consulting gig business, where you were, you were helping other nonprofits and colleges write their own grandpa puzzles. Right. That's right. And I think it was around that time. This is the late seventies, maybe 78, 79. When you also met your wife, right. The woman who would become your wife Marine.

2 (8m 46s):
Yeah. So we dated, and then we married in 1981.

0 (8m 49s):
And the two of you met, I know that you called it a restaurant, but it was really a bar.

2 (8m 53s):
Yeah. It was a disco in, it was called the apple tree. They served food there. So, you know, my, when I called my mother, my religious mom has just said, where did you meet her? I met her at a restaurant.

0 (9m 8s):
Right. From, from what I understand in your first meeting with Maureen, her pickup line was I work on acoustic propagation model, lots of models.

2 (9m 21s):
Yeah. It was, it was, and I knew a little bit about that. I mean, that was kind of surprised, but I had, Yeah. And so I said, so you work on submarines. And she said, yes, she worked for the office of Naval research and it was just fascinating.

0 (9m 37s):
All right. So you guys are together, you are working full-time on your consulting business and this is probably a good business. Like I imagine, was that was your ambition to kind of grow this consulting business out and maybe make that your life's work.

2 (9m 55s):
Yeah, it was. I mean, I had big plans for what that could become. So I started down that path, but I also had these local Washington DC area groups that I was meeting with. And then one in particular got me off thinking about television. And I think if you ask any entrepreneur why they do something, it's typically because they become passionate about an idea or something at some point in their lives that they can't let go. And it turns into kind of a healthy obsession as I like to call it. And I certainly started my focus on television type television television of course is important to all of us.

2 (10m 38s):
But I think for me, you know, growing up, being able to connect to someone like a Walter Cronkite and Walter Cronkite in particular was kind of, well, he was an idol of mine. I mean, you know, we, we were like many families. We got our news from CBS and Walter Cronkite every evening, but he went further. He loved science and technology and space. And so he did a number of series that I just relished every episode. He did. You are there, which was interesting. He pretended what if you were there at the signing of the declaration of independence or you were there at certain historical moments. And for me it was that same car. Why can't there be more of this?

2 (11m 19s):
Okay. There are now starting to be some bright spots on broadcasting. And so my question is, you know, was why can't there be more of this?

0 (11m 26s):
Where are you following the developments in the cable industry? Or were you just kind of a passive consumer of that news? Like, like Ted Turner founded CNN, I think in 1980, you know, HBO had been founded already in the early seventies. Was it something you were paying attention to or not really?

2 (11m 44s):
No. I wasn't particularly studying, you know, the development of cable. There was a day though in 1975, I'd been at the university of Maryland for a little, you know, a few months I think, and a headline above the fold was the Supreme court decided that the FCC restrictions that prevented the creation of cable networks was not constitutional. And the Supreme court held that anybody who wanted to start a cable network was a first amendment speaker. And so that was this ruling. And for me, it connected again, back to when that question, I asked that cable operator back when I was in college.

2 (12m 28s):
And by that time, by the time the court hearing the ruling happened, you know, HBO was up and it was just sweeping the country. The cable industry likes to call that era. The era of truck chasers, people would see a cable truck come through the community and they would chase it to say, when can I get cable? But what they wanted was HBO. I mean, just the thought of having a different movie every night at eight o'clock that you could watch was revolutionary. All right.

0 (12m 56s):
So you are, you've got the consulting business and mainly what you doing, you're doing work for hospitals, universities, helping them kind of, you know, find funding. But I guess you, you had a, one of your, somebody approached you to work with them. And it was a theology professor who worked at American university who was looking for help to get a, a television series that he, he he'd worked on to get it like wider distribution. First of all, why before we talk about the series, why would he have come to you? And this was not your kind of in your wheelhouse.

2 (13m 36s):
It was because initially he was trying to raise money to support his television efforts, his broadcast efforts. So it was a guy fella named ed Bauman. And what he was trying to do was to help Judaism, Christianity and Islam to understand one another. So he created a series called the children of Abraham and lo and behold know, ABC affiliate in Washington, agreed to provide him the studio space at no charge and support him. And so these telecasts occurred on Sunday mornings, very, very thoughtful.

2 (14m 16s):
So he asked me if I could help them in fundraising, but then they said, could we get this more widely distributed in the country? And so then that's when I started researching in earnest, what could this be on public television? And then by that time, there was enough cable channels that had started. But at that time there was a cable news network. You know, there was a sports network ESPN that started in 79 and there were plans for a music, television, MTV. And so that's w the development was why isn't there a cable. At first, I was thinking, why isn't there an educational channel where this could easily play on?

2 (14m 59s):
And then there wasn't one, and then you start spiraling into this. There's not one, why is there not one? How could you start one? And then that started the process.

0 (15m 9s):
So you, you start to go down a rabbit hole. Did you, who did you first talk to about this idea?

2 (15m 16s):
Well, the very first person was my wife, Maureen. So she liked me. She, we loved great documentaries. And I said, what if there was a channel that was dedicated to great documentaries? And she said, well, that's a great idea. And then she kind of paused. And she said, well, this is such a great idea. Why didn't Ted Turner think about it? And it was a good question. It was, you know, Ted was focused on what he was doing cause he loves documentaries. You know, I've since, you know, being in the business, got to know Ted quite well. And he always thought it was such a mistake of him because he did have the idea for a news network. He just didn't go that next step of, well, what about, you know, long form news and documentaries, and I'm glad he didn't.

2 (16m 1s):
So the origination of that idea specifically now about a channel was in around February of 82. And by that September, I had incorporated

0 (16m 11s):
You, you, it literally incorporated, I mean, well, so you filed a documents for an LLC, which would be to start a cable.

2 (16m 22s):
Yeah. It was actually a company. I was curious, so incorporated what, I, I didn't know exactly what the brand name was was going to be was, but so I called it cable educational network. Inc.

0 (16m 33s):
Did you talk to anybody? Did you, did you reach out to any professionals in the, in the industry to find out like, is this even possible? How do you do this?

2 (16m 42s):
Yeah. So, I mean, at that particular timeframe, it was mainly researching and reading just like, how do you create a channel? Right. You know? Okay. Well, I knew the basics. You have to uplink a signal to satellite. There's 24 transponders on a communication satellite, each one, processing six megahertz of spectrum, each corresponds to a channel. So you can have 24 channels up on a satellite. And so I thought if you're going to be successful, I wanted to find out where CNN, whereas HBO, I want to be on the same satellite. How much would that cost? But there was a time that a little later on that I was really going to people in the industry.

2 (17m 25s):
And I started with Winfield Kelly, who was the general manager of the cable system there in prince George's county, Maryland,

0 (17m 32s):
Which is where you were living, which was

2 (17m 34s):
Where I was living, you know, talk to him about it. And he liked it. He thought that was a great idea. And he, he said, you know what, let me help. Let me set you up with a meeting with his, the parent corporation of the cable system. And he set me up with a meeting and it was, everybody was encouraging. So I think people who are successful in business, they're kind of naturally curious people. And so I think when, when I saw anybody I talked to, if they could see themselves using the service, then I could get to a yes.

0 (18m 8s):
Presumably you knew that there was all this content out there that maybe you could, you can capture. But I mean, as you were doing the research and building a business plan, what did you find out about documentaries in general? Was there was, how did you know there was a market for them?

2 (18m 23s):
Yeah. There had been a number of polls on television research, you know, consumer research. And so I knew there was an appetite for it. There were the, the great experiences that we're all seeing with Carl Sagan and what he was doing on cosmos. PBS had wonderful success with Kenneth Clark's series on civilization. I think, you know, there's 25 to 40% of humanity. That's deeply curious. They really want to know where do we come from? You know, how, how is our future going to be shaped by our past? Where are we in the universe, for example. So it's that audience, which had been largely neglected by what a lot of people had called lowest common denominator programming on the commercial networks.

2 (19m 10s):
Yeah. And so there was a wealth of programming, you know, in comedy and entertainment because that appealed to 60, 70, 80% of the people, but not a lot of content for the 40%.

0 (19m 22s):
Yeah. Here's what I'm wondering about John. I mean, you start to really do a deep dive into this wild while also running your consulting business. So this is presumably like occupying your nights and weekends, this kind of obsession, you are working on a business plan. You were in like early thirties, Sydney or 30 or 31 at this point. And in your business plan, from what I've read, you determined that in order to launch this cable channel that you know, right now you would call it, what was it called? Like

2 (19m 53s):
Cable, the vocational network, Inc.

0 (19m 56s):
But in order to launch it, you would need $25 million, which I understand. And television terms is nothing, but that sounded like a lot of money. I mean, you are not an independently wealthy person. You'd not come from family wealth. You, you had a decent consulting business when you came up with that figure. I mean, weren't, how were you not intimidated, overwhelmed by that prospect? Well,

2 (20m 22s):
It was extremely intimidating. I mean, just doing the research, it was clear that I would have an expense rate of at least a million a month. Okay. And the big portion of that was the satellite transponder and uplink, which is our call was around 330 $340,000 a month.

0 (20m 40s):
You have to pay 300 just to rent this satellite transponder

2 (20m 43s):
Yes. Just to lease. And so as soon as you make a call to RCA America at the time or Westinghouse,

0 (20m 51s):
And these are the satellite owners,

2 (20m 53s):
Yes. For them, it's about a $250 million investment to build and launch a satellite. And so when I called Westinghouse, they were eager for me to be successful. So not only were they calling me every month, have you made any progress, raising money, figuring out the business plan. And so the more experts I talked to, it became a little more real because I knew there was a satellite transponder. I could, I could leave. It was, it was at least Western. He says, we will hold this for you until you get your money ready. That way, then I could talk to investors. And their first question is how are you going to do this? And I said, well, I have this satellite pathway. We know that it'll reach at least 22 million of the 26 million cable households.

2 (21m 37s):
You know? So I started to have these details, you know, the business, but you're right. I knew we would need a minimum of 25 million a little over say two years of operations. Okay.

0 (21m 49s):
I mean, you are there a lot of moving parts with this idea that you had, you had to get on a satellite, which was going to be really expensive. You had to source content, which I'm, you knew for example, that the content side was relatively easy because you'd worked in the university library as a student, and you knew that there were all these documentaries just sitting on shelves, gathering dust. So, you know, that's another challenge, but probably less challenging than the satellite. And then you have to have a revenue model. I mean, while you were building this business plan and talking about it with your wife, was there ever a point where she was like, this just seems like it doesn't, it's so complicated to, to make this happen.

0 (22m 33s):
Like, are we really sure we want to go into this?

2 (22m 36s):
Yeah. I mean, there's always times that you have doubts and there's the moments in times when you get almost in a crisis mode about, you know, the, the financial underpinnings of whatever your is going to be. But I was just always grounded and had confidence. If, if we could just get on satellite, people would respond favorably to it. And that was just my mission. What will it take? But you outline, I mean, it was a puzzle, you know, it was a puzzle.

0 (23m 4s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment? How one of the biggest pieces in that puzzle piece, $6 million investment in John's new channel slips through the cracks at the 11th hour, stay with us. I'm guy Roz and listening to how I built this. This message comes from NPR sponsor, Wix. Where do you go? When you want to create, manage and grow your business online Wix, a leading website creation platform create a site with designer made templates that can be customized for your business and looks great on all devices. Reach new audiences with intelligent SEO tools designed to get you found on search engines and manage it all from one place.

0 (23m 52s):
Join over 200 million people already doing it and head over to wix.com to get started. This message comes from NPR sponsor, Dave's killer bread and organic bread. That's no longer a sedative for your taste buds. Dave's killer bread is on a mission to make the most of the loaf to rid the world of GMOs high-fructose corn syrup and artificial ingredients. While planting the seeds of good and all that, they bake killer taste, killer texture, always organic Dave's killer bread, bread amplified

4 (24m 23s):
Charlemagne. The guy was on the come up. His mental health was on the deacon until his friends like Pete Davidson said, maybe you should talk to someone. You can go into therapy since he was a kid. It was just like, you know what? I'm gonna start going to therapy. How the guy with one of black culture's biggest microphones found his voice, listen on the limits from NPR.

0 (24m 49s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 1982. And John Hendrix is basically going through the checklist of all the things he is going to need to start his new cable channel.

2 (25m 4s):
First, you have to have the distribution infrastructure, which is the satellites. And I talked to Westinghouse and I saw, okay, that's a solvable problem with money. Right? Okay. So the money is the problem. Then you say, well, even if you have the greatest idea, you think, and you can put it on satellite will cable operators actually carry it. And so that's when I would make phone calls and call cable operators and they were all supportive, but then there would always be a challenge. It would be something like John, we love this idea, but we don't have any money to pay for it or regulate it. And so maybe Sunday and they were all kind of pinning their hopes on the cable act of 1984.

2 (25m 45s):
And they felt like if that passed, then perhaps it would unlock a nickel or a dime per month per subscriber. And that would be an important revenue stream.

0 (25m 55s):
This is important to explain, cause obviously not nada, not everyone knows about this, but before 1984 cable was, was highly regulated in, in what the providers could charge to subscribers. We should also mention that this was a time when there were like hundreds of cable distributors and operators, right? It wasn't like today where you've got mass consolidation and just a few big regional players or national players. It was like hundreds, like all over the country, right? So

2 (26m 26s):
There's the big at the time, Comcast was not the biggest cable operator was a company called TCI telecommunications, Inc. And they had all of about 4 million subscribers, but it was clear. They were going to be up to six and maybe even 10 million subscribers. But this was the time as you said, I mean, there were literally thousands of small cable systems sprinkled all across America and you know, their capital investment was fairly low. They had to get some invest in dishes. Each one pointed to as communication satellite that had 24 channels, you know, capture that, that, that image put it into what they called their head end center.

2 (27m 7s):
And from there they would boost the signal through and get it out to the,

0 (27m 14s):
And they would late literally lay down cable in their reading,

2 (27m 18s):
Lay down cable. And they had to face a number of hurdles. As you can imagine, cities didn't want a second poll system. Right. You know, because there were telephone poles. Right. And so there was actually a pole attachment law where cable operators had the right to attach

0 (27m 34s):
Two telephone calls. This is, this is like the early railroad where every tiny railroad, you know, parts of railroad systems were owned by different people. Cause they would lay down the track. Right. And some of these tracks weren't compatible. Right. They had like different gauge sizes. I mean, that's what cable was like in the early eighties, you just had these small little operators who paid to lay down the cable. It was their region. And, and, and they decided what was going to go on there, on, on their channel. But so you, so you would basically, the challenge you had was you had to get onto channels. It's like, it's like having a product and trying to get into every convenience store in America. Like having ice tea and calling every convenience store in America to get on their shelves.

0 (28m 19s):
I mean, that seems like an overwhelming challenge to overcome.

2 (28m 25s):
Yeah. And then in our industry, I mean, you mentioned that, you know, developing the business plan, which means the business model. And so in the early days of cable, it was quickly kind of determined. There would be two business models. One was a model with HBO and later Showtime adopted, which was selling direct to consumer, say for $8 a month, you could subscribe to HBO. And there, the revenue from that subscriber would be split

0 (28m 54s):
With the

2 (28m 54s):
Operator. Yeah. 50% of the cable operator, the distributor and 50% to the national source, like a content provider like HBO. The other was the route that Ted Turner went, which was building a channel that would get widely distributed and you could charge advertising. And then what Ted Turner and others like ESPN, who many times had the launch without charging the cable operator, any fee, they all clung to the hope that someday the cable operator could charge what the market would bear. They might increase their rates from $16 a month for cable service to $18, but that they would add on two or three services.

2 (29m 39s):
Right? And that's where we saw an opportunity that at some point we could get a nickel or a dime that the cable operator would pay. When you can multiply a dime times, 4 million homes a month, all of a sudden you have a decent revenue stream to help pay your,

0 (29m 56s):
To help keep the business going. But the idea was, you'd go to an operator and say, Hey, look, you guys need content. We make great content. Here you go. And you would essentially offer it to them for free.

2 (30m 9s):
I'll be free for two years. But in the third year you will get green to pay us a nickel, if you have the freedom to do so from through deregulation. Got it. Got it. So we were, were, we were really rooting for deregulation.

0 (30m 25s):
Right? All right. So you had huge challenges to overcome in this business model and you, but you decide, this is I'm going to pursue this thing and I need to raise money. And so when you went down to, I guess you are connected with these, these folks from store or communications in Fort Lauderdale, which was at the time of a fairly sizable cable operator, presumably you went down to them looking to see if they might give you some seed money to start this up. And you were, were you looking for $25 million at that point?

2 (30m 59s):
No, not at that point. It was just like, I was trying to see if they might be a prospect to be part of a consortium or a group of investors. Right. It turned out they weren't a good prospect, but they were very helpful. They had very bright marketing team. That was the set in, on the meeting and said, you've got to decide, what do you want to be? Do you want to be a premium service? Do you want to be a basic, only service and just live on advertising and you got to pick a name that's better than cable educational network. I said, no, I know. I know. So it was kind of a key moment on the plane ride on the way home. I remember just writing down names and, you know, by the end of that trip, I had Monday morning, that was on a Friday.

2 (31m 41s):
And on Monday morning I had picked the name discovery and kind of started thinking about discovery, but there was a number of prospects. I mean, I love the word, explore curiosity, wonder something bright and uplifting. I knew I didn't want to go with something that the consumer didn't immediately understand. I felt like Nickelodeon, for example, it doesn't really in a vacuum when it was first introduced. What is Nickelodeon? Now later, we all now know it's a children's channel, but I wanted to be fairly simple, like cable news network. You knew exactly what that was when Ted started it. So, you know, the discovery channel, I felt people would understand what that is.

0 (32m 25s):
All right. But what I'm trying to understand here, John nine, this is a sort of early 1983 now, and this is this ideas. Now it being in your head for about nine months, you still haven't raised a dime at this point. No, no. You're you and you're pitching, right? You're pitching people and

2 (32m 42s):
Yeah, 15 people. And then the other, other, you know, the building blocks of this, we kind of covered several of them. But this other question about advertising, I kind of looked on PBS, who's sponsoring cosmos, you know, and I remember making a call early on to general motors and they were kind enough to say, well, that's handled, you know, by our agency. And so I got in touch with the agency, that agency for general motors. And so they said, this is an intriguing idea, but they said, John, to, for us to advertise in earnest, you know, you need distribution in at least 15 million households, you know, ask why they said, well, that's the minimum number of households that Nielsen needs to actually issue a ratings report.

2 (33m 29s):
So that was an initial threshold. So how long would I have to spend money at a million dollars a month? You know, before we could reach 15 million homes, because that would have been the first time we could actually have meaningful advertising revenue.

0 (33m 48s):
Okay. So, so clearly, and not, not to be blunt about it, I guess I shouldn't be blunt at this point. You, you don't have a whole lot to work with, right? I mean, you, you, you don't have any advertisers, you don't have any investors, you don't have a distributor. What about the content piece where you, where you at least like starting to reach out to like producers and content providers to get some of their programming? Yes,

2 (34m 14s):
By that time I had, you know, a kind of a preliminary contract in the development of the BBC. So I knew what a large body of 500 hours of content would cost what it

0 (34m 25s):
Cost,

2 (34m 26s):
Oh, actually fairly affordable. So a documentary that the BBC would have spent a hundred thousand to $250,000 on, I could really license for only a thousand dollars an hour. Wow. And so, and again, for them, it's just found money. So

0 (34m 44s):
At that time they weren't being repurposed. There was no other distribution,

2 (34m 47s):
The market for it. So here's this guy from America who was offering $500,000, you know, each, you know, to pay for each year, we paid that amount each year to license it. And so for them, well, that's another two, three great documentaries we can do.

0 (35m 3s):
But in some ways that year, right? Cause you're, you're financing this through you, presumably your consulting work. And, and really there wasn't much to finance, but you were kind of building and I hope this doesn't sound disrespectful, John, because I'm absolutely just blown away by your audacity. You were kind of building a house of cards here because on the one hand you were going to the BBC and saying, Hey, you know, I'll, let's work on a $500,000 contract you're going to Westinghouse or whoever the satellite company wasn't says. And you're saying, yeah, let's, let's talk about this deal. Meantime, you didn't have any money to do these deals.

0 (35m 43s):
So where you telling these potential partners, listen, I got to raise the money, but this is sort of the deal I'm thinking of.

2 (35m 50s):
Yeah. You have to do everything. I mean, everything has to be transparent. So it's contingent, you know? So when you talk to the BBC is like, you know, this, this is my plan and it's contingent upon financing. And you know, part of that financing is going to be contingent upon if I can get letters of intent to carry the service right.

0 (36m 7s):
From distributors. And did you get those letters?

2 (36m 10s):
Yes. And so, you know, all of this is building throughout, you know, 83. And then by December of 84, it was clear. I had talked to enough investment bankers. I was getting close closer to one investment banker. And here were the conditions that they would invest. I said, John, if you can furnish this evidence, as you can get distribution, if you furnishes evidence through a contingent contract that you can get content and we can see that advertisers would be interested, then we'll invite.

0 (36m 43s):
And by the way, these are investment banks in New York, right. That you're going to yes. And because this is really before the time of venture capital, which really kind of exploded in the last 20 years is early eighties. How did you even get get meetings when you were, you were not a media mogul? Like how did you even get into the door? Cause I think you weren't met with like Merrill Lynch and

2 (37m 6s):
Yeah, there was a number of like Oppenheimer, you know, for example,

0 (37m 10s):
How did you even get into the door?

2 (37m 12s):
It's an overused word, but it's called networking. But it's as simple as asking friends. Right. And contacts, people who might know, and every entrepreneur, you have to have a tolerance for hearing. No.

0 (37m 23s):
How do you have that? How did you, cause you were 30, 30, 30, 31, you, a kid at this point

2 (37m 28s):
You have to be, you have to be so confident that you know, more than the person who's telling you. No. Right. And so you have confidence in your research. You have confidence in all that background of conversations you've had with cable operators, with content providers. And you just have to say, I am working on these conditions and I know, but there's that ultimate confidence that I had, that if I can just put this on satellite, people are going to respond favorably

0 (37m 57s):
And you had real evidence. I mean, you, you, you had to like ratings from, from television networks that showed when they air documentaries or when PBS air documentaries on science, the ratings went up. Yeah.

2 (38m 11s):
But you have setbacks. You do have setbacks. You have, there are several moments like that. And you know, one of my heroes was Walter Cronkite. And when he stepped down from the anchors chair for CBS evening news, it was kind of on a promise that CBS would, would invest in a series for him called universe, that he would air every Tuesday night and lo and behold, right in the middle of my fundraising for discovery channel, CBS canceled, Walter Crow

0 (38m 42s):
Canceled this basically signaling that, no, this actually there is no market for this.

2 (38m 48s):
Exactly. And one person pointed out, well, what makes this fellow Hendrix think that he can make documentaries work on television when CBS just canceled Walter Cronkite's universe series. And that, that is, that's a great question. And so I kind of knew the answer and I got in touch with Walter,

0 (39m 12s):
You actually reached out to Walter Cronkite and said, Hey, can I meet with you? Yes. Well, he was one of the most famous people in America at that point.

2 (39m 20s):
Exactly. So, you know, I, I guess my telephone skills were a little bit good by this time I called and the person who answered that fallen, I'll never forget her. Never forget her name blanche. Laffite just love that name. Well, she was his personal assistant and I said, I would love to have an opportunity to talk to Mr. Cronkite about a cable channel devoted to documentaries. I think he might have an interest in it. And she said, well, write me a letter no more than one page. And so I did. And then lo and behold, was it like maybe the end of the following week, the phone rang and by house early one morning, about eight 30.

2 (40m 6s):
And there was that voice at the end to the other end of the line. And Walter Cronkite was, it was, it was funny cause he called me Mr. Hendrix. He says, Mr. Hendrickson, I'm just read your letter. And I'm very intrigued. And it was like, unbelievable. And at first I thought, wait a minute, there's some people who know that I'm trying to reach Walter Cronkite.

0 (40m 28s):
Yeah.

2 (40m 28s):
Yeah. But it was clear. It was him and he couldn't have been nicer. And he said, you want to come up here and I'll tell you the whole story about what I've done in non-fiction television. And I was on a train, I think within the week and found myself with Walter Cronkite

0 (40m 46s):
And you got him and this is something that's really amazing at red, which is every time you met with people, whether it was like potential advertisers or Walter Cronkite, you got him to write you a letter, basically endorsing your idea, not even committing to it or, and just saying, Hey, I'm Walter Cronkite. This is a great idea. Yes. And you would show those letters to investors. Yep. All right. So 1984, you are really trying to raise money and I read it at a certain point. You were, I mean, you were offering as much as like 40% of the business for $5 million.

2 (41m 22s):
Yeah, it was, yeah. It was clear. I wasn't. And I knew it was going to have to be more equity soul than that because w after consulting with Allen and company, and they're really bright and we had kind of investors lined up where we could see maybe 2 million, which is like

0 (41m 42s):
Two months. And by the way, Allen and company, just to clarify, this is an investment bank that you were working with to get funding, right? Yeah.

2 (41m 48s):
Yes. And so we thought, you know, the first stage would be, we could maybe within the first year, you know, the first six months raise 5 million, but show some success and then raise maybe another five or 6 million. But it was clear. The fundraising couldn't be in, in one fell swoop of 25 million. That was just unrealistic. But everybody felt, you know, this is a gamble and the earliest gamble was the riskiest gamble we closed on. Our very first round of financing was $2 million. That was extremely, extremely risky.

0 (42m 23s):
All right. So 1984, there's this trade show in Anaheim, California. And you've got a booth there for discovery channel, but you, you didn't have any content yet that you could show people. But I guess you, you, at this show, you had worked on like a sizzle reel.

2 (42m 44s):
Yes. And so when cable operators would come to our booth, we would show them that. And they said, this looks interesting. And they would give me a verbal, but I knew I needed something more than a verbal, but Westinghouse anxious to lease a transponder for the satellite 300,000. Yeah. The satellite transponder said, John, you know, we'll donate. We will give you the use of the satellite for a week

0 (43m 12s):
For free, for free in exchange

2 (43m 15s):
For what they're doing in exchange. If you can get the, raise the money, we want to be your satellite provider.

0 (43m 22s):
Wow. They said to you give us content and we'll give you a week's free. We'll be near.

2 (43m 27s):
Yeah. So we put up a sneak preview, what would I call a sneak preview?

0 (43m 31s):
Basically, you, you got content and you bundled it up into a week's worth of programming. And this Westinghouse satellite beaned it out. But, but, but basically all that did was enabled cable companies to see the feed. They were not broadcasting it. They just had the ability to see what the satellite was sending out. So in other words, you could have in theory made, I don't know, a thousand video cassettes and sent them each a video cassette

2 (44m 3s):
Instead, but very efficient way to

0 (44m 5s):
Distribute. This is an efficient way for people to see it. Right. Okay. And what was on it, by the way, what were you showing?

2 (44m 10s):
Okay. That was science and technology. There were some sample content that by that time, the BBC had cleared some rights to allow us to uplink some content. Again, knowing that if it was successful, then you know, I would have the $500,000 for the, for the first payment to BBC. And so they, everybody was incented to banking this as success by this time.

0 (44m 37s):
Yeah. All right. Here's what I'm trying to figure out. The timeframe is crazy to me. Cause I think by the spring of 85, you manage, this is now a year and a half in of just pounding the pavement, trying to raise money. You get the commitments that you need. And so the investors come in and, and they make an investment led by Allen and company and you raise like $5 million.

2 (45m 2s):
Yep. But you know, you got to dig down, you know, how much money can you possibly put into the venture? And I didn't have a lot. And so, you know, we were in, in risk of, you know, our American express card being canceled. We used American express, my American express card to pay so many expenses. And, you know, I had just some people who were working for me and there was a guy who had recently retired from COMSAT general and he surprised me one day with a $50,000 check, which was all the money in the world.

0 (45m 37s):
But what I'm trying to, I'm trying to understand John is the devil with television. The devil is in the details. It's like, you know, for example, you know, the shows had to be 52 minutes or 55 minutes and the edits were, it had to be exactly right. To hit the posts and all those things. How are you able to source the people who knew how to do that stuff?

2 (45m 58s):
Yeah. So it pointed out a difficult phase for every entrepreneur. And that is that phase between the time you have the idea, you've got the plan, you're got the elements together and you can see that this will lead to months later, a successful fundraising effort for us. It was the 5 million. Where do you operate? What funds? Cause I needed staff, you know, I needed staff

0 (46m 26s):
Knew how to run a television network.

2 (46m 29s):
Exactly. And so, you know, I recruited a guy who was head of the radio television and film department at the university of Maryland. Wow. You know, he knew all about how to do a television station. And I was just so fortunate in that I had access to a major university in a few miles away for them. This was a goldmine of internship opportunities for some of their students to come over and edit films. And to meet that clock, as you said, you have to create your model clock. And so things had to be edited down very crisply so that they could be loaded into the, at the master control facility.

2 (47m 9s):
And then the clock would start and each item would play in sequence.

0 (47m 14s):
All right. So it's June 17th, 1985, which, which is the day you actually launch where, where the discovery channel is going out, it's going to be sent out to the public. And I think, I think on that day you had to like close to 20 employees. You had roughly I think $5 million of runway. And by the way, on that first day, how many people in America could actually see the programming?

2 (47m 41s):
Yeah. So on that day, we didn't know exactly later we learned about 156,000 households or had access to service. Yeah. Had access on that very first day.

0 (47m 52s):
How would they know about it? I mean, did you, did you get a lot of media attention was how would just a random,

2 (47m 59s):
Yeah. So the cable operators would promote what they were going to add. So a number of cable operators started in their, what we call bill stuffers. And so at that time, people, you know, people would get their cable bill

0 (48m 11s):
Monthly in the mail,

2 (48m 12s):
In the mail. And in that there would be some promotion. Here's the, a new movie that's coming up next month on HBO. And by the way, we're launching headline news from CNN, we're launching, you know, the discovery channel. And then you learn if they stayed for at least six minutes, then it would count as a viewer. Wow.

0 (48m 35s):
It is amazing that people found out about things through, through things in, through the mail, through bills that they received. Like, I can't remember the last time I opened my mailbox today. Right. I don't even know that I have a mailbox actually. I don't think I do. But, but from what I understand, you, you start to hear from viewers pretty quickly, right. They, they started to like write in and write to the cable operators and say, Hey, this is,

2 (49m 1s):
Yeah, it was quite comical. So we launched a thicker, like at noon, something like that on June 17th and within just, I mean, 10 or 15 minutes, the phone was ringing. We were in a conference room and the main kind of reception area was just outside, was so small. We had like 19 people, the phone kept ringing and ringing and ringing. And the, our staff person who was supposed to answer the phone was in watching discovery channel with us. We said, go get the phone. And then she came back and she said, it's a teacher in Kansas. And she wants to know if she can record this and use their use in the classroom. It was a show that was on called iceberg alley. And we all looked at each other. It was like, I don't think we have the education rights to use for public exhibition in a classroom.

2 (49m 47s):
Tell her we don't have the rights, but we're working on.

0 (49m 50s):
Yeah. And to be clear, you were not a production business. You are not in the business of producing original content. You were licensing

2 (49m 58s):
Licensing content only, you know, my dream was, you know, once we got to break even, and then we could then start investing in our own content. So that if we made, had positive cash flow of $5 million, we could reinvest that in content.

0 (50m 13s):
But at this point, I know you had five or six months of runway, right. When you launch in June, that means with $5 million, that means it's going to be gone. Yeah. By November, your, your, your money is going to run out. So I have to imagine you are, you get, you are hustling and yeah. From what I understand, you get connected with a firm company called the cargo publishing company. And they're led at the time by a guy named, I think Leo Hindery and they say, Hey, yeah, we're, we're going to come in and make an investment. What was the investment that they agreed to, to give you?

2 (50m 48s):
Yeah, it was, it was the entire next round. We thought that we could perhaps raise 6 million and we knew that would get us to mid next year. And then maybe by that time, you know, we would be in, you know, let's say 10 million households, right. And have some advertising revenue

0 (51m 8s):
And Chronicle was going to cover the whole round. They pledged $6 million. They're going to give you $6 million. And it was more or less in your mind, a done deal. Like you were not worried about covering cause you, I think you had like you owed millions of dollars to vendors, right. To the BBC and to the satellite people.

2 (51m 28s):
Yeah. By this time we were asking the BBC to be patients for the next payment for us. We Allen and company and I in late 1985 had a heart-to-heart meeting with Western house and said, you know what? We're not going to pay our satellite bill for the next three months. That's about a million dollars. And we'll offer you stock in discovery channel in lieu of that. I mean, they were very resistant, but in the end to be supportive, they grudgingly took stock right now that $1 million, I think turned in later to be like 65 nights, you know?

2 (52m 8s):
So it was a good, a good investment, but it was very, very difficult. I can't explain. And then, you know, when you hear an investment banker and the client themselves saying we're in and it is, it's not done, it's, you know, you're never, that nothing's done until it was people say the check clears the mail and you get to closing date, but, but they set up a closing date and,

0 (52m 31s):
And this is going to, supposed to be in what gently end of January 86 or 50,

2 (52m 34s):
January of 86. And we had really counted on that. And it was absolutely devastating when Leo let his bankers know the board did not in the end, approved the investment.

0 (52m 49s):
The minute you get a call one day from who telling you, oh, you know, that's that $6 million. You're not going to get it

2 (52m 58s):
Closing day. I mean

0 (52m 59s):
The closing day on the day yours was closed. You get a call saying, actually this is not closing.

2 (53m 4s):
It was on a Tuesday. I was down at our lawyer's office. Dick crooks from Allen and company had taken the train down the night before. So he was there. We're there for closing. This is when monies was going to be wired to the account. And then it, we heard, I think it was around 11 or 1130 Allen and company got a call from <em></em> and they were more

0 (53m 29s):
And E F Hutton was representing Chronicle. So basically your bankers and lawyers got a call from their bankers and lawyers.

2 (53m 36s):
Yes. Yeah. They just said, we can't believe this has happened. But the board at the Chronicle has turned down this investment. We thought we had an approval there. That was absolutely devastating.

0 (53m 50s):
So you presumably at this point have to face your staff because you are not imagine, you're not sure what you guys are gonna survive or maybe you're sure that you're not going to survive.

2 (54m 4s):
Yeah. As my wife calls it black Tuesday and it was, it was the, I think of all the days at discovery, it was the darkest.

0 (54m 14s):
When we come back in just a moment, how John finally gets the money he needs and how with a little help from Soviet television, he starts to turn discovery around, stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this. This message comes from NPR sponsor DocuSign every day, someone signed something that means everything millions of people use DocuSign to share and sign legal documents from purchasing a car to closing on a first home or adopting a pet into the family.

0 (54m 55s):
DocuSign has helped facilitate those important moments in their customer's lives. Learn how DocuSign e-signature can help be there for the next important moment in your life. Visit docusign.com today, DocuSign as real as it gets, this message comes from NPR sponsored Dave's killer bread and organic bread. That's no longer a sedative for your taste buds. Dave's killer bread is on a mission to make the most of the loaf to rid the world of GMOs high-fructose corn syrup and artificial ingredients while planting the seeds of good and all that, they bake killer taste, killer texture, always organic Dave's killer bread, bread amplified.

0 (55m 40s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 1985 just months after John has launched discovery channel, he's run out of money. And the only perspective investment he had has just fallen through. And so the only option at that point, work the phones

2 (56m 1s):
And it's like, you know, calling the BBC, you know, that check, we were going to get out to you tomorrow. We're not going to get out to you. You know, then the investment banker was like, you know, we don't know what we're going to do, but we will think, try to think of something. And so what they thought of the banker that I was most closely working with at Allen and company, one of his colleagues was a named Paul Gould. And Paul Gould was very close to John Malone

0 (56m 28s):
And we should, we should make a credit. John Malone is like a legendary figure and cable, Liberty media, and the head of TCI at the time, the cable operator.

2 (56m 37s):
Yeah. I mean, John load is, you know, he's a strategic pioneer in the cable industry on the distribution side. And then later, really on the content side, he had seen promotions about discovery channel. And that kinda was the phone call that saved the day.

0 (56m 54s):
All right. So in the kind of 11th hour, right? There's like a hail Mary thrown to John Malone. Because from what I understand, you had investors basically saying you got to get ready to go into bankruptcy, but you were, you were not prepared to do that. You still thought we got a,

2 (57m 15s):
I got a deal by there's has gotta be a way, but when it was the first hail Mary, you know, typically there might be four or five hail Mary's throne. It was actually the first one and it connected. And you know, John was being Bitly supportive. John said, we can't let anything happen to discovery. And this was probably on Thursday. So there was bike Tuesday. And I think by Thursday I was in a meeting in a hotel. I mean, this was a bizarre era era. I mean, they actually wired $500,000 to our accounts and that discovery and that was a godsend. And so, and then it was like, okay, let's how do we raise the next round of financing?

2 (57m 57s):
And it was clear with, with TCI leadership that maybe we could get $20 million and actually complete the financing for discovery. What's

0 (58m 11s):
So confounding to me, right, is that you were literally days away from having to shut this thing down. And you had creditors kind of asking for, you know, you couldn't pay your people. And then John Malone comes in and gives you half a million dollars. Presumably he did not know that you were in financial straits. So this was not this is not known to anybody. No,

2 (58m 37s):
No it wasn't. And John didn't want to be do all of it, you know? Cause the first question, how much money do you need? And it was still all the total of 25 million. We've raised five, we need 20. And John didn't, CTCI doing all twenties said, you know, it'd be stronger if we created a, a group, a partnership, a group of investors from the cable industry that maybe each put in 5 million. And so we began to think about, you know, four large multi-system cable operators that would come in Comcast, continental Cox, new house family, and of course TCI. And then John was very close to a friend of his in Denver, gene, Schneider who United cable, which ultimately merged it with the United artists to become United artists cable.

0 (59m 26s):
And you did raise, you did raise the money by the, I mean, it's amazing. Cause like in February of 86 you were out for the count by the summer of 86, you had raised $20 million. How, by the way, I have to imagine that you had to give up a substantial amount of your own ownership of the company you started.

2 (59m 47s):
Yeah. And I gladly did it. I mean, for me in what I've learned is if you think too much about your equity piece or how much money you're going to make, I just don't know that many successful entrepreneurs who were so money focused. I think if you focus on your mission, then all of that's secondary and yeah. So for me, it's, it was that moment in time when I incorporated, when I had a hundred percent equity and then you get diluted down and diluted down. I think after that, I think it was around maybe around 7%. And then, you know, for the longest period, I was at 4% after, you know, I sold some shares.

0 (1h 0m 27s):
You all right? So now you've got the money to keep you afloat, but you were still, I mean, right, you still have to become profitable. So where was your revenue coming from in 1986? Did you start to get some of that? Some of the money from the cable operators that, that 5 cents or 10 cents per subscriber? Yes,

2 (1h 0m 48s):
I was lucky. And then the cable act of 1984 actually passed and it allowed the cable operators to actually increase their rates dependent on just what the market would bear. And so we would offer our service free, you know, until January of 87, at which point we would pay the cable operators to pay a nickel. And then that would grow over the contract period to 10 cents per subscriber per month

0 (1h 1m 19s):
With that five or 10 cents per subscriber. That was enough to just keep the business going. It wasn't enough to make it profitable yet. But just to you, you had to also have advertising revenue. Yes.

2 (1h 1m 31s):
Yeah. So you you'll remember, we've talked about the burn rate or the monthly expenses of being a million a month. So if you, if you have distributors representing 10 million households and they're paying you a nickel, then that's 500,000 a month. If they're paying you a dime and that's a million dollars a month. So we knew just by our contracts break even was going to occur sometime in 1987, in other words would be that magic month and it actually did occur. I think it was August of 1987 when our monthly revenue exceeded our monthly expenses. And that's a great period for any entrepreneur. Then, you know, you have the business model in place.

2 (1h 2m 12s):
And then when you look at growth and distribution, we saw when we crossed 15 million, we had all these advertisers that be glad to advertise on discovery channel and make it part of our, our cable box.

0 (1h 2m 24s):
And you, I mean, th the programming that you were airing, I mean, it was like, you know, you would have documentaries, right. That you would air, and then you would, I think one, like one point you just played, you just broadcast hours of television from the Soviet union. That was like, oh, what was it like, was it translated in real time?

2 (1h 2m 47s):
Yeah. It's always somebody that, you know, I didn't have the idea. A fellow in New York had started tracking Soviet television signals with a satellite dish. And so at Columbia university, the Russian studies department was using it in the classroom. And he said, would you like to put this on the discovery channel? And it was the oddest type, but you know, you're trying to get publicity. I never went to Canada. I thought and attention. And it was immediately intriguing. Cause I asked for what's on Russian television and he said, it's just every kind of thing we have game shows. They have morning children's show. And then, you know, when I saw some tapes of it, I said, this would be fascinating, but we, you know, we ha we would have to interpret it.

2 (1h 3m 31s):
But as with anything, with any idea, there's a lot of hurdles. And this one was the, our state department said it wasn't legal, that we couldn't, you know, intercept a foreign satellite and take that signal and display it into American television households. That, that was illegal. It had to go legally through the it'll set television satellites parked over the Atlantic ocean, for example. So we had to work that out and actually get a legal SIG signal through the <em></em> system. But that's what we did. We put on a week's worth of Sophia television every night.

0 (1h 4m 7s):
That's amazing. I mean, you've got a lot of publicity, Johnny Carson. Oh, it was the most famous person in the U S was like, talked about on a show. Yeah.

2 (1h 4m 14s):
Oh my goodness. For him to have Johnny Carson talk about Russian programming on the discovery channel and make jokes about it, you know, and it was terrific. He did that, I think three nights running and what great publicity that was.

0 (1h 4m 28s):
All right. So you start to really find your audience and you are reaching, I think already 30, potentially 30 million households by June of ADA. That doesn't mean 30 million people are watching you, but, but really I think the turning point, if I'm not mistaken was sharks when you started to talk about or air things about sharks, is that, is that,

2 (1h 4m 54s):
Yeah, it's an 80 S that timeframe. We were just doing some novel things that are live from Russia. Certainly. And so we had a, I remember we had a meeting at the hay Adams hotel, which was kind of fancy for us. And we had, you know, the whole executive staff and the programming staff there wasn't a big group. I would think there was probably around 20 in the room. And we were just, you know, we, we told her to bring your ideas. And so we're just going around the room. It was the classic white F me, what if we did this and this programmer, Steve Cheskin. And he said, what if he said, you know, how independent TV stations have like Marilyn Monroe week or John Wayne week where the movies five o'clock every day.

2 (1h 5m 41s):
And he says, where they have theme weeks, he said, and he's just blurted. I said, what if we had shark week? And it was, the idea was as simple as that, but as profound as that, you know, and we kind of all said, yeah, you know, they all kind of looked at me and I said, I think it's a great idea. And, you know, before that meeting ended, we said, that's one idea we want to implement. And so that was the origin of shark week. And I think it is the longest running television series of it. And in television history right now, it's the longest one that's being maintained.

0 (1h 6m 17s):
John, the story of discovery in the nineties and the two thousands is, is well-known, it's, it's now a huge, enormous player in the media world. You, you are no longer media sort of affiliated with discovery today, mean you obviously ran it and continue to run it into the two thousands where the chairman for some time, but just to be clear, you're not associated with it at all today, right? The discovery kind of entered a phase of stability in 1988 and then just up consistent growth and acquiring other networks, the learning channel and starting animal planet.

0 (1h 6m 59s):
But here's what I want to ask you a broader question about the evolution of discovery, because it really was when you started it and when you ran it, it was like a slightly commercial version of PBS. It was great content that was also good for you. Right. And, and it sort of proved the model that you could do both things like, like, I dunno like a milkshake made with a Gavi instead of cane syrup, you know, still it was delicious and a little bit healthier than what was being offered on mainstream network TV, but a little bit more fun than let's say PBS, but over time discovery did.

0 (1h 7m 39s):
And does today aired a lot more like reality type TV stuff, stuff that really was cheap to produce, but got a lot of audience ratings. And I wonder if over time you think that it kind of strayed from the vision you had initially.

2 (1h 7m 57s):
Yeah. And I think it's clear to viewers the evolution. It was kind of, you know, forced partially by just the raw economics of people's viewing tastes in the majority. At some point, you know, management starts looking at the revenue model and it just became irresistible as people initially saw that. Well, gee, if we put on, you know, at history channel, you know, pawn stars, it gets a little more rating than the history of the, so, you know, a history series for example. And I remember the bittersweet moments, you know, when the ratings came in on honey booboo, but in the back of my mind, it was like, you know, that's, that's not the kind of content that I get enthusiastic about.

2 (1h 8m 43s):
And it's certainly not the kind of content that drove me to start discovery. And so, you know, for us, I think the pinnacle of discovery, at least in mission being true to mission was when we co-produced planet earth, which we start. Yeah. Which was wonderful. I mean, we started that project in 2002 and had it finished for Erin in 2007. And for me, that's, that's the essence of that.

0 (1h 9m 8s):
The discovery, I don't know. I mean, I wonder whether you can really blame programmers at discovery, right? I mean, if it's a, it's a company that has to be sustainable, that has to make money and PBS doesn't write PBS NPR there, they don't have to worry about shareholders or revenue because they're nonprofits and they're bringing in money from, but they still need to be sustainable to pay their employees, but not quite in the same way as discovery. So it's kind of hard to, to blame discoveries programmers for going where the audience wants or, or, or can you, can we,

2 (1h 9m 41s):
No, I, you know, for me, I mean, I was on the board for all those years and I supported cause you're right. I mean, you have to have a sustainable organization. And when you have over a little over half of your revenues from advertising, it drives you to certain decisions. And so, you know, for me, my mind just started to wonder of like, well, is there another model for this type of context

0 (1h 10m 5s):
You decided in 2015 to, I guess kind of go back to your original roots, you launched a venture called curiosity stream, which is essentially a version of, of your, I think your original version of vision of discovery, which is great educational content, but that would be available on demand through smartphones and then other, other, other, other formats.

2 (1h 10m 32s):
Yeah. It's, it's back to kind of the original mission, which is I try to stay away from the word educational cause that kind of brings up eat your spinach kinda TV. So, you know, what is, is there a non-fiction content that's entertaining and UN and enlightening? What was becoming clear to me is that something magic was happening in 2007, with the launch of Netflix, what Netflix did was the same concept that HBO did take great movies rather than create a linear channel feed, which is what HBO did. Netflix says, no, you can watch all movies, but you can watch what you want to watch when you have the time to watch it. So it's that ultimate control.

2 (1h 11m 12s):
And when you turn on the TV at night at eight 14, I've been able to pull up something that you want to watch for the next hour or two. And so I felt we could do, I could do the same thing that Netflix did that for movies in the world of non-fiction content. And so you can probably guess my first call, it was at the BBC. So when we launched CuriosityStream with, you know, well over a hundred titles, great content from the BBC and other,

0 (1h 11m 42s):
And you are, it is a publicly traded company, went public in 2020, I think. Yeah. It's a different story, right? Obviously the city stream, because it's the, the risk is different and you, by that point, I mean, to be Frank, you were, you know, wealthy beyond your needs and beyond generations. So your sort of personal risk was somewhat lower, but still I meant, I imagined it it's a challenging business, right? I mean, you've got to, at the end of the day, you got to get people to subscribe.

2 (1h 12m 13s):
Yeah, it's risky. I mean, you know, again, you have to have the finance financing in place. You have to have the delivery infrastructure. So in the case of streaming, you don't need, you know, international satellite infrastructure of 30 satellites transponders to get your signal across the globe. It's a little bit easier, but it's still complicated. We're again, we're very, very encouraged that, you know, we now are collecting payment, you know, from 20 million households and that's around the world. So we have been global from the start.

0 (1h 12m 46s):
I wonder, I mean, we were 31, 30, 30 years old. He had this really bold idea and a vision. And it was just at that this nascent industry is at the beginnings of what would become such a powerful and important history, the cable industry, which has gone through some major and is going through major disruptions today with streaming and, you know, cord cutting. When you think about all of the things that happened, all the things that had to go right for this to work, all those moments where all the puzzle pieces, cause this is a very complex business. How much of your success do you attribute to how hard you worked and how smart you guys were and how much do you attribute to luck?

2 (1h 13m 27s):
Well, I think a lot of people have read Malcolm Gladwell's book where he talks about the 10,000 hours. And I really believe that I look at anybody I've ever talked to, whether it's Ted Turner, Elon Musk, or anybody they've put in so much labor and effort. And it really is 10,000 hours or more, if you just count it up. And one time when his book came out, I said, yeah, I did that and more, but you've got to count on, you know, 10% luck things just lining up. You know, we talked about one of them today, you know, at the darkest hour, just the luck of just calling the right person and that right person responding favorably.

2 (1h 14m 8s):
And I'm talking to John Malone, you know, without John Malone, without four cable operators stepping up when they did, I don't know if there would be a discovery channel today, I would have worked hard, you know, to find other routes. I think I might've found them. Might've been more difficult, but again, I think it was just the good fortune of knowing the right people at the right time.

0 (1h 14m 30s):
That's John Hendrix, founder of discovery. And by the way, despite the notoriety of shark week, those programs don't even rank among the five highest rated in discoveries history. The network has had the most success with shows like moonshiners about illegal moonshine producers and Amish mafia, a documentary about Amish vigilantes in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, but the highest rated show of all time on discovery, the deadliest catch the show about life aboard fishing boats and the Bering sea during Alaska's king crab season.

0 (1h 15m 10s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week, please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded. If you want to contact us. Our email address is H ibt@npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this. And mine is at guy Roz. Our Instagram account is at how I built this NPR and mine is hat guide dot rods. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by Ramtin Arab Louie. It was edited by NEPA grant with research help from Claremore Ashima. Our production staff includes Casey Herman, Julia Carney, Elaine coats. There are safari Liz Metzger, Harrison, BJ Choi, and Catherine cipher.

0 (1h 15m 54s):
Our intern is Margaret Serino. Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Roz, and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.

5 (1h 16m 12s):
This message is brought to you by the NPR coffee club. A subscription brings fresh roasted coffee directly to your door, and you can also give a gift subscription to the NPR super-fan in your life. Learn more about our new NPR blends by visiting us@nprcoffeeclub.org.