Planet Money (0s):
Sometimes the economy can be a scary place. The market's down further right now after Skyrocketing costs, instantly share interest rates. That is where planet money. Summer school comes in. We are tackling the big questions every Wednesday, till labor day on the planet money podcast from NPR.

3 (20s):
What of the cool moments was while I was trying to raise the money, Mariah and I went to this regional festival called pumpkin Chunkin, right? I took my home brew, pumpkin beer there and kind of muscled the, the grannys and aunts out of the way that had their cakes and pies in the competition. And, and our Dogfish had pumpkin a won the, the food competition. Wait,

4 (43s):
You hijacked a, a baking competition of old women. Grannys with your beer, which is not even a part of a baking competition. And you won that. That's amazing, but that's not fair.

5 (55s):
It didn't say it wasn't for beer.

4 (56s):
That's true.

3 (58s):
Don't hate the player. Hate the game.

4 (1m 6s):
Welcome to how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Raz. And on the show today, how Sam Mariah ke Joni made some of the weirdest beers in America and turned them into a beloved craft beer brand Dogfish head brewery. Last summer, I had one of those black and white to color moments, you know, like in the wizard of Oz, when the black and white film switches to that vivid technical, when Dorothy gets to Oz.

4 (1m 50s):
Well, for me, it happened in a strawberry patch in Northern California. It had been a long time since I picked strawberries. The first one I plucked was a small, shiny, bright red Berry that I popped right into my mouth. And within what felt like light speed, I experienced that black and white to color moment because to compare a store bought strawberry to one, you pick is like comparing municipal, tap water to freshly melted, glacier ice, just not the same. And once you eat a freshly picked strawberry, it's hard to go back to the plastic packs you buy at the store. These are the kinds of moments that sometimes inspire a business idea.

4 (2m 34s):
And for Sam Keoni, it happened at a Mexican restaurant that also specialized in beer. This was the early 1990s and Sam was in his mid twenties. And up to that point, beer, at least to him, mostly meant Budweiser Coors and Miller. Sam was a bartender at the restaurant. It was called nacho mama's burritos. And they happened to serve craft beers from Europe, Belgian ales, saisons beer infused with fruit and spices. And when Sam tried them, it was like, Dorothy, entering that world of technical to say it changed his life sounds cliche, but that's what happened.

4 (3m 15s):
Sam became obsessed with unusual beer, so obsessed. He learned everything he could about how to make it. He brewed beer with override cherries and peaches, even pumpkins. And by 1995, Sam and his high school girlfriend, Mariah decided to co-found their own craft beer company. They called it Dogfish head and they launched it in the small town of Rehoboth beach in Delaware. And it just so happened that they caught a wave that would turn American craft beer into a massive phenomenon. Doc fish head brewery would go on to become one of the most popular and acclaimed craft beer brands. And in 2019, the company sold to Boston beer company in a deal worth around 300 million.

4 (4m 1s):
The story of Dogfish head is also the story of two people, Sam and Mariah, who had a special connection and a truly lucky partnership, not just as a married couple, but as two entrepreneurs, their business skills complimented each other so well, it was almost like they hired each other first and then decided to get married. After Sam grew up in Western Massachusetts, Mariah grew up in Delaware. The two of them met in the late 1980s in high school. They both attended Northfield, Mount Herman in Western Massachusetts, a boarding school that encouraged all of its students to have a job.

3 (4m 40s):
The kids had to work the way through school. And so the, you know, we'd be preparing the meals. People would be, you know, doing the farming, stoking the fires in the, in the power plant. And so, you know, I think really kind of that impacted, you know, influenced our decisions to, to be entrepreneurs, which is probably why that school still such a big part of our lives.

4 (5m 1s):
Tell me how you guys met each other. Cause you're, you're still, you're still together. And this is like 40 years later.

3 (5m 7s):
We've been making out with each other since the mid eighties. Yeah. I might be getting like our meeting story mixed up with that scene in ghost where Demi Moore and Patrick Swayze are molding wet clay together. But I remember it being in an art class, but I know we also had work job together.

5 (5m 23s):
Yes. And I do remember us meeting in the dining hall while we worked in the kitchen together for our work job.

4 (5m 31s):
And how soon after you met, did you start dating?

5 (5m 34s):
Well, dating when you're at a boarding school is kind of a loaded term, cuz there's nowhere to go on a date. So,

4 (5m 40s):
And you probably were not allowed in the, in the girls' dorms and the boys' dorm, right? That was verboten.

3 (5m 46s):
It was an intricate dance guy. We had something called visiting hours where you had to essentially be a contortionist cuz the rules was door had to be opened. The width of a shoe. You each had have one foot on the floor. There had to be one light bulb on. So it was an awesome matrix of fun challenges for young people dating each other.

4 (6m 6s):
All right. So you were, you guys are like, you know, high school, couple, whatever that means really in high school, but Sam, you were, I'm kind of understating this. You were kind of a troublemaker in high school to the point where you, and I'll just, I'll just give this part of the story where you were kicked out before you graduated. But before we get to that point, what was going on? What were you like? What were you doing that got you to that point where you were kicked out?

3 (6m 35s):
Well, the technical term for when they did finally kick me out in March of my senior year was accumulation of offenses, which meant they didn't have me for one big thing. They had me for lots of midsize things. So I know the offenses included things like breaking into the hockey rink with a couple friends and playing hockey naked just

4 (6m 55s):
But I mean just pranks. These were just pranks you were doing. Yeah. You know, some because they were funny. Well

3 (7m 1s):
And just wanting to like be, you know, I always did wanna be like the, the class clown and kind of use my sense of humor to kind of bring my friends together. It was kind of a social thing and, and, and you know, one of them was actually, I would wait outside of liquor stores and because I was a day student, right. And I would pay somebody that was of age, extra money to get me a case of beer and I'd throw it in my hockey bag and then bring it on campus and add a premium cell beer to the boarding students until I got busted. So it was never really malicious at all. And that's what made it so painful when I got kicked out is cuz I loved that school. I didn't really show it in a, in a positive way. But in that era I was pretty unwieldy.

4 (7m 42s):
There's a story that, that I've read about when your, your dad came to pick you up and, and drove you home. And he was obviously you were disappointed. Your parents were disappointed. What, what do you remember about that?

3 (7m 60s):
Yeah, so I lived on the third floor of this boy's dormitory that for whatever reason, the administration school allowed all the troublemakers to, to be under one dorm. So I was in there with a bunch of friends and I had my record player on my dad pulled up and his F-150 pickup truck and I just opened up the window, just threw garbage bags of all my belongings down in the bed of the truck. You know, while my roommates played that's life by Frank Sinatra, I guess in homage to my Italian heritage. And then my dad drove me from Northfield back to Greenfield mass, like a couple towns away where we lived. You could see him like, you know, jaw like clenching doesn't know if he should say anything.

3 (8m 43s):
I just, I didn't know what to say to him. And at one stop sign, he said, you know, Sammy, sometimes you're a tough kid to love. And that was the only sentence I got on my, my way home. And, and it was brutal night. You know, my mom, I got home and she had a book ready for me. That was called when bad things happened to good people. And then literally the next morning we go outside and my Labrador retriever that was on a run outside the run recoiled and he hung himself and died. So in, within 24 hours I kicked out high school

4 (9m 14s):
And

3 (9m 14s):
The dog died. My dog. It sounds like a country music song come to life, but it was yeah. A true story and obviously very traumatizing time, you know, in my life. Wow.

4 (9m 24s):
You just needed a baseball bat to take out the headlights of the truck and then you really would have a country music song

3 (9m 29s):
Sounds like foot loose.

4 (9m 30s):
Yeah. Wow. All you're kicked out and Mariah, were you, he was your boyfriend, right? What did your parents say? Were they like, Ooh, I don't know. Mariah, Sam seems like trouble. Cause you were going off to brown university. I should mention like you were studying hard and keeping your head down and doing all the things you had to do in meantime, your boyfriend's like I don't, know's kind of going in a different direction.

5 (9m 53s):
Yeah. As far as, you know, guy, I was, I was studying every night and sort of on the straight and narrow, although after he got kicked out was the first time I ever got in trouble because I got caught sneaking off campus to have a visit with Sam. But then I was also there the next whole year without him. Cuz he would, did end up going to college, which is the good news of the story.

4 (10m 14s):
So Sam, you did manage to go to college. So you got your degree, your high school degree and you went off to college in Pennsylvania, Muhlenberg and Mariah. You went to brown in Rhode Island and did the two of you stay together? That those, those four years

5 (10m 29s):
We did, we did. It was actually cool. Cuz we, our schools were very different, but we also knew each other's friends very well and enjoyed that different experience that we got to have every once in a while,

4 (10m 43s):
While you weren't in college, Sam at Muhlenberg college, were you a, a beer guy? And I mean, everybody's a beer person in college at some point. Right. You know, but did you think about beer? Did you notice it, appreciate it or were you like a kind of a typical college student just pounding beers,

3 (11m 3s):
More like that? Typical college student? I will say, you know, when I left Berg the next day I moved to New York city and English major, I wanted to go take, you know, courses at Columbia where, you know, at Ginsburg and Jack Cark went. And so I started taking courses in the MFA program up there, but to pay my rent, I worked at a bar across the street from Columbia that was called nacho mama's burritos, which is a pretty, you know, auspicious name for what actually was an amazing first generation craft beer bar. And you know, within weeks I had Chima red and Sierra Nevada celebration. And that's really where I had my epiphany beers and, and started on the journey. You know,

4 (11m 42s):
This is like in the early nineties when, I mean Sam Adams was around, but it, it, most bars served probably, you know, Budweiser cos Miller light, et cetera.

3 (11m 51s):
Yeah. It was really kind of the opening moments of the craft beer Renaissance in America. So there were some first gen craft breweries, like you mentioned, Sierra, Nevada, anchor Liber Liberty. We, we sold from your neck of the woods and Shama Brooklyn, lagger harpoon. I remember so. Yeah. So we, that place specialized in the very finite number of, you know, diverse beers you could get at that time. And I, I learned that I had not only a pretty good palette for appreciating them, but I had a passion for like talking about how they paired with food. And then, and, but what I do remember is being like a voracious reader. I did get like my, you know, library card at the New York public library. And I found books like the joy of home brewing by Charlie Papai and I just went deep into rabbit holes.

3 (12m 37s):
And when you read the story of these monks in Belgium, you know, brewing with these local fruits and these Czech breweries, finding these saws hops, I was like, holy shit, this is just as rich as a world of, you know, Fitzgerald short stories or Salinger short stories. And

4 (12m 52s):
Yeah, but Sam, a lot of people, I'm sorry to interrupt. A lot of young people go and work at a restaurant that sells beer or at a specialty store and most of them enjoy it and then go off and do something else. What happened that you were like, wow, wow, I'm really interested in this. Was there somebody there? I mean, because you were just hired to pull pints of beer and sell them, but clearly something clicked in your mind where you were like, this is interesting. What was it?

3 (13m 23s):
Well, I think it was about like that same like rebellious reflection I had in high school of like screw the man kind of world view. Like what I think I found was okay, as I read about the beer world, I was like, wait a second. There's all these super cool, very unique, very vibrant, different beers around the world, but you can't really find them in America. And America's dominated by these samey, you know, monolithic generic, frankly, in my view, light lagers made by giant companies. This is, this could be a really cool thing to rebel against.

4 (13m 54s):
Did you go into that job thinking that you wanted to start a business one day cuz you went to, to take writing classes, but it seems to me that maybe actually you really were already thinking about what could I do, maybe I could like what kind of business could I do? Is that, is that right?

3 (14m 10s):
Yeah, I think so because you know, my dad was really entrepreneurial and always kind of presented to that. He always sort of romanticized that, not in like a corny over the top way, but just he respected that sort of American dream op you know, land of opportunity to be an entrepreneur. So that was in my back of my mind. But the other thing really was the owner of nacho mamas. Joshua Mandel was only like four or five years old and he he'd left like the start of a career in, in tech here in Boston, moved back to New York city and started a burrito, takeout joint with no entrepreneurial business experience. So I didn't have to look that far from me to have this inspirational figure.

3 (14m 50s):
And then he, he and I kind of both got into home brewing at the same moment when he was my boss. So it always felt very natural, like baby steps to go towards writing a business plan.

4 (15m 1s):
All right. So Sam, I remember this is like early nineties and home beer brewing kits were like kind of becoming all the rage. Maybe they already were. I don't remember. But you bought like a home kit to, to, to brew your own beer in your apartment.

3 (15m 16s):
Yeah. You know, myself and Joshua Mandel tracked down in the New York yellow pages, there was one store I think in all the five boroughs or at least in Manhattan called little shop hops and you could buy these like prefab kits. And he walked out and went to the upper west side where he lived with his kit and I started walking towards Chelsea and as I was walking to my apartment, my home brew kit, I passed a bodega that was having a sale outside on like all this moldy or just squishy, like fruit fly, covered fruit. And for some reason I was like, oh my God, look at all those cherries. Look how cheap that is. What if I take this pale oil kit and squish the cherries into it? You know, it's not the recipe, but I wonder how that would taste.

3 (15m 58s):
It has fermentable sugars, a Belgians brewed with fruit. So that was kind of the moment, you know, for me, I took that kit home and, and started boiling it in our little tiny apartment.

4 (16m 9s):
So that, that, that's interesting because you had been working at this restaurant that sold Belgian ales. And as you mentioned, there's a long tradition of using fruit in Belgian beers. Right. So you were, you were kind of inspired by that and thought, Hey, I wonder if I could do something like that with my home beer kid.

3 (16m 29s):
Yeah. And it was kind of like a hot mess. Like I didn't bother to read these construction manager or anything. And I bought all these used giant, like 32 ounce glass bottles. And the other thing is, it said you could either like sanitize the bottles with the solution or just heat 'em up in your oven to sterilize them. So I remember I heated 'em all up in my oven while I was getting the beer ready to be bottled. And I took them out with like tongues and put 'em down on the floor to cool a half an hour or whatever. And I came back to, to pick it up. I was like, what the, and they wouldn't come off the ground cause

4 (17m 0s):
Melted the carpet.

3 (17m 1s):
It not only melted the carpet, but it affixed the carpet to the bottom of the, of the bottles. Wow. So I remember it getting like an Exacto knife and ripping these circles out of the carpet of our rental apartment. But it was super cool cuz when we served the beer, every single bottle had like a built in coaster and that was a unique feature. Of course, when we moved outta the apartment, there was this like polkadots all over the kitchen

4 (17m 25s):
Who paid for that, that damage to the landlord. You

3 (17m 28s):
Know, we put another carpet over the circles in the carpet and, and just left.

4 (17m 35s):
Alright, so you, you kind of start this process and you leave it in there and you gotta wait for a couple weeks before you try it. Right?

3 (17m 42s):
Yeah, yeah, yeah. You know, there usually is a home brewer. It's awesome to do lots of bottles cuz every week you're so anxious to try it, that you open one and it's so deflating to hear no noise. But that moment when a bottle opens and you hear that KCH of carbonation is like game on.

4 (17m 58s):
All right. So you finally have this beer ready to go. And by the way, I think you had a roommate. Was your roommate mad at you for destroying the apartment? Was your roommate like, dude, what did you do? Or did they just laugh?

3 (18m 11s):
They mostly laughed. Yeah. And I do remember the first time, you know, cuz it was funny cuz I lived randomly with a bunch of actors who are still making an awesome living as actors, Ken Marino was there the first time he was my roommate and he's in a show called the other two on HBO. Wow. And Joel LA Trulio the short cop on Brooklyn. 99 was one

4 (18m 34s):
Of our, they were your roommates.

3 (18m 35s):
Yeah. They were all in a show called the state on MTV when we were oh yeah. When we were in

4 (18m 40s):
There, that was a great show.

3 (18m 41s):
Exactly. And so the, the most surreal night was the Mariah came up from Providence. The night I served that first home brew, all these guys from the state on MTV came over. Some of them were my roommates and then Ricky lake randomly enough, the talk show host, I'd done some weird episode with her cuz I was doing a little night work as a, as a model or just side work. And they had me on the show like on, they had an episode called when good girls fall for bad boys

4 (19m 11s):
And you were, wait what'd you do on the lake show?

3 (19m 14s):
I played a bad boy. And I just remember I was, I didn't treat it very seriously, but she was laughing and I was like, Hey, you want to come over to our house tonight? I made some home brew. I didn't think we'd hear from her. But we got knock on our third floor. Walk up.

4 (19m 28s):
That's amazing. Amazing. Just side gig that you had as a, as a model.

5 (19m 34s):
But they, they hired him for Ricky lake because it was before the show premiered. So no one knew what the show was. So they had to hire actors to play the talk show guests

3 (19m 45s):
Just outed Ricky lake Mariah.

5 (19m 47s):
Oh sorry. Ricky.

4 (19m 49s):
Wow. Who knew? We just blew the lid off Ricky lake.

5 (19m 52s):
Geez. Oh no.

3 (19m 55s):
We love you Ricky lake.

4 (19m 58s):
All right. So Ricky lake, the cast of the state and Mariah and you are all crammed into your apartment about to unveil this home. Brewed cherry English, paleo

5 (20m 11s):
With carpet on the bottom of

4 (20m 12s):
The bottles with carpeting as coasters attached to the bottles. And was it a big thing? Did you like say, and now I'm gonna unveil. I mean, did, was it kind of this magical moment that you were introducing to everybody?

3 (20m 26s):
It kind of was cuz I, I didn't know if the beer was good or not and we opened it up and everyone was surprised. I remember that. And they were just like, wow, this is actually really good. Sam and I do remember drinking one of those whole 32 thingies, myself, 32 ounce things standing on the coffee table and saying, this is what I'm gonna do with, with my life guys. I'm gonna open a little brewery that makes beers like this.

4 (20m 51s):
Wow. So you've got everyone likes this beer and was it, did it have that like a sweetness to it or like a sourness to it? I mean these were sweet cherries. Do you remember whether there was a sweetness to the beer?

3 (21m 4s):
I remember the cherry being pretty pronounced and then the pits from the cherry gave it like a nice Okie wood sort of toasty character.

4 (21m 12s):
What? I wonder what Ricky liked thought of the beer. Do you remember?

3 (21m 15s):
I remember she liked it too. I don't think there was a, a single dissenting voice in that group of drinkers.

4 (21m 23s):
When we come back in just a moment,

Wix (21m 25s):
Sam decides to open a brew, pub finds a location for it, gets it ready, puts up a sign just in time for someone to tell him, you know, you're breaking the law, right stick around I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this. We're spending a lot of time shopping online by 2025, the global online retail market is expected to double in size. So if you're an online seller, you need a powerful platform that can keep up with the trends. Wix is a leading e-commerce platform used by entrepreneurs, agencies and brands around the world. Not only can you build a state of the art online store with full dev customization capabilities, W's eCommerce lets you sell everywhere while managing everything from one place selling on other online sales channels, like Amazon connect them to your online store, selling in person sync your online and in-store orders so you can keep track of it all. Wix helps you manage all the moving parts of your business with ease from inventory management, shipping, and delivery, to taking your business to international markets, go to wix.com/ecommerce today and sell on the platform that's built for your future.

Wondery: Call Me Curious (22m 46s):
From wondering, call me curious as a podcast hosted by me, Nikki Boyer, that finally gives you definitive answers to life's burning questions. Look, we're all on 24 7 information overload on our news feeds and our inboxes on TikTok. So it's kind of hard to know what's real and what isn't, when it comes to health, pop culture and relationships. And that's why I'm bringing you call me curious every week on call me curious. I dive into all the things that you've heard about, but you don't really know about that's right? No more nodding along at dinner parties or running to the bathroom to Google. What is cryptocurrency you're gonna learn and laugh along the way as I explore life's little mysteries and the Internet's hottest topics like does intermittent fasting work or is it true that you can't die in your dreams? So find out with me and some of my hilarious friends on my podcast, call me curious, listen, to call me curious on apple podcasts, Amazon music or wherever you listen. You can listen early and ad free by subscribing tore plus an apple podcast or The wonder app.

4 (23m 53s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Raz. So it's the early 1990s and Sam has just taste tested his cherry infused beer for a group of friends. And everyone's kind of surprised at how much they like it. So when Sam wakes up the next day, he's still buzzing.

3 (24m 10s):
I remember that the next morning I didn't have to work at not mama's till dinner shift. So I literally got up and with the hangover walked to the, the biggest unit of the New York city library and started doing Lexus and nexus searches about starting write a business plan.

4 (24m 26s):
So you, you, you thought right then and there I'm gonna start, I'm gonna write a business plan before we get to the business plan. You had not yet understood the science of beer at this point. Now of course you do. But then you were kind of just throwing things into a, a bucket and mixing it and hoping it worked out at that point, right?

3 (24m 45s):
To some extent. But I, at that little shop of hops, I bought the book that I first read in the library called the joy of home brewing. And Charlie Papai wrote that book and it's considered sort of the Bible. And so Charlie did a really great job in the joy of home brewing of putting into layman terms, the science fermentation. So by reading that I had some level of confidence cuz his rallying cry throughout the book was don't worry, relax, have a home brew. Yeah. Which is basically, yep. There's some serious science going on in your kitchen right now with these little single cell animals called yeast. But don't freak out. You know, this has been happening for thousands of years, trust the process and you'll make good beer.

4 (25m 24s):
Hmm. So you're, so you're learning about beer, but at this point, you know, you want to like make a business out of this and I guess you decide that you're gonna start out by, by opening a, a brew pub, right? Like a restaurant somewhere. Yeah. But why go in that direction with your business instead of like you just making a brand that would bottle beer and sell it to stores or, or, or something like that?

3 (25m 48s):
Well, you know, like I said, I came up in this big Italian family, both sides of my family and my mom's famous for her shrimp Scampy and my grandmother on my yakka valley, ke Joni side for these crazy chicken cutlets. And so I grew up with food and wine being like central to bringing people together. And that was kind of the lens that I started doing the search. How can I blend my love of food with my newfound love of, of, of brewing. Yeah. You know? And it was a fairly unique business plan in that era because the whole concept, like in the first page of the business plan I wrote Dogfish had will be the first commercial brewing America committed to brewing the majority of our beers outside the Rhine height

4 (26m 29s):
Sbot and the Rhine height sbot is like foreign said German purity laws. You can only use like foreign ingredients. Right,

3 (26m 35s):
Exactly. It basically says, why are you top barley? That's all you got to choose from.

4 (26m 39s):
And you were saying, I am not going to adhere to that.

3 (26m 43s):
Yeah. You know, and I, I even said we're committed to brewing the majority of our beers using unexpected culinary ingredients. Like our first beers, for example, a lot of the gates were beers like Chicky stout made with organic Mexican coffee and Chicky and liquorice root immortal made with maple syrup from my family's farm up in Massachusetts, Juniper and aged on Oak rayon Detra made with raisins and bee sugars. So right outta the gates, we were brewing these beers that were not referencing modern beer styles

4 (27m 16s):
Because right. I mean like Sam Adams, for example, prided itself on the rein Heights ski boat, that it was a beer that could be sold in Germany cuz it, it did adhere to those standards. Like that was a point of pride for a lot of the smaller craft brewers.

3 (27m 32s):
Yeah. And, and rightfully so. I mean the first folks out of the gates, the Jim cooks and the Ken Grossman from Sierra, they were brewing these beautiful, fresh local interpretations of modern, you know, European beer styles. Yeah. And that was amazing. But Mariah and I, I mean I knew we weren't gonna have a big marketing budget even to, you know, stand out in that first round of brewers. So that's why I was like, what can we do to really stand out and reading about people like Alice Waters and James Beard who had very similar message, which is America has an amazing agricultural base let's stop genuflecting towards European food traditions. Let's create our own American traditions with our own ingredients.

3 (28m 14s):
And that was sort of the, the epiphany moment that led me to kind of say, I, I want to go in this journey that really is about culinary inspiration for beverage recipes.

4 (28m 25s):
The restaurant business is like one of the riskiest enterprises you can get into it is like very labor intensive and overhead intensive and food spoils. Like it is the riskiest craziest business to go into like, didn't anybody say that to you about the restaurant business?

3 (28m 43s):
I know they did because banks wouldn't gimme any money and that's what they would say. But where I think I was lucky is, you know, Mariah and I worked our asses off in our, our summer jobs. And so when I was raising that money, like it was my, my dad believed in us, Mariah's dad believed in us, my orthodontist put in money. He believed in us a guy built stone walls for my summer job on golf courses believed in us and his wife put in money. So, you know, sharing our passion and the business plan and the concept with a number of people in our lives helped us get on our way.

4 (29m 19s):
And these are friends and family. Right. Cause I think you raised about 200,000 bucks, right. To do this.

3 (29m 25s):
Yep, yep. Cost 220,000. Yeah. And it was really, I did it, I structured as personal loans outta the gate. So it wasn't that initially that, you know, they had equity in the company. Right. So that also helped Mariah and I keep control of the company as we were getting our, our feet under us.

4 (29m 40s):
Yeah. And I mean, you clearly have both of you now have amazing beer PS. Right. And but, and, and there are people who have natural palates, like you meet like wine Soma who are just like blind tasters, but, but then there are people who train their palates, but still that takes time. How did you know at this moment, at this time that, that what you were making was good. Did you have people around you who could kind of, I don't know, stress test it?

3 (30m 11s):
Well, I mean, certainly the, the, our friends getting free beer, like did, but

4 (30m 16s):
That is not the stress test I was expecting.

3 (30m 19s):
I'd say one of the cool moments was while I was trying to raise the money, Mariah and I went to this regional festival called pumpkin Chunkin where a bunch of farmers and, you know, home spun engineers create these, these like rub Goldberg que machines that Huck pumpkins in a field and sort of side show of that competition is the a baking competition. Right. I took my home brew, pumpkin beer there and kind of muscled the, the grannys and aunts out of the way that had their cakes and pies in the competition. And, and our Dogfish had pumpkin a won the, the food competition. Wait,

4 (30m 55s):
You, you hijacked a, a baking competition of old women grannys with your beer, which is not even a part of a baking competition. And you won that. That's amazing, but that's not fair.

3 (31m 8s):
Don't hate the player. Hate the game.

5 (31m 10s):
It didn't say it wasn't for beer.

4 (31m 11s):
That's

3 (31m 12s):
True. Yeah. I do remember there was a few judges and they're like, it just says, it's something that you can ingest. That's made with pumpkins. That's all you need to do to answer this. So he's, we got a, let him in

4 (31m 22s):
And he, you won, you won this comp this, I mean, it wasn't like a massive national, it was a local little comp, but still that's kind of cool. You won.

3 (31m 30s):
Yeah. It didn't lead to like an SBA loan or anything, but,

4 (31m 37s):
And what was in your, your pumpkin a,

3 (31m 40s):
That same as Dogfish had pumpkin nail today. So it was fresh pumpkin meat, fresh crushed Al spice, cinnamon nutmeg. And then instead of fermenting it with, you know, regular sugar, I, I fermented it with brown, you know, organic brown sugar. We still use brown sugar in the pumpkin nail today, so.

4 (31m 55s):
Wow. Alright. So while you writing this business plan, Mariah, while, while Sam was writing this plan, what were you thinking? I mean, you were coming out of this August, you know, Ivy league institution and, you know, you were had lots of options to do many different things. And I wonder, did you, did you immediately think, yes, this is it, this is a great business idea. Or, or were you thinking, eh, you know, maybe, maybe Sam will like move on. Like maybe this will be interesting to him for a couple months and then he'll figure something else out.

5 (32m 24s):
No, I mean, I, I love the idea of opening the brew pub, particularly like, as he said, as a restaurant, cuz I had worked in restaurants every summer during high school and college. So I was familiar with that whole world of waiting tables. And so the original plan was, yeah, he'll move to Providence and start looking for restaurant real estate while I was working in local TV news up there.

4 (32m 48s):
Okay. And I guess, I guess you guys go ahead with, with that plan, but from what I understand, you, you sort of get cold feet when you find out that there's another brew pub about to open in Providence. You guys were presumably I think you were hoping to be the, the first ones there. So, so at that point, do you, do you start to look elsewhere? Like, like at another city?

3 (33m 10s):
Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, Mariah and I talk it through and we are kind of like, well, let's see, what's another state close to new England where, where we are right now that has yet to have a brewering post-prohibition. And it, it happened to be Mariah's home state of Delaware where we worked in the, in the summers of our college years.

5 (33m 28s):
And at the same time my dad called and he said, Hey, there was a group that was trying to open a brew pub in, in Rehoboth beach, Delaware, but they're not opening. So we said, okay, let's control, delete all the Providences in this business plan and replace with rev beach Delaware.

4 (33m 46s):
Yeah.

3 (33m 47s):
And I also knew that beautiful coastal Delaware is, you know, pretty much two hours from DC, Baltimore Philly, three and a half from Manhattan. So it'd actually be like an ideal hub to eventually distribute beer to major Metro markets.

4 (34m 4s):
So you get down to Delaware and what what's available there, where, and, and, and this is Rohoboth beach Delaware.

3 (34m 10s):
Yeah. Yeah. Mariah and I, you know, found a building that was just a few blocks off the beach in Rohoboth where it was called. Like, I don't remember Mariah. Do you remember what these to call that part of town?

5 (34m 22s):
The, the part of town where businesses went to Todd.

3 (34m 26s):
So we, we liked the sound of that. So that's, for us,

5 (34m 30s):
It was just far enough from the beach that everyone said, well, why do you wanna be that far off? Which, I mean, it's, it's literally laughable now because it's only four blocks away.

4 (34m 40s):
Yeah. All right. So, okay. You guys find this place and, and you come up with a name for it, Dogfish head brewings and eats. And, and by the way, how, how did you come up with that name?

3 (34m 50s):
So my folks had a little summer place on an island that was in Midco Maine and it looked out at a jut of land called Dogfish head. And I liked how that name kind of meant a place to me, a rustic woodsy place, kind of like the rustic woodsy beers. But I also liked how it just sounded like three kind of whimsical words, you know, put together in a creative way so that it wouldn't, it wouldn't wreak of geography. If we ever distributed our, our beer coast to coast.

4 (35m 18s):
Right. So you didn't mark call like

3 (35m 21s):
Delaware brewing company. Yeah.

4 (35m 23s):
Or like the first state brewing or something like that. Exactly. Or ware

3 (35m 29s):
Classic.

4 (35m 30s):
Right.

3 (35m 31s):
You could get that t-shirt on the boardwalk

4 (35m 33s):
Guy. Exactly. All right. So you, so you find this location in Rohoboth beach to open up, how many seats was it gonna have?

5 (35m 42s):
I feel like it was like 120 and then plus the deck.

4 (35m 45s):
So that's a, that's a big, decent sized restaurant.

5 (35m 48s):
Yeah. It was two stories. I mean, it was, it had a lot of space.

4 (35m 51s):
Yeah.

3 (35m 51s):
And we rented it from a woman, wonderful woman who her family had, had a crab place that they ran there for like decades. And then they started just renting it out to tenants and it had this reputation of, of not being a well, well run place. But literally the day, like the day I got the wooden sign made that said Dogfish had brewings and eats. I said, Hey, Mariah, stand across the road. So you can get a full view of me taking off the old restaurant sign from the facade of the building and putting our sign up on the building. And so the first surreal moment was I unscrew their sign and I take it off. And there's a sign of another failed restaurant by that

4 (36m 33s):
Underneath. So this is a really good, good, like one failed to fail in. Now, here

3 (36m 39s):
You go. Oh, it gets worse. It gets worse guy. Cuz then I'm like, okay. And so I screw the Dogfish brewings and eats side. Maria's taken the old school analog photos of this whole hot mess. And literally some guy walks by and goes brewings and eats, you know, it's illegal to open a brewery in Delaware. Right. And if you remember, Mariah's dad said, oh, some other entrepreneurs were gonna open a brewery in Delaware and they just couldn't raise their money. Well, that person walking by, of course I should have done my homework. Let us know brewing was not legal. Cuz he had some connection to the other brewery that failed. And so he proceeded to tell me, oh yeah, yeah. The statutes in Delaware law still say it's illegal to open a brewery in this, in this state.

4 (37m 21s):
Wow. This is an old law. Probably goes back to prohibition. It seems like it was just a technicality. But even to like deal with that just sounds like a headache with all the things you're already dealing with. The, the, you know, just the regulatory stuff and the filings and finding the employees and building out the kitchen and the space and then brewing the beer and you know, so what did you do?

3 (37m 42s):
So literally that same day that we ripped two old restaurant signs off a wall, put ours up on the wall. I drove up to Dover and literally I was like, Hey Mariah, what do I do when I get to Dover? And she's like, oh, go left onto Lockerman, blah, blah, blah. So I found the right road and I rolled down my windows and I was kind of like, alright, which one of these is the house of representatives?

4 (38m 1s):
This is the state capital building.

3 (38m 2s):
Yeah. I guess that's what it would be. And I walk through the little security thing and I get on the other side, they're like, can we help you? And I'm like, yeah, I'm under construction on a brewery. And somebody told me it's illegal. Who do I talk to about that? And they were really sweet. I mean, they, they were like, well son, you're gonna have to write a bill and they open their doors. And I think that's something that I wanna give shouts to the state of Delaware. It's a super business friendly state. When you think of its history from DuPont to gore, to agricultural

4 (38m 33s):
Shell companies. Yeah. Yeah.

3 (38m 35s):
Maybe that, maybe that too. But they were super cool. Like they're helping me. They're like, alright, so write this up, get a lawyer who can stand with you and massage the language. And literally guy within a month, we were on the floor getting a bill that we wrote brought forward and then governor Carper, who's

4 (38m 54s):
Now the Senator,

3 (38m 55s):
You know, signed that bill. And it actually turned into this just kismet moment cuz all of a sudden our, our state's biggest newspapers are writing 24 year old kid, you know, foolishly rents, a restaurant to open a brewery it's illegal and he has to go to Dover

4 (39m 9s):
And to change the law.

3 (39m 11s):
Yeah. So people were kind of rooting for us to get this

4 (39m 13s):
I'm sure. I mean, what, what you couldn't have bought better publicity around that.

3 (39m 18s):
And then subsequently after that, we became really friendly with those good folks in Dover through the years.

4 (39m 23s):
All right. So you get this law passed brewing is legal in the state of Delaware.

3 (39m 29s):
Yeah. That was an amazing moment. And I remember like calling Ry from a payphone, you know, like let the faucets open, you know, it was kinda like one of those post-prohibition moments of wow, we, we, we, we made this happen.

4 (39m 41s):
Yeah. June 23rd, 1995. You open the restaurant. This is, it's now fully open. Right. How was business that first summer?

5 (39m 50s):
It was good. I mean, people came in, people wanted to explore, we had a lot of people ordering, you know, their standard beers and we'd explain that we didn't sell those beers. We made our own beers. So every, every customer was a, a teaching opportunity, I guess.

4 (40m 7s):
I mean, most people's pallets at that time was like, you know, your standard cores and Miller light and maybe Sam Adams, which is a great beer, but was not as radical as what you were, you guys were doing. Were there people who were like, eh, not for me.

3 (40m 27s):
Yeah. I mean, especially once we opened, you know, necessity mother invention and the fact that we couldn't afford a, a full scale, you know, commercial brewing system and had to start with tiny little pots and pans, you know, making 12 gallons of beer in the corner of our, our restaurant. It was actually a blessing in disguise cuz I would brew two or three batches per day. And let's say I was brewing Rayson, Detra, Belgian brown, you with raisins and beet sugars in the three brews that day, I would tweak one variable in that recipe three times. And that was our first like defacto focus groups. I would ask the customers who cared enough to visit this crazy little brewery. Hey, did you like the batched more raisins, less raisins.

3 (41m 7s):
Yeah. And we kind of developed the recipes in concert with our original fans and, and that's kind of how our brand grew

5 (41m 14s):
And they actually paid us to do that, which was kind of helpful.

3 (41m 19s):
And back then I would hand out like file cards when we'd hand people beers and ask them, what do you think of these? And I, I wish that we kept them. I remember we had one beer on tap called high alpha wheat that was made with lavender buds. And one of the comic cards came back and says, this beer tastes like tongue kissing, Laura, Ashley. I remember that. Like, I dunno if that's a good thing or a bad thing, but probably fair point.

4 (41m 47s):
One of the things about what you were doing was that it was expensive, right? You were using a higher volume of grains and expensive, you know, dried fruits and sugars. And so you had to sell your beer for more money, you know, kind of beer might be like double the price of a, a kind of Budweiser Miller light. Did you have to educate people around that?

5 (42m 12s):
Yeah. To a degree, but that's the education we were doing anyway, to explain to them what the different beer was in the first place. So I think it kind of worked hand in hand, you know, I think in, in the bigger context, you know, beer is pretty much an affordable thing to splurge on. Right. So that worked in our benefit and yes, it was more expensive than, you know, the regular beer that you would buy down the street, but you could only get our beer at our place. And I think people appreciated that it was gonna cost more cuz they knew why I think, you know, they saw it being made.

4 (42m 46s):
Right. So from what I understand in initially, maybe in the first, at least year you were brewing all of the beer for this restaurant in 15 gallon kegs. Yeah. On propane burners. That's not a lot of beer for a restaurant that has 150 seats every night. So what, just help me understand how, how you were brewing enough beer. What were you doing?

3 (43m 9s):
Yeah, so I had a mattress in the seller of the pub. So I would only go home to our house maybe three or four nights a week and then stay in the basement of the wow solar. And we would shut at midnight or one and then I'd start brewing, you know, before the day would get hot. You'd wanna start brewing by, you know, eight in the morning or so. So five or six days a week I would triple brew, you know, 12 gallon batches. It worked fine. I would use the hose before people got there in the, in the, in the brewery for my showers and Mariah had a real job cuz we needed insurance.

4 (43m 43s):
What were you doing? Mariah? What was your real job?

5 (43m 46s):
I was working in local TV news in Salisbury, Maryland

4 (43m 50s):
On, on camera,

5 (43m 51s):
Mostly off camera. I right. Prefer that.

4 (43m 55s):
But you, what were doing that in a day? Daytime and come in the restaurant night.

5 (43m 58s):
Yeah. I would come in and bus tables or work at the front door. Do some dishes. Yeah. Whatever needed to

4 (44m 3s):
Be done. And Sam, you were doing, you were brewing the beer and doing payroll and doing the shifts and the, the schedules and stuff like that.

5 (44m 10s):
Oh he wasn't doing payroll.

3 (44m 12s):
I don't trust me with the mess. Let's

5 (44m 14s):
Be clear.

3 (44m 15s):
Come on. No one trusts me with a math guy. Come on. I was more, I was doing the front of house, basically talking about the beer and the food and how they work together with the customers. I'd be getting ready to get the bands on stage and oh you

4 (44m 30s):
Do live music.

3 (44m 31s):
Yeah. Like the holy Trinity was original beer, original food, original music. We also refused to have any cover artists, which, you know, 93% of the bands that play back then were Jimmy buffet cover bands. So we were like finding all these indie rock bands from across the country, you know? So that was a big part of kind of the brand building as well. And then like trying to foster relationships with other entrepreneurs, knowing that in the winter, the tourists were gonna go away and try to get other sort of entrepreneurs to choose us as their preferred watering hole. Those were the kinds of work I, I was doing as well as, as brewing.

4 (45m 5s):
All right. So you've got the restaurant going, but it's very rare for any business, let alone a restaurant to break even or be become profitable in the first year. I'm assuming that you were not profitable in your first year.

3 (45m 21s):
The restaurant actually did pretty darn well like radar, the gates bringing people in. But what did become challenging is I knew that our recipes were unique nationally by that focus on the culinary. I knew that if I could start distributing the, the beers to cities like DC, Baltimore, Philly, Manhattan, and I could get the Washington post to write about a beer made with raisins or the Philly inquire to write about a beer made with Chicky or that would help our brand grow disproportionate to our tiny scale down in, in coastal Delaware.

4 (45m 56s):
Right. Cause you, you could not do that with just that Delaware market. You had to go to those huge media markets and consumer markets like Philadelphia DC.

3 (46m 6s):
Yes. And that kind of drove us to get our bottling line going in our building and buy a little box truck and get on the road. And I would drop off two pallets at a distributor in New York or Philly, but then take a bucket of beers to art for a magazine or interview or food and wine or, and, and you know, usually people would let us in their door for if say, Hey, I'm wanna throw a, we wanna throw an impromptu happy hour for your editorial staff or your writers. And that really helped us start getting national attention.

4 (46m 35s):
So what Mariah, what gave you the confidence to leave your job in, in television to, to go full-time? Cause I think full-time 1997, you joined the company full-time

5 (46m 47s):
So right before I left my full-time job to come to Dogfish, we opened a separate production brewery to brew and package beard that we could then distribute to these, you know, markets around us. My last job in TV news, I was working, managing the assignment desk for the news department. So I was like the receiver of all of the press releases and media alerts. And you know, so I naively assumed that that meant, oh, I know how to do the opposite of that and put out all this information and I'm of course I know how to do marketing, but quickly I realized that I was not needed as much to do marketing as I was all of these other things that we needed to be able to do,

4 (47m 31s):
Like accounting,

5 (47m 32s):
Accounting, and HR and TTB or tobacco tax bureau over excise tax forms twice a month. But I learned, I learned a

3 (47m 40s):
Lot and while this is happening, we also had first starting a family. So, so it was definitely an intense time for, for us as a, as a couple and as entrepreneurs,

4 (47m 52s):
You know, it's remarkable to me when I meet people who met when they were teenagers or kids, because that is so rare, right? Like your judgment as a, as a kid or teenager is just so different from your judgment. And even our judgment as adults is, you know, people, marriages don't last or whate whatever it is. Right. But I mean, part of it is luck that the, just two of you guys happened to be compatible and liked each other. But, but I'm just, just curious Sam, from your perspective, cuz you married very well, right? Like you married somebody very smart. And who was like the brains of the operation at Dogfish had right in Mariah, did you see somebody who could be like a, you know, not just life partner, but like a business partner.

3 (48m 36s):
Yeah. Yeah. So I often use that analogy of like a comic book universe as an entrepreneurial universe where there's all these mutants with complimentary superpowers that take on the big, bad guy, you know, a giant corporation or some monolithic industry. And so I, you know, to use the Marvel universe, you know, I'd say I was a lot like Cyclops where I just was like spraying, you know, creative energy in a million directions outta my brain and eyes and sometimes for good and sometimes recklessly and destroying stuff. And Mariah's definitely, always been more like the professor X, like she could read my mind and, and could kind of see the lay of the whole land, you know, cultivating and nurturing creative ideas that I have into a direction that's, you know, positive for, for Dogfish, but you know, just also for us as a family.

4 (49m 24s):
Hmm. Alright. So, so at this point, both of you are, are working at Dogfish head full time you're and, and you're starting to take your beer outside of Delaware trying to get some national attention. And, and so how, how exactly were you doing that? Like, were you, were you marketing mostly to small bars or were you also, I don't trying to get into like some, some big stores or like some of the big restaurant chains.

3 (49m 48s):
So we knew as we were growing, making these really exotic beers, it's not like the biggest chain Applebee's or chain Costcos was gonna take a chance on a beer made with raisins or a beer made with apricots. So our goal at first was to find these, you know, much like, and I know you did a great story with merge records and if you look at how much the indie music movement in America, essentially the same era when craft beer was coming up late seventies, early eighties, that whole concept of getting a van as a band and you go across the country and you find this grassroot networks of other people

4 (50m 25s):
Who venue to venue. Yep.

3 (50m 26s):
Yeah. Other people that give a shit in every city about this art movement that you're involved in. Yeah. So really I found that grassroot network of hardcore craft, beer bars and restaurants that prided themselves on exotic lists. And that's where I would drive to when I go to Pittsburgh or Hartford or wherever. And I tried to do a beer dinner and talk to the local newspaper. And really, it was like this Sonic youth, you know, model of growing a, a brewing company. Yeah.

4 (50m 57s):
I read a story about a beer event that you were at Sam in 97. So you're still in your late twenties, 28, maybe around then. And this was an August crowd of beer makers. And you stood up to talk about this new beer you were making with apricot puree. What, what happened?

3 (51m 19s):
Yeah. It was at the brick scholar, which was a Mecca of crowds. Oh, in DC. Yeah. You remember that? Don't

4 (51m 24s):
You famous bar? The brick.

3 (51m 26s):
Yeah. Had like the most beers available under one roof and yeah, so there, and they were like one of the first places to host these brewers dinners. Like we'd all get our five minutes at the microphone. There'd be a room of a hundred people and you'd get up there and describe your beer. And then you'd go back to the brewers table. And I remember very proudly saying, you know, getting up on the stage and being like as a homage to like the fruit aromatics of Northwest American hops, I've decided to infuse the beer while it's fermenting with fresh, pure apricots and kind of made my passion plea to describe the beer. And I sit back down and a little older brewer than me gets up on the stage and quiets the audience with a spoon on his pint.

3 (52m 9s):
And he says, I believe that fruit belongs in your salad, not in your beer. I was like, okay. All right.

4 (52m 18s):
But, but at that moment, did you feel kind of like upset or did you, were you confident that you were onto something

3 (52m 24s):
Mariah and I were, I think scared because we had bill collectors calling us and I'd come home and we'd both be beat up and tired, but I'd be like, Hey, I, I dropped off that beer in Pittsburgh. And you remember how last time nine people showed up for my beer dinner? Guess what? 11 people showed up this time, you know, she was supportive and was not like, this is crazy. We're not making money. Let's just shut this down. But there were some challenging years there where we thought we were gonna go bankrupt, like late nineties. Right. Mariah.

5 (52m 52s):
Yeah. I got really good at disguising my voice when our grain purveyor would call and ask for money and I'd be like, oh no, they're not here. You know? Like,

4 (53m 3s):
What was it? Was it just, you were running the business inefficiently, or you just weren't selling enough beer or what was going on?

5 (53m 11s):
Well, anytime you wanna make more beer, you need more capital because it's such a capital intensive process. It's like you can't just make more beer without investing in more tanks and a more bottling lines and more so. So we, we were living hand to mouth and any money that we got in, we were putting right back, whether it was into our people or our ingredients or our equipment.

3 (53m 33s):
And I'd add to that, you know, it was all crappy used. We had a bottling line that came from east Germany that I think made soda over there in the 1950s and was sent to America as part of a cold war initiative to screw up American manufacturing. And we literally paid a guy who was a very skittish and wore ski goggles to just stand behind the bottoming line and push valve number seven down as his job, cuz the machine didn't work. And literally I think one fifth of the beer that came off that bottoming line wasn't even a full bottle and we couldn't sell it, not a very sustainable business model. And then that was really around the time that Mariah's dad, Tom Draper could see that we needed some help.

3 (54m 15s):
He's like, you know what, alright, I wanna put in this amount of money and I don't know if it was a hundred thousand or, or it was some meaningful amount, but I do want a minority equity stake and we're gonna form a board of directors and we're like, oh wow. Okay, let's do that. Okay. And that was awesome. But to your point of what was the cashflow like one of our first board meetings where Tom Draper, I stood up and showed him like some magazine article about our beer that got national coverage and he was quiet for a minute. And then he just said, Sam cash is king and you have no cash, which is true.

4 (54m 50s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Sam and Mariah begin to turn things around with help from a famous beer journalist, a retro children's toy and king might stick around I'm Rahz and you're listening to how I built this. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Raz. So it's the late 1990s and Dogfish head has a strong cult following, but it also has cash flow problems and it needs to start growing faster.

4 (55m 35s):
Fortunately, the famous beer journalist, Michael Jackson, yes. A different Michael Jackson starts saying some really nice things about the brand.

3 (55m 44s):
Yeah. And telling people that we're making fun of us or are laughing us. He said, Hey, wait a second. Dogfish is a very traditional brewery. If you look thousands of years back, every culture and every region of the world was using local indigenous ingredients to make beer. And in the beer world that gave us, you know, we were always thinking beyond beer, like how can we recontextualize beer and moments like that were impactful.

4 (56m 9s):
I should mention that Michael Jackson to beers like Robert Parker to wine. Right. Like he's that important?

3 (56m 14s):
Yeah. Yeah. That's great.

4 (56m 16s):
Meantime there's I think, I think another pretty pivotal moment was, was around this time, sort of the turn of the millennium around 2000, when you launch the 90 minute IPA and then eventually the 60 minute IPA, these, this will become signature beers for you. What, what first just, can you explain what is the 90 minute IPA?

3 (56m 38s):
Yeah, sure. So IPA's a, you know, many centuries old English beer style and basically it

4 (56m 44s):
Was India pale, right?

3 (56m 45s):
India pale ale. And it was basically processed, you know, of an elimination. The English would send beer to the troops in India and just learned through different shipments. If they sent regular mild or regular pale, a, the beer would be spoiled when it got there. So they kind of amplified the alcohol, they added extra hops, very hoppy, more bitter. So those two factors made this more durable, more intense beer style called IPA. So that was already in existence. But what we did is kind of took our culinary inspiration into that IPA space. So one morning I think it was a 99. I was heating up water to brew. Then the chef show came on the television above the bar and they were talking about if they added little pinches of cracked pepper to a soup the whole time the soup was simmering that the flavor, the complexity, the nuances of the pepper would be woven into that soup, you know, more gracefully.

3 (57m 39s):
And then if

4 (57m 39s):
They added, wait, hold on. I say, cause I I'll do a lot of cooking. You're saying, if you add grinds of pepper throughout the simmering process, it has a different effect than if you just add it all at once.

3 (57m 50s):
Yeah. I distinctly remember them saying if I took the same volume of pepper in one handful and added it, it would taste all dislocated and bitter by adding little tiny doses. It can, you know, give more nuance and complexity. So I'm watching this chef talk about this. And I literally, I just had a epiphany. I shut off the gas burner on my brewery and I drove out to the highway to salvation army store. Cuz I remember like this is a place where you'd used jeans and flannel shirts and cool stuff like that. And they had one of those old vibrating football games from the sixties or seventies that the little guys would be on the field and it had a vibrating motor under it. And I bought the football game. I drove back to the brewery.

3 (58m 31s):
I took a five gallon bucket and I perforated holes into it with a, with a hand drill. And then I duct tape the bucket on some two by four S to the vibrating football game and then filled the, the bucket with pelletized hops and just put a step ladder over my boil kettle and just changing the angle of the football game. I could vibrate the hops out of the bucket down the vibrating football game, into the boiling beer with a goal of, could I make, you know, one pellet hit the boiling beer for the whole 90 minutes of the boil one stream of pellets. So it's just like one giant hop edition.

4 (59m 6s):
This sounds like a very complicated experiment.

3 (59m 10s):
Yeah. But by doing this little tiny continual hopping method, it made our beers really intensely aromatically, beautifully hoppy without being crushingly bitter. Like if we added that same right volume of hops all at once, the beers would have an unpalatable lingering bitterness by that volume. Cause

4 (59m 30s):
IPAs can be prohibitively. They can, it's like an obstacle for a lot of people. Cuz there are people who do not like hoppy beer, a lot of people, especially when it's bitter, but this was a way to get people into the hops door without the bitterness.

3 (59m 44s):
Yeah, exactly. And to start with everyone's like you're the one and done brewing company. No one's gonna drink more than one of these super strong super hoppy beers. But when people tried it, they would buy it again. And I remember like being in our, in our house and Mariah like coming outside and being like, Hey, these guys own a website called beer advocate and 90 minutes the best, you know, review the highest rated beer on their, on their website. And they wanna do an interview. And I remember being simultaneously stunned at a 90 minute was the best selling or the highest rated beer on their website and really surprised that they were people that had a website that rated beer. That's how little I knew about the internet, you know, back then.

4 (1h 0m 25s):
Yeah. There's something about beer, especially craft beer that just like attracts a certain cult following. And we know, we know from this show that when you create a niche product that attracts a cult following it eventually becomes a mash product.

5 (1h 0m 41s):
Well, like we also started as the anti mass product, right? Like we like our whole craft industry started that way, but we were at the right time coming up in that industry and there was a shakeout in the late nineties that we navigated

4 (1h 0m 57s):
And the shakeout meant that a lot of the small brew pubs closed. Yeah. They did not survive.

5 (1h 1m 2s):
I mean, I think a lot of people got into it who weren't like all about the beer. They were more like, you know, I read about this micro brewery trend in the wall street journal and I'm gonna make a lot of money and

4 (1h 1m 13s):
It's like podcasts.

5 (1h 1m 14s):
Yeah. A lot like podcasts. Yeah.

4 (1h 1m 16s):
But yeah. So, so that, so, you know, from a branding perspective, yes. What you did. I don't think this was like a, a cynical marketing move at all. It was really just a passion. You carved out your niche by like, not just experimenting with, with different ingredients and weird, but doing collaborations like one of the first unusual collaboration you did was with a, a professor at, at Penn to resurrect like an ancient Egyptian or you know, middle Eastern brewing method cuz they were brewing beer, you know, 3000 years ago.

3 (1h 1m 48s):
Yeah. And, and that as fate would have it, there was a beer festival at the university of Pennsylvania. The guest speaker was Michael Jackson who we've already talked about. Yeah. And Michael Jackson got a tap on his shoulder by this guy, Dr. Pat McGovern, who's said, Hey, I'm a molecular archeologists. And I basically can reverse engineer what they were drinking, you know, the night they buried king might. Wow. And, and Michael Jackson rest in peace, put us together with Dr. Pat and it formed this awesome relationship where we've, you know, we've reversed engineered and kind of these liquid time capsules from ancient China, ancient Italy, ancient Turkey.

3 (1h 2m 28s):
And that's been a big, big part of our journey.

4 (1h 2m 30s):
Wow. I mean, amazing. And, and I wish you mentioned Michael Jackson. I think he, he passed away in 2007, but I mean what a incredible chance, because you know, I remember when this beer came out because it was a, just a natural media story. The beer king might rank is now being brewed by this company in Delaware.

5 (1h 2m 50s):
Yeah. And it's funny cuz it ended up with Sam on a full page spread of people magazine wearing a, a crown on his head. But like we would've never thought people magazine would be interested in our beer, but like that's something that afforded us a new audience

4 (1h 3m 8s):
And you know, it could have been a fly by night sort of, you know, oh, this is just a little gimmick and I'm sure there were some Snickers in the industry where people probably were like, Ugh, just a gimmick, but it wasn't actually, it did. It did started to sell people, started buy it. Yeah. I think by 2004 I read Dogfish was doing like 7 million in revenue, $800,000 in earnings. So you were, you turned it around by then. You guys were definitely doing pretty well at that point,

3 (1h 3m 34s):
I will say by that Eric Guy, one of the things that was fortunate for us, we are all these really transparent with our customers and said, you know, this beer had three times the ingredients in it as a normal light lager and we have to charge three times as much for it. So we did reap the benefit of that pricing premium. We were able to command and that did help a lot with cash flow. So in general we enjoyed at least a decade of double digit annual growth. And so that really helped us get our sort of financial feed under us.

4 (1h 4m 8s):
So as you grow, there was an article that came out in 2008 in the new Yorker, which, and the new Yorker. Right. That's a pretty awesome place to be that article. It talked about how you, by that point you would quadrupled in size from 2004. So you were doing like 40 million revenue, but you still could only meet four fifths of demand. Like a fifth of your orders went, would go unfilled. I mean, that's great to have such a high demand, but it's also a problem, right? Because you don't want to not fill those orders. What was happening. We just didn't have the capacity to meet demand.

5 (1h 4m 41s):
Yeah. We called our sales team at the time that the sales prevention team. So

4 (1h 4m 47s):
You were telling to stop selling.

5 (1h 4m 49s):
Well, we pulled, at one point we pulled out of a number of states. We found like we couldn't supply as many states as we had opened up. So we retracted a bit, we didn't wanna get too far out over our skis. That growth was great, but we didn't wanna outgrow our people and our processes all at the same time. So we kind of intentionally slowed things down a little bit.

4 (1h 5m 13s):
Yeah. How, how, how about your relationship? The two of you? I mean, now you're really growing. You've got probably by 2008, at least a hundred, maybe 200 employees. You've got distribution channels, you're working with distributors and you're also raising children. Did you guys ever sort of have any tension between the two of you have ever had to run the business or was it just very clearly demarcated? What Mariah did, what Sam did?

5 (1h 5m 41s):
Well, I think we had, we definitely had different focus areas and that also meant we had natural time apart, which was probably a great thing too. Our desks at the brewery are, are literally next to each other. So it's great when we're there together, but it's also great when either one of us is on the road and we get a little space there.

3 (1h 5m 59s):
We, we joked the window between our two cubicles is actually Bulletproof glass. No, I mean, I, I did wanna say though it, it did put an interesting dynamic on our family as we're, as we were raising Sammy, our son and Greer our daughter for family time, because we do get to travel a lot to do collaborations with breweries around the world. We would choose, you know, what trips we could bring Sammy and Greer on. Yeah. So that they could see, you know, what we were doing was not just about making a living, but we were trying to build this community and giving back to our community. So having our kids be part of that, instead of feeling guilty about the challenges of work life balance, I think was something we had to learn along the way.

5 (1h 6m 44s):
Yeah. No, I mean, there isn't a work life balance, cuz there's no like demarcation between work and not work really. I mean, we, we go out to dinner at night where it's, it's at an account. Like we go to somewhere on the weekend, like pretty much everywhere sells beer. Right. So, so we're traveling and there is no like, okay at this moment, we're not gonna talk about work anymore. It's just, it doesn't happen. It's not possible.

4 (1h 7m 10s):
Yeah. I, I wanna ask you about something that happened in 2010, which sounds amazing. You were approached by 0.0 an amazing production company. I know they made famously Anthony Bourdain shows. They approached you cuz they wanted to do a show with you, which they did. You eventually did a deal to make a show called brewmaster Sam. You were the face of the show. It began airing on discovery and didn't last for more than five or six episodes. What, what happens? It was a pretty good show.

3 (1h 7m 42s):
Right? You wanna go? You want me,

5 (1h 7m 44s):
No, you go. You're the face of that show. Oh

3 (1h 7m 46s):
Thanks. You're right. 0.0, beautiful storytellers and Anthony Bourdain, an amazing inspiration. And so they did an amazing job and they, we were really proud of the show that we, we made kind of celebrating this blossoming global craft brewing movement. And then the show started at airing and discoveries. Offices are actually right down the road from us in DC and they came and watched with us and I'll be careful here. And I won't say the name of one of the international brewing conglomerates decided they were gonna make custom ads to run during our show and Mariah, our queen of social media. And I said, well, I guess we can't stop you from having them as advertisers.

3 (1h 8m 28s):
But you know, when our fans talk about that, we're gonna talk to them about, have a normal conversation about how we feel about that and how they feel about that. And sure enough, after that first episode, the interwebs was a chatter and we, we said, yep. That's not a ind craft brewery. It's it's trying to look like one. And then like within two weeks, the executives that the network workers saying, oh, a major beer brand is pulling their advertising. Yeah. Unless we stop running your show and to Anthony Bourdain's credit, he jumped on his own social and let people know

4 (1h 9m 1s):
He started talking about this. Yeah, yeah, yeah. He was like big beer killed this show. But kind of, I mean, I'm not trying to take their side, but big beer companies saw that the craft beer revolution was well underway. And so they were making all these, they would just throw Brooklyn or some cool word into a beer, but it was really made by like Budweiser and by Anheiser Bush and, and Coors. Right?

3 (1h 9m 22s):
Yeah. There was a good amount of that going on.

4 (1h 9m 27s):
Hey, nothing wrong with it. They're trying to make money too. And if the beer's not bad and well branded, okay. More power to them.

3 (1h 9m 34s):
And that, and that when I mentioned that we're living in this great moment where this community of sort of misfits found each other, we actually do have a real home, which is we have a trade group called the brewers association. And so as craft beer became this movement that left the margins and came towards the center. We saw these international breweries making beers and selling them as if they came from small local indie breweries. Right? So the, the, our trade group came together and I was on the board along with Jim cook and Ken Grossman and Kim Jordan.

4 (1h 10m 6s):
Now you're talking about, everyone's been on how I built this, all, all the

3 (1h 10m 8s):
Breweries, you got good taste guy, you got good taste. And so a bunch of us, you know, recognize that we needed to come up with a definition of a true independent American craft brewery. So essentially it means if you're over 3 million barrels or more than 25% owned by a brewery, that's over 3 million barrels. You can't use our trade groups seal that says you're an indie craft brewery and right. 3 million barrels sounds like a lot until you put it in the context of market share. And that means, you know, you're less than, you know, like a 5% or 4% or even even less,

5 (1h 10m 43s):
Hey Sam, you said 3 million a couple times, but isn't it actually six.

3 (1h 10m 47s):
Yeah. I think it

5 (1h 10m 48s):
Is just fact checking you.

3 (1h 10m 49s):
Thank you for fact checking me, honey,

4 (1h 10m 53s):
But it's, it's very European, right? Like obviously champagne can't must come from champagne, Parma, ham Parma, John. And so this is a version of that. It's like saying, Hey, if you wanna call yourself a craft brewery, but there's no, there's no real legislation backing that. Right? Like a big multinational company can brew an something and call it craft beer. They may not have your seal of approval on it, but they can still call it craft beer.

3 (1h 11m 19s):
Right. And, and, and we're up against these international conglomerates. So that's why these smaller businesses really need this definition of, of what our businesses are like. And then really beers, you know, the beauties in the eye of the beer holder. And I guess it's up to the consumer to say, I give a shit about that definition or I don't

4 (1h 11m 40s):
Alright. You get to, I mean, I think at a certain point you are like within the top 10 craft brewers in the us probably by 2018, is that, is that about right sound about right?

3 (1h 11m 53s):
It does.

4 (1h 11m 54s):
And May 9th, 2019 announcement comes out. You're being acquired as a, describes a merger with the Boston beer company, makers of Sam Adams that you would become part of this bigger company. Help me understand why, why this was a good decision. I mean, there was gonna be money involved and, but you were doing great on your own. Why did you feel like it was a better decision to merge with the biggest force in craft beer?

3 (1h 12m 25s):
So I was on the board with Jim cook, you know, at the bruise association for over a decade. And I would see Jim at his booth at the great American beer Fest, you know, working his ass off, serving the beer, or listen to him on a radio commercial, talking about the Ryan Heights, CBO and the purity of, of the brewing. Yeah. So I always admired him before we were friends. And then around 10 or 12 years ago, we did our first collaborative beer with Sam Adams. And I remember calling down to Delaware and talking Ryan. I was like, oh my God. Now I've met other people from Sam Adams. And they remind me a lot of our coworkers. They're fun, they're passionate, they're creative. They wanna win in the marketplace.

3 (1h 13m 7s):
And so at some point in our journey, we just started looking at our, our companies and our, our values and saw that our values were, were very complimentary, but also our portfolios because Boston beer company is Jim and, and the coworkers built it. Yes, it had Sam Adams, the number one craft lager in America, but it also had angry orchard. The number one cider in America. Yeah. It had tea, it had seltzer, whereas Dogfish had hoppy ails. It had sours. It had distilled spirits, canned cocktails as well, which is now, you know, the fastest growing category and the fastest growing part of Dogfish heads business. Yeah. And the values and sort of that portfolio drove Mariah I's decision to do the merger.

4 (1h 13m 50s):
Well, let me, let me ask you about cuz this is important. A lot of people listening, right? They have companies, they get to a point where they have to decide, we take this fork or that fork and, and one fork could be, we stay independent like Gary and ki Erickson, cliff bar, they stayed independent. They continue to grow, but you could also take that fork and it could be a bad decision. Right. The market changes things happen. It, it, it can be scary.

5 (1h 14m 12s):
Yeah. And, and what we were also seen as a independent craft brewery is that we were looked around and we were one of the few independent mid-size craft breweries left. A lot of the big multinational breweries had been buying up a lot of our peers. So we were like, okay, well we can be independent, but we're at this really awkward, almost teenage size where we're not fully national, like really deep nationally. And we're, we're too big to be just local, you know, and we're independent and all of our peers are now not independent. I not all of them, I would say the majority, maybe 80%,

4 (1h 14m 51s):
But it is incredible that this thing that you really didn't need, that that much money to start out with turned into a deal that went for 300 million to Boston beer company. I mean, I'm sure that had you thought about that in 1995, you would've thought that's gonna be an amazing outcome, but you couldn't imagined that you would build a brand worth $300 million.

5 (1h 15m 12s):
That was not part of the original business plan.

3 (1h 15m 16s):
And like, honestly, if we pulled into our brewery, like I did yesterday in Milton Delaware and the big tanks that hold, you know, 10,000 cases of beer were just filled with 60 minute, I would feel like we failed in our,

4 (1h 15m 29s):
Is this still your best seller? By the way, 60 minute IPA,

3 (1h 15m 31s):
60 minute IPA is still our best seller. But what, what I'm most proud of is we come into this brewery that has some national scale and the tanks are still filled mostly with beers that have Seasaw and limes and monk fruit and pumpkin, we're just brewing them at scale. So the community that we built, like from the smallest brewery in the country in Delaware, that's the most rewarding part of it.

4 (1h 15m 56s):
All right. There was pushback. Okay. Anybody who's seen Portlandia knows what that means. Right? Anytime the band goes from playing the indie club to the stadium, their sellouts, what you're collaborating with Elton John and cold play. How could you do that? You're not cool anymore, especially cuz you know, you guys were a, you know, you got this punk rock aesthetic, you have a brand called punk and nail. It's a punk pumpkins on the thing and there's an aesthetic, you know, kind of fighting against the man, the big guys. And now you're part of a big company and there were people who were like you guys sold out. Did you care when you heard that, did that sting or were you like no, those people don't understand.

5 (1h 16m 39s):
Oh, of course we cared. But we also expected it. I mean, we hoped that over time they would see that the way we're operating the partners that were choosing do still fit into the Dogfish that they know and loved. And for those who that merger was a problem with, we had to earn it back. And I, I hope that we've done that, but the drinkers have to say,

3 (1h 17m 2s):
And, and thankfully now in the world of social media, a lot of that sentiment is quantifiable. So as we went into the merger, we knew, of course the smaller of the entities that merges is always gonna take, you know, more of the arrows for the bigger. And so we knew monitoring our social channels, that the sentiment would be more negative for us, but it was up to us to continue that real dialogue with our fans to say, no, you know, we're still doing what we're doing in Delaware. We're adding jobs, not taking jobs away, investing in the community and had those conversations. And soon enough we could see that sort of uptick in, in positive sentiment, back into our world. So it takes time and it kind of have to put your money where your mouth is and never really let the, the tail of, of inspiration be wagged, you know, by the dog of, of money, if that's how you say it.

4 (1h 17m 52s):
So, alright, now you are working as part of this bigger company and I'm gonna make you uncomfortable here. This is the uncomfortable part of the show. There are a few others, but you both, I mean, this made you very rich. You have a lot of money. Does that mean anything practically to your life? Does it change anything about the way you live your life?

3 (1h 18m 12s):
I would say no. And I mean, you know, pre-merger thinks to the hard work that we've put in and our coworkers have put in and a fair amount of luck. We were already, we, we made a good living. So nothing really about the merger moment, other than the scale of the dollars has changed how we live our lives. And we know how lucky we are to be able to say that. But we also know that we love to get up and do the work we've done for 27 years today. Just as much as we did when we were fighting to be one of the smallest breweries and not just the smallest brewery in the country.

4 (1h 18m 52s):
All right. So Sam, you answered my luck skill question. Thank you for preempting it. Appreciate

5 (1h 18m 57s):
It. Can you tell me we're avid listeners,

4 (1h 19m 3s):
Mariah, what do you think? I mean, I have my take on your story because I mean, the fact that you met in the cafeteria when you were 15 or something, you know, and that you're still together takes hard work too, but I think there's an element of luck there. I don't know. What do you think? How, what, what do you attribute the success of this, this business to,

5 (1h 19m 18s):
Oh, I, I don't think it can be either or I think there was a lot of hard work, different, hard work along the way, but there's so much that we've talked about today that is like, and then we had this amazing opportunity and then this really cool thing happened. So I think the luck kind of came to us cuz we were looking for it. You know, we didn't pass by opportunities. That in hindsight were really amazing, lucky opportunities that we had.

3 (1h 19m 46s):
I'll say, you know, I go for a paddleboard or, or a bike ride pretty much every morning to earn my beer calories. And when I get all the way out, whether it's on water, on a bike trail, I always kind of say the same mantra, which is thank you for this beautiful day. Thank you for this beautiful place. Thank you for my beautiful life. And thank you for my beautiful wife. And that is from my days of being a, a pretty, you know, rebellious teenager, not knowing where I, where things would go. The biggest part of luck for me was meeting Mariah

4 (1h 20m 20s):
That Sam and Mariah K Joni founders of Dogfish had craft brewery. Is there anything like totally off limits when it comes to flavoring? Be like, I don't know, like, would you use like raw tuna or I don't know, like, well

3 (1h 20m 33s):
We've used human saliva guy. You gotta come back the next time we do our Chicha beer and we, we chewed the corn and that was a good one.

4 (1h 20m 41s):
I don't think I could drink human saliva beer. I just don't think I could do it. It's sold out, sold out. Wow.

3 (1h 20m 47s):
We boil it. We boil it. Spit happens.

4 (1h 20m 53s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to this show this week, if you wanna contact the team, our email addresses H I BT id.wondery.com. This episode was produced by Alex Chung with music composed by rut Arab Louey. It was edited by Neva grant with research help from Catherine cipher. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, Josh lash, Liz Metzker, Carrie Thompson, Sam Paulson, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris MACI, and Carla Esteve I'm guy Raz. And you've been listening to how I built this.

4 (1h 21m 40s):
Hey everyone. So I wanna make sure you know, all of the different ways you can listen to how I built this. As you probably know, you can follow the show on Amazon music, apple podcasts, or wherever you're listening right now. But I wanna let you know that you can actually listen to the next episode of how I built this today. One week early on Amazon music, you can also listen to it early and add free by subscribing to Wondery plus and apple podcasts or on the Wondery app. Please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded. And another way to support the show is by filling out a survey wondery.com/survey. And thanks.