0 (0s):
Bigs he's on a mission to make awesome scrubs suited for the awesome humans. Working in healthcare. Forget boxy itchy scrubs figs are engineered to be ridiculously soft and incredibly durable. Plus their functional figs has a proprietary four way stretch fabric and our moisture wicking anti-wrinkle and anti odor. Thanks to Sylvia their anti-microbial technology. Thanks to their innovative technical comfort technology, bigs blends, comfort style, and durability into high-performance scrubs that help you perform at your best. Whatever the day throws at you. Figs believes the awesome humans in healthcare deserve scrubs that match head to where figs.com and use code Wondery to get 15% off your first order. That's w E a R F I G s.com code wandering for 15% off your first order.

1 (46s):
Hey, it's guy here just, well, you know that on November 13th, I'll be doing a live webinar with Gary Erickson of cliff bar. He'll be talking about how to build a business and a business culture that reflects your personal values. The webinar is free. It's supported by go-to meeting, and it's just one of the projects that grew out of our first, how I built this summit in San Francisco. If you want to check it out, go to summit.npr.org/webinar. That's summit.npr.org/webinar. And one more little thing this Thursday, we're going to be running our first bonus episode from the summit. It's my live conversation with Jennifer Hyman of rent the runway.

1 (1m 26s):
So be on the lookout for that in your podcast queue. And now here's the show.

3 (1m 35s):
It was not very scalable. I mean, all things that summer that we did were not scalable. I mean, we would take the orders as basically phone operators and then we would do the deliveries ourselves. And I remember graduating from business school and two days later, while my classmates were flying out on their exotic vacations, I was delivering, you know, hummus in my Honda.

1 (2m 6s):
Brian NPR. How I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Ross and on today's show the story of how student named Tony shoe went from delivering Thai food to dorm rooms, to building one of the biggest meal delivery services in America. When I was in college, there was a student who used to roll a giant cooler down the corridors of the dorm, and he would shout out Chinese food, man, get your Chinese food. And every Tuesday and Thursday night, this very enterprising kid would go to a local Chinese takeout.

1 (2m 51s):
He'd order, a hundred bucks worth of chow main and fried rice and beef and broccoli and egg rolls. Mark it up by about percent and sell it to a hungry college students at 10 or 11:00 PM that night. This was kind of a big deal in the 1990s when the only real delivery option was pizza. But of course, at a certain point, the novelty wore off and the Chinese food man got a job somewhere and that was it. Dorm room food delivery. Wasn't scalable, except that today this very concept pulls in an estimated $13 billion in annual revenue. Just imagine the following situation.

1 (3m 33s):
It's 10 at night. You want me low for a burrito or some fried chicken or a burger, but you're binge watching some show and well let's face it. You don't want to get off the couch. You don't want to leave your house. So you grab your phone, you click on grub hub or Uber eats or Postmates or DoorDash and boom, 30 minutes later, the food is at your door. Now you might think all of these services got started to solve this exact problem. But actually when Tony shoe co founded door dash, about five years ago, he wasn't really thinking about us about the eaters. He was thinking more about the restaurants, the chefs, and the owners who want it to get more of their food out into the world, but didn't have an easy way to do this.

1 (4m 18s):
So when Tony was still a student in business school, he and some friends built a system that linked local restaurants to hungry customers, to the drivers who were available to deliver the food. They started with a simple webpage, eight restaurants and a Honda accord. Five years later, door dash is valued at over $4 billion and it's done over a hundred million deliveries across the country. But getting to that point, wasn't so simple. Tony, didn't start out with lots of connections or money. In fact, he only started to learn English as a boy. Tony was actually born in Nanjing, China, and when he was four, his father got into an engineering program at the university of Illinois at Urbana champagne.

1 (5m 2s):
His mom left behind her career in medicine and started waiting tables. And as a kid, Tony got to work to trying to fit in at his new American school.

3 (5m 14s):
There wasn't a lot of diversity at that time, not in the late eighties and the early nineties. And so I had really two ways to learn English and to really learn English on my own one was watching lots of TV. And that's actually how it got my name. I

1 (5m 29s):
Oh, your name, your name is not Tony.

3 (5m 31s):
No, my Chinese name was shushing. And when I got to the U S none of my classmates, nor my teachers could pronounce my name, I was the only Asian kid in school

1 (5m 41s):
On the registration form. It said shooshing.

3 (5m 44s):
Yeah, it did. And as I was learning English, watching lots of TV to do it, I saw many episodes of who's the boss starring Tony Dan. And so pretty much at the age of five, I walked with my, to the immigration office and legally changed my name

1 (5m 60s):
Inspired by Tony Danza from who's the

3 (6m 2s):
Bus. Absolutely.

1 (6m 5s):
Did you, did you do any, like any businesses as a kid? She said anything.

3 (6m 12s):
I did have a couple of businesses, so, so we didn't necessarily come with a lot of money. And so w in order for me to, you know, buy Nintendo games or a new basketball, I started working at a pretty young age. I, you know, I'd wash dishes inside my mom's restaurant.

1 (6m 28s):
The one that she

3 (6m 29s):
Worked at, the one she worked at a dishwasher, I was a dishwasher. I'm a very good dishwasher today and have those days to think, but I, I mowed lawns. And I realized actually at a very young age that Walt, because the lawns in champagne were very large, you can actually make a business out of that. And I could actually charge money for different shapes for lawns.

1 (6m 51s):
You invested in a lawn mower, or

3 (6m 53s):
We invested in a old lawn mower, and I would just go door to door to door and ask if I can cut people's grass. And I started realizing over time. Actually, if you cut grass at different Heights, you can come up with different shapes and patterns like the U S flag,

1 (7m 8s):
Like a mow, the us flag into someone's laws.

3 (7m 11s):
So, so at first use out first use the mower to, to make the stripes and I could cut them at different Heights. And then what I would do is I'd ask if I can borrow one of their Clippers as well as am blanking the

1 (7m 24s):
Tremors.

3 (7m 25s):
Yeah. The tremors that are there, electric, the electric trimmers and effectively make different shapes in the lawn. Wow.

1 (7m 32s):
It's quite a line of giant American flag,

3 (7m 35s):
Many hours, but when you really want to Nintendo and you have no money in the bank, you do what it takes.

1 (7m 43s):
Did you ever have any inkling as a kid that your parents were struggling?

3 (7m 49s):
I had, maybe when I went to middle school had had small observations of it. For example, you know, we couldn't afford lessons for, you know, or sports uniforms. We lived in a fairly small apartment compared to some of my friends who had single family homes. I lived off of the free lunch program for pretty much kindergarten through middle school. So I think that's small semblances of that. But I think for most of my childhood, I, I didn't think too much about that.

1 (8m 24s):
And just, just to be clear, your mom was a doctor in China, right?

3 (8m 28s):
Was she was a doctor and she effectively had to give up her credentials because when she immigrated to the U S no institution in the U S would recognize her credentials from China. And so, as a result, she kind of had to go backwards. So she worked as a waitress inside of a restaurant. She worked as a babysitter. She works at a hospice and, and, you know, she did that for 12 years before she could save up enough money to open up a medical clinic and basically relive and regain her life in China.

1 (9m 5s):
And why your mom was doing all that stuff. Your dad essentially became an engineer. And I guess his first job was in California. So you guys move out there. How old were you when you moved to California?

3 (9m 17s):
I was 15.

1 (9m 19s):
So you guys move out to where, where, where

3 (9m 21s):
Did she move to San Jose?

1 (9m 23s):
So you probably given where you moved to all of a sudden we're a school where people, there were people who looked like you, where you felt right. If you were not the only Asian kid for the first time,

3 (9m 33s):
It's almost like going back to China. I'm one of maybe three kids now, right. In, in Illinois, in my grade that that's Asian. And then I moved to San Jose. I'm like, wow. You know, this is, this is a surprise. Yeah. And my opening conversation with the principal was one where he and other educators that assessed that I was like two years behind everyone. And, and then it's mainly because I had no idea how competitive the school system is here in the bay area, you know, in, in the Midwest, especially where I grew up, you were recognized for your athletic abilities. Definitely. It wasn't cool to be the smart kid in class out here.

3 (10m 16s):
You know, there were math competitions, there were, there's so many academic lessons after school. And I worked my tail off. I, I was miserable. I mean, my first year, it was just day and night. All I did was pretty much all first catch up because I truly was behind. And then secondly, do a lot better. Sure. And I remember looking the teachers in the eye and said, I'm going to graduate as valedictorian of your class.

1 (10m 47s):
Wow. You said that as a freshmen,

3 (10m 49s):
I said that it was almost an instinctual response. Looking back. It was certainly a bit presumptuous, but, but, but four years later that happened. You

1 (10m 59s):
Were the valedictorian of your high school?

3 (11m 1s):
I was. Wow.

1 (11m 3s):
Okay. So you go to college at UC Berkeley, and then eventually you go to Stanford for business school, right? Yeah. And one of the things that you do in business school is you create a lot of projects. Yes. Which spoiler alert, this is the sort of the beginnings of what would eventually become door dash. But tell me about this project that, that you did for a class. What was it?

3 (11m 28s):
Well, the, the assignment, what was work on a customer audience that you're passionate about and try a bunch of things. And that was really what my co-founders and I kind of gravitated towards, you know, my co-founders and I w we all met really because of a shared interest for local businesses.

1 (11m 46s):
Where were they in a class with you, but they weren't. So you all sat around and said, how can we help local businesses, like scale, or just make their, their operations more efficient?

3 (11m 56s):
We didn't even know what problem to, to work on. At first, it was just that audience that we were passionate about. And, and, you know, each, each person has their own personal connection with a local business. Mine was clearly to my mom's business. I've watched her in the world of local business for 20 plus years growing up as a kid. So I've always been a fan. And we started by talking to a lot of businesses in the bay area, all sorts of businesses.

1 (12m 19s):
What were you asking them,

3 (12m 21s):
Asking them about if there was a magic wand and we could take away any problem for you this week, what would it

1 (12m 28s):
Be? So you would call up a restaurant and say, Hey,

3 (12m 31s):
We go and physically,

1 (12m 32s):
Yeah, you go, Hey, I'm Tony, I'm a student at Stanford and we're working on a project. And if you had a magic wand, what's the one problem you could solve. That's what you guys would do. What are they telling you? What's their problem?

3 (12m 42s):
There are a few. I mean, we, we, we had heard a few, so we had her challenges with staffing. We had her challenges with how do we know where customers find out about us? And actually the first idea that we had worked on was really an idea towards helping them better understand where their customers were coming from. It was more of a marketing solution where we put a tablet at the checkout and ask very simply when a customer was checking out, where did you, or how did you hear about this business? And that was actually the very first idea we've worked on.

1 (13m 12s):
All right. So where did that idea go? What happened to it?

3 (13m 15s):
We realized that while it's a helpful idea, that it wouldn't be the fastest way to help a small business. So maybe we can help and tell you where your customers are coming from, and you can deploy more dollars into those marketing channels, or maybe we can just get you more customers. And, and that was when we started shifting our thinking towards, and our attention towards how do we do that?

1 (13m 38s):
So how do you do it?

3 (13m 41s):
So while we started hearing about challenges with delivery and

1 (13m 46s):
Delivering, like

3 (13m 47s):
From restaurants, florists, some retail stores, and this is very bizarre because delivery has been around forever, forever, and yet outside of New York city, just about no one does delivery, 85% of restaurants in America don't deliver. So,

1 (14m 4s):
So you were hearing from room restaurant saying delivery, delivery, delivery. And then what,

3 (14m 8s):
So let me tell you about one customer. So th this is a cake store owner, and sh her store is 500 square feet, maybe the size of your studio. And she would say things about turning down 10 to 15 orders a week. This is material. This is very,

1 (14m 27s):
Very short when you're making cakes,

3 (14m 29s):
Especially

1 (14m 29s):
When you're making pensive,

3 (14m 30s):
They're expensive. And as I remember how many orders my mom would used to do in her restaurant in Illinois, like 10 or 15 years is a lot.

1 (14m 39s):
She was turning them down. Why?

3 (14m 41s):
Because she had no way to deliver them. She didn't want to do it herself.

1 (14m 45s):
She,

3 (14m 45s):
You know, she, she was a one person show many of the days,

1 (14m 48s):
So she could not afford to hire.

3 (14m 50s):
She could not afford a hire. Right. And, and, and, and when she did try to hire, you know, she had this challenge of, well, you know, only sometimes where the driver's busy, because, you know, when there was a spike in demand that then maybe the drivers very busy, but on most days the driver is doing nothing. And, but she had to pay the driver, obviously for, for both the uptime and the downtime. And she literally had copies of customers, payment information and details that she could not fulfill. And so this is just crazy. This is, this is so un-American to, to, to turn down all these credit cards. And so that was really what turned our eye towards. Is there an opportunity in delivery?

3 (15m 30s):
If so, what is it?

1 (15m 31s):
So at that point, you guys started to do some research to find out, okay,

3 (15m 35s):
One, we did research to figure out why is delivery not a thing outside of New York city? And then the second thing we did was can we run a small pilot here at Stanford campus to test out our idea? So on the first piece we would, you know, do deliveries for services like Domino's or FedEx. And we would learn how to, how does deliveries actually work?

1 (15m 58s):
What do you mean you would do deliveries? You would go and we'd just

3 (16m 0s):
Be a drivers.

1 (16m 1s):
Oh, you, you mean you applied to Domino's, you

3 (16m 3s):
Would just be a driver.

1 (16m 4s):
You actually went to go work for Domino's. Yeah. So you guys were, so you were a students at Stanford graduate school of business, but you also had these, like part-time gigs working as drivers for FedEx. And Domino's just really to learn about how this works.

3 (16m 20s):
We were just trying to figure out how delivery works, because none of us necessarily had a background in logistics. And so we learn a couple of pretty interesting observations. The first to us was, is so hard as a single store to know how many drivers to put in the store. You know, if there's, for example, a football game at Stanford, wait times would skyrocket, you know, we, we would, we would, we wouldn't know what to do. We would know how to flex up the number of drivers. You know, this would happen at a florist to if there's Valentine's day, good luck. You know, we're calling this, the store owners are literally calling all of their families and relatives

1 (16m 57s):
To

3 (16m 57s):
Deliver fires, right. Because you can't, you can't flex up. Okay. But then think about, you know, a normal day of the week where literally we're folding pizza boxes to drivers, because there isn't the volume. And so you have this very difficult and inefficient use of expensive labor. And so as consumption is becoming more last minute, isn't it strange that the way these goods are brought to us require advanced planning. And it was just this weird juxtaposition to us that says, well, maybe there's something here. Hmm. And, and so we said, well, well, let's just, let's just run a test. Let let's just do something on Stanford campus, something simple. Let's, let's pick one thing to deliver, instead of trying to deliver everything.

3 (17m 41s):
We chose restaurants because well, people eat 20 to 25 times a week. And we had researched that 85% of them did not do their own deliveries. In fact, all of the restaurants we had spoken to in the bay area had zero delivery. And so when we saw lat, we said, well, okay, is that because nobody wants the deliveries or is that because of something else? And so that's what, that was really the crux of what we wanted to test when we were at Stanford.

1 (18m 6s):
All right. So you decided to test this theory out. Yes. And, and how, and what did you do? What, what, what we, what were you offering and, and how did you do it?

3 (18m 15s):
So on a Saturday we built a website called Palo Alto delivery

1 (18m 19s):
Dot. You guys all knew how to do this.

3 (18m 22s):
We, we, we did it well, building website, fairly straightforward. And what we did was we put eight PDF menus on Palo Alto delivery.com and ate

1 (18m 33s):
From local restaurant from

3 (18m 34s):
Local restaurants. Okay. There was a Google voice number that I had signed up for that would ring the cell phones of all of my classmates and now founders in me. And, and that was it.

1 (18m 44s):
So you, and, and did you partner with these restaurants, you call them and say, Hey,

3 (18m 48s):
We're going to, we did not do that.

1 (18m 49s):
Did you ask their permission

3 (18m 50s):
Would, did not. And you did

1 (18m 51s):
Not ask

3 (18m 52s):
In the beginning and

1 (18m 52s):
What you just picked eight restaurant. We

3 (18m 54s):
Picked eight restaurants that we liked and what

1 (18m 56s):
Were they?

3 (18m 56s):
Oh, there was Bangkok cuisine, which is a Thai restaurant. There was Oren's hummus, which was a homeless store, a middle Eastern homeless food. There was a Chinese restaurant there, there was an Indian restaurant, there was a salad bar

1 (19m 9s):
And, and people could call the number and just order off the menu. And then, and so how are you going to make money if the restaurants didn't know, like, who was, you were just going to hope that they tipped you, like, how was that

3 (19m 21s):
We were not necessarily making money. So we were, so we would take the orders as basically, you know, phone operators. And then we would do the deliveries ourselves.

1 (19m 30s):
There was no app. There was no, there

3 (19m 31s):
Was no app. It

1 (19m 32s):
Was just a website.

3 (19m 33s):
It was a jenky

1 (19m 34s):
Webpage. And you call the number

3 (19m 37s):
And you call them

1 (19m 37s):
And you would say, hello, it's Tony from Palo Alto delivery. May I help you? Yes. And they would say, sure, I want a big bucket of homeless and some pita and, you know, some Baba news and you would say, great. And then how would, you know, how long that was gonna take?

3 (19m 54s):
We would make an estimate in the beginning, we would guess, and we'd say

1 (19m 57s):
45 to an hour, I

3 (19m 58s):
Would say 45 minutes. And then we would drive to the store. The restaurant would

1 (20m 2s):
Call orange, who moves first.

3 (20m 5s):
We would call on the way we call on the way we call on the way. And we would place the order, pick it up on behalf of the customer, show up at the customer and use. So I used to work at square as well. So take a square card reader and use

1 (20m 20s):
Like a summer internship at square.

3 (20m 22s):
I did a summer internship at square. And so I had many skirt, a square card readers with me. So I would plug them into my phone and use that to receive the payment,

1 (20m 30s):
Essentially. Meaning you were just being reimbursed for, for buying their food at the homeless bar.

3 (20m 35s):
Yes, we weren't. We weren't losing money. We just weren't making any

1 (20m 38s):
Money. And how quickly from the time you put it out there until the time your phones rang, did you, did you start getting orders?

3 (20m 45s):
We got our first order, 45 minutes actually, actually after launching. Wow. And that was very pleasant surprise. The only way this customer could have found us was by typing in Palo Alto delivery into the browser, hitting enter and finding us. Yeah. And, and you know, this customer places, an order at a, at a Thai restaurant who, who

1 (21m 9s):
Delivered it,

3 (21m 11s):
My co-founder and me.

1 (21m 12s):
And then when you showed up at his place, did you say, thank you so much work grad students at Stanford business school doing this research, or did you just say, here's your food?

3 (21m 20s):
We actually did the former, we actually taped the whole thing. We actually asked her permission that, and, and you videoed it w w with my phone and asked them how you found out about us, you know, and a few other questions.

1 (21m 32s):
He was just like, okay, thanks for the food. Or he

3 (21m 34s):
Was really friendly. He was actually a visiting author and he was a bit of entrepreneurial spirit himself. And, and, and he was very supportive of, of what we were doing.

1 (21m 45s):
So you decide that you're going to keep this going. Yes. So how are you, if your Google voice phone was gonna ring presumably 24 hours a day and the you and your co-founders had to do all the deliveries, how did, how did that work?

3 (22m 0s):
Well, it was a bit of a limited service. So we, we only offered service when we were not in class. So it was really

1 (22m 7s):
Great, great technology there. Killer app

3 (22m 11s):
We're available

1 (22m 12s):
From nine to noon.

3 (22m 13s):
So we're available from five to 8:00 PM. That was actually what we, what we were available. And so this was, this was certainly not, it's certainly not a venture, but those were the early days.

1 (22m 24s):
So how long did you guys do this for? Well,

3 (22m 25s):
We did this, we did this for five months.

1 (22m 30s):
And what were you, I mean, every time you were doing a delivery where you recording, like how long it took you, what did you have? Like a, a book or like a spreadsheet that you were putting numbers in?

3 (22m 40s):
Yeah. Th there are a few things. So the three major questions on our minds at the time, you know, number one was, do people want delivery and how much are people willing to pay for it? Number two, we were interested in, you know, our restaurants interested in working with us. So as we started getting orders, we would talk to the restaurants and asking, is this something that, you know, you find valuable is, you know, would you pay for this service

1 (23m 3s):
In other words, instead of the customer paying a premium with the restaurant pay you guys? Yes.

3 (23m 9s):
And then the final question was, well, as you mentioned, we were in class at the time. And so sometimes it was difficult being in class and on a delivery at the same time. And so w w w we started trying to recruit Tribers at Stanford. And so we're trying to figure out what can we do that? Would people be willing to use their own vehicles? Would people be willing to, you know, how much do they need to be paid? Things like this. Those are the three areas that we're really interested in.

1 (23m 35s):
And at what point did you and your co-founder say, this is our business. We're going to, like, what, what, what information did you get, or did you gather that you, this, this was going to be the thing we're going to try to do?

3 (23m 49s):
Yeah. Th there wasn't, there wasn't that moment. We're doing such little volume. We were, we were delivering maybe five to 10 orders a day, half of whom from our friends. And so it certainly from the data, it would have been too far a jump to, to say, there's a business here, but, you know, I think two things kept us going. One was just enjoying working with one another. And then second was, we kept getting positive answers to the questions we were asking, you know, is this something that consumers wanted? Is this something that restaurants were willing to pay for? Is this something that drivers were willing to, to, to partner with? And so it was more incremental and, and, and there wasn't these, you know, step function jumps per se.

3 (24m 35s):
We were a very small service still at the time.

1 (24m 37s):
Did you strike a deal with any of these restaurants in that time to pay you? You did. We did. So some of them were like, sure, we'll give you like a percentage of the sale.

3 (24m 44s):
All of them actually. Oh, well,

1 (24m 45s):
Yeah, but it's not like you were bringing them a whole lot of business.

3 (24m 48s):
No. The first check I remember cutting to a very popular store today was for $21 and some change.

1 (24m 58s):
I mean, at this point, this thing, this thing is not scalable.

3 (25m 2s):
It was not very scalable. I mean, all things that summer that we did were not scalable. I mean, I remember graduating from business school and two days later, while my classmates were flying out on their exotic vacations, I was delivering, you know, hummus in my Honda.

1 (25m 23s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Tony shoe went from delivering hummus in his Honda, in Palo Alto to delivering just about every food you could imagine all across the country, stay with us and guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR In business. Competition is the key to success. Every product you own from your shoes on your feet, to your phone in your hands, got there because of cutthroat business decisions and wonder is podcast.

1 (26m 9s):
Business wars brings you stories about the most well-known companies in the world and how the decisions they make shape, what you buy and how you live with over 50 seasons to choose from. You'll hear about the fight for your feet, with Nike versus Adidas, the battle to control the smartphone market with iPhone versus Blackberry or the game-changing company that is Tesla and Elon Musk's bid to take on the entire auto industry. Business wars covers every sector from fashion to food tech, to travel sports, to pop culture, and more, these stories are entertaining, fun, eye-opening and help you understand a little bit more about the world around you. Listen to business wars on Amazon music, apple podcasts, or wherever you get your podcasts.

1 (26m 52s):
Listen, one week early and add free by joining Wondery plus in apple podcasts or on the Wondery app. If you're a parent like me, you're probably looking for activities for your kids that doesn't involve a tablet or a screen enter. Tinker cast. Tinker cast is the leading audio. First producer for curious kids, our podcasts share stories of science and innovation, unsung heroes, and more that wow kids and adults like our newest podcast flip and moseys guide to how to be an earthling flip and mosey are two aliens who crash land on earth and have to wait several hundred light years for the next space tow truck to arrive.

1 (27m 33s):
So in the meantime, they travel earth as bloggers learning from different animals. What it means to be an earth Lang this intergalactic musical podcast shares the wows of our planet and brings conservation into the conversation for kids and grownups. So this earth day, and really any day discover the wonders of our animal friends and listen to flip and moseys guide to how to be an earthling wherever you get your podcasts or ad free. And one week early by subscribing to Wondery plus kids in apple podcasts or wondering plus in the Wondery app.

1 (28m 17s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's 2013 and Tony shoes, company, Palo Alto delivery. Isn't really growing a whole lot, and it's clear he and his partners need more money to make this food delivery service thing grow. So they decide to apply to the Y Combinator accelerator program. And well, they get in. So that's like, it's kind of the golden ticket, right?

3 (28m 45s):
I don't know if we viewed it as a golden ticket, as much as just the next step on the way to, you know, of our project, because it was still very small at the time we were, you know, we were high-fiving each other when we did 20 orders a day, right. This is not a very large service. So w it was certainly not obvious that there would be a business here. So

1 (29m 4s):
What does Y Combinator gets you? Does it, do they, do they give you, cause they don't give you a whole lot of cash right

3 (29m 9s):
Now. They give us $20,000 at the time,

1 (29m 11s):
And then they get a small piece of ownership. Yes. And, but you're in this thing, which is very prestigious. And of course, all these VCs are like vultures circling around Y Combinator looking for the next big thing. But then what, with 20,000 bucks, I mean, was it still a web page with PDFs of menus?

3 (29m 30s):
It was still a webpage. It got a little bit more sophisticated. We, we, we, we evolved from the PDFs and, and to actual store menu pages for you, a customer can order it wasn't it was still all web though. Nothing on your phone. So at the end of Y Combinator, it culminates into what's called demo day where you pitch yes. Where you pitch. And there had about 40 companies in our group and all 40 companies pitch, you know, on stage to a group of investors,

1 (30m 2s):
Let's say, I'm an investor there. I'm going to listen to this. And I'm going to say, Tony, you're really smart and impressive guy. You present really well. I just don't understand. What's the big deal. Like, how is this going to be different than, you know, there's grub hub and there's this and there's that. And I, I don't, I don't get it. What are you offering? What did you say?

3 (30m 23s):
I set that we're building logistics business, not a food delivery company. And, you know, our goal is to not just do food, but we need to start somewhere and we need to show value from day one. And this is the best way to serve businesses.

1 (30m 41s):
So how much money did you guys, were you able to raise out of those pitches?

3 (30m 46s):
So we raised $2 million, a $2.2 million in our seed round

1 (30m 52s):
In the seed round.

3 (30m 52s):
When the seed rounds,

1 (30m 54s):
You said it was hard to raise money, but that's pretty amazing.

3 (30m 57s):
It was, it was a bit of a harrowing experience because our bank account was dwindling quickly to tens, you know, between 10 and $20,000, I had debt and, you know, from grad school as did my co-founders yeah. I had a wedding also upcoming my own wedding that I was struggling to pay for. So I had to take a loan. You should have, should have loved. That's true.

1 (31m 18s):
So, all right. So what was that $2 million going to get you guys? What, I mean, you, what did you need to do with that money?

3 (31m 27s):
Well, we needed to prove that the service was viable in a, in a market right. In, in, in one area. And so we chose San Jose,

1 (31m 36s):
But you couldn't do that with a webpage. You had to, at this point, I'm assuming build an app.

3 (31m 41s):
Yeah. So, so after graduating Y Combinator, we launched our app and saw timber. So the month after,

1 (31m 48s):
And w where you called Palo Alto delivery at that point, or, or door dash

3 (31m 51s):
In, in Y Combinator, we launched as a door

1 (31m 54s):
Dash. How did you come up with that name?

3 (31m 57s):
So it was a bit of a nerdy experience, but we, my co-founders and I, with a few very simple criteria, we wanted a name that was easy to spell a name that was two syllables or less whose domain name was available. And those are the three criteria. And we ran a script across the internet to crawl, you know, many third-party services, that list websites, the GoDaddy's of the world and found door dash,

1 (32m 21s):
And nobody owned it.

3 (32m 23s):
Nobody owned it. So for $9 and 95 cents, we were able to purchase door dash time.

1 (32m 29s):
And who are your drivers?

3 (32m 31s):
They're mainly ourselves. It was my co-founders and me and the early employees at door dash. We did all of the deliveries for the first, almost the first year.

1 (32m 40s):
So you run a business and you are delivering.

3 (32m 42s):
Yes. So, so it was a, it wasn't exactly 24 7, but it was very close.

1 (32m 49s):
And what was it that you were in that year, trying to figure out what information were you trying to gather?

3 (32m 57s):
Well, we were realizing that the most difficult part of what we do with consumers, merchants, and drivers. So you have three parties now, now not just two is that you have to build a lot of products that consumers don't see. How do you get the order to the restaurant? How do you reconcile orders? If they go wrong? What about payments? How do you actually tied to the accounting that restaurants are already doing? How do you know which door you should be entering? If you're a driver, delivering

1 (33m 29s):
All these things, save precious minutes,

3 (33m 32s):
Which also saves money for, for consumers. Because if we can save costs out of the system, we can lower fees to consumers.

1 (33m 40s):
So who was doing all of the coding and the, the data analysis and sucking all that stuff in an organizing.

3 (33m 49s):
So my co founders led the engineering team, and a lot of our early recruits, we had an unfair advantage of friendship. We would hire a lot of friends, right? Most of the, that initial early engineering team actually is still at door dash today. But, but that was really the early crew that built the product.

1 (34m 7s):
How did you get the word out about it? And, and yeah. How did you even start?

3 (34m 11s):
Well, we, we employ a tactic that, that, that, that worked for us pretty well at Stanford campus, which was at the time we, we would print out flyers and we would stuff take bags at restaurants. Here's the, here's the challenge though. Printing is not free. And we, we, you know, that, that summer, and when we were just testing this project out, we printed out hundred thousand plus copies of flyers. Wow. So I broke every single color printer on campus. And some it's a mystery, right? School's out, you know, no students are supposed to be on campus, but yet all the color printers and the toners need to be replaced every day. And so, and so when we launched San Jose, we did something very similar.

3 (34m 54s):
We printed out flyers and we distributed them to the different restaurants and the restaurants got the word out on our behalf.

1 (35m 1s):
So were you on the phone all the time restaurants trying to explain what you did, trying to get them to sign up with you or to partner with you?

3 (35m 10s):
Absolutely. I went door to door, to door to sign up our first 50 restaurants. And, and, and later on, we, we, we evolved into phone calls and other, other ways of reaching the restaurants

1 (35m 20s):
After that first year in San Jose. When did you decide, okay, this is going to work. Let's, let's go to the next city.

3 (35m 27s):
Yeah. So w so San Jose over a three, four month period of time, it was growing very, very, very fast. And once we discovered that that's when we decided to raise our next round of financing to see if we can take this beyond the barrier.

1 (35m 45s):
And you needed that money to create new technology,

3 (35m 48s):
To create new technology, by hiring people, to hire salespeople. When we launch into a city, we have to make sure drivers are on the road. And so we have to pay dashers on the road. We have to spend on marketing. It was really to operate the business. We needed the capital.

1 (36m 5s):
So let's just talk about this for a minute, because my understanding of door dash is there's an app for the user. Like I have door dash on my phone, and then the restaurant has a different app. And the driver has a different app.

3 (36m 17s):
Yes. That's

1 (36m 18s):
A really expensive to do all that backend technology.

3 (36m 22s):
It's even more complicated in that we have to then build lots of systems to figure out, well, how long is it going to take, you know, for this delivery? You know, what's it going to be for deep dish pizza versus a salad? What if they come in in the same order, how do

1 (36m 36s):
You even start to figure that

3 (36m 37s):
Out while you get into the lowest level of details you have to? So this is, this is why one of the best things that could have happened to our company was that every single person did deliveries and customer support every single day for the first year. And actually we still do this today. We do this once a month, instead of, you know, every day, every single person in the company. And so, as a result, you become an expert. You learn about different systems. You learn about the nuances of, you know, how difficult is parking versus if the food is in a different aisle, from the drinks, from a different aisle, from the desserts, you learn how to call it, those orders. You learn how to build that into the software so that you can scale this across the country.

1 (37m 19s):
It's a little bit like stitch fix, which is yeah. They sell fashion, but ultimately you're really a data company.

3 (37m 26s):
Yes. W in many ways we're an applied math company, right? We, we, we are, we are collecting lots of information. We're trying to digitize. The physical world. We are trying to understand is every parking lot. We're trying to understand, whereas every construction zone, whereas every alley, whereas every elevator inside of a mall,

1 (37m 44s):
Paul, and how does it work? Because the delivery fee is how much does

3 (37m 48s):
The delivery fee is arranged from a dollar 99 to 5 99. So there's two ways that door dash makes money. You know, door dash makes money from the consumer. So delivery fee and door dash makes money from the restaurant percentage of the order. And so it's really, you know, the combination that makes the model work.

1 (38m 7s):
I'm curious, like when you think about this dis-aggregated world we live in, right, can this industry, the logistics industry support door dash GrubHub, Uber eats Postmates on and on and on. Do you think they can all coexist in that world? Or do you think there's ultimately going to have to be one or two winners?

3 (38m 31s):
So it is a very giant space, as you mentioned, there are, when we were doing our research starting the company five years ago, there were 800 plus companies just in third-party logistics. I know we know about the FedEx's and the UPS's sure of course, in the postal service, but there are 800 plus companies just delivering parcel that we researched. And I'm sure around the

1 (38m 53s):
Country

3 (38m 53s):
Or around the country, The offline world is just so much bigger. And dis-aggregated to your point, you know, the second thing I would say is when you look at the, our current industry, the restaurant industry, it is not yet even online, 95% of orders still happen through a phone call or an in-person visit. Only 5% occurs through an internet connection. I know we talk about a lot of these other services, but the fact of the matter is that we are in the very earliest endings, AB gigantic industry. And we really remember started this all started because of a want and desire to help local businesses. But it's also given DoorDash the clarity to go and get all the details, right?

3 (39m 40s):
Even the ones that don't seem scalable. There's for example, the cheesecake factory that we deliver from in San Francisco, it's on the sixth floor of a mall of Macy's to

1 (39m 52s):
Make

3 (39m 52s):
Downtown in downtown in the union square in the shopping district.

1 (39m 56s):
It's a nightmare to drive

3 (39m 57s):
In it's a night. It is very hard to make those deliveries and to make that one deliveries from that one store happened. We have to find dedicated parking that we negotiate with them. All. We have to find dedicated access to a mall elevator that only mall employees, and dashers receive that. We have to figure out how to get orders from different stations, because that store is so large. So to make that one store happen,

1 (40m 23s):
I am losing sleep. Just thinking about trying to figure that out. That's just one problem.

3 (40m 28s):
It's one of 242 cheesecake factories, one of 200,000 businesses.

1 (40m 33s):
Tony, I am really interested in, in just the pressure, you know, like I want to try and get into the movie in your head, right? You're, you're sort of like internal dialogue. You guys have raised enough money now from different major investors where your valuation is $1.4 billion. If I'm you, I am like, I'm S I'm nervous. I mean, of course, you've got to project confidence and you, and you've got to believe in this thing, but that's a lot of pressure. Does that feel like a lot of pressure?

3 (41m 8s):
It's a lot of responsibility, but it's one that I feel very, very lucky to have. I mean, if you think about

1 (41m 17s):
Why are you just wired to think of it that way, or are you just kind of an even keeled guy? I mean,

3 (41m 24s):
So I don't necessarily focus on, you know, some of those metrics, you know, I, I, we started this company again to help the businesses on the streets. Why are we doing that? We're doing that because the business is on the streets, even in Silicon valley produce 60% of the jobs inside every city, and we need to help them. We need to help more of their stores. We need to give them technology. We need to offer them logistics. I guess when my brain thinks about that, it thinks a bit less maybe about, you know, the, the, the company valuation or, you know, how much pressure necessarily we're under.

3 (42m 4s):
I think more instead about the future, I think about how do we actually service that opportunity? How do we make the job easier for, you know, the dashers? How do we think about serving other types of businesses? That's where my brain goes.

1 (42m 17s):
Where do you, where do you see this, this in 10 years? If you, if you are, you know, if you're building your sort of dream house vision, right? Like you've got your magic magic wand, like you asked these businesses early on, Hey, you got a magic wand. What's the provenance you want to solve. You've got the magic wand and door dash is what in 10 years, is it, is it the Netflix of, of delivery? Is it the Amazon? What is it?

3 (42m 45s):
Torn? Ash is the biggest infrastructure for a city that connects consumers and merchants. We would be, we would be your first phone call. If you wanted to start a company, we can help you start that business. We can introduce you to customers and that business, we would want to introduce all of the customers to all of your use cases, delivery, being one of them. But certainly I still envision, even in 10 years, people going into stores, we're still social creatures. We're still going to go hang out with our friends or our co-workers or our spouses and partners. And we're going to do that in the physical world. Door dash will help you figure out which businesses to do that with and will be the best way to grow local businesses.

1 (43m 32s):
When do you, I mean, I mean, there's different sort of different measurements, but from what I understand, you don't have the biggest market share, right. You know, the biggest chunk of market share yet, but I have to assume that's a goal, right? To capture the greatest share of the market. Do you feel like you're heading in that direction?

3 (43m 55s):
We've been the fastest growing service in the space for the past year, and we're actually the biggest service and about 60% of the population in the us. So we have ground to cover as we were not the first service, but we feel very, very good about the trajectory and we feel very, very good about, and the fact that the ideas that we had come up with a few years ago around servicing merchants in the best way have really proved proven out well.

1 (44m 26s):
Yeah. Can you even imagine what you would do afterwards once this company goes public or is sold, whatever happens, you know, once everybody cashes out, what do you, what do you think?

3 (44m 41s):
I haven't given that a lot of thought, you know, most of my days are pretty obsessed over the people that we have that and the plans for the future I am in the business. We haven't given much thought about w you know, when I w so again, I go back to my life decision framework of where am I going to have the most fun and the least regret. And that's what I'm enjoying today.

1 (45m 10s):
How much of your success do you attribute to skill and hard work and intelligence, and how much of what is happening is do you think is because of luck?

3 (45m 19s):
There's a lot of luck involved in shaping a lot of the circumstances for me, it's, it's absolutely a combination. That's the short answer, but, but when I think back in my life, I've come a long way on the shoulders of a lot of great people who I was going to meet in school to things I studied in the past that somehow have magically made its way back into my life today, to people in Silicon valley, who, you know, before even having a, you know, a business partnership with, with me or the company who have more than a volunteer, the time to help me, there's been a lot of fortunate circumstances for me on the flip side, of course, there's a lot of hard work.

3 (46m 7s):
And I think, you know, the hard work and skill is, is really not a one person. And I think that's the thing that sometimes people forget. I think we live in a world where it's easy to idolize this. The stars to me, the real heroes are, or my teammates and the people who use collective hours, skills, hard work and drive, or what has allowed me to be successful today.

1 (46m 46s):
Tony shoo co-founder of door dash door dash has now delivered more than a hundred million orders in cities across the United States. And if you happen to live in the San Jose area and use door dash on the right day of the month, you might get your noodles or breakfast or hummus delivered by Tony himself in his Honda accord.

3 (47m 9s):
It is the same Honda.

1 (47m 10s):
What kind of Honda is it? That's

3 (47m 11s):
A 2001 Honda accord.

1 (47m 13s):
It's a sweet Honda accord.

3 (47m 14s):
It's an amazing Honda accord, great delivery

1 (47m 16s):
Vehicle. How many miles do you have on your Honda accord?

3 (47m 18s):
Nearing 200,000.

1 (47m 20s):
I love it today. You're the CEO of a $4 billion valuation company. And you got an a 2001 Honda accord.

3 (47m 27s):
It's a great car.

1 (47m 27s):
Great. You should be driving that. I will do

3 (47m 30s):
It for as long as it lasts.

1 (47m 42s):
And please do stick around because in just a moment, we're going to hear from you about the things, your building. Hey, thanks so much for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that. And today's story begins a few years ago in Miami with Ashlyn cook and her dog.

5 (48m 1s):
So my dog's name is Winston, and he is a German Shorthaired pointer. He is liver colored.

1 (48m 7s):
Anyway, Ashlyn was working in Miami in the fashion business, and she met a guy named Dean who also had a pointer.

5 (48m 13s):
We started hanging out and running with our dogs, taking the dogs to the beach, and eventually it turned into more

1 (48m 21s):
Ashlyn and Dean and the dog's Winston and Louie bonded. And eventually the humans and the story started dating. Now, things were going great. But then earlier this year, Dean got a job offer in Boulder, Colorado. So Ashlyn decided that might be a sign to get out of Miami and head to the mountains. So the four of them, two humans, two dogs relocated, and Ashlyn had to figure out what to do. Next.

5 (48m 47s):
I really wanted to do something on my own. I had had the entrepreneurial bug for over a year at that point. And I knew I wanted to do something with dogs, but with a little twist. So we had bounced ideas off of each other for dog food. And honestly, I just thought of a food truck for dogs just came out of my mouth. And we looked at each other like, is that a thing?

1 (49m 9s):
Well, it turns out food trucks for dogs were sort of a thing. The refuse scattered across the country, but nothing in Colorado. So Ashlynn and Dean pulled together their savings. They got a loan from Ashland's dad and they bought a custom built trailer that looks like one of those vintage models from the 1950s,

5 (49m 29s):
They have that iconic paint job where half of the bottom is a different color. And it has that canned ham shape with the rounded edges.

1 (49m 38s):
And after she ordered the trailer, Ashlynn got together with a local chef to come up with a bunch of recipes for healthy doc treats with no salt, no sugar, no fillers and Winston Ashland's pointer.

5 (49m 51s):
It was a good taste tester for us because he is a picky dog finding out like, okay, he really liked this one. He didn't like this one. I remember I tried to make a dried banana tree, but he would put in his mouth and spit it out. So I realized, okay, Winston does not like bananas.

1 (50m 8s):
Winston did like some of the other treats Ashland came up with pumpkin apples, spice, cookies, zucchini, squash biscuits, and one of his favorites, bison burger jerky,

5 (50m 19s):
It is made with just three ingredients, ground bison, which we do source from a local bison, ranch, cranberries and organic flax.

1 (50m 28s):
And I know this stuff sounds like food. You might order at one of those farm to table restaurants, right? But of course Ashland's target. Demographic was just dogs. And the dog centric nature of her business actually proved to be a problem. When she started to apply for the permits she needed to launch the truck,

5 (50m 47s):
The most challenging part was defining ourselves as a new category. A lot of the cities would say, well, we only allow food trucks for humans. Other cities would say, well, no one's ever come to us with that type of business before we have no idea how to define you guys. So we ended up going the route of just full on getting all the permits of a few human food truck.

1 (51m 10s):
So finally this past June Ashleigh and started parking the truck at breweries dog parks and farmer's markets all around Boulder. And since then, things have been going pretty well. It's the treats are popular and a major sign of customer buy-in. A lot of the dogs are starting to recognize the truck.

5 (51m 29s):
Oh, absolutely. They will literally jump up to the counter with their two front legs and stand up at the counter. It is hysterical.

1 (51m 37s):
The company is called a Winnie Lou. It's named for Ashland's Doug Winston and Dean's dog, Louie. And in addition to that one food truck, when he Lou now sells treats online and it's six independent pet stores in Colorado.

5 (51m 52s):
So there are thousands of pet stores in the United States. And we would love to be in all of the independently owned, smaller pet stores that we can

1 (52m 4s):
To find out more about Winnie Lou or to hear previous episodes, head to our podcast page, how I built this.npr.org. And of course, if you want to tell us your story, go to build.npr.org. And thanks so much for listening to the show this week, you can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can also write to us@hivtandnpr.org. And if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this. Our show is produced this week by James Dylan. Lucy was music composed by rum teen Arab Louis. Thanks also to JC Howard store could see Neeva grant seventh Meshkinpour and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Mia Vencat I'm guy Roz, and you've been listening to how I built this from NPR.

6 (52m 55s):
We all have moments where our limits are tested. What I want to talk about is how we define those limits and what it means to exceed them. I'm Jay Williams, check out my show, the limits where I talk to people who have overcome theirs and achieved great things in business sports and culture. Listen to the limits from NPR.