Wondery (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How I, Built This Early, and ad free Right. now join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts.

Audible (10s):
Get closer to the best. you With Audible. you can enjoy all your audio entertainment in one app. You'll always find the best of what you love or something new to Discover. I recently listened to Mark Hyman's Blood Sugar Solution, which completely changed how I think about what I eat, when I eat it, and how metabolic health is connected to a long life And. as an Audible member, you can choose one title a month to keep from their entire catalog, including the latest bestsellers and new releases New members can try Audible free for 30 days. Visit audible.com/built or text built to 5 0 0 5 0 0. That's audible.com/built or text built to 5 0 0 5 0 0 To. try audible free for 30 days audible.com/built.

Turbo Tax (1m 3s):
TurboTax makes all your moves count. And roughly 37% of taxpayers qualify to file 100% free with TurboTax free edition form 10 40 and limited credits only. File 100% free. Max refund guaranteed. See if you qualify to file for free@turbotax.com. See max refund guarantee details at turbotax.com/guarantees.

Apple Card (1m 30s):
Reboot your credit card with Apple Card. It gives you Unlimited daily cash back that can automatically grow over time when you open a savings account. A high yield low effort way to grow your money with no fees. Apply for Apple Card and the wallet app on iPhone to start earning daily cash and growing it with savings today. Apple card subject to credit approval savings available to Apple card owners subject to eligibility Apple Card and savings by Goldman Sachs. Bank, USA Salt Lake City, branch member FDIC. Terms apply.

0 (2m 1s):
I mean, you could have been wrong at every turn and this could have collapsed and it could have really potentially damaged your relationship with your brother-in-Law and maybe even your sister. It

3 (2m 11s):
Could have

0 (2m 11s):
Like, that was risky,

3 (2m 12s):
Right? It was, but that's all I had. I only had one shot and I was tired of worrying about the future and tired of worrying about, I just didn't wanna worry anymore.

0 (2m 23s):
How did you deal with the stress of the possibility of being wrong and all that collapsing?

3 (2m 29s):
I didn't consider it. I didn't let that get in my head.

0 (2m 42s):
Welcome to How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz and on the show today how Tiffany Masterson started a second act as a 40-year-old stay at home mother of four by creating Drunk Elephant, a skincare brand. She sold for over $800 million. Okay, lemme get right to the headline here. Drunk Elephant is a skincare brand that was launched in 2013 by a stay-at-Home mom and her brother-in-Law.

0 (3m 29s):
Just Six. years later, the brand was acquired by the Japanese Beauty brand, Shiseido for a whopping $845 million six years. Drunk Elephant went from zero to $845 million in six years. Now you all know that at the end of this interview, I'm gonna ask a version of the question I always ask. I know you know it, so I'm not gonna paraphrase it. But what I will say is that while this is a story of luck, it's also a story of incredible determination and strategic thinking and research and hard work because Tiffany Masterson was a nobody in the beauty industry. She knew almost no one, she had no substantive connections and she had no money, but she did have an idea.

0 (4m 15s):
And a brother-in-Law, who was willing to give her the initial seed money, Tiffany found a Drunk Elephant in her mid forties. And professional branding people were convinced she was making every mistake in the book. For starters, everyone hated the name Drunk Elephant. What's that have to do with skincare? Most people she spoke to also hated the packaging and colors, and she was advised not to focus on higher end retailers like Sephora. But Tiffany followed her instincts and figured out how to build a brand that spoke to thousands of women. Even kids have gone crazy for Drunk Elephant. The brand recently saw an explosion of interest in its products among tween girls as young as eight and nine.

0 (4m 60s):
Much of it fueled by TikTok. Anyway, Tiffany grew up in Texas, in Houston, to be exact. Her dad was actually the quarterback for the Houston Oilers back in the late 1960s. His name's Pete Beford, but her parents split when she was a kid. And even as a kid, her main ambition was to become a mom and start a family.

3 (5m 21s):
I wasn't a good student. No, I didn't like school. I didn't even think I myself as very smart. I just kind of, I couldn't focus in school and it was stressful and it was, it was kind of a sad, a little bit of a sad time for me. It came later. I did well in college, but I was a cheerleader and I, I always wanted to be like my mom and get married and have babies. And I'm, that's just super honest. Like I, it doesn't sound very admirable. I just wanted to get married and have kids. That's what I knew. That's what my mom did. And, and so that's what I thought was right for me.

0 (5m 54s):
Fair enough. I mean, no shame there. I mean, you knew what you wanted to do, which most 22 year olds have no idea what they wanna do.

3 (6m 1s):
Right, right.

0 (6m 3s):
How did you meet your husband?

3 (6m 5s):
I met my husband when I was 30 and I was set up on a blind date. Yeah. And I knew it right when I saw him. I literally saw him walking towards me and it was a blind date. And I, I said to myself out loud, the party's over. That's it. Huh? Like, I recognized him. It's weird. It was really weird.

0 (6m 22s):
What's your husband's name? Charles. Charles. So this is the late nineties, right. You guys get married and pretty soon after you start a family. That's

3 (6m 30s):
Right. We, we got married in October of 1999 and our first child was born in December of 2000.

0 (6m 38s):
Yeah. And so you were gonna focus on raising the kids and what was Charles doing? What was his profession?

3 (6m 44s):
So when we got married, Charles was at Enron,

0 (6m 47s):
The famous Enron.

3 (6m 48s):
Right, right. And so that was, I thought, you know, this is good. We can have this little, we're comfortable and we could have our, I didn't know how many kids I'd have. I thought I could handle two. And he already had two kids from a previous marriage. But right when Chloe turned one, my daughter Chloe turned one. He, I found out that day that Charles had lost his job and Ram was going under

0 (7m 12s):
The famous accounting Scandal that basically collapsed that massive energy business overnight.

3 (7m 18s):
Yes, yes. It was incredible.

0 (7m 20s):
Yeah.

3 (7m 21s):
And well, he went on to work at a place called Texas Commercial Energy and worked there for two, three years. And the same thing happened at Texas Commercial Energy.

0 (7m 31s):
It just collapsed.

3 (7m 32s):
It did. And he ended up having to sue them and,

0 (7m 34s):
And he was a sales, he was a sales rep.

3 (7m 36s):
He was. And maybe not even following his passion. So that was an issue. Yeah. But he was doing it. Yeah.

0 (7m 42s):
He was making money to support the family.

3 (7m 44s):
Right.

0 (7m 46s):
And you were happy being at home looking after and raising the kids and handling that world. Did you feel fulfilled?

3 (7m 54s):
I was so happy. Yeah. Oh, I was so happy. I was so in heaven with my kids. And I remember like waking up and doing all the laundry and doing all the cleaning and at one point I had four babies under four. Wow. Like four, one and one and zero.

0 (8m 10s):
Because you had Chloe and then you had twins, and then you had another one

3 (8m 13s):
Right away. I had this, I had my fourth baby. Right. I was told I couldn't get pregnant and I turned out pregnant nine months later. So Wow. Right away.

0 (8m 19s):
Four kids under four.

3 (8m 21s):
Yeah.

0 (8m 22s):
That's a daycare. It

3 (8m 23s):
Was. It was a daycare. And I was in heaven. I really was in heaven and I didn't want help. Yeah.

0 (8m 28s):
It's the best.

3 (8m 30s):
I wish I could go back sometimes. I wish I could just for a week though. I wish I could go back and come back when I wanted. Yeah.

0 (8m 36s):
Alright, so you are in the thick of it. And from what I gather, from what you're telling me, you were never sort of sitting around dreaming of ideas or, or just imagining a future where you would do something else, right? I mean, you were focused on being a mom.

3 (8m 52s):
I was focused on being a mom. And then something happened around 2008, that's around the time. So 2009 that I really was like, I'm, I wanted to be creative. I remember being on the computer all day. Yeah. Like doing stuff that was mundane, like reading gossip websites. Yeah. I was like, this is ridiculous, you know? But I'd also wanted to make extra money for the family, and I just wanted to pitch in.

0 (9m 17s):
I've got some time, what

3 (9m 19s):
Can I do? I also remember creating invitations for their birthday parties that were super I would spend like hours creating these great invitations,

0 (9m 27s):
Like physical invitations that you would send out. Yeah.

3 (9m 29s):
And I remember re recognizing that part in myself, like, I love this creative stuff. Yeah. And then so I, it started with I wanted to do a catering company.

0 (9m 40s):
Are you a good cook? I'm a

3 (9m 42s):
Good cook. And I remember trying to do meatballs, like I was gonna package up these meatballs that I made. I thought I can sell these things

0 (9m 50s):
Like sell 'em frozen.

3 (9m 51s):
Yes. I was gonna sell 'em frozen. And my husband went out and bought this huge freezer from Costco and, and it never even got used. Yeah. I don't know. We, he figured out, he was like, Tiffany, the ingredients you wanna buy are so expensive.

0 (10m 3s):
Right. You'd have to go to scale. You, you have to sell each meatball for like five bucks and no one picking us Exactly $5 meatball.

3 (10m 10s):
Yeah. Yeah. Then I went on to this whole pantry cleaning out business where I

0 (10m 15s):
Well, tell me about what's that business?

3 (10m 17s):
So I was, one of the things I read about all the time were supplements and healthy food Yeah. And how to be healthy and all that. And I, I thought I can go to people's pantries and get rid of all the bad stuff and replace it with great stuff. And this would be a great job to have.

0 (10m 31s):
Oh, that's cool. Like a consultant, like a home pantry consultant. Yes. You go in and like a pantry

3 (10m 35s):
Consultant

0 (10m 36s):
This out, out, out, out. And then you could like, no, you want flax seeds. No, you don't want, you know Yes. You don't want white pasta, you want brown rice pasta, let stuff like that. Yes. Okay.

3 (10m 44s):
That's yes. I called it, named it Holy pantry. Nice. My mom said you can't use the Y you have to use, change it to an I

0 (10m 52s):
Holy pantry. Like how, like HOLI? Yeah. Why not HOLY?

3 (10m 58s):
My mom thought it was disrespectful.

0 (10m 60s):
Sacrilegious. Yes.

3 (11m 1s):
That's what she thought. So she said, you gotta call it holy with an I. So you

0 (11m 5s):
Could like left a bible in the pantry too. Like that could have been part of the deal. Yeah. And then,

3 (11m 9s):
Oh, clean

0 (11m 10s):
Out your pantry and leave you a Bible.

3 (11m 12s):
Yes. Yes. I'm gonna And you need to pray while you're at it. Yes. I got fired from my first job by my hus, my best friend's husband who came in and said, what the hell did you do to my pantry? Now you've cost me a bunch of money and I've gotta go replace everything you threw out.

0 (11m 27s):
Oh, you threw away all, you threw away the Cheetos and like the ruffles and stuff. Yeah, the Chips Ahoy. He was furious. Yeah. You're like, no, no Chips Ahoy. You could have Dayton car cookies.

3 (11m 38s):
So that didn't go, it didn't go far. He goes, get outta my house. And also I feel sorry for your kids. What the hell have you done? So yeah, that didn't go anywhere. And then I started selling Arbon, which is a skincare line.

0 (11m 49s):
Yeah. Tell me about this. So just to put this in context, I mean, you have some time and money's a little bit tight at home,

3 (11m 56s):
Right. Money was very tight. Wa

0 (11m 58s):
Was your husband after he left the energy business, what, what was he doing mainly to earn a living?

3 (12m 5s):
He, he wanted to be a financial advisor for a while. And he did go work at Smith Barney and he didn't love it. Yeah. And then he, he's 40 at this point or 40. He's older than that at this point. Yeah. He's seven years older than me. So he was frustrated. And, and then we had a serious talk about, you know, what his passions were. And he, he's a very, very talented artist. And his, he comes from a long line of artists and his family, his mom is a jewelry designer here in Houston.

0 (12m 30s):
Wow. In his heart of heart, the guy's an artist. Yes.

3 (12m 33s):
Yeah. In his heart of hearts, he's an artist. And so he started doing like, prototypes of like metal lights and he ended up partnering with this guy who did all the gates around town, all these gorgeous metal gates and fixtures and everything from lights that chandeliers, you know, and he was really the only guy in town doing this custom, but it wasn't also wasn't a great business model. Yeah. Not an easy way to, you know, support a family of six. Yeah.

0 (12m 58s):
Okay. So that's a context and you're exploring all these different opportunities and then you, you find out about this company called Arbon, which is a, I think it's a multi-level. It is like skincare, a beauty company like, like Mary Kay or any of these other brands. Exactly.

3 (13m 13s):
Yeah.

0 (13m 14s):
And it's like a way to, you know, make some money and it is maybe get a pink Cadillac that's a different company, but it's

3 (13m 20s):
Oh, this one? Yeah. With Arbon you get like a Mercedes I think. Ooh,

0 (13m 24s):
Nice. If you, if you hit the, it's insane if you hit this metrics. Right.

3 (13m 28s):
Completely impossible numbers unattainable. But I, but I did that for, I don't know, three, four months.

0 (13m 34s):
And what, what kind of things were, were you selling

3 (13m 37s):
Skin care? So like a line of skin care? Yeah. I didn't know a lot about skin care. I remember always being interested in skin care because I had kind of some skin issues. So I just kind of learned a little bit about the products. And that didn't go very far either though. I just, I didn't really have the ownership there. I, I wasn't interested, you know, when it's not yours, it's very different. Yeah. And that wasn't mine. So I don't think I was really, I didn't, hadn't bought into it. The conviction wasn't there.

0 (14m 4s):
So you only, you did it for a couple months and you realized this wasn't, wasn't for you.

3 (14m 9s):
Right. And I also got a call from my brother during that time. Yep. And he said his wife and he had been at a wedding in California and Yep. When they were there, somebody walked up to them who knew them because they owned a little store in Austin.

0 (14m 24s):
Your brother's store?

3 (14m 25s):
Yes, my brother and his wife. Yes. And it was in Austin and it was a little store that sold baby blankets and Oh, and sold candles and stuff like that. Yeah. And so he called and he said, you know, his wife thought that this bar that they'd been given at this wedding, like this woman walked up and said, this bar's from Malaysia and I think it's the greatest next, best thing, try it and maybe y'all can sell it in your store. Maybe you can sell this bar in your store and you could do really well with it. And so they agreed to, to sell the bar. And so they were buying it from her and she was buying it from a guy in San Francisco and he was buying it from a guy in Malaysia. And the guy in Malaysia was buying it from the manufacturer. And so it was, it was also a multi-level kind of thing.

0 (15m 4s):
What was so special about this bar of soap?

3 (15m 7s):
It was called the Wonder Bar. Okay.

0 (15m 9s):
Good name.

3 (15m 10s):
And the claims around the bar were that it did everything, it reset your skin, like detoxified your skin and cleared up any, any issue you could possibly have. And they did it with this magic chlor nare, like this algae from France and this Austrian clay that was, you know, huh. They basically said it could do everything. Right. I mean, this bar, there's nothing this bar couldn't do. And the instructions were to use it with a very plain moisturizer. And, but I, I kind of jumped at the opportunity because the setup was going to be that I buy it from my brother and his wife, and then I sell it for a profit. And the profit wasn't huge,

0 (15m 46s):
By the way. How much was each bar? How much did it

3 (15m 48s):
Cost? The big bar was $105.

0 (15m 50s):
$105

3 (15m 52s):
For to sell. That's retail.

0 (15m 54s):
You could sell 'em for a hundred bucks.

3 (15m 56s):
Oh, I sold a lot of bars.

0 (15m 57s):
That's like popcorn in the movie theater. Wow.

3 (15m 60s):
And so selling that was not, not easy, but you had to really be a good salesperson. I guess. I had this bar like in Carpool Line and at events at school and stuff, selling it to my friends. Yeah. I mean, I don't know how much I was making maybe $2,500 a month profit for me. That was a lot. Yeah. But I was, I was really committed. I remember staying up late every night. I was emailing everyone I could. I had, but

0 (16m 24s):
I mean, what made this more something you believed in more than the Arbon products?

3 (16m 29s):
I think I understood it was the Arbon products were just a bunch of like, they were very fragranced products. And I guess looking back, like using the Arbon products that didn't help me with my skin. I had really red, sort of inflamed skin. Yeah. I had unpredictable skin. I broke out on occasion. Yeah. I had I large pores. I thought I had rosacea. The Arbon products didn't do one thing for my skin. I mean, maybe they made them feel soft, but with the bar, I took the instructions very seriously. I used the bar. Yeah. And I also used a really mild moisturizer that, that had no fragrance in it and my skin, like it just cleared up. Huh? It just cleared up. So I thought, oh, well it's clearing up because of the algae and the clay and the this and the that and the bar.

3 (17m 11s):
And so I sold it that way. And that's why I was convicted of the bar because I thought, wow, these ingredients are amazing. So I was selling it and I was very engaged with people. Like, I was like, call me anytime, text me anytime. Email me with your issues. And so they started doing that. Like, and they'd be like, well, I like the bar, but I'm breaking out like crazy. Like, what is going on? And I would say, well, are you using, you know, what are you using? Oh, I'm using, you know, these three things. Well send 'em to me. I'll look at the ingredients and maybe I can figure this out So crazy. It's, it's, there's no reason for me to think I can figure it out. I mean, but I, I'm the type that if you call me what's the best movie? What's the latest Netflix show? What's the best restaurant in Chicago?

3 (17m 51s):
I'm gonna try to fi figure it out. Huh. Even though I don't know, I'm gonna be on on Google, you know, and I love to help people so much that that's what I was trying to do with people's skin.

0 (17m 60s):
By the way, what's the best taco in Houston now that you're on? Now that I've got you?

3 (18m 3s):
Oh, I think it's pop. I, I think it's a little Papa PTOs. Not everyone agrees with me, but I think they're Fajitos are

0 (18m 8s):
So good. I'm there next time I'm in Houston. Thank you. I'm calling you. I'm gonna get your top 10. You're welcome. List please.

3 (18m 13s):
Yes.

0 (18m 14s):
So you're in Houston and you're selling this bar, but was the idea to just sell it to friends in Houston or was it to like turn this into a national product?

3 (18m 24s):
Well, I didn't get the memo on this, so this is, I really thought, so there was this woman in California who my brother and his wife were buying the bar from. Yeah. There was a Wonder Bar usa. And so my brother and his wife and this girl in California, they were managing the website. I had my own website in Houston. That was just wonderbar houston.com. Right. And, and and, and also they told me up front like, this is just for you in Houston. This is not for you to go. I see. Well, I, I got overexcited and I was really loving like the marketing of the bar and talking about it and sharing it. So I thought, well I'm gonna, I'm gonna start reaching out to national editors and I wanna get it on every website and every blog. And I wanna, I just didn't fully understand they didn't want me involved in that part of it.

3 (19m 7s):
And they called me and basically said back down, back off like, this is not for you. This is what we're doing.

0 (19m 13s):
You're just selling it to ladies in Houston. That's your job.

3 (19m 17s):
That's my job. Just be quiet and sell it to ladies in Houston. And that was it. So my brother-in-Law in Denver, who's married to my sister, they called him, they called several family members who had money Yeah. And asked people to invest and they wanted someone else in the family to buy the bulk of the bars so that we could own the distributorship. And I say we, but it wasn't, we, it was, they could own the distributorship in North America. And so they called my brother-in-Law and they said, do you wanna buy $300,000 worth of bars? So he ended up with $300,000 worth of bars to sell. He said, I see that you're selling these like crazy on Wonderbar Houston, would you be willing to come to Wonderbar USA I'll make you a partner and then you can, then all your hard work that you're doing can benefit Wonderbar USAI want my money back is basically what he was saying.

3 (20m 9s):
Yeah. But cost of goods to buy the bar. They were, they were buying the large bars for $18 a bar. Wow. By the way, my brother and my brother-in-Law knew nothing about the beauty industry. Yeah. And so they didn't know that buying a bar cost a goods $18 a bar was outrageously stupid. They didn't know that.

0 (20m 30s):
I wanna unravel this a little bit 'cause it's gonna get confusing. 'cause there's, in this story will be your brother, your brother-in-Law, and then your brother-in-Law's brother.

3 (20m 39s):
Yeah. That comes later. The brother-in-Law's brother comes with Drunk

0 (20m 42s):
Elephant. So there's gonna be, there's gonna be some brothers brother-in-law's Brother-in-law's brother. Right. And we're gonna, we're gonna clear that up, but right now it's your brother and your brother-in-Law and your brother-in-Law's got the cash. He's the guy who's like, yeah, I'll put, I'll invest $300,000 to own the distribution of this clearly very profitable like fancy cleanser bar. Right. You are selling them in Houston like hotcakes. And he says, look, I own the national distribution, just kind of fold your platform into ours and you'll be a partner here. Right. And you had, I mean you had no sort of cash equity in there. It was your sweat equity.

3 (21m 23s):
That's right.

0 (21m 24s):
Alright, so now that you become a partner in this venture, what did that mean? I mean, were you still focused on Houston or did you start to travel and help build this brand up this Wonder Bar brand up?

3 (21m 36s):
There wasn't a lot of travel and they were pretty tight with the money. So it wasn't like I I, I made, I made a small salary to replace what I was making on my own when I was selling the bars. Yep. So they agreed to gimme $2,500 a month. And I did get the bar. Once I was made a partner, I was allowed to get it in national publications. And

0 (21m 55s):
How did you do that?

3 (21m 56s):
I would go on and try to contact blogs and emails and I mean, magazine editors. I subscribed to this membership where I had access to the names of all the editors. And so I would email all day long. I would, yeah. They, I think I counted 3000 emails I sent out. Wow. Over a period of time.

0 (22m 13s):
And you would say, I've got this amazing cleansing bar and you would say it's got Austrian, clay and French, you know, algae,

3 (22m 22s):
Chlorine, whatever.

0 (22m 23s):
Yeah. Seaweed. And, and can I send you one And you would basically, that was it. That's how you started.

3 (22m 28s):
Yes. And around the same time, so I had reached out to Guthy Ranker, they feature products on their television station. Oh, okay.

0 (22m 36s):
The direct marketing company. Yeah. They actually helped launch Proactive, which is that Right. Acne treatment and a bunch of other products. So, so they're behind a lot of infomercials. They started with Tony Robbins in, in the early days, but yeah. So they, they agreed in principle to sell Wonder Bars. Right.

3 (22m 53s):
So they called and they said, we're interested and we wanna buy X number of Wonder bars, we will pay you $5 a bar. I went, what? $5 a bar? I think they paid $19 for the bar.

0 (23m 6s):
Oh, you, you, they were just saying, we'll pay you five bucks a bar. You were like, we're already paying $19 a bar. Yes. They were saying, you guys are nuts. You could make this for a dollar. They

3 (23m 15s):
Did. Okay. They said, you are nuts. And I think we both laughed at the same time. The consultant was like, that's the craziest thing I've ever heard. Who agreed to that? You know, you can make a bar for a dollar or less. Like, sorry to tell you, you just got completely screwed.

0 (23m 28s):
Yeah. So they by the way, gut the rankers, like, there's no way we can work together. Your price is too high.

3 (23m 34s):
No, I said, I said, I would have to pay you to do this. I'm, I we can't do this.

0 (23m 38s):
Yeah. And, and I've read that there are also some, some like quality issues with the bar, right?

3 (23m 42s):
Yes. And there was this horrible thing they called the healing crisis that people in Malaysia, huh. That may, that people would turn bright red and break out and cystic. It was awful. And they called it the healing crisis. Like it was normal.

0 (23m 55s):
Sorry, I'm confused, but whoa, whoa, whoa. Sorry. I'm, what is the, he the people in Malaysia would break out after using this bar?

3 (24m 3s):
Yeah. Initially. So the, the whole directions of use were use the bar, leave it on your face for three to five minutes and then rinse it off and then put a, a plain moisturizer on. Okay. That was the whole thing. Yep. And if you get a terrible breakout and a horrible reaction, that's normal. That's all the toxins coming outta your skin.

0 (24m 21s):
I see. Which

3 (24m 22s):
Is not true, but I

0 (24m 24s):
Believed it. And that happened to you too?

3 (24m 26s):
No, it never happened to me. Strangely. But it happened to a lot of people. I sold the bar to,

0 (24m 29s):
They would break out and basically the argument was, Hey, this is totally normal. Right. It's detox, your skin's pushing out all the bad stuff you're gonna break out, but it'll get better in a couple days. Yes. That seems plausible to me. Well,

3 (24m 42s):
I remember people having to go to the doctor. Hmm. My sister-in-Law, my other brother's wife had to go to the doctor with huge welts on her face. Yeah. I somehow managed to get in with the beauty director from Harper's Bazaar. Alexandra. Yeah. I put her on it. I remember her emailing me from the, the Ralph Lauren fashion show saying, what the hell my face is like, someone beat me up. Wow. What, what is this?

0 (25m 8s):
And I

3 (25m 8s):
Got on the phone with her, I talked her through it. She put it in the magazine. She ended up,

0 (25m 12s):
She still put it in the magazine. Put it in

3 (25m 13s):
The magazine. I went into her office. Wow. Flew her New York and met her in person. And it was crazy.

0 (25m 19s):
So you believed this argument, which again, it might be true, that it basically is extracting the toxins. It's like that was basically what you were saying to people.

3 (25m 27s):
That's what I believed. Yeah. Until I got a scathing review from a website called Beauty Pedia.

0 (25m 33s):
Okay. And what'd they say?

3 (25m 34s):
They said, this is a bunch of bss and this is a scam. Huh. And these ingredients are a joke. Huh. And there's no chance that any of the ingredients in this bar can be responsible for anything good that happens to skin. So all the claims are bogus. It gets a one out of five. Wow. I was shocked. I I was just like, wait, what?

0 (25m 55s):
This happens over a year, maybe a year and a half after you're selling the bar, I think. Right,

3 (25m 60s):
Right. This is like in 2000. Yeah. 11 10, 11. Yeah. 10 11.

0 (26m 4s):
But a year and a half of you really pushing the selling it, believing in it, using it, when you saw that review in Beauty pedia, I mean my instinct would've been like, well, screw them. They're wrong and I don't care about this review. But you, you actually really,

3 (26m 18s):
That wasn't my instinct. I had two instincts immediately. Mm. One was, if it's not true, then why is my, why did my skin clear up? Yeah. And two, I respected this website a lot. This is, I believed them. And so what my second instinct was, I don't believe the guy's in Malaysia now, they must not be telling us the truth about this bar. What's in it? I wanted to know what was in it.

0 (26m 39s):
So what did you do? I mean this review clearly freaks you out.

3 (26m 44s):
A lot of things are happening right here and now. One is I've reached out to Sephora. They've told me no we would never carry a single sku. Yeah. Like in other words, if you don't have a group of products, we're not interested. I remember picking up the phone and calling my brother in Austin. He was kind of checked out at this point. Patrick and his wife still sold it in their store. Yeah.

0 (27m 2s):
Patrick's your brother. What's your brother-in-law's name Charles.

3 (27m 5s):
Same as my husband.

0 (27m 6s):
Okay. This is confusing. Yes. So like

3 (27m 8s):
I

0 (27m 8s):
Know, okay, we got it. We got it. Patrick's your brother Charles, your husband Charles also your brother-in-Law.

3 (27m 13s):
Exactly. Exactly. So, so I'm questioning, I remember getting on the phone with like a, some sort of a chemist who could do a reverse engineering on the bar and trying to figure out what was exactly in the bar. And that kind of didn't go anywhere either. We talked to the actual creator of the bar.

0 (27m 29s):
Who In Malaysia?

3 (27m 30s):
In Malaysia who wouldn't give us very much information. So, you know, we, I was getting more skittish by the day. Just, we're not gonna be able to get into a retailer, we're not gonna be able to make this what we thought we could.

0 (27m 40s):
But you still have a lot of product to sell

3 (27m 43s):
A ton. So I'm talking to Charles on a daily basis and I also think of Charles as my boss by the way. Because somewhere along the way it was stated like, look, you have this small salary, you will never make a penny until the investor is paid back in full. Yeah. Just know that. Yeah.

0 (27m 57s):
Alright, let me ask you a sort of a slightly uncomfortable question. You still had to sell the Wonder Bars, right?

3 (28m 5s):
That's right.

0 (28m 6s):
So how were you personally feeling about selling something that you felt was not good?

3 (28m 14s):
Well, I was conflicted. Yeah. Because there were people who had bad reactions. There were a lot of people who called in tears saying, this has scar my face. Yeah. Now I'm like, what am I telling people to put on their face that that really upset me. So that was worrisome. But that being said, it was Charles's investment. Yeah. And he wanted to sell the bars. Yeah. And so that was my job.

0 (28m 36s):
If I'm your brother, I'm thinking, well we gotta sell. What do we have, you know, offload this somehow and then let's talk about next phase. Is that what he said?

3 (28m 44s):
So Charles, my brother-in-Law said, listen, I think you're sup super passionate about this and I feel like I you, you really love what you're doing. I said, well I have, I'm kind of coming up with an idea that maybe I should do, I should, maybe I should do a line. Hmm. Maybe Sephora has a point.

0 (29m 1s):
They want a bunch of different products. They're not just gonna sell bar soap.

3 (29m 4s):
And that kind of got me thinking along these lines of solution, skin solution, like a total skin solution.

0 (29m 11s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Tiffany did exactly that. Using her own skin and willing friends to develop her own skin care line. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This.

NETSUITE by Oracle (29m 32s):
Your business gets to a certain size and the cracks start to emerge. Things you used to do in a day are taking a week. You have too many manual processes, you don't have one source of truth. If this is you, you should know these three numbers. 37,000 25, 1 30 7,000. That's the number of businesses which have upgraded to NetSuite by Oracle 25 NetSuite turns 25 this year. That's 25 years of helping businesses do more with less close their books in days, not weeks. And drive down costs. One, because your business is one of a kind. So you get a customized solution for all of your KPIs in one efficient system with one source of truth, manage risk, get reliable forecasts and improve margins. Everything you need to grow all in one place. Right now, download NetSuite's popular KPI checklist designed to give you consistently excellent performance absolutely free at NetSuite dot com slash built. That's NetSuite dot com slash built to get your own KPI checklist NetSuite dot com slash built.

Squarespace (30m 47s):
I've talked to hundreds of founders on How, I, Built This, and I've heard time and time again how important it is to have a strong web presence in order to really grow a business. Squarespace is an all-in-one platform for building a brand and engaging customers online. Squarespace lets you easily create a dynamic website and sell anything your products and services and even content you create. Squarespace makes it really easy to get started with best in class website templates for all types of businesses that can be customized to fit your specific needs. Squarespace also provides the tools you need to run your business smoothly, including inventory management, a simple checkout process, and secure payments. And with Squarespace email campaigns, you can build a community of email subscribers and customers. Start with an email template and customize it by applying your own brand ingredients like colors and logo. And once you send built-in analytics, measure your email's impact. Go to Squarespace dot com slash built for a free trial and when you are ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

4 (31m 58s):
Hi guy, this is Grace from Shanghai, China. I love all the personalities from every episode. My favorite one is with Herb Kelleher from Southwest Airline. I love how he never thought anything is impossible and he doesn't take himself seriously. I can just imagine that he would approach everything with jokes and a big laugh. I keep going back to that episode and every time I ended up feeling sunshine and laughter going back to my life. Thank you so much for that. And RIP Herb, hope you're still enjoying your cheese crackers and wild Turkey vin in heaven. Cheers.

0 (32m 31s):
If you wanna share your favorite episode of How I Built This record a short voice memo on your phone telling us your name, where you're from, what your favorite episode is and why a lot like the voice memo you just heard. And email it to us at HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com and we'll share your favorites right here in the ad breaks in future episodes. And thanks so much. We love you guys. You are the best. And now back to the show. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's around 2010 and Tiffany is still a full-time mom and a one woman sales team for Wonder Bar.

0 (33m 15s):
But she also starts to research what goes into skincare products. And the deeper she goes, the more she starts to see connections between certain ingredients and why her customers might be having bad skin reactions.

3 (33m 31s):
And I'm telling these customers that I have that maybe don't use this ingredient maybe, maybe take that outta your routine. Yeah, maybe. Maybe essential oils and fragrance aren't good for your skin after all. Maybe they're irritating. You take, it was all instinct. But instinctively, it's the weird thing and I'm almost embarrassed to say it, but like I would put stuff on my skin and it would tingle a little bit like in a bad way. Like I would feel like, oh my gosh, this just isn't good for my skin. Like this is causing me to react. It started out like that. Just all kind of guesswork. But then I started really reading about the ingredients and I started kind of guiding people and kind of getting this idea in my head about ingredients that were in products that maybe weren't so good for skin after all.

0 (34m 9s):
Alright, so you, I guess you were your own Guinea pig, you were just testing on your own skin.

3 (34m 15s):
I was. And my friends and everyone around me, you know, anyone I could talk to that would, that would try.

0 (34m 20s):
So what would you do? You would just buy a bunch of skincare products or you would buy individual ingredients? Oils

3 (34m 27s):
Never ingredients. I never was the one, I'm not the one who made products in my kitchen. Yeah, I, I wanted to read and understand like toxicity, levels of ingredients. Yeah. And I, yeah, I remember buying like this avocado oil and I got it, I used it. I broke out exactly like 10 days later and I looked at the ingredient deck and sure enough there's essential oils in there, but I didn't recognize that to be essentials 'cause they came under different names. So that would force me to then learn the, the all the names of essential oils they can, things go by different names. So yeah. And I couldn't understand why everybody was using them.

0 (35m 0s):
So this is like a research phase, right? Basically where you thinking I'm gonna come up with a basically a new bar or I'm eventually gonna come up with like a cream cleanser or did you not quite know yet? At that point

3 (35m 12s):
I wanted a line that was formulated with ingredients that I chose. Yeah. And that I could be con in control of and that I would know what was in the product and that. Then I also wanted a solution. Like I could say, look, you don't have to go out and buy a serum or a sunscreen or this or that. This is the whole thing right here and you don't have to worry about ingredients affecting your skin from another product because I'm not gonna use the ingredients that could potentially trigger a breakout in your skin. But then Charles, my brother-in-law wanted me to make a bar because he happened to love the bar. So that'll be the cleanser portion of the line. Yeah. And then I'll make a vitamin C and I'll make a sunscreen and I'll make a like an acid and I'll make, you know, so I would go read dermatologist articles and I just read so much and try to teach myself about what this line would need.

3 (35m 58s):
Yeah. And then a lot of what I would want as a consumer.

0 (36m 1s):
How would you keep track of all these things? Like did you have like a journal that you would write things by hand or did you have a com? Like a spreadsheet?

3 (36m 9s):
I had a spreadsheet on a computer. Were

0 (36m 11s):
You intuitively, naturally like a spreadsheet p and l kind of numbers? Organizational person or

3 (36m 19s):
I'm not, I hate it. I'll tell you I don't, I don't think I have those skills so much. Even today when you show it me a spreadsheet, my brain kind of goes numb. Yeah. But I'll tell you when you're passionate about something and when it's all you think and care about at the time in the moment, yeah. I mean I opened up a Excel spreadsheet. I may not have really known totally how to use it completely, but I knew how to fill in four squares and I was excited to see this kind of come to life. Hmm.

0 (36m 45s):
You know, you, you'd mentioned to me on the phone that you wouldn't have been able to do this in your twenties. That you actually had to do this in your forties. And that makes a lot of sense to me because as a mother or father, you know, to raise children requires a lot of organizational skills, right? It requires a lot of like making sure the calendar, like the school events and the sports and getting this kid there and that kid there. And so I was thinking about your sort of methodical approach to ingredients, spreadsheets and writing things down and like, but I have to imagine that just raising four kids also gave you skills that enabled you to kind of think very methodically.

0 (37m 25s):
Like spreadsheets, calendars, like lists. Is that right?

3 (37m 29s):
You don't have a choice. Yeah, you don't have a choice. Yeah. And I'm not like that. I was never like that In fact, I didn't think of myself as anybody that would be able to raise or handle kids. I remember thinking I could probably could handle two. Hmm. But I ended up just You do, you just do it. You do what you gotta do. Yeah.

0 (37m 44s):
And what would you put on the spreadsheet? Like the name of the ingredient. And

3 (37m 48s):
So I would take a product just to reg and I would look at the ingredient deck and then I would list out all the ingredients. And then I would, I had three categories, you know, it's like the way I understood it as a consumer, here's three categories. These, these ingredients are there for skin, it's a, this is a humectant or an oil or a cell communicating ingredient. You know, the second category were ingredients that were there for the formulation itself. That you have to have a preservative, a stabilizer. Things that help the product do what it's supposed to do and keep it, it keeps it safe. Yep. And then the third bucket that we're, I use the word suspicious, I'm a suspicious person. Like why are these in there? Well there's only one answer They're in there that either make the product smell pretty, look pretty, feel pretty.

3 (38m 31s):
There's dyes, there's fragrance, there's essential oils, there are silicones that create this silky feel. Yeah. But a lot of ingredients can't get through silicone. So why are they there And drying alcohol, why is that there? It damages your skin straight up damages your skin. Chemical screens. Every time I used a chemical sunscreen I broke out. Hmm. So is physical better like mineral? So that's what I was thinking like at the time. Like these are ingredients that don't need to be there. These are ingredients that do, yeah. I'd love to do something with ingredients only Ingredients that need to be there and let it let the formulation come out like it will.

0 (39m 5s):
And so you would basically buy, but basically buying brands cleansers off the shelf and testing them. Is that how you were coming up with this spreadsheet, this list?

3 (39m 17s):
No, I was, a lot of times it was somebody who called me and say I'm breaking out or I doing my skin is like freaking out right now. And I would say, what are, what are you using? They would screenshot, you know, take a picture Yeah. Of the ingredient deck, whatever and send it to me or read it to me. Then I would go from there. I remember going online and reading like what a product had in it, taking that list and then analyzing it.

0 (39m 39s):
But what I'm wondering is how did you know that certain ingredients caused certain reactions? Well first of all

3 (39m 46s):
It was every ingredient on the list I would look up. Yeah. There were two or three websites that were helpful in the sense that they would rate the ingredient EWG for example, rates. Ingredients one to 10 for toxicity. Yep. And so I can't say, there was like one thing that I did that was like, oh this light bulb, these six categories of ingredients are bad for your skin. It wasn't that it was over probably two. Yeah. Two, three years of me reading about ingredients and kind of learning. Like do they need to be there and what could they do?

0 (40m 15s):
I wonder though how you, you know, how can you really say, hey these are safe and these cause breakouts. Because like for example, I found like the thing that has affected my skin more than anything is cutting sugar outta my diet entirely. All sugar. And some people are like, you're a freak. That's has nothing to do. But in my case I believe that to be the case. And please anyone listening, I'm not a doctor so please don't trust my advice. I'm an idiot. But I'm just saying that this and

3 (40m 43s):
I've, I'm the same. Yeah. I was a stay-at-home Mom of four. I'm, I'm, that's why I called the ingredient suspicious six because I at the time didn't know it for a fact. I am like, look, I've tried this. I don't know really why it works. Yeah. But it's working for a lot of people, this philosophy.

0 (41m 0s):
And so you came up with six ingredients that you felt caused reactions in people. What? What were those ingredients?

3 (41m 8s):
One is SLS, which is a harsh surfactant.

0 (41m 11s):
Sodium sulfate. Right.

3 (41m 13s):
Lal sulfate. Yeah. Yes. So it can strip your barrier, your skin barrier. One is essential oils, one is fragrance dyes. And I lumped them in same category because they're just so, they're pointless

0 (41m 26s):
Fragrances and dies. Okay. Yep.

3 (41m 27s):
One is drying alcohol. Okay.

0 (41m 29s):
So essential oil, fragrance, alcohol, sodium, lower sulfate. What else?

3 (41m 34s):
Silicones. Okay. And then the last one is chemical sunscreen. Yeah. And and also just to clarify, it sounds so crazy, right? I mean Yeah, but it does a little bit. It, it's like if your cable's broken,

0 (41m 45s):
Not calling you crazy, but yeah.

3 (41m 47s):
I mean you wouldn't be the first. I kind of think that about myself too. If you're, if your cable breaks and they, they give you a list, the first thing you do is go down the list of things you can try. This is like that. This is just sort of a troubleshooter for people with troubled skin. Hmm. So if you have something going on with your skin, try removing these six ingredients Ah. And see what happens.

0 (42m 9s):
Okay. So it's like when you call tech support and you're like, okay, first turn off your computer and you're like, yes, I've done that. Right. Alright, now turn it on. Yeah. Is it plugged in? Yes, it's plugged in. But here, here's the thing. Right. I imagine that virtually every single cleanser had one or more of these ingredients in them.

3 (42m 28s):
Every single product on the market I could find had one or more of these ingredients in them. Hmm. Except for like a pure oil that you might buy at like a Whole Foods or something. Yeah. People really rolled their eyes and thought I was just flat out stupid. Yeah. And I was getting, at the same time people tried the philosophy and when they took this break from these six ingredients, it changed everything for them. It's can be really transformational. And I believe that this was something that no one else had thought of. I remember walking around Rice University one day. Yeah. And it hit me like a lightning bolt. It hit me for the first time. Like it wasn't what was in the bar that was helping people's skin, it was what wasn't in the bar.

0 (43m 12s):
You know, part of me makes, it makes me think that like maybe we should just use water on our skin.

3 (43m 17s):
Yeah. Well that's, yes. The answer is that our skin has an acid mantle or a barrier that protects it. So if you're not stripping the barrier and you're not disrupting it Yeah. And you're not sensitizing and inflaming your skin, your skin will do what it's supposed to do. Yeah. It's because you're not doing anything to it. Skin knows how, what to do if you let it. And there are obviously issues with people's skin that you can't just fix like that. Like I'm not a doctor and I'm not saying we can fix eczema and rosacea. It's not that. It's more of this, there are a lot of issues with skin that we actually create by using certain ingredients. And so a lot of people walk around like I just have acne, pared skin. Yeah.

3 (43m 57s):
But maybe they don't and maybe it's one of the ingredients they're using on a daily basis and they don't even realize it. And then once removed their skin can reset and kind of do its thing.

0 (44m 7s):
Okay. So you are in Houston trying to experiment with a bunch of different things and you keep mentioning essential oils and I'm like, God, I thought essential oils were were good. Like or, or is all of it a problem or suspicious?

3 (44m 22s):
Well they do have some good things about them, but the cons outweigh the pros. Yeah. And the good things about essential oils. You could say those same good things about non fragrant plant oils. Right. Like marula oil or apricot oil.

0 (44m 36s):
Okay. So let's talk about one of those oils. Marula oil.

3 (44m 39s):
Yes. Made from the seed or the P of the marula fruit.

0 (44m 42s):
What is, is that an edible fruit?

3 (44m 44s):
Yes it is. Okay. And there's a laur called Amarula. It's from South Africa. Okay. And at the time the kind of the IT oil was argon oil. Oh yeah. And I remember thinking like this could be a good moment to introduce a new oil out there. Not a lot of people had heard of Marula. It, it was out there but it wasn't like very well known and very popular. I remember the people around me had never heard of it. I felt, I love the way it felt. It absorbs really easily into my hand. One of the things that was important to me for whatever reason was absorbability and not sitting on top of the skin. So a lot of the products I'd used in the past sort of sat on top of my skin. Hmm.

0 (45m 20s):
So Marula oil, you sort of land on this ingredient 'cause you're looking for something that could kind of be the anchor for at least one, maybe all the products in the line. And this to you felt like it could be the one Meru

3 (45m 37s):
Oil. Right.

0 (45m 38s):
So once you were ready to make like a, a test line of products, where did you go? I mean at this point you'd been selling Wonderbar for a couple years. So PR and you had some contacts in the media 'cause you had promoted that bar. Did you have any contacts in like the, you know, in the cosmetics industry? 'cause a lot of these brands are made in the same places. Right. Did you have contacts, you know, at some of these manufacturing facilities?

3 (46m 6s):
I didn't. I had, the only contact I had that I reached out to and who, who actually was sort of her idea was this consultant from Guthy Ranker. Yeah. Who said, you know, with your, the way you market and the way you talk about with the passion that you talk about, you ought to consider doing your own thing. Yeah. So we were kind of gonna do it together. Ultimately, I called somebody who said, why don't, why don't you try to call this place called Benchmark Labs in Orange County. There's a chemist there who is great. So I called and I asked her to make my vitamin C my sunscreen and this like colic acid, which is nighttime exfoliating serum.

0 (46m 40s):
And you sent the list of ingredients that you wanted her to work with.

3 (46m 44s):
Right.

0 (46m 45s):
Was this expensive to do? I mean, how did you pay for it?

3 (46m 49s):
It was expensive, so I had to make sure because I was, I was only allowed to use Charles's proceeds from selling the bars. Right.

0 (46m 57s):
Do you remember how much it cost to get samples made? Like 10,000. 20,000?

3 (47m 2s):
No, I think each product was like around 30. Wow.

0 (47m 5s):
That's really expensive. Yeah,

3 (47m 7s):
It was expensive and it made it ma it it could have been less, it could have been 15, but so a lot of times skincare brands will go ask for something to be made and they don't own it. Right. They just can use it. We owned these formulations. Yeah. Which I don't know how I knew to do that, but I thought it was a good idea for us to own them.

0 (47m 23s):
And when you pay that amount, you're not getting like a bunch of product, you're just getting the formulation. Maybe they'll go back, maybe, maybe they'll do five or six different iterations. Right. Until you're happy.

3 (47m 32s):
Yeah. You get a certain number of retries. Yeah. Before you have to pay them again. And then you own the formulation that money gets you that then you go find a manufacturer. Yeah.

0 (47m 41s):
Alright, let's talk about the name because obviously Marula Oil is the, a key ingredient was gonna be a key ingredient that comes from a tree that with fruits, I think they're a little bit like Loquats. Maybe they grow in Africa. Right. And the name Trunk Elephant, where does that come from?

3 (47m 59s):
So I'd been searching for a name and I'm pretty shy. I didn't really see myself calling it Tiffany Masterson. And at the time I looked around at brands, it's like doctors and Yeah. French names. Yeah. And I just felt like, what, what am I gonna call this? So Marula oil was what I wanted to use as the moisturizer. And so this oil felt great. I went home, I googled it and a video came up of animals in South Africa eating marula fruit off the ground fermented. And they were like stumbling around. Huh. So the implication was they get, they eat the fermented fruit, they get tipsy. Probably not true, probably impossible. But still it was

0 (48m 38s):
They're getting Drunk off fermented marula fruit basically.

3 (48m 41s):
Exactly.

0 (48m 42s):
Drunk elephants. Yes.

3 (48m 43s):
And so I remember thinking, well this is kind of my personality. Yeah. Should I call it Drunk Elephant?

0 (48m 49s):
When you went to friends and you were like, Drunk Elephant. Were most of 'em like, yeah, that's, that's cute. Or were they like, Hmm, this is a

3 (48m 55s):
Little weird. My best friend said, no way. I ha I, she took me out to get pizza and she was like, I gotta tell you I hate it. Yeah. I don't like it. She changed her mind quickly though and my mom didn't like it. My grandmother said it was the most asinine thing she'd ever heard. Yeah. A lot of people said that sounds like a bar, a pub.

0 (49m 11s):
Yeah. I mean, were there any, I dunno, people who were like, look, the result is you're not gonna sell this product. Like any, any professionals or people in the industry that you consulted with?

3 (49m 21s):
Yes. I, I hired a, so in 2013 when I launched the line on my own website in Houston, actually August 15th, 2013. Yeah. I hired this big fancy publicist in New York and I was super excited to work with them. And she actually asked me to put together a focus group. It was gonna cost me $30,000 to talk about the name.

0 (49m 42s):
Oh, shoot. They would convene a focus group. It would cost $30,000. And you would pay them to find out what people thought. Okay.

3 (49m 49s):
Right, right.

0 (49m 50s):
And

3 (49m 51s):
I knew what they would tell me. So I, I got a new publicist.

0 (49m 55s):
Oh, you decide not to spend the money. 'cause you knew people were gonna say, I hate the name. I

3 (49m 58s):
Knew, I knew what they would say. Oh, and by the way, the consultant with Gut, the ranker, I told her I've chosen the name now. And she said, what is it? I said, Drunk, Elephant. And she said, I'm out.

0 (50m 8s):
Wow. She's like, I'm not into the, I'm not gonna, she's

3 (50m 10s):
Out. Never heard from her again. Wow.

0 (50m 13s):
I mean, it is a very unusual name. Now you've been proved right in the end. Okay. The name worked and people, and people noticed it. But I would've told you then I'd have been like, listen, Tiffany, this is an awesome product. You're going, there's a lot of potential here. Yeah. But let's just come up with a name that is gonna say, this is non-toxic. All natural. That, you know, conveys what it is. Drunk. Elephant is a Drunk Elephant. Right. It's nothing to do with what you're selling. I would've said that

3 (50m 46s):
To you. Right. And that's what people said to me. But I didn't listen.

0 (50m 50s):
But I'm trying to figure out how you decided to stick with it, despite all these people saying, this is not a good name. Why? I mean, why didn't you say, you know?

3 (50m 60s):
'cause it was my, it was in my gut. Like it was, that was my personality. That was, yeah. It was my taste, my style. And I knew that everything that touched this line, this brand was gonna be me. Yeah. And so it had to be me fully. I couldn't listen to other people because then where do you go with that? Where do you go after someone tells you change the name? Yeah. Then you're like, wait a minute now I'm completely lost. 'cause I wasn't, then I wouldn't trust any choices I made. Yeah. I remember kind of thinking, if I fail at this, I should fail all the way just being me. Like, I should fail spectacularly right away. Yeah. If I follow my gut on all these little things. So, so I just went with it. Fair

0 (51m 37s):
Enough. But even if, if, if someone's like, just make a slight alteration, like call it Elephant or

3 (51m 42s):
No, even you saying that right now, I can remember I'm

0 (51m 44s):
Triggering you. I'm

3 (51m 45s):
Sorry. No, no. I wanna call it Drunk. Elephant. I'm going to,

0 (51m 50s):
Are you just stubborn about things? Certain things?

3 (51m 52s):
No, I mean, I am stubborn. I know what I like. Yeah. I I know I, I made decisions very quickly, so No, I, I, I knew I did. Who's gonna forget it? Yeah. Who's gonna forget that name?

0 (52m 1s):
Nobody. Nobody's gonna forget that name. Right.

3 (52m 4s):
Yeah.

0 (52m 4s):
And by the way, the logo, which is just a sort of a pencil drawing of an Elephant, like a, a silhouette. Right. You drew that, right? That was the logo you drew.

3 (52m 12s):
Yeah. That was a With a marksa lot. Yeah.

0 (52m 14s):
Yeah. With a Marx lot.

3 (52m 15s):
I don't know how, I'm not an artist. That was, I sat down with a stack of paper with my daughter. Yeah. I remember Chloe was sitting with me and I said, okay, you're gonna sit here with me until I get this logo out. And it came out the first thing, first thing I drew and it came out and I was like, that's her. That's it. That's our logo.

0 (52m 31s):
Okay. So you picked this name and now you've got make the product. I have to imagine you've gotta put in a few hundred grand for a company to commit to making the products.

3 (52m 44s):
Right. So Charles, I mean he ended up having to start putting his own money in at some point. And we did not take on another investor until 2014. Like

0 (52m 55s):
Before you brought in any

3 (52m 57s):
March, April, 2004 before we brought in a second investor. And at that time it was a second and a third. Yeah. Not large investments, but something to kind of help.

0 (53m 7s):
Yeah. The idea was to launch with how many different, how many different SKUs?

3 (53m 11s):
Six and 5,000 at each.

0 (53m 14s):
So six six skews. 5,000 of each. And it was gonna be what? Vitamin C, serum sunscreen. What else?

3 (53m 22s):
An exfoliating serum for night. Okay. Yep. Two bars, one plane, one exfoliating. Okay. And then the mar oil.

0 (53m 29s):
Okay. Do you remember how much money that cost to get all that together?

3 (53m 32s):
It must have cost 150,000.

0 (53m 34s):
Right.

3 (53m 34s):
Okay. Something like that. A thousand. Yeah. I mean that's, that's actually a guess. I just know we were over 400 in, in 2000, late 2013, 2014.

0 (53m 44s):
Alright. You set up a website, you get the domain name. I'm assuming Drunk Elephant dot com was available.

3 (53m 49s):
It was in the summer of 2012. I got that name. Yeah. Yeah.

0 (53m 52s):
Not too many people registering. Drunk. Elephant. But you still have to spend money on the website and the packaging. And your brother-in-Law is pouring now significant cash into this thing to make, to be able to make the product line. How was that relationship going? I mean, he's got the money on the line. You're in charge of this thing. Neither of you have any consumer product experience. You'd never worked for a corporate consumer brands, not like you were at p and g. Again, not necessary, but still stressful, I imagine for him. 'cause he had a lot of money on the line. How was your relationship?

3 (54m 31s):
It was not, not good. So he had brought in his little brother to help with accounting.

0 (54m 35s):
Your brother-in-law's brother to be the accounting. Okay. Yep.

3 (54m 39s):
Right. So what happened was his little brother started getting really nervous for him and basically held the belief that you're gonna lose all your money on it. Again. Charles is in over $400,000 at this point. Yeah. And not happy about it. So he's kind of saying things like, I'm, you know, he was diluting me.

0 (54m 60s):
He was diluting your, your ownership. He

3 (55m 2s):
Felt like he had to. Yeah. You know, I mean, he felt like he had no control and he was scared. And I don't blame them. There's no reason to think this would work. We had it online. At that point. It was doing fine, but not great. It got a lot of coverage. Yeah. And I think my sister probably was behind the scenes prodding him along too, because she really wanted this to work for me. Yeah. But David, the little brother, he had his ear. So he, like, I could tell when Charles had been on the phone with David 'cause he would call and he would sound stressed and worried and he was turning sour on the whole thing. And he, it was very upsetting because I, it was the relationship on the line with my brother-in-law more than anything else for me.

0 (55m 40s):
Yeah. How stressed were you?

3 (55m 45s):
I was so stressed. I had, you know, we were struggling financially. I had a seventh grader who was, you know, Chloe at the time was, I don't know. She was going through one of her, you know, just a typical 14-year-old phase. So it was a hard age. Yeah. And I worked, I did everything from home. And so I, I I would sit at the table and just trying to juggle all of this different stuff that was going on. And it was a scary time.

0 (56m 10s):
This is a super personal question and I, I almost hesitate to ask it, but I think it's relevant in the context of this, because there's a lot of stress that goes into starting a business. How about with your partner, your husband? I mean, did it create also stress and tension?

3 (56m 27s):
It, it, it was both. I think that he believed in me and he was, you know, of course I could not have done it without him. Yeah. No way. Four kids. He had to give up a lot himself for me to go do this. And also, if I put myself in his shoes and I'm being honest, I don't know that I would've been like, yeah, let's go for it. Yeah. I mean, I had to not be there with the kids a lot, you know? Yeah. And also at some point I had to ask him to stop working. Yeah. And say like, I can't focus when I'm traveling because I want the kids to be taken care of the way that I would take care of them. So would you be willing to stay at home with them until we can get through this period And I can get this off the ground.

3 (57m 7s):
Yeah.

0 (57m 9s):
Okay. When you launched in 2013, when you like went live with a website, I know that your goal was to get this into Sephora and your brother-in-Law felt, I think understandably, that that was an unrealistic goal. Like, I think he was like, let's just try to get it into any shops we can. But you resisted that why

3 (57m 29s):
I did. Because again, it was part of my vision. And I really felt strongly that you don't wanna spread yourself too thin. You wanna get into one place and really get your feet on the ground. Now that's, he had David in his ear,

0 (57m 42s):
His brother, your accountant

3 (57m 44s):
Right. Saying, I've dealt with this kind of thing before and this is what you need to do. You're gonna lose your money. Yeah. If you're waiting for the golden egg to hatch, it's not gonna hatch. Right. I'm gonna sit back and watch you lose your money again. And I don't wanna do that.

0 (57m 57s):
But I'm wondering why you didn't think it would be a good strategy to try to get into small boutiques or smaller stores. At the very least, like your whole plan was, we've gotta get into Sephora and the, in the meantime we'll just sell it through our website. Just because they're not here to defend themselves. I'm going to have to defend them. Charles and David, like, I do understand their perspective. Like I do understand David saying, we've gotta sell this stuff. Let's go, let's move product. Like, I don't think that was unreasonable. It, your strategy proved to be right, but it proved to be right in part 'cause you've good instincts and, and also, you know, there's some luck there too. I mean,

3 (58m 35s):
Agree. I agree with you. I see why they did that and why they were scared. And I was just in my head at that point, really, really focused. And I just couldn't see another way. I think I read an article of a brand that got into Sephora and this whole article was about the day she knew she made it. And I got that in my head. And I also shopped at Sephora myself. And so that was my dream. And I felt like putting in a lot of, you know, strip centers around the country would be incredibly time consuming and difficult to manage. So I got probably defensive and I got my feelings hurt, all of that. And then it made me dig my heels in even harder.

0 (59m 12s):
I mean, you could have been wrong at every turn about the name about the Sephora thing and this could have collapsed and it could have really potentially damaged your relationship with your brother-in-Law and maybe even your sister.

3 (59m 25s):
It

0 (59m 25s):
Could have like, that was

3 (59m 26s):
Risky, right? It was. But that's all I had. I only had one shot and I was tired of worrying about the future and tired of worrying about if, you know, I just didn't wanna worry anymore.

0 (59m 40s):
How did you deal with the stress of the possibility of being wrong and all but collapsing?

3 (59m 45s):
I didn't consider it.

0 (59m 47s):
See, but you were, but

3 (59m 48s):
I didn't let that get in my head. But you had to,

0 (59m 49s):
You had to have been stressed out.

3 (59m 51s):
I was stressed about Charles's change of heart. Yeah. I asked him at some point, do you want out? He said yes.

0 (59m 58s):
When we come back in just a moment, Tiffany gives Charles an ultimatum and starts working to get Drunk Elephant into her dream national retailer. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This On How. I Built This. We love to highlight businesses that are doing things a better way so that you can live a better life.

Mint Mobile (1h 0m 26s):
That's why when I found Mint Mobile, I had to share Mint Mobile ditched retail stores and all those overhead costs, and instead sells their phone plans online and passes those savings onto you for a limited time. They're passing on even more savings with a new customer offer that cuts all Mint Mobile plans to $15 a month when you purchase a three month plan. That's Unlimited talk text and data for $15 a month. Mint Mobile's network is crystal clear. And ever since I switched to using it, I've saved so much money. And you can use your own phone with any Mint Mobile plan and bring over your own phone number along with all your existing contacts to get this new customer offer and your new three month Unlimited wireless plan for just 15 bucks a month, go to Mint Mobile dot com slash built. That's Mint Mobile dot com slash built. Cut your wireless bill to 15 bucks a month at Mint Mobile dot com slash built. Additional taxes, fees and restrictions apply. See Mint Mobile for details.

Amica (1h 1m 30s):
When it comes to auto, home and life insurance, you want a company that's always there for you, like Amica, they take the time to understand what you need and tailor a policy to meet your needs. When you need Amica, their representatives put you first and let you know what you can expect from them. They'll tell you exactly what you need to do and walk you through it. By choosing Amica, you'll know you'll have someone in your corner when you need it. Most, as they say at Amica, empathy is our best policy.

0 (1h 2m 7s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's around 2013 and Tiffany's relationship with Charles, her business partner, and brother-in-Law is on the rocks. They've just launched Drunk Elephant online, but Charles wants to leave and Tiffany doesn't have the money to buy him out.

3 (1h 2m 26s):
I couldn't buy him out. No. And I, I didn't know a lot of people who would potentially invest, but the two or three people I did know, I called and told my story to not asking them to invest, asking for their advice, but hoping they'd say, oh, maybe I can invest. None of them did. But I called a, an investor friend and asked him like to help guide me, like, what do you do? You know, I'm being diluted and I've got no money in it and you know, how do I protect myself and how do I, what should this be looking like? Yeah. And he was like, well, you've got a $7 million accountant on your hands. Like literally, like David had 7% of the company at that point. And I did call Charles and say, listen, David's not working out.

3 (1h 3m 6s):
He doesn't believe in the vision. He's, he's actually causing tension so much between you and me that it's hard to, you know, this is not going well. Yeah. And eventually I came back to Charles, I said, look, let's kind of start over. Let's kind of say like, look, we're equal partners and we'll bring in investors or else I'll leave and go, Hmm. It was just high emotions, you know, he's a great guy and we still are very close. It's, it wasn't like it broke up the relationship, but it was just this stressful time. Right. So, yeah. So I called my brother and I said, do you know anybody that would wanna invest? And I said, Charles is not being very fair.

0 (1h 3m 43s):
Patrick's your brother. Yes.

3 (1h 3m 44s):
Yep. But my brother was so close to Charles that he kind of ended up being the mediator between the two of us. Right. You know, and he did, he did introduce me to the two people who came in.

0 (1h 3m 53s):
Oh. The two investors who eventually came in, which

3 (1h 3m 55s):
Was great. And that, that really did help. And Charles was happy with that. Yeah. And it took some strain off Charles.

0 (1h 4m 1s):
This makes, yeah, this makes me just, it just reiterates the old saying never do business with friends or family, but I'm

3 (1h 4m 7s):
Glad I did.

0 (1h 4m 8s):
Alright, so you have, you launch at a very fortuitous time, unbeknownst to you, because this is the golden age of direct to consumer, right? This is like really when you could put up a website 2013 and you could actually buy ads and social media was really starting to blow up and you could attract attention to your website. So how did you, when you had Drunk Elephant dot com before you were in a, in a single store, how did you get attention for it?

3 (1h 4m 38s):
So I decided not to advertise early on. Yep. Never advertised till last year actually. So I reached out to every beauty director of every major publication and sent them this gorgeous acrylic box with confetti and the, and the whole line, the line was so photographable, it's so, it was so bright. The colors, which got a lot of pushback on, by the way too.

0 (1h 4m 58s):
Yeah. You had like purples and yellows and Right. Like Yeah.

3 (1h 5m 1s):
Yeah. Every product had its own color. It was

0 (1h 5m 3s):
Like sort of a confetti colored product line. Yes. Which again, it was counterintuitive because it doesn't look like, I'm thinking of like, you know, Clinique and like, you know, these very simple, like

3 (1h 5m 16s):
There was no color in skincare at the time. No. There was no color and there was no fun.

0 (1h 5m 20s):
They kind of looked like tops of markers, like highlighters.

3 (1h 5m 23s):
Right. And that was just my personal taste. That was just me. I wanted to decorate my house in all white with pops of color and I couldn't afford to do that. So I think I took that out on my line. Yeah. It was the packaging people who pushed back and it was the, you know, it was just all along the way, everything I did was like, skincare brands don't do that. Yeah. That's not gonna work. You know, kind of thing. And so I was just like, well this is my, I wasn't trying to appeal to anybody. I was just trying to do what I thought looked great on the counter and Yeah. Thought was sophisticated.

0 (1h 5m 51s):
So when you sent these out to beauty editors, just cold, sent them out, did it work? Did any of 'em follow up? It

3 (1h 5m 59s):
Worked. I sent this box out to 30 beauty directors and I, it's hard to get people's emails, right. So you, I had this system where I would create, like put their name dot their last name at, or their first initial last name or their first name last. And I, I try every way that an email could be until I got through to these editors and I got through to all of them. The packaging wasn't even final yet, by the way, in 2013 when I launched on my line and they, they published it. I mean they, yeah, it didn't get into magazines, but it got into, it got online everywhere on

0 (1h 6m 33s):
Websites.

3 (1h 6m 33s):
Yes. It got attention.

0 (1h 6m 35s):
But I read that a lot of people around you, especially even in Houston in your hometown, didn't take it seriously. Like you actually had a hard time getting attention from local media in Houston, or

3 (1h 6m 48s):
It was harder to get local attention than it was national. I got the attention of the New York editors really quickly. Houston not so

0 (1h 6m 55s):
Much because why? Because you were sort of brushed aside as a housewife who, you know, forgive the derogatory term, but I'm just wondering, is that how they would sort of look at it? Yes,

3 (1h 7m 4s):
I think so. It's pretty, it's a long shot to think that somebody in their forties with four kids that just launches a skincare brand is gonna make it. Yeah. It's super hard. And I think like even like two years in, people would say, are you still repping that little brand that you were repping? Mm. Yeah. Because I didn't talk about it much in Houston. I didn't try to sell it to my friends. I really just focused on the big picture. And that came later on.

0 (1h 7m 27s):
So interesting how oftentimes you're not taken seriously in your immediate environment by the people who know you, but actually you have to go be outside. It's happened to me in my life again and again. I think a lot of people can relate to that idea.

3 (1h 7m 40s):
Oh, it's just, that's exactly what happened. And so I didn't talk a lot about it and I kept all the good news sort of under wraps and I didn't, I just thought to myself, you know, one day they'll realize it's, it's for real and I don't need to try to tell them about it. They'll have to read about it if they, if it works out. Yeah.

0 (1h 7m 56s):
How did the, I mean, you launched in August of 2013, Drunk Elephant dot com. I mean, I can't imagine all of a sudden the cash register was just, was opening and closing nonstop. I mean, was it No,

3 (1h 8m 7s):
It's, I remember I had a dinging on my phone that sounded like a cash register. Right? Yeah. It would go off on my phone every time we got a sale. And it was so exciting. I remember calling my mom saying, we sold, you know, $1,400 today. Yeah.

0 (1h 8m 21s):
But slow going. I have to imagine at the beginning. Yeah. So in that time, how were sales generally? I mean, do you remember what you guys did in year one?

3 (1h 8m 30s):
I think less than a hundred thousand. Yeah. And I remember, so August, 2013 we launch online. Yep. And then 2014, July I've got the final packaging and I've got the final formulations and I've tweaked things a little bit based on the feedback I've gotten during that first year. Yep. And so I remember getting into this place called, it was cosmoprof, which is a huge convention in Las Vegas. And Right. You have a chance to sit with the retailers and pitch your brand. And it was the first time I was gonna show the big retailers my brand. And I, you get your list like the week before of the retailers that have chosen to meet you. Oh,

0 (1h 9m 7s):
I see. They have to choose to meet you. Okay. They have to

3 (1h 9m 9s):
Choose to meet you. And Sephora wasn't on it. Hmm. So I'm thinking I'm not gonna meet them at this conference. So I go

0 (1h 9m 16s):
By yourself or with somebody else or a couple other people

3 (1h 9m 18s):
With my sister. Okay. With my sister. Nice. And the day before, the last day, this group of women came by and they had their badges turned around. I couldn't see who they were from and they were intrigued. And I had, actually, I left this part of the story out, but I had actually six months prior to this, done the same thing with the head of Sephora merchandising, where I jumbled up her name into every combination. Could possibly get

0 (1h 9m 42s):
You just, you just guessed an email

3 (1h 9m 44s):
I did. And I reached her. Yep.

0 (1h 9m 45s):
So you found the name of this person you emailed her at Sephora. And did she respond?

3 (1h 9m 50s):
She did.

0 (1h 9m 50s):
And were they interested?

3 (1h 9m 52s):
She said, I'm gonna forward you to a girl, a merchandiser. And she responded, send me the products. And I said, well, I don't have final packaging yet. This was six months prior to cosmoprof. And she said, well, you just keep in touch. Yep. So, so she starts seeing it in magazines or online at, not in magazines, but online. She starts seeing it and she, she reaches back out to me. I remember the, I was downstairs cooking dinner one day and she, I go, oh my God, this is Cindy from Sephora. Yeah. I ran upstairs, got on my computer and responded, I still don't have packaging, but I'm going to in July. She said, okay, well keep us posted and send when you have it. So I go to, I'm at cosmoprof. She comes by with five other women.

3 (1h 10m 34s):
I don't know who it is. I'm talking, talking, talking.

0 (1h 10m 36s):
And you didn't know it was her. Didn't

3 (1h 10m 37s):
Know it was her. My sister, on the other hand, my sister's like, that was Sephora. I saw one of their badges.

0 (1h 10m 43s):
Oh. 'cause they, they're hiding their badges.

3 (1h 10m 44s):
They're hiding their badges. And then she comes by again the next day. Hmm. And she just sticks her hand out and says, I'm Cindy from Sephora. Love the line. Please keep in touch. We're unfortunately not going to pick anybody up for 2015. This was July of 2014. She says, we're not gonna pick anybody up for 2015. So I'm really sorry. They're

0 (1h 11m 3s):
Not gonna pick up anything new for the year. Okay. So you Discover Sephora's not gonna put you in the store next year,

3 (1h 11m 8s):
But keep in touch. Yeah. And my heart sort of sunk, but I still didn't believe her. It was really weird. I just didn't believe her. I just gave her her bag and I said, great to meet you. Hopefully I'll talk to you soon. Huh. So I go home and a week later I get an email from Cindy and it actually chokes me up. I'm surprised right now, Cindy from

0 (1h 11m 27s):
Sephora. Yes.

3 (1h 11m 28s):
And I've told this story so many times, it makes me cry. She said, how? Oh God, I can't say it. It's so strange. I've, I think I'm really back in that time right now. Yeah. And she said, I wanna talk about being partners. I wanna talk about partnering with you and launching your brand. Wow.

0 (1h 11m 46s):
Next year. Mm. After they already told you they're not gonna put anything in their store.

3 (1h 11m 51s):
January of 2015.

0 (1h 11m 52s):
So in six months,

3 (1h 11m 54s):
Six months away,

0 (1h 11m 56s):
How'd you, how, what was your response when you got that email?

3 (1h 11m 58s):
She said, can we talk next week? And I was actually going to Jackson Hole with a friend and bringing my kids with me. And I, I remember being on the phone that trip a lot because I was so nervous about this call. Yeah. And so it was there in Jackson Hole that she told me that, yes, we wanna pick you up all six products. She goes, if you don't sell a million in the first year, we won't kick you out. And you know, I emailed my whole family. I told everybody that I, I'd gotten in and at this point, my brother who had just, he was excited for me. And so I called him and I said, I got in Sephora. And I don't know what I'm doing. I'm, I'm really, really nervous. Yeah. Charles was a silent partner. He is a silent investor at this point.

0 (1h 12m 35s):
But you needed operational help.

3 (1h 12m 37s):
I did. And I really respected my brother. And my brother had just gone through this bad divorce and so I thought it would be really fun for him to get involved in something. And he was so excited.

0 (1h 12m 47s):
You asked him to join the company?

3 (1h 12m 49s):
I did. I asked him to bring some money and join the company and help me manage what was about to happen.

0 (1h 12m 54s):
And he had business, he had experience running a retail store.

3 (1h 12m 57s):
He did. He had done that with his wife, but he also had lots of experience with investments and, and just, he just, to me, he was my big brother who I trusted and he could probably help operate things and keep this thing organized. 'cause I certainly couldn't, and you don't wanna get a checkbook near me. I mean, I I can screw up a checkbook in a second. So I didn't, I I, I knew what I didn't know. Yeah. And so Charles was very happy for Patrick to come in and help run things. And so he came in in late July, early August of 2014 and helped me like with my first conference call with Sephora in September. So we had lots to do, lots to get organized and, and to get Yeah. Kind of ramped up to, for this big launch.

0 (1h 13m 38s):
How did you guys finance the, because now you're gonna be in Sephora in six months. Right. Did you have the capital to make enough product to fulfill that first order?

3 (1h 13m 47s):
We did. Patrick brought money in at that point and we had money from those two other investors. And so it was just a, it was just kinda, everything sort of felt like magical timing really. When

0 (1h 13m 57s):
You finally, you launch in Sephora in January, 2015, this is the really the first major brick and mortar that you're in. Right. 'cause up until that point, you're direct to consumer. And do you have any recollection at all of what kind of sales you were doing before you hit Sephora? Like had you hit half a million a year?

3 (1h 14m 17s):
No, no, no, no. Because that, that we're only a year in, I mean this is still 2014. Yeah. So what I did have at that time was not as much sales numbers. We had two things. One, we had repeat customers. Right. And I also had feedback from, I had, I did a whole focus group myself and I had like 50 people in that focus group. And I had incredible feedback on the philosophy and what it had done for people's skin. And so I just kept waiting for someone to pat me, tap me on the shoulder and say, you don't know what you're doing. You're wrong. Go back to being a stay-at-home mom. And every time I had an opportunity to learn more about if my philosophy worked and if this was like, you know, if there's proof of concept, I would get like major proof of concept.

3 (1h 15m 3s):
I would, I would, it would be like a confirmation would come and that would Yeah. You're on the right track.

0 (1h 15m 7s):
And the philosophy was there are these six suspicious ingredients and we have eliminated them from our product line. Yes. And there was nothing else on the market at all. Even in like Whole Foods or, or organic brands that, that eliminated these ingredients. No.

3 (1h 15m 23s):
In fact, they doubled down on the, I mean, whole natural brands double down on essential oils.

0 (1h 15m 27s):
Yeah. And presumably the margins on cosmetics are pretty good because it's not that expensive to make even with high quality products, but you can sell it at a premium.

3 (1h 15m 37s):
Right. I mean my, I think Charles would say that if you could make it expensive, like a high cost of goods, it would be me. I, I could do it myself. Because he's like, why is everything so expensive? I just was choosing the top of every, I was, I wanted everything to be the highest quality I could get. Yeah. The very best formulations. I I, I was choosing ingredients that were expensive. So cost of goods for us was probably more a little more expensive. How

0 (1h 15m 59s):
Did you guys choose to, to price it? How did you cut land on, on the pricing strategy?

3 (1h 16m 3s):
I looked at dermatologists brands and how expensive they were. And then I looked at drugstore brands and I thought, you know, what would I wanna pay for this as a yeah. 44, 40 3-year-old woman, what would I be willing to pay for this? But

0 (1h 16m 15s):
If you priced it too low, you, you might be sending the signal that it was like a cheap product,

3 (1h 16m 20s):
Not serious. Right. That's

0 (1h 16m 22s):
Right. So you kind of had to price it, but at the same time, you yourself, you know, your financial situation was a little precarious. So would you have been willing to spend $80 on cleansers and stuff, stuff like that at the time?

3 (1h 16m 33s):
Dunno if I could've, but I would've. Yeah. Probably done it anyway. And you know, Sephora never said anything about it. It's not like they said these, these are priced very strangely. They, they, they seem to be in line with, with the competitors at the time.

0 (1h 16m 45s):
Yeah. So, alright, you come in to Sephora January of 2015, still you're not a national product. You don't have a national marketing engine behind you. So, you know, you walk into a Sephora, there are a thousand products available for sale. How would people even know what your product was? Why would they buy Drunk Elephant at that point?

3 (1h 17m 8s):
I don't know. Well, first of all, I was only online in 2015. I wasn't to go in stores until April. And that was only 21 stores. So I had to prove myself online pretty quickly. Yeah. And thankfully a publicist approached me who had seen the website in 2013. She was like a one woman show and she had a little boutique agency and she really believed in the way the brand looked and the name. She loved everything about it. And so she did a lot to help me get like, some of these exclusives with InStyle Magazine and the Lore magazine and Mm. Some of these big like publications that, you know, had a wide reach. And so like, it was a combination.

3 (1h 17m 48s):
I mean, we were on social media and it's Instagrammable, the product line, everybody was taking pictures of it. So it was just word of mouth and editorial. That's how we built it.

0 (1h 17m 58s):
This is 2015. So Instagram is really starting to take off.

3 (1h 18m 2s):
It is. How

0 (1h 18m 3s):
Did you start to use Instagram?

3 (1h 18m 5s):
I just started taking pictures and posting with cute captions. I mean, it was just, again, it was, I didn't have a manager yet. That didn't come till later. Yeah. I was doing it on my own and it started just gaining followers. And I, I do think the, I mean the pre, the CEO of Sephora came to Houston a year in and just said, what are you doing? We don't know what you're doing. The traffic coming from your Instagram into Sephora is like, we haven't really seen this before. I can't explain it. I don't, I think it was word of mouth combined with the products worked. These formulations were surprising. They were super sophisticated. I wanted all of them to be as good and effective as clinically effective as anything on a dermatologist shelf because I wanted that for myself.

0 (1h 18m 49s):
How did it do at Sephora when it launched?

3 (1h 18m 51s):
It sold out of a, a couple products right away. So the glycolic acid sold out really quickly. Huh. So we knew a month in that it was, it was being very well received. And so that happened quickly. And in the summer, like, so I launched in January, I go into some stores in March, April 21 doors, I get a phone call. Gosh, it went so fast. I get a phone call probably in April, may

0 (1h 19m 15s):
Of 2015. 2015.

3 (1h 19m 17s):
Yeah. And I was driving down the street, going to pick up my kids at school and it was Cindy and she said, Tiffany, there's a thing called the Favorites wall at Sephora and we want you on it. Huh. And it's every door.

0 (1h 19m 29s):
Wow.

3 (1h 19m 30s):
By September of 2015,

0 (1h 19m 32s):
Every Sephora.

3 (1h 19m 33s):
Every single Sephora. By September of 2015, I only had a few months.

0 (1h 19m 38s):
It's so remarkable to me that Sephora and maybe Ulta too Ulta, that they can really, I mean, I just think about Whole Foods, right? If you are only in Whole Foods as a food product, like if you're just a, a brand, you're selling ketchup. Like, you know, you could probably do seven to 12 million a year in revenue, maybe 15 million just through Whole Foods. But really to, to go big, you have to be in Walmart and Target and Kroger and Walgreens. You have to be everywhere. If you're gonna like sell potato chips, it seems to me that Sephora's different, that you can actually build a huge brand just in Sephora.

3 (1h 20m 17s):
Right. Sephora is known for building baby brands. They take indie brands and they blow 'em up. If they, if they like you, they can also, like, if it doesn't work, then it's kind of hard to come back from that. Yeah. What I did when they told me that we got in every store, I remember somebody telling me before that to go in every Sephora door will cost you $500,000. So when I got the call, we're going in for free because you don't pay for the favorites wall. Yep. Which was unbelievable. That was a huge break. Right. I called Patrick and Charles and I said, I think that we should put the money we just saved into sampling. And I think we should give every single employee at Sephora the Little's kit, which was the whole line, but little version

0 (1h 20m 59s):
That they could use in themselves to take

3 (1h 21m 1s):
A Drunk break.

0 (1h 21m 2s):
So smart. That's, you call them Drunk breaks.

3 (1h 21m 4s):
Yeah. I call 'em Drunk breaks. I called 'em clean breaks at the time. Yeah. But now I call 'em Drunk breaks. I called my kids the littles. So I got little versions of the products and I said, I wanna get the littles to every single person that works at Sephora so they can experience the philosophy and sell it. You know, knowing what they're talking about and and really be personally invested in it. So we sampled the heck out of it.

0 (1h 21m 24s):
Yeah, that's smart. So you, you basically took the money, invested in samples, gave it to employees of Sephora.

3 (1h 21m 30s):
Yeah. And also everyone who asked on social media, every person who DMed me on social media I sent product to. Wow. And so, instead of advertising all of the dollars we were saving and I kept reminding everybody like, we're saving a lot of money on advertising, so let's use that to give people so word of mouth, you know, and that's how you build Word. And it was painful a little bit 'cause we were giving away a lot of products. But yeah, that's what it takes. So that wave of like awareness that the brand actually worked and the formulations were super sophisticated, that came later. And so that kind of helped in the second year sort of. 'cause I started getting awards and so once I started getting awards, then you start getting credibility. Yeah. I didn't tell this story, but it's a good one.

3 (1h 22m 11s):
Nathan is my head of product development. SVP of product development at Drunk Elephant. He is the one that wrote the review for the Wonder Bar.

0 (1h 22m 20s):
Wow. He's the guy who wrote it on Beauty Pedia.

3 (1h 22m 22s):
He's the writer on that review. Yeah. And after I launched Drunk Elephant, I got a, a Google alert that said Drunk Elephant was mentioned on Beauty Pedia. And I, I almost died. I was like, I cannot take this again. Like if this is the blow that they delivered to Wonder Bar, I don't know what I'm gonna do. And he had reviewed four of the products, I think maybe five. And they all got five stars. Wow. It was like the biggest, best confirmation. And I had just won my first Allure Beauty award in 2015, which was also this big confirmation for me. So after he reviewed those, he, he emailed me and said, you know, I wanna review the bars, I wanna review this, I wanna review that. Can you tell me more about how you formulated?

3 (1h 23m 4s):
So I responded. Then we kind of of got this dialogue going and eventually he emailed me. He said, listen, the website's changing a bit. I don't want you to be nervous when you go on, 'cause I know you're a freak and you go on and look every day for new reviews of your products. But it's gonna change a little bit because Paula's choice is dividing from beauty dedia. So it's gonna look a little different. And it made me think he may leave. Hmm. And so I said, if you ever are like leaving your job and you I would love to talk to you. Yeah. Like, I learned a lot from you and it would be an unbelievable honor to have you on my team. I don't have a spot, I'll just create one. And he wrote, wrote right back, he said, you know, yes, let's talk. Hmm. You know, he's a scientist. He said he's, so we brought him on to help me.

3 (1h 23m 44s):
And so, so I wasn't choosing all the ingredients myself anymore. I was still choosing them, but he was reviewing them and we were doing it more of a collaboration. And now to this day, he's Wow. Right by my side. Wow.

0 (1h 23m 54s):
So the guy who totally rocked your world and made you kind of a abandon that, that bar now works for you. Yeah.

3 (1h 24m 1s):
Yes. Works with me.

0 (1h 24m 2s):
Alright. Imagine once you start to gain some traction, you start to get outside investors coming to your door saying, Hey, we want in. And in 2017 you did take on some private equity. I guess I have to imagine at that point in your mind you're thinking, okay, let's go to phase two because eventually we wanna sell this thing. Is that how you were thinking about it?

3 (1h 24m 22s):
I was, but here, so something amazing happened before that, which was that, so in the summer of 2016, I went to a Sephora conference and by the time I got to the booth, there were two ladies standing in my booth and I didn't, had never seen them before. Hmm. And one of them walked up and the other one stood on the other side. And she said, hi, I am Jane from Estee Lauder. Congratulations. And I said, hi, thank you for, for what? And she said, for becoming the fastest growing brand in the history of Sephora, the fresh, fastest growing skin care brand in the history of Sephora.

0 (1h 24m 59s):
Wow. Estee Lauder.

3 (1h 25m 0s):
Yes. I said, she said, the president, I'm the president of Estee Lauder. And I said, how do you know that? And she said, well, they announced it this morning. Hmm. And I was so blown away. She said, here's my number, keep in touch. And then I turned around and the lady on the other side of my booth was the president of L'Oreal.

0 (1h 25m 17s):
Wow.

3 (1h 25m 18s):
It wasn't a month before the people from Estee Lauder came out to visit me in Houston. And

0 (1h 25m 23s):
Just to, they wanted to get to know you because presumably they were interested in maybe talking deeper about a acquisition. Some mail.

3 (1h 25m 29s):
They were, and I think it's public knowledge that Estee Lauder was in the running. We, we talked to L'Oreal, we talked to all of the brands of course. But going back to this point in time, we didn't have private equity yet. Yeah. And so there was some discussion at that point. Do we entertain the idea of, of selling? So that was very early. We, this is when Patrick says, look, I'm gonna start responding to all the inquiries on LinkedIn. Yeah. We got, we're getting LinkedIn inquiries every day, all day from private equity. And we ended up going with a private equity company that was kind of focused on health and wellness. And I don't know, it was, it was kind of bittersweet for me. It was just the idea of selling the brand at that point was so scary.

3 (1h 26m 10s):
The brand was still so young. Yeah. I mean, I only launched it in 2013. I don't wanna sell it right now because it's a middle schooler. I wanted to graduate from high school before I get rid of it.

0 (1h 26m 22s):
Yeah. I mean, what I'm wondering about is if you were getting some potential interest in acquisition already, what was the point of bringing in private equity cash? Why did you do it?

3 (1h 26m 31s):
The idea was, listen, the next phase of this company is to get a c-suite and to start doing some due diligence

0 (1h 26m 39s):
To get like a real seasoned professional from the industry into into your business.

3 (1h 26m 44s):
Which I had never done. Yeah. We didn't have, you know, my brother was the president

0 (1h 26m 48s):
And were you the CEO?

3 (1h 26m 50s):
No. Never. I never, yeah. Never. No, I was never the CEO

0 (1h 26m 53s):
Was there. A CEO. Mm.

3 (1h 26m 55s):
There was a CEO after we got private equity, we brought on A CEO. Yep. The private equity, they put some money in and that, that allowed us to hire the executive team. And this, this is when I knew I wanted to go really with industry veterans who had been, who had made an impact in the industry. Who, yep. So the, the number one skincare brand at the Sephora at the time was Fresh Beauty. And, and the number one makeup brand at the time was Urban Decay. So we got a CEO and a CMO from those companies to come over.

0 (1h 27m 25s):
And by the way, at this point, I'm assuming you had an office in Houston? We

3 (1h 27m 29s):
Did. Okay.

0 (1h 27m 30s):
And roughly in 2017, how many people worked for, for Drunk. Elephant? How many employees did you have?

3 (1h 27m 36s):
Maybe 20. Maybe 20. By the time this is happening with private equity. Right. You know, I, I met with the private equity team trying to, you know, start to really discuss how we want things set up. And I decided I wanted to make everybody an owner of the company. Everybody in the company was gonna have a piece of the company. I don't think of myself as a really strong leader because I don't like confrontation. And I really wanted to be on the same level as everybody in the company. I really wanted it to feel like a team and that we're all in there doing this, you know, doing the hard work together. And I also thought, because I had worked at a company where it was sold and I didn't get anything when it was sold. I want everybody on the day we sell this company to feel it.

3 (1h 28m 18s):
Yeah. To get a check in the mail and really feel it. And also, I was building a really good team and I wanted everybody to feel like they were invested in it and they had a reason to, to wanna be there.

0 (1h 28m 29s):
So this is kind of nuts, which is, I shouldn't say nuts, but I mean, you, you had already had some interest from a company like L'Oreal potentially maybe one day acquiring you, but they actually sued you in 2018 for patent infringement

3 (1h 28m 43s):
Right in the middle of us being on the market.

0 (1h 28m 45s):
When you were actually on the market open to potential acquirers, they sued you that your C firma serum took their formulations for their vitamin C serum. Was that stressful? I mean, because that probably was a significant product for

3 (1h 29m 0s):
You. No, it wasn't stressful. It wasn't, I'm not allowed to talk about the case at all. Oh, I'm not allowed. But I can tell you that CFO m is still on the shelf.

0 (1h 29m 8s):
Yeah. Well you guys both, I think the claims were all dismissed in the end

3 (1h 29m 11s):
And I wasn't stressed out about it. Yeah. Because I knew you

0 (1h 29m 14s):
Knew it would be resolved. I knew

3 (1h 29m 14s):
What was going on.

0 (1h 29m 15s):
But were they, so did that mean that they were outta the running and potentially making a bid for for you guys?

3 (1h 29m 21s):
No, no, they weren't out of the running.

0 (1h 29m 23s):
It didn't create like weirdness, like, wait a minute, you guys are talking to us about acquiring us, but then you're suing us.

3 (1h 29m 29s):
I felt like it was a misunderstanding and it was, it wasn't resolved until after we were required. I

0 (1h 29m 35s):
See. Okay.

3 (1h 29m 35s):
And here's the thing about that is that I wouldn't wanna copy another brand. In fact, it's quite the opposite with me, is that I didn't look around very much because I didn't want seeds of ideas to get in my head and I wanted to be very different.

0 (1h 29m 48s):
Alright. Clearly, you know, you guys were ramping up for an acquisition and in 2018 you were already having conversations with a bunch of potential suitors and you were, it was announced in December, 2019 that Shiseido, the Japanese, huge Japanese cosmetics brand was gonna acquire Drunk Elephant for it was reported at $845 million, which is a massive acquisition. I mean, this is six and a half years after you launched the website. In your mind, did you want this acquisition to happen? Because you were like, okay, now I can take a breather. I wanna just make some money off of this thing. I haven't made any money yet.

0 (1h 30m 29s):
You know, I feel like I wanna be rewarded.

3 (1h 30m 33s):
No, in my mind it was like, it was no different than bringing in private equity and bringing in the c-suite. That was the next phase of building the team. Now it's time to build the brand around the world and spread awareness and help people. And I was so excited about the next phase. And that's how I looked at it. I wasn't planning to leave. I didn't leave. I'm still there, still doing the exact same thing that I was doing before. And I never thought of resting or anything like that.

0 (1h 30m 57s):
Tiffany how, I mean, look, your investors, the private equity people, your brother-in-Law, your brother, they made a lot of money off of their investments.

3 (1h 31m 6s):
Right. And, and, and, and so did all the employee, the employees all made a bunch of Yeah, everybody made a lot

0 (1h 31m 11s):
Of money. And you made a lot of money. Probably not the most by far, because that's just how it works. Investors always unfortunately make more than the person whose idea was, but still, you did very well out of that. And you had gone from being, you know, kind of careful budgeting with your cash and your family to, let's just be honest, to getting rich like, right. I mean, that must have been both satisfying, but was it also like kind of jarring? Like all of a sudden you're like, you're not just like a millionaire, you're like a multi-millionaire.

3 (1h 31m 42s):
Yeah. There's a little bit of a shock that happens and your mindset doesn't change those strangely. Yeah. Like if you have, I I'm a worrier and if I can't pay a bill or if I, you know, I still have that mindset. Yeah. I'm stuck in this broke mentality.

0 (1h 31m 58s):
Totally get it. I get it. Yep. And

3 (1h 31m 60s):
It just, it doesn't mean I didn't buy a big house. I did good

0 (1h 32m 3s):
For you. You deserve it. I

3 (1h 32m 4s):
Bought a house that fit my children and I got to decorate it white with pops of color. Like I always dreamt I would nice, but I'm always worried about it no matter what. Yeah. I'm worried about it. It's a weird, it's a weird thing to be in. It's a weird place to be. It's

0 (1h 32m 16s):
This feeling like you could all go to tomorrow. Like, you know, the world could end, I wonder because it's public, right? It's like it's a public number that's out there. I don't know. Do you kind of have to be a bit more cautious just because people know that, that you have money. And so there are philanthropies and there are, you know, charity events and there's, you know, and, and maybe even being careful about, there are people who just kind of wanna be around you 'cause 'cause of this. I don't know. Does it, has it changed the way you interact with the world around you? Has it kind of forced you to be more cautious?

3 (1h 32m 49s):
Yeah, I've had to learn a few pretty rough lessons actually. Because you do get, you get sucked in sometimes with people who don't have the best intentions or maybe they're with you for the wrong reasons. Yeah. But I have like my core group of friends that were with me when times were tough and they're with me today, and so I know exactly who my friends are. Yeah. And I actually made a list, this is so weird. I, but I do, I do have a list on my phone of my best friends and I've just kind of gotten closer to the people who have been with me. And you live and learn,

0 (1h 33m 20s):
Your kids are, I think you're close to being an empty nest or you and your husband. Yeah.

3 (1h 33m 25s):
That's coming.

0 (1h 33m 26s):
You're only in your mid fifties. You're still so young for having this amazing career. You've got an important job at Drunk Elephant. So you know, you'll be busy, you'll be really busy. But at some point, is there something else you'd want to do with your time?

3 (1h 33m 42s):
No, not that I can think of right now. I'm, I love what I do. I love my job. I love my brand, and I could do this for 20 more years. If they'd have me, I may change my mind next year. But listen, I mean, I'm, I work there, I'm an employee, I get a paycheck and it's also gonna help. I'm, I dread my last child leaving. Yeah. The house. I don't know what I'm gonna do. I feel

0 (1h 34m 5s):
You.

3 (1h 34m 6s):
I don't know what I'm gonna do. But we actually did buy a house in Austin when my first daughter decided to move there. Oh. So I have three girls who are in college at the same place, and then a son who's headed to hopefully the same college. So I can just, if he ends up going to ut also, which I hope he does,

0 (1h 34m 23s):
Then you can be there in what, two hours we

3 (1h 34m 25s):
Can if I can just follow him when he leaves. Yeah. You know, so if that works out, I consider myself the luckiest person in the world.

0 (1h 34m 33s):
When you think about the journey you've been on, the story you've told, I mean, how much of, of where you are now do you attribute to the hard work you put in, in your, your skills? And how much do you think has to do with getting lucky?

3 (1h 34m 48s):
I worked really, really hard. And also you have to have all of these stars aligned at the same time. You've gotta have, you've gotta hit it on so many different levels. You have to hit it on the, the name, you have to hit it on the packaging, you have to hit it on the formulations, you have to hit it on the timing. You have to hit it on the people. And I got really blessed and lucky on all of that, even the logo. But anybody who you ask will laugh and say, you didn't get lucky. You worked your ass off. It's all I saw you do. I mean, I would travel with a girlfriend and at 5:00 AM she'd see me under the covers. Like secretly, like we would get two double beds in a PO and I'd be under my covers for emailing and working and she'd see the little light with the phone on.

3 (1h 35m 28s):
You know, I worked every waking moment I could that I wasn't with my kids. I sat and worked until they needed dinner or they needed to be picked up or they needed the laundry done, or they need, you know, I was there on the computer all the time. And so I, I think that that's what it takes. It just doesn't feel like hard work when you're on the right path. It doesn't feel, I look back and I think that was so fun. What a blast I had. I didn't even wanna get up for lunch and I, I didn't wanna fall asleep at night and it worked out. Thank God.

0 (1h 35m 59s):
That's Tiffany Masterson founder and chief creative officer of Drunk Elephant. By the way, remember how Tiffany's dad, Pete Behar was a quarterback in the NFL? Well, he's part of a mini NFL dynasty. Pete's brother Bobby is in the Pro Football Hall of Fame. He won four Super Bowls as an executive in Miami and Washington DC and Bobby's grandson, CJ Beard is currently a quarterback for the Jacksonville Jaguars. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And as always, it's free. This episode was produced by Alex Chung, with music composed by Rum Arablouei.

0 (1h 36m 42s):
It was Edited by Andrea Bruce with research health from Katherine Cipher. Our audio engineer was Josephine Nyounai. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, Sam Paulson, Kerry Thompson, John Isabella, Neva Grant, Chris Masini, Carla Estevez, and Malia Aguello. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This.

Wondery (1h 37m 16s):
If you like How I Built This, you can listen early and ad free Right now by joining Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts. Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon Music. Before you go, tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey. Being an actual royal is never about finding your happy ending, but the worst part is if they step out of line or fall in love with the wrong person, it changes the course of history. I am Aisha Skidmore Williams. And I'm Brooke Sifron. We've been telling the stories of the rich and famous on the Hit Wondery show, even the Rich, and talking about the Latest celebrity news on Rich and daily. We're going all over the world. On our new show, even The Royals, We'll be diving headfirst into the lives of the world's kings, queens, and all the wannabes in their orbit throughout history. Think Succession meets the Crown, meets real life. We're going to pull back the gilded curtain and show how royal status might be bright and shiny, but it comes at the expense of, well, everything else, like your freedom, your Privacy, and sometimes even your head follow. Even the Royals on the Wondery app or Wherever, you get your podcasts. You can listen to even the Royals early and ad free Right now by joining Wondery Plus.