0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Charles Schwab last year taught us. We don't know what tomorrow holds, but Schwab knows that successful financial planning can help propel net worth by 2.5 times find easy flexible planning options and more at schwab.com/plan.

1 (19s):
Hey everyone. A quick thing before we start the show, how I built this as doing its annual survey to better understand our listeners and how you use podcasts. So please, please, please help us out by completing a short anonymous survey at npr.org/built survey. It's all one word, npr.org/built survey. We'd really appreciate your feedback. We really do need it. So again, npr.org/built survey, and thanks,

3 (54s):
We are coming around and I'm like, this is the airplane shot. This is the first one we ever take. And so I'm like, oh my gosh, this is going to be like, I have no control over where this goes. I have never, I've never dropped a ball out of a plane, like who knows. And it was kind of starting to rain. I remember when I put my hands out the window, I was like, oh gosh, it kind of hurts because the rain was like spitting behind the propeller. And it just felt like a bunch of needles going into my hands. So I dropped the ball out of the side of the plane and

1 (1m 29s):
From NPR. How I built this show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built. I'm guy Roz. And on the show today, I have a bunch of college friends turn their backyard basketball rivalry into a viral video, and then a viral entertainment franchise dude. Perfect. One of the most popular channels ever put on YouTube, You might be surprised to discover that I don't spend much time on YouTube.

1 (2m 10s):
Okay. Of course you knew that I'm an early middle-aged dad with a busy life. So the fact that I even know the names Mr. Beast, or Pewdie pie, or the Paul brothers has everything to do with having two boys who are approaching their teenage years and among all the clips they'll show me. I've been consistently entertained by a group of five guys who perform outrageous athletic stunts and go by the name, dude. Perfect. So when we decided to interview them for this episode of the show, I had to give up my mic for a few minutes, to some wild eyed fans who were hanging around the studio, my children, all right, there was a soda can and the card was stolen.

1 (2m 52s):
It splits a soda can in half. How did he do that? Yeah, so like he

3 (2m 57s):
Has a couple different types of cards and one of the kinds he has

4 (2m 60s):
Is metal. And so that one here,

1 (3m 2s):
Can I just stand? This last voice is Corey cotton. You'll hear more from him in a moment. What you need to know for now is that these five guys who called themselves, dude, perfect, are among the most popular entertainers in America among three to 14 year old boys and girls, which is why my kids insisted on asking questions of their own

5 (3m 24s):
Scored that world record in Oklahoma. When you shot the ball like 220 feet and you made it in the hoop. When you went to sleep at night, what, what were you feeling?

4 (3m 33s):
What was I feeling after I made the shot?

1 (3m 36s):
Perfect produces are stunningly complex tricks, a basketball hurled from an airplane into a hoop far below a hole in one golf shot off a multi-story roof into the hole. A thousand feet away, a bowling ball being hurled from a moving car at dozens of pins for a perfect strike. And none of it is faked. It's all real. It might just take a hundred or even a thousand tries before it works. Sometimes one shot brace single video can take two weeks. As of this recording, dude, perfect has nearly 57 million subscribers to its YouTube channel.

1 (4m 18s):
The guys are among the biggest YouTubers in the world and hits a big business with tens of millions of dollars in ad revenue, a massive live show that sells out stadiums and arenas, television deals, and even a few food products and partnerships with big brands. But of course, like any great business story, the rise of dude, perfect as a powerhouse brand was a slow burn, more than a decade in the making for years, they'd drive halfway across Texas every weekend to shoot videos and then pull all nighters to edit them. And this was long before YouTube became a way to make decent money.

1 (4m 59s):
But one of the things that's made, dude, perfect. So popular is that they're actually nice guys. They're not mean they don't get into beefs or boxing matches with other YouTubers. They don't swear and their videos. Despite what I said above, actually look effortless. But as I say, and as you will hear that effortlessness takes a hell of a lot of effort, dude, perfect is based in Frisco, Texas, not far from Dallas and just a few hundred miles from where they all met at college. The five dudes are Cody Jones, Garrett Hilbert, two brothers Corey and Coby cotton and Tyler, Tony. And there was no way I could speak to all five of them in one sitting, but I did speak to two Tyler and Corey, his twin brother COBie is also in dude.

1 (5m 48s):
Perfect.

4 (5m 49s):
Our parents love him to death, but they decided to confuse the whole world. We had solid real first names. I'm William Cotton, he's John Cotton. And they decided to go with the tricky middle names for what we were actually going to be called and that's and Coby

1 (6m 3s):
One letter apart. What I'm wondering. Yeah. I was like, wow, your parents called your brother Coby and called you Cory. And you're identical twins, but that's actually your middle names, correct? Yeah.

4 (6m 14s):
Set us up for a little bit of a confusing life, I think, but it's okay. We like it.

1 (6m 19s):
And you guys were preacher's kids, right? Like it, your, your dad was a, was a pasture kind of in, in and around the Houston area.

4 (6m 26s):
That's right. So we definitely grew up playing tag in churches and got my finger jammed in a, in a door that Coby slammed on me as we're playing tag. And we always felt like everyone was looking at us. Right. I mean, you're, we're just the pastor's kids. So you're there. Everyone knows us. We don't necessarily know them, but you know, you've got all these people 50 years older than you walking up to you and rubbing your head and oh man, you're getting so much bigger and it's all that kind of thing. Yeah.

1 (6m 50s):
And did you, was that okay? Were you okay with that?

4 (6m 53s):
Honestly, it was really fun. I know people have different kind of opinions of what it's like to be a pastor's kid. I feel like usually it goes either really well or really poorly, but ours was on the good side for sure.

1 (7m 4s):
And Tyler, from what I understand, you grew up in, in prosper, Texas, or just, just outside and I, from what I understand, your dad was also involved in the, in the faith community. He was, he was like kind of well known, I guess, cause he sang in a, in a Southern gospel music group that, that your grandfather was also involved. Is that right?

3 (7m 23s):
Oh yeah. Yeah. I remember vividly going back when I was four or five, six years old, my dad and my uncles and cousin and grandpa, they'd all be at the house, gathered around just the biggest speaker in the house. You know, singing like four inches from each other's ears trying to nail their parts. And I remember laying in bed at like 10, 11:00 PM at night and just hearing them blast that music downstairs and for the older generation and a lot of those Southern Baptist churches, they were, they were celebrities, I guess you could say.

1 (7m 52s):
And then your dad went and worked for a software company. Yup. Yup.

3 (7m 56s):
Went to basically software companies. He was at Netscape when they were kind of the original internet Explorer browser. And my mom stayed at home with us, with me and my sister. And she was a stay-at-home mom

1 (8m 11s):
Kid. Were you, were you good athlete from, from an early age?

3 (8m 15s):
I say that I was an above average athlete. My dad always, he was always telling me, you know, teaching me about mental toughness and hustle and how that can overcome a lack of talent in a lot of areas. And so I played everything. I mean, I played a lot of hockey, played football, basketball, baseball,

1 (8m 33s):
Track golf. And I would venture to guess that if you were to pull people in Texas about their faith, that high school football would rank pretty high up there. I think so it's really important, right? It's a really big deal in Texas, especially in small towns where they don't have professional teams and, and Tyler, you play like you weren't just on the high school football team, you were the quarterback, right? Let's not bet it's a big job.

3 (8m 59s):
Yeah. It was all about Friday night, lights, football. I mean it, all the shows are pretty accurate. As far as that goes, literally the whole town would come out and watch those football games and stores would close down and things would get moved. Other school activities would get postponed. So it's just a little different feel than it is now with how many people are living in this area.

1 (9m 20s):
How do you, I'm just curious as a, as a 17, 18 year old kid, that's a lot of pressure to be the quarterback. Everyone knows you. They're all coming to the games. How do you deal with that?

3 (9m 31s):
I never really felt pressure being the quarterback. I, I, I would get nervous before the games, but I mean, as soon as you took that first snap, you forget about all that other stuff. Like I just, I love competing. I loved taking my guys out against your guys and see who comes out on top. At least for me, I didn't think about the people in the stands or anything like that. I just focused on my guys and having fun. And I mean, those looking back, those were by far Friday nights, playing football were by far my favorite memories. Wow.

1 (10m 0s):
Corey, you were also a high school athlete, but I I've seen you. And I've seen you evolve over the years and you are a much slimmer man than Tyler is. So I have to imagine you did not play high school football.

4 (10m 13s):
No, there was no high school football in my career that is accurate. I was a basketball guy. I will say that my brother and I were, I mean, we were like your typical obsessed, short basketball kid. I mean, if you went and looked at my whole childhood, I had, what was the NBA's old slogan? I love this game. My mom painted, I love this game in the whole basketball NBA font on our wall. And it's so funny looking back now, especially now that I have young kids, because I genuinely thought that I was going to the NBA. I mean, if you asked me fourth grade, seventh grade, 11th grade, I probably no joke would have told you at an absolute minimum. I was going to play college basketball.

4 (10m 54s):
And I, I mean, I was not kidding the type of playing time, even in, in early high school that it takes in order to get there. And it's just so funny looking back, but I just loved it so much. Yeah.

1 (11m 5s):
All right. So both of you do you don't did not grow up knowing each other, but both of you would end up going to Texas a and M and college station. Corey, what was your kind of thinking? I mean, you were 18 and ready to go to college rethinking. Yeah. Maybe I'll I'll do what my dad does. And be like a spiritual leader or, or did you have other thoughts in your mind?

4 (11m 26s):
That was definitely at least a leading candidate in my mind. So my brother and I went to school together, we pretty much did everything together. I mean, I'm sure that some twins go the opposite direction, but we enjoyed, you know, hanging out together and stuff. So that was never really a question of if we were going to go to the same college or not. So we went together when we both worked at the apple store seasonally off and on in high school and college. And so I'd say there are two kind of top career paths for both of us where we're either going to go into some sort of sports ministry. Cause we both love basketball so much. Or we were going to work, try to corporately at apple. And that's why we chose to be communication majors, speech comm majors at Texas a and M

1 (12m 4s):
How'd you do a school. I mean, were you a good student?

4 (12m 7s):
Honestly, I was a good student. Coby always squeaked me out slightly. When we graduated college, he squeaked into <inaudible> and I was nothing. Right. I was just right below that to where they don't say anything. So alphabetically, his name comes right before me. And so, you know, in front of 30,000 people, this is a and M huge stadium, Coby walks across and it takes them a long time to kind of say his whole jaw and Coby, cotton, Summa, Coombe loud, and everyone claps. And it's William, Cory cotton. It's just a short, nothing after it. And so it's these little moments that I think about, but we enjoyed competing and honestly, it's been a fun dynamic.

1 (12m 44s):
You were a good student, you worked hard. And what about you Ty where you, I know you, when you went on to Texas a and M you, I didn't even notice a major. I didn't even look at majors. I mean, it is Texas a and M was founded as an agricultural school, but I didn't know you could major in hunting and fishery. That was your focus. Is that what you thought you would do? Something in like commercial fishing or ranching? Like what did you think you were going to do?

3 (13m 7s):
Yeah, So it was wildlife and fisheries, hunting and fishing would have been an even better. Maybe that one wasn't offered, unfortunately, but no. So I started off, I was going to go be a dentist. My uncle, my dad's oldest brother is a dentist. And I was like, man, that'd be cool. I'll go do that. And started on that path and got to a little class called organic chemistry and decided like, yeah, maybe I should go do something else that, you know, I enjoy a little bit more. And then I figured out, okay, well there's a duck identification lab. That's a part of this wildlife and fisheries major. And I was like, man, I'm all in on that. And it was a whole lot less math and English classes and a whole lot more wildlife and ecosystems.

3 (13m 54s):
And I didn't really know what I was gonna go do with that. I kind of thought maybe like game warden or something along those lines or ranch management or something like that. But I just knew that I enjoyed that a lot more than being a dentist.

4 (14m 7s):
Ty, you rip off some duck names for us,

3 (14m 9s):
Got all kinds of duck names. Gadwall Mallard pin, tail cinnamon, teal blue wing, teal green wing, teal Wiggins. The duck lab was a nice, that was one of those where I didn't have to do a lot of studying beforehand showed and ECA. Well, I was like, man, this is the easiest class I've ever taken in my life.

1 (14m 25s):
All right. So fall of 2006, Corey, you and your brother show up at college station and you guess you find a place to live together right. In an off-campus house. And you're just, you know, your regular students there. And tell me a little about how you started to meet, cause this is you didn't meet Tyler. What? Right away. I think first you met two other guys who would eventually become part of dude. Perfect. How did you meet those guys?

4 (14m 53s):
That's right. So we, Tyler is a year younger than the rest of us. So you're correct. We met him the following year, actually through Garrett, which we'll get to, but my brother and I show up on campus and we actually went to, I mean, let's call it what it is, right? There's this thing called fish camp at ANM. And it's essentially an awesome brainwashing camp to help people that don't know all the traditions about Texas a and M. And then there's kind of a similar one. That's a little more Christian oriented called impact camp. And we all went to both of them, but at the Christian one, we happened to meet each other. And so my brother and I met Garrett and we also met a guy named Sean and we all kind of hit it off real quick. And so we'd kind of grouped up very quickly that freshmen.

1 (15m 34s):
So you meet Garrett and he's just a cool guy that you kind of start hanging out with. You guys have a lot in common.

4 (15m 40s):
I think we just connected on a fun friendship level first, but we all had the same hobbies. He's his main sport for sure was basketball as well. So we pretty quickly formed an intermural team and we hadn't met Cody yet. We ended up meeting him through playing basketball up at the rec center in our illustrious intermural career. And we also had a Bible study that we were all a part of together. So those two things really kind of kept us connected outside of when we were at school.

1 (16m 5s):
And talk to me a little bit about that, cause there's a discipline in going to that every week or more than more than once a week. Was that connected to just the way you were raised or was it, was it part of a discipline, like getting up and exercising every day? I mean, tell me, yeah. Tell me about why you, you guys would go to Bible study every week.

4 (16m 24s):
That's a good question. I think a combination of both, right? It was a little bit how we were raised. I think all of us had a really good experience growing up, I say in the church, but really, I just mean with our faith and because of that, we met people that felt the same way and there's just a bond there. It doesn't mean that we weren't really good friends with other people that didn't necessarily believe the same things as us. But I think we grew up and experienced what it was like to have really close, strong friendships with guys that can back you up and had your back and things like that. So then when we moved and we were all on our own, that's something we were looking for. We were looking to replicate some of the friendships and kind of brotherhood that we had in high school. And in growing up in our own separate lives, then that's how essentially we met these guys combined that with, with basketball.

4 (17m 10s):
Yeah.

1 (17m 10s):
Tyler, you come to Texas a and M the following year and the fall of 2007. How'd you meet these guys? How did you even come into contact with them? Because Texas a and M is a city. It's massive. So

3 (17m 22s):
Garrett and I went to

1 (17m 23s):
High school together. Got it. And Garrett was already hanging out with those guys.

3 (17m 26s):
Yeah. So he went down to a and M and then when I got down there, he introduced me to the twins and Cody. And the first time I went with Gary, he was like, Hey, let's go to these guys' house. I want you to meet them. There's a pool guys. They're

4 (17m 39s):
Super cool. Super

3 (17m 41s):
Cool guys. I walk into their house and they have the soldier boy dance up on their projector. And they're like learning the dance moves to soldier,

4 (17m 53s):
Dead

1 (17m 53s):
Soldier, boy.

3 (17m 54s):
They were cranking that soldier boy as I walked in the door and I was like, God, I don't know. I don't know these guys maybe going to do something else tonight, but no, it was, that was my first introduction to them. And they got a little bit cooler after that.

1 (18m 9s):
And they were loud. They were like kind of sports guys. Like they, they were into sports and playing sports. And I think you also joined the Bible study group, right?

3 (18m 16s):
Yeah, no, absolutely. I mean, I think anytime that you share, especially a faith, but then also interests with, with other people that are like-minded, that's a very natural progression of friendship and allows for a much deeper friendship and obviously beyond. So I think it's been cool to see that progress over the last, I mean, gosh, like 14 years now, something like that,

1 (18m 39s):
You know, in a place like Texas a and M there's going to be, and I I'm, I'm totally project and, or no, I've never been there, but I think because it's a big school, like any big school, there's going to be all kinds of different activities and different different scenes, but presumably a huge fraternity scene, probably a really big party scene. Did you guys avoid that because of your, because of your interest in sports and faith? Like, did you, I don't know what you guys drinking and doing like, I mean, I'm not no judgment. I'm just curious, like, were you doing beer bond games and stuff like that in college?

3 (19m 13s):
No. I think that the answer to the question is not really when we were in college, kind of one of the things that we wanted to show people is that you didn't necessarily have to go to parties and get wasted and drink a lot of alcohol to have fun and enjoy yourself in college. And personally, I had another outlet, my family ranch that I grew up on, it was only about an hour and a half from college station. And honestly, I skipped a lot of weekends in college station to go hang out with my grandma and my grandpa down there at our ranch. We didn't really

4 (19m 45s):
Feel like we were missing out. Right. I mean, I think, yes, it was the five of us, but we also had a lot of other friends that would come and our house was a huge hangout. And you know, it probably looked like we were having just a massive party sometimes because you know, the place would come every once in a while. Cause we had a lot of cars in front of our street, but people would just come and hang out. And we just had, you know, fun sports, you know, goofy games going on at our house. And there were just a lot of people that were hanging around. So

1 (20m 12s):
From what I understand, Tyler, your sophomore year, you move in with those guys and Cody was also living with you or not, not at that point,

3 (20m 20s):
I believe so. My sophomore year, their junior year, Cody Coby, Corey and me all lived in a house together and get,

1 (20m 29s):
Who would become also part. He did not live with you. He lived like down this.

3 (20m 33s):
Yeah. He couldn't live with us. He was to clean our dishwasher and sink was too messy for him. So.

1 (20m 39s):
All right. So this is your kind of group house you y'all were students. So you had to study and, but you also take me inside that house where you video games all the time, or are you doing in there?

3 (20m 50s):
There was a few video games. There was a lot of made up games, hustle bowl. Yeah. I mean, we, we had like these really ugly doors. This house was, I don't even know when it was built. It was probably built in the seventies. It had like these very like star Trek share chores that were just like very rounded. And one of them was kind of across from the kitchen opening and we just ended up turning them into like hockey goals. And so we would just stop pillows in, you know, pants and shirts for the goalies and play hockey in the living room. We had a mini hoop in the living room that we played basketball made up a bunch of games outside. I mean, we were just always competing. We were always creating ways to have fun. And we were never short on ideas, I guess, for things to do.

1 (21m 33s):
So you guys were like big boys, basically my, and this is not a again I'm this is not a judgment. This is like, cause I think about my boys from a very early age, he would like take socks and roll them up and play hockey in our living room or baseball. Like they would just throw up a stuffed socket, the other one with the plastic bag and just, and my wife would be like, what are you guys doing? And eventually we just, we all understood. That's just what they were doing. But you guys were like 19, 20 years old. And you were, you were doing this at your college

3 (22m 5s):
Group house now 31 and still doing it. I mean,

1 (22m 9s):
You would do things like you'd have to have you just sitting on a sofa and one person would throw a football in between. And like whoever caught it would like try to wrestle it away from the other person. I mean, right. Like you were like doing that kind of stuff.

3 (22m 23s):
Yeah. That was hustle ball. Great game. I think that one may have cost us to TV at one point. And I think a hole in the drywall.

1 (22m 30s):
So you guys were not hanging out in the quad, like reading philosophy?

3 (22m 34s):
No. I had to ask my sister where the library was my senior year when she was a freshman. Unfortunately when I was forced to study for a class that I really needed to pass to graduate. So that was a, that was a humbling moment to

1 (22m 46s):
All right. So as the story goes that I've read at a certain point in this house, you decide let's buy a basketball hoop. Like one of those hoops that the standalone basketball hoop, right. That you like put sand or water in the bottom to weigh it down.

3 (23m 2s):
Yep. It was a, a plastic bag board basketball goal from academy like Garrett and I went and bought and we didn't really have a great driveway or any concrete to play basketball on. So we just stuck it in the backyard and we would make up shooting games or just have free throw competitions. And we were getting ready to go to lunch one day and I went to the corner of the yard and I was like, Hey, if I make this, you're buying my lunch. And he's like, okay, whatever that's right.

4 (23m 26s):
Ty is pretty known at least back in the day for creating what we all call one sided bets. So for example, I walked into the backyard one day call Charles and Ty has a knife in his pocket. Right. Grew up on a ranch, always has a knife with him. And he said, Hey, I bet I can throw this knife and stick it in that tree all the way across the backyard, you know, 30 yards. And if I do you owe me 10 bucks, well there's no, if I don't, I owe you 10 bucks. It's just one sided. And so, you know, classic may, I'm like sure, whatever. And he does it sticks in the tree. So it was that situation, just basketball version that kind of started everything ties in the backyard. And he looks at Garrett and he says, Hey, if I make the shot, you owe me a Jimmy John's sandwich. And he's kind of standing in the corner and toss up a hook shot, swish Dre now.

4 (24m 9s):
So they go to lunch and they get back and a camera gets involved and we start filming everything. But

1 (24m 16s):
How does it, so, so I understand you've got the hoop, right. But what, first of all, what kind of camp like was an iPhone camera? Was it like a video camera and who decided to start filming those shots that day?

4 (24m 29s):
It was a picture camera on video mode. And I can not say that more clearly we are talking.

1 (24m 34s):
It was like a little compact digital camera.

4 (24m 37s):
One of the ones where you turn it on and the, you know, the middle lens goes and kind of pokes out towards the front. I mean, very small. And to be honest, we've never really been able to remember who exactly busted out the camera. I think my gut is that Tom made that first shot and Garrett had to buy him lunch and we wanted to show the other guys when they got back. And it was kind of a, you know, keep everyone honest, make sure that they pay their bats and also show the guys. Cause it was a funny story

1 (25m 6s):
And you just held the camera and would like start filming Tyler or, or each other or what

4 (25m 13s):
It started with recreating that shot with Tyler and Garrett. So Tyler goes in the corner, does this hook shot? And I think the dynamic shifted when we saw it on camera. I know that's silly to say, but when we were looking through, you know, playing it back on the camera, it just has a different vibe. Right. And especially when you've never done this kind of thing before, it just looks fun to try and do again. And so it started with that shot for Thai, but then someone else said, Hey, I want a shot. And Sylvan goes across the fence and throws it. Or one of the guys climbed on the roof, you know, or someone does a bounce shot off the chimney. And we were just having fun in our backyard,

1 (25m 46s):
I guess eventually like what, you, you had a friend of yours, Sean actually like do a proper film of like really actually try to make cool films of this. No.

4 (25m 58s):
So

3 (25m 58s):
Don was so originally DPS six members. So Sean was one of the other guys that lived with us at the house and me and him were in the backyard originally when we decided like, Hey, we need like a beginning to this video of these trick shots. And so we had two chairs set up like lawn chairs in the backyard that were sitting in the middle of the yard. He put the camera on the railing. Cause obviously we didn't have a camera man or anything like that. And when he set it up, he went around and looked, you know, on the backside of the camera, on the little, through the little viewfinder. And he said, oh dude, perfect. It's already in frame. Like everything's good to go. Like it's centered up. Nice. And so we went around and it was already recording at that point.

3 (26m 39s):
So he came around and sat down next to me and we recorded a terrible intro where we named it like backyard stunt man. And when we went back and listened to the original audio, we just thought it was funny, the way that he said, dude, perfect. And so we ended up like, I guess kind of adopting that as the title of the video.

1 (26m 56s):
It says dude. Perfect.

3 (26m 58s):
Yup. And that original dude, perfect audio is still in all the videos.

1 (27m 2s):
All right. So April 8th, 2009, you guys recorded a video which you decide to upload to YouTube. And this is still like pretty early YouTube days, like two and a half, three years into YouTube, very early. First of all, what was the, what did the video show describe the video?

4 (27m 23s):
So we basically put together a video of us doing the shots in the backyard, right? Picture, you know, music and us doing different shots with, you know, the occasional celebration in between actually all at one,

3 (27m 34s):
It was picture the space jam music as the soundtrack, because that was the original one. And we had our first lesson in music, copyright issues.

1 (27m 42s):
You use the space, share music cause you're like, yeah, of course. But you obviously were college students and bozos. He didn't know that you can't do that.

4 (27m 49s):
Exactly. So I was the only one with a YouTube channel at the time. I was also the only one that knew anything about video editing. I had taken one class in high school and so I bust open I movie on my apple laptop and put the footage in throw obviously one of my favorite songs at the time space jam and put that behind it. And very quickly after we load the video, like Tyler said, you know, this video has been banned worldwide was the error message we got back. And we learned that you can't just use someone else's music. Right. And so then we actually called one of Cody's buddies who lived down the street and he had happened to just be there actually the week before handing out his demo CD for their groups, you know, recent kind of launch of their music career.

4 (28m 30s):
And one of the songs on it was awesome. Yeah.

1 (28m 32s):
And it was a, what kind of, what kind of music was it like Ross hip hop? Like,

4 (28m 37s):
So everyone should go look it up, shout out Manock bloom. And the song that we used was running from the scene.

1 (28m 46s):
And just to be clear, because you can see this video obviously still available and it's like, there's a shot of like one of you guys like throwing a ball off the chimney and then it going into the basket and, you know, throwing the ball from a distance. And the idea was, let's just put this up on YouTube and see what happens.

4 (29m 5s):
We wanted to share it with family and friends was really the main reason I had kind of had in the back of my mind, a kind of bucket list idea of at some point in my life, I would love to put up a video on this new thing called YouTube that got a million views. That sounded fun to me that wasn't the goal when we started filming. But I think after I had finished editing it, we all shared it on our Facebook status was something along the lines of, Hey guys, my buddies tonight just made a fun basketball video. We're trying to see if they can get a million views. Thanks for watching.

1 (29m 39s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Corey Tyler and the rest of the dudes began to grow an audience by giving themselves harder and harder trick shots to perform, stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR, sponsor Lincoln financial pursuing your dream starts with financial security. Lincoln can help you get started, whether it's protecting you and your family from life's unexpected events or planning for retirement, Lincoln can help you enjoy today while staying on track for tomorrow.

1 (30m 23s):
Visit L F g.com/get started to discover how Lincoln financial solutions can help you plan protect and retire. Lincoln financial is the marketing name for Lincoln national corporation and affiliates copyright 2021.

0 (30m 39s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, Samsung with the Samsung galaxy Z flip three 5g flip your galaxy Z flip three 5g to flex mode for hands-free pigs and group selfies without the need for an outdated selfie stick with hands-free chatting your phone stands on its own without sliding around or leaving your friends, talking to the ceiling, just flip your phone, open halfway, set it down and do your thing. 5g connection and availability may vary check with carrier

6 (31m 11s):
<inaudible> prince rice. Silvana Estrada. These are just three of the performers. We have lined up for our tiny desk concert takeover during Hispanic heritage month. And who are the others? You got to check out the outlet dental podcast from NPR music to find out,

1 (31m 32s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's April, 2009. And the guys from dude perfect. Just released a video montage of a bunch of trick shots in their backyard. They've sent it out to everyone. They know, hoping to eventually get 1 million views.

4 (31m 51s):
The video definitely did not get a million views. It got probably maybe a hundred thousand, probably closer to 50,000 views. That's

1 (31m 60s):
Unbelievable. How did that happen?

4 (32m 2s):
I guess we had friends that had other friends and people just shared it and it bounced around the numbers were not, you know, when you think of a viral video, it wasn't that, but it did get passed around enough for someone to notice it. And the absolutely wild thing is that somehow the very next day I'm laying in bed, you know, probably sleeping late. Like, like you would imagine in college. And I wake up to my phone buzzing and I pick it up groggily and it's some lady who said, Hey, I'm a producer at good morning America. And we wanted to play you guys this video today. Is that okay? So of course I'm like, wait, what is happening? How do they have my phone number? Still don't know how they got my number to this day. But of course I, you know, said, let me pray about it.

4 (32m 42s):
Yes. And run around the house, screaming and telling the guys, you know, Hey, we're about to be on good morning, America. Did they want

1 (32m 47s):
To interview you too? Or just play your video?

4 (32m 50s):
They did sore subject. They said, Hey, we would love for Diane. Sorry to ask you guys some live questions while the footage runs. And so we all huddled together in the living room and they've got us, you know, on the cell phone. And we're about to record and kind of do a, you know, kind of live

1 (33m 5s):
Hit. I was an audio interview, not a video interview,

4 (33m 8s):
Correct. There was audio, there was no way for us to shoot a video feed in there at that point. But we're, we're there and we are ready and we are ready for our phone to ring. And you know, we'd given them our number and they said, Hey, we're about to call you guys. You'll see it on TV. But you know, all you have to do is answer our questions. So we are sitting there, you know, salivating, ready to do this interview. And for whatever reason, they never called us. But on camera you can see Diane Sawyer saying, what was her phrase? Ty, we're trying to phone you guys. We're trying to phone you guys. And so we're like, oh, you're not sitting here, here, make it a stud pass. But they showed the footage. And obviously for, you know, five college guys, it was, it was kind of a fun 15 minutes of the spotlight.

1 (33m 47s):
So they showed some of the video. You did not, not ever get a chance at that point to talk to Diane Sawyer. That's her have at this point, haven't not yet Diane. You're waiting for your call, but it's on good morning America. After that first video and got attention, was there like a strategic like conversation like, Hey, let's do more of these or was it just like, that was fun. Maybe we'll make another one. Yeah. Very

3 (34m 9s):
Much. Just like, oh, that was cool. Like, I mean, that was the extent of our thoughts. Like, oh, no way.

4 (34m 14s):
It was awesome. It was, that was cool. Let's do it somewhere else is probably what we really thought. Right. That was fun. Now let's take it out of our backyard. We'll drag that basketball goal somewhere else and do it again.

1 (34m 24s):
And how long did it take you to make a second video a

4 (34m 27s):
Month? Maybe? Where did we go for a second one time? Was that the ranch? Yeah, the

3 (34m 30s):
Ranch that I was talking about that I would go to, that was my, my grandpa's

4 (34m 34s):
Place. So we did our second video at the ranch and you know, for us back at the time, it was where can we do a basketball shot? That was all we were thinking about. Right. So Tyler had a good water tower, for example, it wasn't a Watertown.

3 (34m 45s):
It was a feed tower, but to a city boy from Houston, it looks like a water guy.

4 (34m 49s):
I am a city boy. So he, you know, he goes up and, you know, sits on top of this thing and does a hook shot down into the goal. And we just wanted to change environments and mix it up first. Try

3 (34m 57s):
By the way that one was a that's true.

1 (35m 0s):
Well, so you're still making some videos, but this is just kind of a fun thing you're doing as college students, but in the fall of 2009, I guess you have your second really big kind of moment, which was you decide to try and make the world's longest basketball shot. And Tyler, you were, you were going to be the one to do this. What, tell me what the idea of this was.

3 (35m 25s):
So I think at this point it was like, okay, well, how are we going to outdo people's expectations now, because now we'd done the backyard video. Now we'd done the ranch edition. So they'd already seen basketball shots taken out of, you know, traditional environment. And so we were, I think I was in the car with Coby and we were driving to campus and we drove by Kyle field, Texas a and M football stadium. And I was like, we need to get in the stadium. We need to do the world's longest basketball shot. I was like, that would be something that people would watch. And the twins were communication majors. So I told Coby, I was like, Hey, if you get us in that stadium, I will throw a ball from the third deck and I will make the shot.

3 (36m 7s):
So he sent some emails around and I have no idea why, but somebody felt good about unlocking Kyle field for us and giving us free reign of the stadium and

1 (36m 18s):
You, by the way, and you brought your basketball hoop there.

3 (36m 21s):
Oh yeah. Yeah. We brought our portable

1 (36m 24s):
Basketball, basketball hoop. That

3 (36m 26s):
Was 70. Yeah.

1 (36m 28s):
So you would just like load it into a truck and drive there.

3 (36m 32s):
That was pretty typical for us to load it up in the back of one of our trucks and college station and go drive it around.

1 (36m 37s):
So somebody gave you permission to go onto the field at Texas a and M. And where did you place the basketball hoop?

3 (36m 44s):
The basketball goal was on the right on the other side of the track in between the track and the football field. And we only had four basketballs at the time. We had recruited a few buddies to go out there and help us rebound because we obviously knew it would take more than one

1 (36m 60s):
To get. And this is a huge stadium, bright, and it's like, could see what 60, 70,000 people

3 (37m 6s):
More than that. I think at the time, I think it's closer to 85,000 probably. Well, and so first I went up to the second deck cause I honestly, I didn't know how far I'd be able to throw it off the top. I didn't know how far the ball would go. And so I went to the second deck and threw a ball off as hard as I could. And it sailed over the goal onto the football field. Wow. And at that point I was like, we can do this. Like we can go to the top of the stadium and I am, I am physically capable of throwing it far enough to make the shot. And that was all we needed to know because what we would have stayed there as long as it took to get the,

1 (37m 39s):
And you brought one camera with you or did you bring more than one? Cause you needed to film you and the basket and the right. The shot.

3 (37m 48s):
We had upgraded to

4 (37m 50s):
Two cameras at this point. And I think we had made the massive improvement of going from not just one picture camera to video mode, to a second actual cam quarter, the type that looks like kind of a cylinder that you put your hand through, the little strap and your index finger on the top. You can zoom. I think we borrowed that from a buddy. So we were feeling extremely,

1 (38m 8s):
Really fancy and was either camera static or where they going to track the shot.

4 (38m 13s):
Both handheld. We could not afford to have a camera on a tripod that got hit by a basketball goal. It would have buried the whole company.

1 (38m 19s):
Okay. How far were you from the basketball hoop?

3 (38m 22s):
If I had to guess, I'd say it was like 60 yards, so you know, 180 feet something like,

1 (38m 26s):
Yeah. And that's the basketball center. Football. Different aerodynamics. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. A lot harder to throw. All right. So you get up to the third deck. Oh, the rest of the dudes at point was six people. The rest of you guys are on the field or in different parts of the stadium. Coby

3 (38m 41s):
Was up top with me filming. Okay.

1 (38m 43s):
And Corey, you were on the field

4 (38m 45s):
On the field. I don't think I was holding a camera at that point. I was standing right by the

1 (38m 50s):
Right, but you are going to be the video editor. So I'm assuming you were the director.

3 (38m 54s):
I don't think we would've thought about thinking way too. I got way too far ahead of

1 (38m 58s):
Over intellectualizing. This I got,

4 (39m 0s):
You know what I like it guy. Yes, that was the director. Okay.

1 (39m 3s):
All right. So, so you go up there Tyler and tell me what'd you do?

3 (39m 9s):
So we start throwing basketballs. We had a few members of the tech sane and basketball team that had kind of, they were kind of funneling out of practice to come watch. And we had kind of a little gallery going, ended up popping one of our basketballs. I think it hit like a bench or something down below on the field. So we were down to three basketballs now at this point, and it's a little bit of a slow process, obviously in getting three basketballs all the way back up to the top of the stadium. But we'd have somebody on the first deck that the guys on the field would throw to the guy on the first equity, throw it to the guy on the second deck. The guy on the second deck would throw it up to the third deck.

4 (39m 43s):
The problem was if somebody in the relay chain threw the ball up, but didn't throw it up quite high enough. It would bounce all the way back down. So it was a tricky, tricky situation. Elevators became our best friends as we move forward with this company.

1 (39m 58s):
And we know what happens in the end. We know you made the shop, but before you get there, how many sh I mean, I can't imagine how many shots do you have to shoot before that you got one that went in? Yeah,

3 (40m 9s):
I would say it's probably not as many shots as you would think. Especially with only three basketballs. Cause you know, after you shoot three basketballs, it probably takes a good five minutes to get everything back up top and reset. So it was only an hour and a half, two hours of shooting. And so it, it didn't take too long to make the shot

1 (40m 30s):
Even an hour and a half. I mean, that sounds like it's amazing that you made it an hour and half, but that's still a long time, you know, it's a lot of like, okay, this didn't work, let's get the balls back up. Oh, Nope. Didn't work. Let's get the balls back up to him. Like you must have been convinced that you would eventually make it.

3 (40m 47s):
Yeah. I mean, we w like I said, when I threw the ball off the second deck, and I knew that we were capable of doing it, we would have been there a week if we had to.

4 (40m 55s):
And you got to remember every once in a while, the ball would, would come really close. Right. You would hit the back iron, you know, hit the rim. And at that point you're like, oh, I'm staying until as long as it takes, like I'm not giving up on this.

3 (41m 5s):
We always liken it to play in battleship. Like if you just keep guessing and keep throwing enough, then it's going to go in at some point, like it has to, like, the ball can only go so many places. And so, as long as you're willing to put in the reps, any trick shot, theoretically it's possible.

1 (41m 20s):
But sometimes like there may be 2 million places where a ball could land and you can't throw it 2 million times because you just, the time would rap. But I mean, I guess your cat kind of calibrating your throw and you're, you're there's memory and you're feeling it. And you're trying to make tiny adjustments, but we're humans, we're not robots. Right. We can't be as perfect as robot, but you're kind of feeling that and just making tiny adjustments, hoping that everything kind of goes your way. At some point,

4 (41m 50s):
I think this is where Ty being a quarterback really came into play. Right. Cause you just said it. And what you just said is, is the answer, right? It's making adjustments. So it goes

1 (41m 58s):
In basketball and the hatchery react.

3 (42m 6s):
We lost our minds. I mean, I think that's what a lot of people gravitate towards too is, especially at the beginning was seeing the celebrations and the excitement and the joy and just that like pure elation of not only is it over, but you accomplished what you set out to do.

1 (42m 23s):
So you put this out on the YouTube channel on, on Corey's YouTube channel, and I'm assuming you wrote, Hey, watch us do the world's longest basketball shot. And did it just go crazy overnight?

4 (42m 35s):
This was a simpler video in a sense, right? So everything we'd done up until this probably three or four videos had been, you know, what someone would probably call a montage, almost felt like a music video, multiple shots, music behind it, all spliced together. This one, we wanted to try something different. And obviously we didn't film multiple shots in the stadium. We just did this one. And so in our heads, we were like, man, we got this. This is going to be one super shareable clip. It's going to be awesome. And it's funny, we put it up and we were expecting this like instant reaction. People are going to go crazy over it. And we put it up. And for a while, it just kind of went flat.

1 (43m 9s):
I mean, because this was an insane, I mean, anyone can watch it. It's totally nuts.

4 (43m 14s):
And for whatever reason, yep. People didn't, didn't pick it up at first. So

1 (43m 18s):
What happened? How did it get attention?

4 (43m 21s):
So it was probably three days later and you know, we were all split up. I think maybe we had done the shot right before some sort of vacation. Maybe there was a break in our schedule. And so I remember my brother and I hopped on a plane to North Carolina, with our family. My grandparents lived in North Carolina. And so we hop on the plane and I mean, I was like, literally thinking about how sad I was about the fact that, that cool video we had shot recently, didn't do well. And you know, whatever, let's just go on vacation and not worry about it. And my brother and I hopped on this plane and we're flying in it's about a two hour flight. And so as we land, we flip our amino, my phone back off airplane mode. And all of a sudden my phone just starts vibrating. Like I'd never seen mine or anyone else's do before.

4 (44m 3s):
And I mean, I thought it was broken. And so, you know, finally the screen kind of slows down enough for me to read a text message or two. And what people had said was something to the effect of, Hey guys, your most recent video has 2 million views and it was shared on Yahoo's homepage. And so that turned out to be what had happened. Yahoo's homepage, which I don't know if you remember, but that was like the spot. It was a thing

1 (44m 29s):
That was people's homepage. That

4 (44m 31s):
Was a life-changer for people.

1 (44m 33s):
Yep. And so it turned out honestly, to be the same thing for us, it had been shared as the main kind of clickable thing on Yahoo's homepage. And about two hours, it had gotten about 2 million views. And because this one was so shareable, it just instantly went bananas. And not only did it get a lot of views, but it got picked up by sports center and every sports talk show you can imagine. And every morning show and night show. And like we landed in North Carolina and went to, you know, somewhere to eat and you know, obviously we're texting each other and, and laughing about how crazy this is, but we walk into eat somewhere and I look up on the TV and there we are. Wow. That was, that was the first time something like that had ever happened.

1 (45m 12s):
The TVs like playing sports center and you're on it.

4 (45m 16s):
Yep. We're just sitting there at a, at a burger place and look up at the screen and you know, they're playing it over and over and, and people in the restaurant are pointing at it and it was just one of those like whoa moments. It was pretty cool. Were

1 (45m 27s):
They saying on sports center? Oh, this is total totally fake.

4 (45m 30s):
A hundred percent. Yep. That's what everybody was saying. I think,

3 (45m 35s):
Yeah. I think Carmelo, Anthony was the one who was on the top 10 desk at the time when the Kyle field shot was blowing up and he was the one they asked him, they were like, Carmelo is this real? And he was like, no way, not a chance. Wow.

1 (45m 49s):
How were you initially? Kind of sad about that. Like, oh my God, it's not fake. We did you feel bad when people were saying that

4 (45m 56s):
There was a little bit of pride of like, Hey, come on, people like, we're capable about this, you know, Ty's Tyson athlete. He can do this, this, this, this is real. But, but there was also a piece where we were like, Hey, if that's what it takes for people to talk about it, you know, at this magnitude, you know, go for it

3 (46m 11s):
Am. Yeah. I mean, there's like Corey said, there's definitely a part of you. That's like, like, why would you not believe us? But then it was also just a Testament to like, look what we pulled off. Like there's professional athletes that are out there saying this can't be done. And we just did it.

1 (46m 25s):
I love that. I mean, it's so it's, it makes total sense. Cause if you did fake it and people said it was fake, then you might've felt bad. Cause you're like, oh, they found us out.

3 (46m 33s):
Yeah. Well even going back to the first video, that was a decision that we actually had to make very early on because we had a shot and the original backyard video, the first one we ever uploaded, it hit just in front of the rim. But you know, hit the net, looked like a swish and we were like, we could totally put this in the video. And literally no one would question it. And this conversation came up and we just said like, look, if we, if we are truly gonna say that everything we do is real, then we can't have one fake shot or we lose all credibility within. It's like, okay, well, if you fake that one, then what else did you fake? And so we decided from that point on anything that we do is going to be 100% real, 100% authentic, and this is going to be, what do perfect represents going forward?

1 (47m 18s):
All right. You guys get all this attention for this video and clearly the gears in your head start to turn thinking, maybe there's something bigger here. Cause that year you set up an LLC, you, you filed the paperwork to set up dude, perfect. LLC. Who, who came up with, who went to the team to the other five guys and said, let's just like register a business here.

4 (47m 40s):
I think it was right after that shot had happened. And that video had, had done pretty well. My brother and I were back home with our family and it was right around the master's. I mean, I remember and Coby and I were kind of sitting on the couch, watching the golf tournament and Coby looked at me and he said, you know, we should probably see if dude perfect.com is available. Like if we're going to go for this thing, we should maybe make it official. And so he logged on to whatever domain company and for 9 99, we snagged dude. perfect.com. Yup. And so I think that was, it kind of solidified it in our minds is like, okay, this is a thing.

1 (48m 12s):
All right, you're still in college, still college students. And I guess you get contacted by YouTube right? At this point, this is a 2009. And they're like, Hey, do you guys want to be a YouTube partner? Like, is that what they asked?

4 (48m 25s):
I think so it's changed over time. Kind of how that partnership program works. Now it's a little more automated if you there's some very low threshold. If you are able to achieve X amount of views, then you can start to advertise against your stuff and make ads sentences. So Google owns YouTube, right? So it's Google ads since it's kind of the piece that people make money on. And so I think back then it was, you had to have X amount of followers or X amount of views, but then YouTube itself would kind of contact you and say, do you want to opt in to be able to advertise? So we did. Yeah, but of course, I mean, we're talking almost no money whatsoever. I think it was probably four or five videos in a tie comes running into the, to the living room at some point.

4 (49m 7s):
This is when we're still at college. And he said, guys, we've officially made it. I think we just made collectively enough money to buy a sandwich. Technically

3 (49m 14s):
Each made 1 cent, but I, I had the incredible foresight to say one day we will each be able to take this money that we made from people watching our videos. And we will be able to go buy a sandwich with it. Yeah.

1 (49m 25s):
That's what it was. Cause people don't realize that even if you get a million views on YouTube, it does not that you don't get paid that much money. Well,

4 (49m 33s):
Especially back then, it was just so early there weren't the type of demand that there is today from the advertiser side.

1 (49m 41s):
All right. So you've got this LLC, but this was like still, you know, early days. Right. And so, and you guys were in college, but presumable, you kept making videos. What was the cadence at that point after that, that, you know, that shot that you make in the stadium, there's a demand. So did you guys say, you know, we gotta do this every week or we gotta do this every month? Or what, what did you what'd you think?

3 (50m 4s):
I don't think there was a cadence, even at that point, I think it was still so early on. Even at that point, we still had no intention of like, oh man, what if we play our cards? Right. You know, this could be huge. I mean, we were, I guess a little bit small minded and didn't see like the big picture until a lot later down the road,

1 (50m 24s):
She'll just super fun. But you guys were getting attention, like, you know, media outlets, we're interested in you. I mean, you were a bunch of college kids making these, these cool fun videos. So presumably you were sort of seen as a novelty act or just like something like that at the time.

3 (50m 40s):
Yeah. I mean, it's very much like the trick shot guys. I mean, that's what people labeled us as, as others, the basketball trick check guys that are doing this,

4 (50m 46s):
Then we said, oh, we're going to shake that up. And then we started throwing footballs,

3 (50m 51s):
Really diversified.

1 (50m 53s):
I read that in like 2010, you got a corporate sponsor GMC that came aboard, which sounds that may sound to a lot of people like, oh my gosh, you've got a corporate sponsor, but oftentimes it's like, Hey, we'll give you $10,000 to make a video. And we want to put our logo on it. Right. I mean, that's, that's what that, probably something like that meant at the time.

3 (51m 13s):
Yeah. I mean, you're not far off, so GMC calls and they wanted us to do, first of all, just the fact that somebody wanted to pay us to make a video like that was mind blowing to us. We were like, we are scamming these people. This is incredible. And so we show up, I think it was down around Austin. And they had like a couple of, I guess there was like a few different videos that we were going to try and do that we're going to post on our YouTube channel. And then they were gonna use as a NBA finals commercial. And then they were going to use another one during the world cup as a commercial. And so we show up to this place in Austin, we were doing the airplane shot. You were going

1 (51m 51s):
And to be in a single engine, airplane flying over a basketball hoop,

4 (51m 56s):
That's right. They basically asked us, Hey guys, if y'all could attempt any type of shot, what would it be? And just off the cuff, we throw out, oh man, we'd love to make a shot out of an airplane. And so like Ty said, then, you know, the eyes got dotted and the T's got crossed. And all of a sudden we roll up in a van to Austin and there's this huge tent with at least 50 to a hundred cars. And we kind of pull up and it's foggy in the morning and you know, we're all looking around and I must be

3 (52m 23s):
Having a wedding or something out here.

4 (52m 25s):
God, this is a crazy event. Like, man, it's early for all these people to be out here. That's weird. And we walk in and as soon as we walk inside the flap of the tent, people start looking at us and clapping and we're like, oh my gosh, they're here for us. That was

1 (52m 38s):
The production

4 (52m 39s):
Crew. That was more than, than a flip camera on video mode. Oh my God.

1 (52m 44s):
And there was a real airplane

3 (52m 47s):
Sitting out in the field, just waiting for us. I like a crop

1 (52m 50s):
Duster, like a low flying airplane. I wasn't

3 (52m 52s):
A crop duster. I was just hyper Cub. Yeah.

1 (52m 54s):
Okay. And so the idea was you would have a basketball hoop in a middle of field and you'd fly low over it. And Tyler, you were the one who was going to take the shot.

3 (53m 4s):
Yep. That was the concept. How'd you do

1 (53m 5s):
That? What'd you do?

3 (53m 7s):
So I get up in this plane and I'm talking to the GMC guys and they're like, Hey, you know, just keep in mind. Like we don't want to hit the truck because the serial number on this truck was like 0 0, 0, 0, 0 0 4. And it was like, you know, we've only got one of these in the U S the other two were off somewhere else. And the other one's like getting finalized or whatever. So they're like, Hey, don't, you know, whatever you do, don't hit the windshield or the hood and put like a massive dent in this truck that we only have one of. So the truck was sitting probably, I don't know, 30 feet in front of the basketball goal where it could be seen in the camera. And so I'm like, that's fine. That's like, it's way far away from the goal. I'm not going to hit the, the truck or whatever, but thanks for like the vote of confidence to put that in my mind, right before I go up in the plane.

3 (53m 50s):
And so we get up in this plane and they load probably there wasn't a lot of room. They could only put like one bag of basketballs in the back of this plane, which is like eight, because it's just going

1 (54m 0s):
To keep flying around and flying around until you make it. Okay.

3 (54m 5s):
And I just remember, like once we got up in the air and we kind of go for this first, like, pass, not getting ready to take the shot yet, but I looked down and I'm like, oh my gosh, they moved the truck right underneath the goal. I'm like, what are they doing? And if they hadn't moved the truck at all, it just looked a lot closer to the goal from up in the air than it was. And so I'm like, oh my gosh, this is going to be like, I have no control over with, let's go. I've never dropped a ball out of a plane, like who knows where this thing is going. And so we come around for the first pass and it was kind of starting to rain. I remember when I put my hands out the window, I was like, oh gosh, that kind of hurts. Because the rain was like spitting behind the propeller. And it just felt like a bunch of needles going into my hands when I stuck my hands out the window to drop the ball.

3 (54m 49s):
So I, we are coming around and I'm like, this is the airplane shot. This is the first one we ever take. I dropped the ball out of the plane, out of the side of the plane. And we're moving so fast that I can't really tell where the ball goes after I drop it. And the guys come on the radio on the walkie-talkie and I could just tell, like, everyone went from this like super excited, like this is going to be incredible. I can't believe we're going to do a shot out of an airplane too. This is most likely, never going to happen because it was about like 150 feet past the goal. Like the worst miss, probably in the history of dude. Perfect. To that point for this, from the goal, like not even close. Oh my. So you could just tell the energy was just like way down at that point.

1 (55m 33s):
Yeah. And so, so you tie your up in the plane and you're trying to make the shot from, from like a hundred plus feet up and, and Corey, presumably your share on the ground, what was going on there?

3 (55m 44s):
So I'm down at the bottom at this point. And the crew like Ty said is, is just deflated. I mean, this is going to be a big time TV, commercial, they're all dialed in, ready to go in that first shot missed by, you know, like Tyler said a couple hundred feet, if not, you know, 80 yards. I mean, it was like insane. There were some cows way, far away and the ball almost hit a cow and I'm like, oh gosh, this is about to be the most embarrassing day of our lives. So at this point I'm like, okay, well that's fine. It was, you know, just going to drop the ball earlier was like the only thought I had at this. But I was the only thing I thought I could do, like no control over this. I just got to drop it earlier. And I'm like, okay, here we go. You know, round two. But I'm like, golly, this has taken forever because to reset the shot, the pilot had to take like a pretty huge loop to get back around.

3 (56m 29s):
And so I'm just picturing how long, like the Kyle field's shot took to get rebounds. Well, this was like, I mean, after we shot the ball, it was another like three minutes just to get back around to a point where we were even able to attempt another shot. So now I'm starting to do the math in my head. Like how many, what am I going to get? Like, you know, 30 shots at this before it's sunset

1 (56m 52s):
Stressed out, by the way. Cause it's like a professional crew of people and these are like hardened experienced production people. I'm sure you must've felt like, Ooh, God, I don't think they realize how, how, how long it's gonna take

3 (57m 6s):
For sure. And we'd never had people waiting on us either to like film us. Like it was always just us and I didn't care if the other guys had to sit down on the ground at Kyle field and throw up a couple more rounds of rebounds. And so we come around for the second pass finally after what felt like forever. And I'm like, okay, well I'm just going to drop it earlier and see what happens is probably going straight through the windshield of the new GMC Denali pickup truck. And I dropped the ball and it looked like it was like pretty good timing, but you know, the plane keeps going. So I can't really see. And all of a sudden like the radio, all I hear is just, Wow.

3 (57m 48s):
Well, I was, I told the pilot, I was like, I think I just made it

1 (57m 55s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Tyler Corey and the rest of the team keep dude perfect going wow. Keeping their day jobs, a decision that at first nearly runs them into the ground. Stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Click up on average. People can lose three hours every day between all of their work apps, click up, has the solution bring all of your essential tools into one place, allowing you to prioritize tasks, collaborate on docs, chat with your team and track goals.

1 (58m 42s):
Companies like Uber and Webflow use click up as their mission control center. Click up guarantees to save you one day every week and it's free forever. So try click up today@clickup.com slash NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor auth zero. The log-in experience can make or break user's first impression of a brand business or app with auth zero businesses can provide the convenient logging options that customers want with the security that their industry demands easily customized login with features like social login multi-factor authentication, single sign-on passwordless and more learn more@authzero.com.

1 (59m 34s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's 2010 and Tyler is up in an airplane for dude perfect. First sponsored video. And he can't quite tell from up in the air, but it looks like his second attempt has actually gone in.

3 (59m 52s):
It took us like five minutes to actually confirm, okay. We did make it because nobody could even talk at that point. Wow. And it was a doubt that had to be like one of the most like surreal moments in DP history as far as like just not expecting a shot to happen. And then second try out of an airplane. Swished it. Wow. It was just like a complete opposite emotion from after that first shot.

1 (1h 0m 17s):
I mean, you guys were still in college. Some of you graduated. Cause I think Tyler, you knew that you'd have another year of college. Right. And since may of 2010, you were in commercials for the world cup for the NBA finals. At that point, I have to assume that people, at least at on campus knew, knew you guys knew you were.

3 (1h 0m 39s):
Yeah. I think that my senior year was a little bit different in the fact that people started to recognize us around campus. And you know, when the guys would come back in town to film something and we'd have a basketball goal in the back of the truck, like everybody knew what we were going to do. And they're like, oh, nice dude, perfect is going to film something. And you know, people in our classes and stuff would know and they had seen the videos. And so there was a little bit of a, a small, I guess, celebrity status to it. But even then it still, wasn't like a major thing at that point.

1 (1h 1m 6s):
Cory, you and Cody and Garrett, you guys graduated. Right. And, and Coby too. And you went off to get a job, like a real job. Right?

4 (1h 1m 17s):
Well, so again, five of us and three of the guys not Coby. And I were either getting married or had already gotten married by the end of school. And so we basically had to, you know, kind of make a decision on how we were going to handle the continuing dude perfect stuff. And so my brother and I decided to move back to Austin, which is where our parents were living at the time. And so we lived at, at their house with them and took the free option so that we could work on dude, perfect. During the,

1 (1h 1m 41s):
Because this was not sustainable, you were not making, you cannot make a living off of this,

4 (1h 1m 46s):
Not even remotely. So we had gotten paid by GMC and that was essentially, it we'd made some ad money, but you know, it's probably sandwich money at that point. And you know, that was cool. And that definitely was like opened our minds to the fact that this could be a real job. And so I think that gave us enough motivation to try and keep it going after school, but we didn't know how it was going to work. And so my brother and I kind of took the mantle of the weekly stuff. Coby did a lot of the business calls and then I did a lot of the editing or all the editing at that

1 (1h 2m 15s):
Point, working with them on, on trying to get sponsors.

4 (1h 2m 18s):
Yeah. We, you know, especially once that, that GMC thing happened, I think GMC or the production company probably is who really won the award for that. And it turned out to be that we didn't scam them, but in, in some sense, right. You know, they got a great deal from us because it just got a ton of publicity. It was a great, great video

3 (1h 2m 36s):
Over a billion impressions on that campaign. I remember when I said, that's exactly

1 (1h 2m 40s):
Right. And so that production company probably got a ton of business.

4 (1h 2m 43s):
I think they probably did. And so we started getting calls from, from different groups and, you know, agencies and production companies and brands. And so we just realized that this is a whole thing. Like this is a world that is available to us. And so Coby, fielded, a lot of that stuff. And then I was editing everything. And so we lived at our house while the other guys and their wives at this point, you know, had real jobs.

1 (1h 3m 3s):
And you would just gather every week from different like, cause you're an Austin, Tyler, you were in college station, where were the other guys?

3 (1h 3m 11s):
They were up in Dallas. So, I mean, at this point, not like we had a lot of brand deals or opportunities anyways, but when we did, we would just tell companies that we were, we were so busy with speaking engagements and things like that during the week that if they wanted to do a branded dude perfect video, it would have to be on a Saturday. And you know, the brands are like, what? Like what, there's no way you're that busy during the week. We were like, yeah, yeah, it's going to have to be a Saturday. When in reality I was still in school and the other guys were working on,

1 (1h 3m 39s):
Right. Like Garrett, wasn't working in our architecture firm and yep. And you guys were working for your dad's church, Corey, right. You and your brother and I guess Tyler, when you graduated the next year, like you went and worked for a landscaping company.

3 (1h 3m 52s):
Yeah. So I had done an internship at a landscaping company and prosper and I went back to work there. I was laying sod at the beginning on a maintenance crew and then eventually kind of oversaw like our residential department and a little bit of our commercial maintenance stuff.

1 (1h 4m 6s):
So let me understand this, Texas is a very big state. You guys would drive once a week, somewhere to a central location and film something to put it.

4 (1h 4m 17s):
Well, I wish it was a central location. The reality was these guys were grounded here in kind of the Dallas area. Right. And they're married and their families are here. So Coby and I were in Austin and it is a, about a four hour drive. So it's kind of past that easy drive status to where it's like, ah, this drive is pretty rough, but we probably drove it at least once, if not twice a week for four years, this was what kind of, wow. We, we think of as absolute, you know, the grind years. No question. So you would

1 (1h 4m 44s):
Leave super early in the morning on a Saturday or a, what are you leaving Friday

4 (1h 4m 47s):
Night? Yeah, probably Saturday morning. And then you would film

1 (1h 4m 50s):
All weekend and then drive back on Sunday night,

4 (1h 4m 53s):
Exactly. Drive back and then I would edit it. And so

1 (1h 4m 56s):
You had to have a successful shot in that two day period.

4 (1h 5m 2s):
Definitely. No question certainly

3 (1h 5m 3s):
Felt like it.

1 (1h 5m 5s):
And meantime, you were thinking of new, new kind of tricks and stunts to do right. Cause they had to be better than the previous one. How do you be in an airplane shot? Like especially without a budget.

4 (1h 5m 15s):
It was tough to continue to try and out do yourselves. Right? I mean, this is back when all we did were trick shots. And so the bar is, is simple. It's make it better than the previous video. And what that usually means to people is farther or higher or something that just feels like a totally different concept.

1 (1h 5m 30s):
I mean, you guys were like, you know, you got on Jimmy Kimmel, you were, you know, you were getting attention meantime, Ty you're like, like laying sod Monday to Friday. Yeah.

3 (1h 5m 43s):
We'd eaten landside, selling plants, all the,

1 (1h 5m 46s):
Because you couldn't, even though you were getting sponsors and attention, it's a see this amazing to me. It was not, it wasn't actually that much money to, to make a sustainable business. That's right. Yeah. What explains that? I mean, I'm trying with all of the views you were getting and was it just like you guys weren't asking for, for enough you were just kind of, or was it you just, I don't know, just the, the, the industry wasn't quite mature yet. What, what, what explains that

3 (1h 6m 13s):
It gets closer to what you said? The industry just wasn't quite there. I mean, I think even at the time, dude, perfect has always been kind of a premiere brand. We were charging even back then, what we felt like was top dollar for a YouTube group to be charging a brand, to do a video.

1 (1h 6m 27s):
You charged a brand back in 2011 to do a video for them.

4 (1h 6m 32s):
Gosh, I know GMC the very first original thing, and this was for a TV commercial. So this felt way bigger than a YouTube video, but this was kind of the first thing we ever heard. I think they paid us 50 grand. And I mean, that was honestly, it was life-changing because it made us feel like this

1 (1h 6m 46s):
Was a thousand bucks a person.

4 (1h 6m 49s):
Absolutely. And then we kind of learned about taxes and we're like, oh, that's

1 (1h 6m 52s):
$4,000 a version, but

4 (1h 6m 53s):
That was the first number we'd really ever heard. And so I think we, I think honestly the biggest thing was we had to split it with five guys and I just, that really carves into it pretty quickly.

1 (1h 7m 4s):
It's like, this was your side hustle. Cause you had the full-time job, but clearly you had the vision of making this, your main hustle, not your side hustle, but you guys were driving four hours back and forth from Dallas. I think basically until 2014. And from what I understand, it got to the point where some of you were like, I don't think I keep doing this. This is not work.

4 (1h 7m 29s):
Okay. That's right. So we and I were the ones driving four hours back and forth each time and we were working on it during the week. And so there came a point where we drove, you know, a handful of times in a row. And we were working on a video all through the night, two nights in a row. And you know, I wasn't used to doing that even, even coming out of college. And so for whatever reason, my body just broke. And so we were at one of Ty's buddy's ranches. And I woke up in the morning after finally having gotten to sleep at whatever 72 hours or something. And so I wake up and I go to brush my teeth in the morning and the water is just running down the right side of my face. And, you know, I turn the light on and, and look in the mirror and I thought it had a stroke because the right side of my face was, was not functioning.

4 (1h 8m 11s):
And so I went and, and tapped Kobe and woke him up and he drives me, you know, in the middle of nowhere, Texas, wherever we worked this ranch and he drives me basically a hundred miles an hour towards the nearest hospital or emergency room. That's probably 30, 45 minutes away. And so I get there and they tell me, you know, after doing some tests on me that I had, what's called Bell's palsy. And it's basically kind of a paralysis of the face that they still don't know exactly what causes it, but what they usually see is stress and lack of sleep. And so they call it temporary. It took six full months for me to get a single Twitch in my face back. And it's just a practical example of how hard we really work going. And we would just do whatever it took to get that next video out and to the point where we just broke.

4 (1h 8m 56s):
And so that's, that's kind of me at this point emotionally for years. And it's like, you know, I'm looking at the guys when, you know, when we're meeting up one day and I was like, guys, I, I don't know if I can keep doing this.

1 (1h 9m 8s):
Were you ever even slightly resentful of the other guys because you were also going home and editing this stuff and that's a lot of work. Were you ever like, God, those yo, I got to do all this work,

4 (1h 9m 20s):
Honestly, I don't know that I would have described it as resentful. I mean sure. Did thoughts cross my mind of, Hey, these guys are not having to do dude perfect. As much as I am sure. But the reality was they were working crazy hours with their other jobs. So we were both doing the same amount of work hours wise because they had full-time jobs during the week. And we all had DP during the weekend. So, you know, logically I couldn't really go there, but I think we were all so excited about what could be with dude perfect that we just powered through, but it hit a breaking point. And for me it was the kind of physical piece.

1 (1h 9m 53s):
And I guess around like, like 2013 or 2014, maybe some somewhere around there, there was kind of a turning point where you guys were like some event for March madness and, and Tyler, I guess you suddenly realized you had to make a decision. Like you have this, this landscaping gig and you had to choose one job or the other.

3 (1h 10m 14s):
Yep. Probably I ever feel this the Houston final four or the Atlanta final four. But they, they had flown out ahead of time because they needed to be there Friday. I was having to work. I flew out Friday night down there. And Saturday when we're all down there doing our event, I got an email from my boss at the time. And it said basically like, Hey, you can't miss any more Saturdays. Like if you know, if you're going to work here, I need you to be here Saturdays. So I remember I showed Garrett first. I think we were sitting on the plane headed back home and I was like, man, I don't like, I don't know what we're going to do. Yeah.

1 (1h 10m 50s):
I mean, of course now looking back on it, knowing what we know, I would have thought you might've been thinking, yeah, I got that email. And I thought you can take this email and shove it up your butt. That's not what you were thinking. Okay.

3 (1h 11m 4s):
Well, and we weren't in a place. Not only would I, I hope that wouldn't be my thought, but we were also just not in a place that could warrant a reaction like that. I think when we really looked it, we were like, okay, what if, cause Garrett had wanted to make a change in his architecture firm. I think anyways and Cody was looking at making a move. And so I knew I had to find something else if we were going to continue to perfect. And so I was like, what if this was in April, this was during the final four. I was like, let's look and see what would happen if for the rest of the year for the next, you know, eight months we just try dude. Perfect. And we had it figured up after doing all this research that we could each take home about $8,000 the rest of the year.

3 (1h 11m 45s):
And for some reason that we felt good about that. For some reason, that was like, okay, well, okay, we can totally do this till December and see what happens. And so

1 (1h 11m 54s):
Sooner on Saturdays, so you, you knew that you, you could make $8,000 each during the year.

3 (1h 11m 59s):
Yeah, it was, it was still, it wasn't supplementing the income that we were making at our other jobs at that point. And so it was

1 (1h 12m 5s):
Definitely a real ramen money.

3 (1h 12m 7s):
Yeah. Yeah. It was definitely ramen money. So, you know, we had to have that conversation with not only our wives, but our in-laws and you know, for me and Garrett and Cody, we all had somebody else to take care of at that point. It wasn't just us. So your kids. Yeah. I think I didn't have kids yet. I think Garrett may have just had his first kid.

4 (1h 12m 26s):
Oh wow. Which that's unfathomable to me now to think back, to have a child and to think I'm going to quit my architecture career. Cause he had his masters and a pretty solid job and go into YouTube videos. Cause this is, this is cat videos still, you know, for the stage of YouTube. This is, if you tell someone you're a YouTuber, it's you work in your basement. So for Coby and I, we, you know, it was easy. We were still living with our family. Any money was enough for us and you know, anything for us was gravy. And obviously at some point we wanted to make a little bit of money, but we were okay. And these guys were having to look at their, you know, father-in-law's in the eye and explain how they're going to take care of their girl. And it was funny cause for Coby and I we're like, great, thank goodness we can all, you know, kind of try and do this together for those guys.

4 (1h 13m 9s):
Someone had to pull the parachute first. And so I remember listening to the guys, you know, after deciding this was going to happen and they kind of looked at each other and he's like, okay, cool. Like I get that. We're all going to quit, but who's going to quit first. Right. Because, you know, once you, once you say that you're, you're burning that bridge realistically at that company. So it was kind of a funny conversation.

1 (1h 13m 27s):
All right. So it's mid 2014. You guys all decide to go in all in on this thing and you've got to professionalize, right? I mean, I'm assuming you've got to like create some kind of infrastructure at least have some kind of some system to bring in incoming inquiries. And, and so I guess at this point, what Tyler, your dad kind of helps out decides, you know, he's decided he's going to help you guys out.

3 (1h 13m 53s):
Yeah. When we first did the GMC, when they sent that proposal, like is one of the first brands to ever work with us and we got a contract, we were like, what in the world? Like, this is like 50 pages. Like who's going to read this. And my dad being in sales and you know, being a good negotiator and stuff, we were just like, let's just send it over to him and see what he says about it. And so that was kind of how that relationship started and

1 (1h 14m 17s):
The camera work. Did you, did you hire a professional camera team or did you already have a team at that point?

4 (1h 14m 24s):
No, we sure did. And I think we were probably still at the, about the same cameras as we started with, to be totally honest. We may have upgraded one step, whatever step that was at the time. My big stipulation when we moved from Austin to Dallas was that I really needed some help on the editing side. So I told the guys, Hey, I will, you know, uproot my life and leave all my friends and family and stuff over here. If you guys are cool with us taking a total leap of faith and not only all going full time, but being willing to throw enough salary at somebody to where we can hire an editor to help me. So it was, it was tricky because we didn't even know if we had enough money to make this whole thing make sense for us to begin with. But then we had to hire somebody, you know, on top of that. So it was tough, but it was definitely the right call, no question.

1 (1h 15m 5s):
And when you decided to go all in, how did you D cause you got to do business development, you got to get sponsors and you got to get revenue in. So how did that happen? How did you, how did you start to bring more of those people in,

3 (1h 15m 18s):
I don't know, maybe a month after going full time, we got an email from Nerf who has been one of our, our longest partner that we've had. They have been since then. And so we had signed our first big Nerf deal to come out with dude perfect Nerf products and do videos for them. And that was like our first big partnership. And that for us just kind of confirmed like, okay, like this is what we're supposed to be doing. Like, this is a great first step in the right direction. Going full time. We still didn't think that we needed an office. So for the first year we pretty much just met at like Panera or corner bakery or whatever coffee shop we could sit in and not order anything until they kicked us out.

3 (1h 16m 1s):
And we got away with that for a while. But after some time, obviously he's had to start like making more real business decisions, I guess in financial expenses, like, okay, we do need an office. If we're going to hire somebody to edit our videos so they can have a place to sit there and work. And yeah, it was kind of a slow transition rolling into all that stuff. And just kind of a learn along the way process of what that looks.

1 (1h 16m 25s):
So once you guys made that decision, you gave yourself like six to eight months, right. To see if it would work. Was this, I mean, you got the Nerf deal. So that was great. That was going to be sustainable. But then was it just like, things started to just come in, as you put more videos out, you got more attention, more stuff came in, it just became like a natural kind of organic growth like that. Or did you have to go out and hustle and get the work to you?

4 (1h 16m 50s):
It was still a hustle, but I think we also moved into our first office and office is overstating it, I mean, it was a pretty fun space. It was like,

1 (1h 16m 57s):
All right, it was like 2000 or 3000 square foot or something like that. Correct.

4 (1h 17m 2s):
The public-facing building, but it was a cool space. Right. And so we knew we physically needed somewhere to office out of, but we didn't want it to be your typical, you know, cube farm. And so we made it as cool as we could and we built it out in a cool way. And it was, it was very, you know, sporty on the inside and activity-based and a basketball goal hanging on the wall and shuffleboard and ping pong tables and pool tables and a space that was very, you know, natural to film it. And so I think when people saw that, I think it was like, oh, these guys are serious. Like this is the first time we've ever seen anyone online, basically create a space for

1 (1h 17m 37s):
Hi palaces and all these places in LA. Now with that definitely matters. And did you, you were financing these videos essentially through your sponsorship, right? Because the videos, even if they were getting a lot of views, that was not your revenue model at the time,

4 (1h 17m 51s):
It was a consistent revenue model. Right? I think that's the cool thing about the ad side is you can start to predict and get a little bit of a, you know, predictable cashflow there. So it helped, I would say we probably thought about it more so as our YouTube money, meaning the ads we can pay for our bills, right. And then the sponsorship stuff, that's what can hopefully help us, you know, support our families. Did you guys know,

1 (1h 18m 14s):
You know, you got them now it's a business and this is going to be your livelihood and you gotta really get quality. The pressure on you is to make high quality videos. Cause you've already been making high quality videos. So there's an expectation. You watch them, they look seamless, simple, cause it's so hard to make them, I know that looking at it, but that does create creative tension in any environment, even in our environment, you know, I know you're all friends and stuff, but in any kind of business arrangement, there's always going to be tension. If you had big, big arguments between the five of you <inaudible>,

4 (1h 18m 47s):
I mean, we're brothers, right? Like we have known each other for 14, 16 years at this point. So anything that you can imagine with family, you know, with five brothers that that's what's happened. So we've certainly, you know, been upset at each other many times and that's a lot of people, that's a lot of cooks in the kitchen to try to agree and try to vote. And so, as you can imagine, it gets messy, but I think we've all just, we've aligned on the things that really matter, right. We've majored on the majors and minored on the minors. And so are, you know, tent-pole things right. Quality and that people can trust everything we put out. Like those things continue to kind of guide what we do. And so I think as a group, you know, we didn't have to convince each other about those things over and over again.

4 (1h 19m 30s):
I think, you know,

3 (1h 19m 31s):
I know for us, there's obviously been moments throughout the 12 years that have been extremely difficult and you know, very confrontational and difficult moments. And I think the only reason that dude perfect is still a thing today is truly because of our faith. And I think, you know, as five Christian guys, Jesus was all about loving people and forgiving people and serving people. And you get a lot of opportunities to do that when you have disagreements with your friends that you work with. And so we've definitely had our opportunities to do that. And I think truly that is the only reason that do perfect is still a thing 12 years later.

1 (1h 20m 5s):
Well, on that point, right? And I, I, that makes a lot of sense. You can always circle back to this thing you share, which is in, in your case, it's your faith and you can kind of lean on that to resolve things. And I know we're talking about this more than normal cause you guys don't really talk a lot about this in the videos, which I think is actually great. I mean, in a sense that you've got all kinds of kids and people watching and some people just, they respect faith, but they don't want really not interested. Don't want to hear.

4 (1h 20m 32s):
Yeah. I don't think it's something that we purposefully try to hide our main purpose for making the videos and any type of entertainment we do is to bring people together. Right. I mean, I think at the end of the day, you know, we've actually been talking about it recently. Our mission statement is to be the world's most trusted world-class entertainment. So I think for us, I don't think that we feel like it's necessary nor is it necessarily very entertaining to sit around and talk about our faith on videos, but it is the most important thing to us. So I think we put, you know, entertainment as the key piece of our videos. And if anyone digs, you know, at all, they can kind of see, you know, what we're really all about. And we're happy to tell anyone that asks,

1 (1h 21m 10s):
You know, we heard my boys earlier in the conversation I'm 12 and 10 years old. And that's how I learned about you through my boys. Cause I, I'm not a YouTube watcher and you know, I'm in my mid forties, it's just not my thing. Right. And it's really cool how they connect with what you do. And as I've gone down the rabbit hole of dude, perfect. It's clear that you have a massive audience, probably your primary audience is like boys, right? Like probably between five and 15. Is that fair? That that's your biggest core audience? I think

3 (1h 21m 44s):
It's definitely our biggest, I think we've been surprised over the years as we've started to transition out of just being the basketball trick shot guys, you know, now we've got the trick shot. Videos are probably our least popular series we have now, which is awesome. I mean, we love that. That's cool to see, you know, us try new things and they work, I guess. So they're, they're well received by the audience. So now we've got the stereotypes and the battles and

1 (1h 22m 4s):
I should have mentioned, these are like sketch shows like stereotypes. You like have one where y'all go to the beach and there's like, stereotype of the person always gets sunburned and like the muscle guy and like, that's what it is.

3 (1h 22m 14s):
Yep. We've just tried all these different series and it's cool to see our audience grow with us. And especially like me talk about some of these athletes and celebrities. So we've been fortunate enough to meet and you know, on tour we were, we were shocked to see how many females were there. I mean, it was a good, like I would say 70, 30, 60, 40 split between girls and boys that were coming to the, to the tour in 2019.

1 (1h 22m 36s):
All right. Here's the other thing that's happened to you guys? You beat you've become really famous. I mean, I, you know, they're going to be some people who listen to this, who haven't heard of you and put, but just so they know you have like a bigger YouTube channel, then the NBA, then the NFL then Ariana Grande. I mean, you've, you've had 10 billion views of your videos. Like you guys are really famous. Like you get recognized where wherever you go, how has that changed your life? Right. You must get, you probably can't walk through an airport terminal without getting stopped.

4 (1h 23m 9s):
It's I mean, there's no question it's drastically changed our personal lives. And again, something we didn't think about, right. I mean, when it started happening a lot, which I'd say is probably, I don't know, five or six years ago now is when we were like, oh snap. Like people are recognizing us everywhere we go. And not just as a group, but individually it's tricky. I would say the large majority of the time, it's a really positive experience. But at the same time, you know, we're, we're regular people too. And so we'll be out at dinner and we're with our family and our kids and we'll be, you know, tucked in the back of a booth at a Mexican restaurant and then you'll have a family stand up and the dad will say something like, Hey, take a picture with our kids, you know? And he's not really asking.

4 (1h 23m 49s):
He's kind of saying, Hey, do it. And you're stuck in the back of the booth. And if you take one picture, then everyone in the restaurant is going to notice. And you know, before, you know, you'll have a line and it's not that we don't appreciate everyone in the restaurant that their kids know us or that their parents know us and that they want to take a picture. But obviously it just changes the whole dynamic.

3 (1h 24m 6s):
Yeah. I think it just goes back to our faith, why we handle situations like we do. I mean, if it was purely from a selfish perspective, I think there would definitely be times when you walk out of the office and you're like, man, the last thing I want to do is go take more pictures. I'm trying to get home and see my own family. But at the end of the day, like if you think about it, like, you know, I may have 20 or 30 of those interactions in a day. I'm not going to be able to remember the kids or families names that I meet or anything like that. But that kid is probably going to remember that experience for the rest of his life. But it's definitely a conscious decision that you have to make that yes, it may be inconvenient. It may be frustrating. You may have just come off of having an absolutely horrible day personally, but there you walk outside and there's a group of 20 people waiting to take a picture with you.

3 (1h 24m 51s):
You've got to decide in that moment, you know, how am I going to handle this? Like they have no idea what's going on in your personal life. I mean they, and they sh they, they, there's no way that they could. Yeah.

1 (1h 25m 1s):
You guys expanded to a live show. You've got multi-channel shows on YouTube. Clearly you've got a vision to make this bigger. And by the way, how many people work for dude? Perfect. Today,

4 (1h 25m 13s):
We're probably up to between 15 to 20, you know, different time. What time people are listening to this. Yeah. Full-time

1 (1h 25m 20s):
I think it's estimated you're like a $30 million business annual business. Is that fair to say?

3 (1h 25m 27s):
Yeah, I think so. I think we choose not to discuss finances on a detailed level, but yeah. There's plenty of articles and reports out there and they're, they're not too far off on the estimates. All right. So you are

1 (1h 25m 39s):
Pretty, you're a media company now what's the ambition. I mean, what do you guys want this to be? Cause it's, you know, some people might say, oh, those are the trick shot guys. Some people might say, oh, this is the YouTube guy. Some people might say, oh, that's those guys that do that live show. Tell me, tell me the vision.

4 (1h 25m 56s):
And the truth is, I think we like all the things you just said, right? I think we want to be relevant on all the platforms, right? Anything that's popular. We want to have a presence there and just continue to kind of shine our light and in those different areas. And so we're, we're trying to do a bunch of different things. We've got a movie that we're just starting to work on. And so we're, we're kind of trying to tackle it all. And it's, it's, it kind of goes back to us being competitive guys, right? There's a piece of a piece of it. That's the business side. And we think that part is fine. And you know, just like any entrepreneur, we like growing the business. And then there's also a piece of us that, you know, no matter what we do, we're still competitive guys. And we like to try and tackle some different areas. And if that means that, you know, we want to make a movie, then Hey, let's try it.

4 (1h 26m 36s):
That's a completely new experience. And you know, we want to see it happen. How crazy would,

1 (1h 26m 40s):
And you thought if when you were in college, one of you guys was like, we're going to make a really, really significant business. That's going to generate a lot of money out of that, of these stupid things we're doing in our,

3 (1h 26m 57s):
I think if you had have said that two years ago, we would've thought it was crazy. I don't think he had to go back 12 years to when we're back in college.

4 (1h 27m 4s):
But yeah, it was unfathomable. I mean, honestly we could not have even wrapped our minds around it, partly because that world didn't really exist. Right. I think kids now, your kids probably even grow up in one of their top things. Hey, what do you want to be when you grow up? Well, I'm going to be a YouTube cause that's a thing. And it was not a thing when we were growing up and it was barely a thing at all when we are, you know, and the beginning stages of dude. Perfect.

1 (1h 27m 26s):
Yeah, by the way, thanks for that now. And every time I asked my kids what you want to be, they're not like I won't be the president. Like I want to be a YouTuber.

4 (1h 27m 32s):
Yeah. We, it, we have to apologize for that. And we didn't start water bottle flipping, but we definitely helped make it a kind of a thing. So we apologize to teachers for that all the time. I'm sure that's endlessly frustrating to them. Yeah.

1 (1h 27m 45s):
How much for both of you, Tyler and Corey, how much of your success do you, do you attribute to how hard you worked and just the grind and how much do you think has to do with luck?

4 (1h 27m 55s):
We are perfectionists, right? We all are. And we are all willing to put in that extra effort and whatever piece of the process you can imagine. I mean, just the other day, as an example, we launched a new book recently. And so we did kind of a contest giveaway, and we did this big film project in order to make it happen. And we put a lot of time and effort into it and we edited it and we looked at it and we said, I don't like the way it looks like it's okay. No one would really bat an eye at it, but that's not the vision that we had. And we, we went and we redid the whole thing. Right. So that's just so classic dude. Perfect. We have this bar that I think is a lot higher than what most people imagine. It would be at least online. So on the hard work side, I mean, I'm not gonna lie.

4 (1h 28m 35s):
Like we, you know, we try hard, we take it seriously. It's the most fun thing ever. So we don't take it too seriously, but we take the opportunity that we have with it seriously. And you know, if we can spread a little bit of hope and joy in that sense, that's a huge win. How about you telling,

3 (1h 28m 50s):
I mean, there's no question that we've all put in a, a lot of work, but I think we would still be putting in that work. I mean, I was putting in that work when I was doing landscaping, our personalities have always like, the way we were raised is, you know, you've got to work for, for something it's not just going to be handed to you. And so I think we tend to look at it, maybe not so much of luck, but more so that God has blessed us with this platform for a reason. And even if it's just as simple as providing content for families to sit down and watch together, I think we, we hope it minimum. Like that's what we can provide for people. And I don't tend to look at it as luck, but I think it's been a huge blessing to be able to have a platform like that.

3 (1h 29m 35s):
I mean, it would be a waste if at the end of this, it was like, oh, okay, well, we made some funny videos on this website called YouTube that may or may not be around in 50 years. And I think we all hope that there's a little bit more meaning and a little bit more purpose behind do perfect than that. When this is all said and done,

1 (1h 29m 55s):
That's Tyler, Tony Corey cotton, two of the five co-founders dude. Perfect. Oh, and by the way, I think we may have forgotten to ask just one more critical question, Brandon, I'm gonna take this one. Yeah. Have you ever scored an incredible trick shot, but it turns out you weren't recording.

3 (1h 30m 15s):
We have. So I was like, Hey, well let me go to the front yard and see if I can make this shot over the house into the backyard. And I was like, I'm just going to go practice it and throw a few. And I ended up making it and we were not filming. And so we decided rule number one of trick shots are either filming or you're not filming

1 (1h 30m 34s):
Discussion was that trick shot. Daddy, daddy has to do his job.

3 (1h 30m 38s):
Dad's going to be out of a job soon. Sounds like I see you boys. Thanks for the question, John.

1 (1h 30m 46s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you're not yet a subscriber, please do subscribe to the podcast. Wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us, our email address is H ibt@npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter, we're at how I built this or mine is at guy Roz on Instagram or at how I built this NPR or mine is at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by <inaudible> blue. It was edited by new grant with research help from Claire Ashima. Our production staff includes Casey Herman, Rachel Faulkner James DeLuise, Julia Carney, Elaine coats, Farah safari, Liz Metzger, and Elise Ober and Harrison BJ Choi.

1 (1h 31m 30s):
Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Ross, and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.

0 (1h 31m 43s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, Samsung with the Samsung galaxy Z flip three 5g unfold, your screens, your best angle shoes. What she wants to capture, set it down, stand back and shoot 5g connection and availability may vary check with carrier.