wondery Plus (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How I Built This early and ad free Right. now join Wondery. Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts.

Indeed (10s):
What's better than finding quality candidates? Finding them fast. With Indeed. you can attract talent interview candidates and hire all in one place. As soon as you sponsor a post on Indeed, you get a short list of quality candidates whose CVS match your job description. Boom, just like that. So start hiring now with a 100 pound sponsored job credit for your job. Post at Indeed dot com slash how I built Offer good for a limited time claim your 100 pound credit now at Indeed dot com slash how I built. Just go to Indeed dot com slash how I built and support this show by saying you heard about it on this podcast. Indeed dot com slash how IBU terms and conditions apply Need to hire you need indeed.

NPR (58s):
Did You know you are physically adapting to all your swiping? scrolling and tapping We're changing our bodies and what they're able to do through our habits. NPR R's Body Electric. a special interactive series investigating how to fix the relationship between our tech and our health. Listen in the TED Radio hour feed wherever you get your podcasts.

4 (1m 25s):
I had a biweekly lunch with Fred You know one of the investors. Fred Wilson. Yeah. Fred Wilson I. thought I was just going to lunch to chat about Etsy and and went to their office and met him. and he told me that I was fired, but he didn't tell me why.

5 (1m 42s):
Hmm.

4 (1m 43s):
He just said, we have to do this And I remember saying like, you don't have to do this like you're choosing to do this. And. the whole process felt like it was something straight out of a a Kafka novel.

0 (2m 3s):
Welcome to How, I Built This A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I am Guy Raz and on the show today how Rob Kalin followed his passion for making things by creating Etsy, one of the biggest and best known online marketplaces in the world. Let me tell you a little bit about what Rob Kalin the founder of Etsy is up to these days, He left the company more than a decade ago and today he lives and works in a small town in upstate New. York in the Catskills.

0 (2m 43s):
Rob rebuilt his entire house from the ground up. He even built the furniture for it. It's actually beautiful stuff. Super spare and minimalist wooden tables and chairs. He started another business not too long ago making handcrafted high fidelity speakers. Don't bother looking for them at Best Buy. They are custom made and very expensive. Someone is actually selling a pair of them online for close to $50,000 soon. Rob plans to launch yet another business, a learning tool for kids that blends technology with old school hands-on toys. Now the point of all this is to explain if it's not already clear, is that Rob is very much a maker.

0 (3m 27s):
He is exactly the kind of person he had in mind when he created Etsy back in 2005 when the website went live. Rob and his co-founders wanted to create a marketplace for makers who could sell their stuff and be part of a community. Today, Etsy is one of the biggest online marketplaces in the world, close to 100 million active buyers and about two and a half billion dollars in annual revenue. But a lot of that growth, it actually happened after Rob left the company. Like many of the stories we've told here on the show, founders, even the most creative and passionate and visionary founders aren't always the best leaders or they might be great leaders at first, but not necessarily the right people to grow and scale a company.

0 (4m 16s):
And that's okay. There's nothing wrong with that, but this is exactly the challenge. Rob faced back in 2011, he didn't exactly leave Etsy to sail off into the sunset. Rob was fired suddenly. And with how Warning and for Rob, it was a huge personal blow. He was 31 and Etsy was his life's work for a few years. He brooded over what happened, but eventually Rob recovered and settled into a life as a maker. It didn't hurt that Etsy's growth and Rob's stake in the company also made him a wealthy man. So this is a story of triumph and loss, wild success and failure and everything in between.

0 (4m 60s):
But we'll get to all of that. What you need to know for now is that Rob. Kalin grew up in the eighties and nineties just outside Boston. His mom was a teacher and his dad was an architect. Rob describes himself as the kind of kid who had trouble sitting still, and as he got older, school got a lot harder to the point where he just decided to leave.

4 (5m 23s):
When I hit my junior year of high school, I just stopped going to school. I did not tell my parents I stopped going to school. I would leave in the morning and pretend like I was walking to school and I would go into Boston. I was really into photography. I was taking pictures, built a dark room in the basement. Eventually I got a job at a camera store near Boston and I would just walk by school and go to work and felt like that was a much better use of my time.

0 (5m 48s):
So you would just, you just wouldn't, I mean, and I mean, didn't that catch up with you? I mean, didn't eventually like your grades start to suffer and your parents start to sort of ask you what what's going on? Oh

4 (5m 58s):
Yeah. The ruse was up when the first report card got mailed home. And what's interesting was I didn't have bad grades. I had incompletes, which I think was the letter N, and my brothers and sisters report cards were on the fridge with their high marks. And I remember opening my own report card highlighting all of the ends and then putting it on the fridge and then just kind of going to my room and forgetting about it. And when my dad got back from work that day, my door got forcibly opened and it was You know. It was an interesting moment because there's this really strong equation between do well in school and then be successful after school.

4 (6m 44s):
And it definitely wasn't an equation that I was subscribing to even at that point. And so fixed my door and that was my introduction to carpentry. And then from that point on had a pretty strong sense of, okay, I need to figure out what I want to do. And You know, I think in some ways that's one of the most valuable skills I learned going through that public schooling system was just like how to carve out my own path or how to walk away from something and then turn towards who I am and what I wanna be doing.

0 (7m 16s):
So you did manage to graduate from high school I think and fair to say, kind of barely.

4 (7m 23s):
Yeah, so I stopped going to high school for my junior year and then at the end of that year, most of the advice being given to me was just go take your GED and then we'll figure out where you can go after that. And I was a hundred percent in my like You know rebellious phase. So when I graduated with a 1.4 GPA, I mean I was walking a very fine line to try and figure out You, know exactly how much effort I had to put in in order to graduate all the while still focusing on You know the photography. And I remember during the latter half of my junior year, my mom just dropped me off on the main street in town and said, don't come home until you have a job.

4 (8m 3s):
And so at age 16 I started working as a cashier at Marshall's. And again, like very valuable experience, not an easy place to work and making less than, I don't know, $8 an hour at that point. This would've been 1996 and working through the holiday season with You know I was probably the only person under the age of 50 working there.

0 (8m 27s):
I, I guess you spent a, a little bit of time at at art school in Boston after high school, but you, you eventually made your way down to New York.

4 (8m 37s):
Yeah, so when you're an art school, the idea of making it as an artist in Boston just doesn't even count. You have to get to New York City. And so I went to New York City and I remember interviewing the Strand Bookstore and getting that job for again, under $8 an hour and just living pretty close to the bone for my first, first year in New York City and started doing construction work at night. So trying to just get a little bit more money saved up so I could go back to school.

0 (9m 8s):
And what kind of construction work were you doing in New York?

4 (9m 12s):
I started out with just simple two by four framing of things and then ended up taking a full-time job at a construction company that was renovating a beautiful brownstone on the Upper East side. And I remember waking up at five o'clock in the morning and getting on a super packed subway and just doing a very physically demanding job during the day. They were in the kind of demolition phase of the renovation and you're the lowest rung on the ladder. I was essentially just carrying barrels full of plaster, laugh down four flights of stairs for most of the day, but for sure being able to watch the other people on the job and it's not even just the work that they're doing and the skills that are required, it's, it's who they are and how they show up and what their personality is and this kind of community and comradery that gets built on, on a job site full of people doing pretty difficult work.

4 (10m 7s):
And that really stuck with me even outside of that environment.

0 (10m 11s):
And, and I guess when, when you were in New York, you also kinda went back to school. Oh, well not kind of. You did, I think you, you, you took some classes at the new school and, and in like Greek and Latin and then you, you transferred to NYU, they the Gallatin School there. And you studied classics there as well, which, which seems like kind of a departure from what you were doing like with photography and, and the arts. So after you, you graduated, what kinds of things were you thinking about doing?

4 (10m 42s):
Yeah, so there was always this momentum pointing me towards the arts. And so You know I ended up graduating college midyear and I had a full year's worth of student loans and a friend called me and told me that his roommate moved out, he was living in Paris. And so I went and lived in Paris for, for a season and then coming back to New York City after that, as luck would have it You know, I ended up dropping a rent check off one day and my landlord was talking on the phone and reading a piece of paper and I jokingly handed him my rent check knowing that he'd have a free hand and me this little pantomime where he couldn't accept it unless he handed me what he was holding.

4 (11m 25s):
And so I took what he was holding and I read it and it was a proposal to make a website for this restaurant that he owned and called Acme Bar and Grill on Great Jones Street. And he said, covering up the mouthpiece of the receiver, can you beat that price? And I again jokingly just kind of said, I'll do it for half. And he goes, okay great. And he kind of shoo me out of his office and I leave his office holding this piece of paper that was someone else's proposal to make a website for this restaurant and was like, alright, I guess I'm doing this You know. I remember the proposal was for 1600 bucks and I was like, I guess I'm doing this for $800.

0 (12m 1s):
And did You know how to make a website?

4 (12m 4s):
Absolutely no idea. I didn't even know how when you type something into a web browser, it went and found the files. I thought maybe the files had to be on your computer somewhere and You know this whole concept of You know what I now have a pretty good understanding of wasn't present for me at all. But the challenge of You know how do you populate this website with content? So I had to go talk to people, I had to go take pictures. I remember learning Dreamweaver and put all of these things together that I didn't really know and made what I'm sure is by all means a completely mediocre website. But the process was fascinating to me and You know, I remember being in art school and I was learning anatomy and old master painting at that point, and I would go down to the computer lab once a day to check my email and I would see all these people hard at work staring at computers.

4 (12m 53s):
And I would think like, that is definitely not for me. But lo and behold, You know the piece that we think is not what we're going to be is what becomes the cornerstone of what we're going to build next.

0 (13m 7s):
So basically there was an opportunity to build a website and that's kind of just by default you kind of starts like figured out how to do this. So that kind of became a little business.

4 (13m 20s):
So I made that first website and because this is, I don't know, 2003 I got known as, oh, this guy can make a website. And the wife of one of my NYU professors, Jean Rela was running a website called Get Crafty. And she needed that website rebuilt

0 (13m 40s):
What was, what was Get Crafty,

4 (13m 42s):
Get Crafty was a community site, really like a forum with people sharing what they were working on and talking about life. And You know one of those beautiful early examples on the web of these kind of like watering holes where people just kind of gathered and talked. And there wasn't all of You know, there were no algorithm algorithms manipulating people's attention. There weren't even really any ads being served up on this. And so she was just like, Hey, I I need this rebuilt, I hear you make websites, can you help me?

0 (14m 17s):
And this was not a a commercial website, it was just like a community board for people to like, I guess post photos of what they were work like the crafts that they were working on.

4 (14m 27s):
Exactly. And there was a dynamic element to it that I didn't know because I was just doing the front end work and didn't know how to do any backend work. And at Gallatin there was someone known for writing code and I reached out to him. So Chris and I built Get Crafty I imagine in a couple months.

0 (14m 49s):
And and when you say Chris, you're talking about Chris McGuire, the the guy you met at at NYU who would go on to, to found Etsy with you?

4 (14m 56s):
Yeah, so the idea was let's start a little web dev shop and we'll go look for more clients and we'll do bigger work. And we were able to parlay building, get crafty into a couple other projects. You know a lot of times we didn't have any say on the design side. And after several months of that, I remember telling Chris, I just wanna build something that's our own that we can kind of steer the direction of. Hmm. And I set up a wood shop in my bedroom in Brooklyn and got to making furniture. And when I was looking to actually try and sell the furniture You know all of the storefronts where you could sell it are taking a large commission and aren't really looking for mediocre furniture made in a bedroom in Brooklyn.

0 (15m 39s):
Yeah. By the way, what kind of furniture were you making

4 (15m 42s):
At that point? Mainly desks. And I was specifically trying to make desks with a computer built into the desk. And I was also just studying the history of furniture and getting a sense of like different styles, different cultures and trying to think like what's like a Brooklyn vernacular for a furniture aesthetic. And the early two thousands were,

0 (16m 2s):
Where did your desks, I mean were they good? Were you good at woodworking

4 (16m 8s):
Compared to, so I've been woodworking more or less continuously for the past 20 years or so. So I mean, compared to what I can make now versus what I was making then no, I would not say they were very good. Right? You know, again, they were a very good attempt at expressing something and exploring something. And so running up against this challenge of, well, how do I sell it and not really having access to any storefronts and I was like, okay, You know I'll try and sell this online and You know there really isn't much infrastructure for doing this at this point in the world. You know this is 2004 and the only option for selling it online was eBay at that point and really had no interest in doing that.

4 (16m 55s):
So built a website to sell my own furniture. Right After doing that, one of my friends who also made furniture said, Hey, I need a website. Can you make me one so that I can sell my own furniture? And You know it wasn't a big leap. And

0 (17m 12s):
This is like 2000, this is like 2005.

4 (17m 14s):
Yeah, this is, yeah, this is probably early, early 2005. And You know I'd, I'd made Get Crafty and I'd seen the power of all of these people sharing a space together and communicating about what they were making. And then You know my friend is like, can you make me a website? And so I said, instead of making you your own standalone website, why don't I just kind of create a place where we can both sell what we're making? And I remember going to Jean who was running Get Crafty and saying, You know, could we add a tab on here for a marketplace so people could actually sell some of this stuff? And You know she's very thoughtful and decided against it because You know that Energy of Commerce really wasn't a part of the community at that point.

4 (18m 3s):
And so I asked for her blessing to kind of just go off and try and build this thing on my own. And lo and behold, that was the seed of what eventually became Etsy.

0 (18m 15s):
And and so when you, and, and by the way, the name that you picked for this website Etsy, where, where did that come from?

4 (18m 23s):
Yeah, the naming process. There's something quite ineffable about that where it has to feel right. And I was looking for something that could just have this emotional connotation of no baggage plus here's something new and ended up You know mishearing something in a Fellini film and looking up the.com for that. And by some very strange stroke of providence and luck, the four letter domain for Etsy dot com was available.

0 (18m 57s):
And you'd heard this, you thought that you had heard somebody say Etsy in a Fellini film.

4 (19m 3s):
Yeah, I think in Italian it means Andif or something like that at sea, et Sea. And so I was specifically plumbing the depths of my You know Latin and Greek language learning to try and come up with a word that Right, wouldn't mean one specific thing. And I mean, I remember my Greek professor companies would contact him all the time, usually pharmaceutical companies to help him create names for, for different kinds of You know drugs that they were creating. Right? And I also, I think even at that early stage had a sense that I wanted it to be a global brand. And so if it was just two English words stuck together, I felt like it would be more difficult.

4 (19m 43s):
So I wanted to create a kind of playful, nonsensical word that had no branding baggage attached to it.

0 (19m 50s):
So So you said you, you were thinking about a global brand. So I mean it sounds like from the get go you had, you had ambitions about this. It wasn't just, let me just build this thing and sell my my woodworking stuff. It was more like, let's see what we can do. Let's see how big we can make this.

4 (20m 5s):
Yeah, so, so there was this moment where I was sitting in a chair by my window in my apartment on South Elliot Place in Brooklyn, just starting to sketch out the causal chain of what Etsy could be if we started from these principles with these values in this community. And it just became so clear to me even at that moment how big it could be and where it needed to go. And there was absolutely the sense of inevitability pretty much from that moment on.

0 (20m 40s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment, how Rob and his partners launch Etsy move from an apartment into an office, which they soon discover is not an easy place to pull an all-nighter. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

Justworks (21m 6s):
Hey small business leaders on How, I, Built This, we hear all about how founders have built their companies from the ground up. Today's sponsor Justworks makes it easier for you to start, run and grow a business. Lemme tell you how Justworks can help your business. Whether you are looking for help with payroll benefits, HR tools or compliance, Justworks has you covered. And Justworks makes it simple to hire and manage remote employees across all 50 states. Its Cloud-based platform enables managers and employees alike to quickly and securely access benefits, payroll and other HR functionality from anywhere, anytime. Justworks also believes that it's your right as a customer to have a phenomenal service experience every time. Whether you have a question about setting up benefits, paychecks or anything else, their team of experts is standing by 24 7 ready to guide you. Learn more about Justworks and how they can help you get more done by visiting Justworks dot com slash podcast. That's Justworks dot com slash podcast.

Miro (22m 13s):
Hey, it's guy here and I've got a quick request for all of you. Name a public figure who's really inspired you. Just let me know On the How I Built This Community Miro board, go to Miro dot com slash built and add your thoughts. That's MIR o.com/built. It's that easy. Miro is actually sponsoring this episode and if you haven't heard of it, it's this incredible online workspace. Our team relies on Miro for a lot of our own brainstorms and processes and I think it's super useful to try out, if you wanna build something great with your team while you're leaving your answers, feel free to play around on Miros platform. You can pick from plenty of templates to get started, like a quick brainstorm or icebreaker or a flow chart. I cannot wait to hear from you on our Miro board maybe who knows, you'll inspire me to reach out to some of your suggestions to have 'em on the show. Go to Miro dot com slash built to leave your answers with sticky notes, comments and reactions Miro dot com slash b ui lt Miro dot com slash built.

0 (23m 22s):
One more thing before we get back to the show. every time I run into a How I Built This fan, the first thing they wanna do is tell me about their favorite episode, which is so awesome, So. now I wanna share your favorite episode with the millions of people who listen to this show episodes they might not have heard or might wanna hear again. So here's what I want you to do. Grab your smartphone and record a short memo short like less than 30 seconds and tell us your name, where you live and which episode is your favorite and why you loved it. So for example, I might say, Hey, it's Guy Raz here in San Francisco and my favorite episode of the show is the one about Hamdi, Lakay and Chobani because I learned so much about how to just push through and nothing seems to be working out and it gave me a whole new perspective on being resilient.

0 (24m 11s):
So that's it. Something like that. You know, and by the way, that's not my favorite episode. I love them all equally. Anyway, once you're done with the recording email or message it to us at HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com and we'll share your favorites right here in the ad breaks in future episodes. Thanks so much. You guys are the best. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 2005 and Rob, his friend Chris McGuire and another guy from college, hi I'm Chopik, decided to devote their full attention to building the website that will become Etsy.

4 (24m 56s):
That was the kind of seed getting planted of like, okay, let's build our own thing. I now had to go out and do some fundraising and obviously like I've never done fundraising before and I was actually finishing up building a bar in the apartment of what became Etsy's first investor Spencer a and along with his brother Judson. And when I was done building his bar, we were just kind of chatting and I was like, Hey You know, here's this other project I'm thinking of doing, do you have any interest in it? And he kind of looked at the bar and he looked back at me and he's like, if you can build that and he really liked the bar, then I'm sure you can do a good job building this.

4 (25m 38s):
And he's like, You know, come back tomorrow and I'll have a check for you. Hmm. And You know, I still remember that experience. He lived near NYU's Stern, like their business school and went back the next day, picked up a check as his first money in for $50,000 and walked by Stern and was like, You know I did it. Went to the bank. That seemed like a kingly sum of money to me. I was like, this is enough money to run Etsy for You know as long as we need to until it gets profitable.

0 (26m 10s):
Yeah, tell me, and and how much did you, did you need to raise or did you raise initially?

4 (26m 15s):
So at this point I didn't even know that startups were a thing and didn't have a sense of like, oh okay, there's a difference between an angel investor and institutional investors. So I went to my grandfather and I told him what my intentions were. He was the kind of You know businessman in the family and he worked at IBM back in the fifties and sixties and just said, Hey, like here's what I'm thinking of doing. So there was this sense of like, okay, he'll know what to do. And I remember telling him, alright, You know here's my idea for the business and here's the capital that I've raised, what do I do next? And he's like, well you need to spend this amount of time doing this amount of market research and you need to do this and you need to do that and I need to meet with Spencer.

4 (27m 4s):
So Spencer and now with his brother put in a bit more money and a third investor joined in Sean Meenan who's a restaurateur who had a restaurant across the street.

0 (27m 15s):
But at that time, help me understand what you needed the money for. I mean, presumably at the time it was just more expensive to build a website and to to You know to get servers. Is that, is that why you needed to raise the money? Mean today if you were gonna start a a business you would just, you and some friends would just go start building a website and you wouldn't need much money to do it. But in 2005 I guess you needed the money to actually to to buy the services that you needed to buy to make the the site.

4 (27m 45s):
Yeah. So in 2005 there's no infrastructure, there's no cloud computing and apart from hosted servers, which are very expensive and we're doing our best to build the website at that point, the software is by no means as efficient as it could be. And we're compensating for that by bulking up on the hardware side. And so all of the fundraising in those early days, 'cause we were not making much money in terms of what we were paying ourselves, was going towards hardware. And I remember just kind of like countless hours spent ordering from New Ag and then the hardware showing up in my apartment and You know these big pizza box one U Rack servers on the floor and assembling them and then driving over to Secaucus, New Jersey and installing them in the data center.

4 (28m 30s):
I remember Christmas Eve crimping, RJ 45 plugs onto patch cables setting all of this stuff up. So yeah, those were the good old days. We were just doing the best we could with what we had.

0 (28m 44s):
Alright, so so the three of you, Chris, you and Em are basically starting to build out this site and before you even made it You know, launched it and went live, how did, what was your business model gonna be like when you went to, to Spencer, the guy whose bar you built and who was your investor and he was like, okay, how are you gonna make money? What did you, how'd you explain it to him even before you went live?

4 (29m 11s):
The business model thankfully was very straightforward. Even from those early days, obviously we could point to a website that already existed like eBay and say, all right, there's gonna be a per item listing fee and then there'll be a sales fee associated You know when something sells. So that piece of it was more straightforward and it actually felt really nice because the other websites of the day, You know watching kind of Facebook's rise and then Twitter were based on ad revenue and You know we were kind of able to take this pseudo moral high ground and say like, we're not gonna be reliant upon third party advertisers that we'll have to kind of cater to. We're just gonna, like, the business model felt like it was baked into the, the website from the beginning.

0 (29m 56s):
And when people asked you, well how is this different from eBay? Your answer was, well this is not eBay at all. We're not selling everything, we're only selling handmade items, things that people make.

4 (30m 9s):
Yeah. So this sense of the overcoming inertia in the early stages of a marketplace is incredibly difficult. It's almost impossible, which is why You know there were so many eBay clones that never went anywhere. And You know you need to be able to tell a compelling story and you need to build up a community and the community needs to organically overcome that You know inertia in the early stages of the marketplace and start get the flywheel going. Hmm. And one interesting thing is you can't fake that, right? We knew that we had to be that community and from working with Gene on Get Crafty and really seeing what it looked like to participate in an online community in those days, You know had a good sense of that.

0 (31m 1s):
Alright. I guess from what I read, it took you guys just two and a half months to build this website and you launched it in June of two thousand5@c.com. And then what happened? like, you hit the Go button, You know You, it's, it's, it's out there, the world, but this is like still early days on the internet and what happened? Did anything happen? Did, did people start to find it immediately? Or, or not really?

4 (31m 31s):
Yeah, what happened was we hit the Go button and then went for dinner. And I think when we'd come back for dinner, You know we're checking the web traffic and a couple people had noticed it. We posted on Get Crafty and there was another You know kind of handmade community called Crafter. And we posted about it in those forums and people started noticing it. There's this beautiful DH Lawrence quote that has always resonated with me slow like growth. Hmm. And Etsy very much embodied that, and I think that's actually a really healthy thing because it ends up becoming something that has a lot of momentum behind it, and which means You know it's, it's got a lot of, of staying power.

4 (32m 20s):
And you see the inverse of this with companies like Groupon, which I think was You know fastest ever to go from zero to a billion dollars in revenue. So with Etsy it was this kind of long, slow organic growth that said You know in the first year of business we did a million in sales and that seemed like quite a lot. And this was all being driven by the more organic traffic of the early web You know, being written up on blogs like Boom Boom.

0 (32m 48s):
So basically people started to discover it from blogs and, and from other You know being pointed to it from other places. And what were the kinds of things that people started to, I mean, what kind of Yeah, what, what were people selling on it initially?

4 (33m 4s):
So the, the sellers were predominantly women and the categories were actually laid out by Leah from Crafter and You know, they span in some ways all of the obvious things that you would expect. You know everything from houseware and accessories to clothing to stuffed animals. There was AB two B side from the beginning where there was a supplies category and we relaxed or basically let go of our requirement that something had to be handmade if it was considered a supply. And there was also a vintage category. And a lot of people in the community, they would make things but they would also buy from other people who make things.

4 (33m 44s):
Yeah. But,

0 (33m 45s):
But again, I mean o other sites at the time were, were doing that kind of thing too. So how did you distinguish yourself from, from like, from like eBay or, or other places that sold the same types of things?

4 (33m 57s):
Yeah, so when Chris and I and I were building Etsy, I knew that we needed to have something in our visual identity that really proclaimed that. Like we were different, we weren't eBay. And there was a digital artist who I had an enormous amount of admiration for named Jared Tarbell. And he was doing these kind of generative artworks where pixels would imitate life. And I remember while we were building Etsy, just emailing him and saying like, Hey, we're building this. I'd love for you to create some visualization tools for the items that get listed in the marketplace, has new ways to discover what's for sale and there'll be all of these ways that we can shop online that you just could never do offline, like arranging everything by color, or that you could zoom through a three-dimensional helix showing you all of the items that were listed in a particular category through time.

4 (34m 49s):
Hmm. The, the, the pitch to Jared was this will be a kind of laboratory where we'll give you a really interesting set of data and you can kind of work your magic on it. And while we were building Etsy, Jared was a little bit on the fence, You know before any items were listed. And as soon as some items were listed, he was like, alright, I'm in. Hmm.

0 (35m 10s):
And, and, and Jared would, would go on to become like your fourth founder. So it it, it would be you and Chris Heim and Jared and he, I think he really contributed to the early look and and feel of the site, right?

4 (35m 25s):
Yeah. So even just the first things that he was creating when I was going to the investors and when people would talk about Etsy, they would say, oh, that's the website where you can shop by color. And Jared's work played a big role in that. So understanding, again, it all comes back to that storytelling piece of being able to wrap it up in a big flag that you can wave and say like, look, this isn't what you think it is. This isn't the ordinary stuff, this is something special. And You know, there was a bit of being more philosophical about it and saying, why would we just try to reprise offline shopping experiences online? This is a new medium, so you shouldn't just You know, take a newspaper, put it online and make it a digital newspaper.

4 (36m 8s):
We're not just trying to take an offline marketplace and make it You know and put it online. We should be creating these genuinely new ways to shop.

0 (36m 16s):
I guess like pretty soon after you, you launched it, you started to think about, I mean obviously this is gonna take more money and if, if if, if it was gonna become something bigger. And I guess you got in touch with the founders of Flickr, Katerina Fake and Stewart Butterfield who were, who were married at the time were a couple. And you wrote to them, 'cause I guess you, you liked Flickr and you sort of asked for their advice. What, tell me, tell me the story.

4 (36m 45s):
Yeah, so again, early days of the web and they were absolute royalty. I mean, Flickr was one of the first websites to really, like even the design language really take a stand and say like, here's what we're about. And so I remember just writing to them pretty simple You know, two sentence email just saying, Hey You know I really admire what you made. Here's something that we built over here and any advice, and I forget who replied first, but they were basically like, yeah, let's meet up. And I was like, well I'm not, I'm not in California. And there really wasn't a New York Tech scene back then anyways.

4 (37m 26s):
And, and so pretty early on in the company we were like, well, let's go out to California and and and see if maybe we wanna relocate there.

0 (37m 36s):
So so you went out there to meet Meet Kettering and certain Stewart obviously of course went on and found Slack who was on, on, on this show many years ago. Yeah. You went out there to meet them and what, what happened?

4 (37m 52s):
Yeah, so I still remember the first time meeting them, they definitely kind of took us under their wing mainly on like product design and fundraising were the two big pieces. You know this was probably two years into building Etsy, maybe not quite that far in, and Katerina was the one who kind of You know she could at that point just kind of pick up the phone, make one call and get a meeting with different investors. Those meetings were kind of all over the place. That was definitely my introduction to the world of, of venture capital. And a lot of those meetings, I just remember leaving them being like, I don't understand how that person would wanna invest in this or I wouldn't want their money investing in this.

4 (38m 39s):
So she did a little bit of filtering upfront and then kind of worked with me to figure out who we wanted to raise money from in the end.

0 (38m 50s):
And, and you were, I mean, I guess the attraction at, at, at that point was that you were, you had like, people were set up accounts and they had storefronts and the more accounts they set up, the more essentially users you had. And, and so, and you mentioned that in year one they sold like a million dollars worth of things on Etsy, right? So, so the, the, the artist sold about a million dollars worth of products. Is that, is that right? Is that your, your memory?

4 (39m 20s):
Yeah, so year one, and again this is the kind of inertial momentum getting built up in the very beginning of a marketplace, the like classic chicken and egg problem. Year one did a million dollars in sales, which looking back on it now is far more than I remembered. And I am pretty proud of that. I think that's one of the hardest pieces in a marketplace is to just like get the flywheel going

0 (39m 45s):
And and a million, I mean a million dollars in, in, in sales is great, but you guys only got three 4% of that. So your revenue is still fairly small, but obviously you were showing a trajectory of growth, of significant growth.

4 (40m 2s):
Yeah. So at that stage, any investor is more concerned about You know total addressable market and how big is this opportunity? Not You know. There's that other piece of how much we'd already captured. And when you're talking with these institutional investors, You know this was in some ways the best piece of business advice I ever got from Sean. It's a little bit crass in his Brooklyn way, but he's like, you're the drug dealer, they're the drug addict where he's like, you have what they want and maybe you'll let them invest. And obviously Right. That's very haughty and got a lot of swagger to it, but it was definitely helpful to feel like there was some kind of safety net there in the beginning.

0 (40m 48s):
So, alright, so you, I guess on, on a trip or maybe this first trip to San Francisco, but I'm going back to that trip when you, when you met with Katerina and Stewart, they introduced you to some potential investors and 'cause the idea was you, you wanted to raise, I guess from what I read, you wanted to raise about a quarter of a million dollars at that point.

4 (41m 10s):
Yeah. So that was the beginning of this process that has been a kind of long and storied journey and we ended up raising, yeah, very modest. I think this would've been called our series B, just to show how much times have changed. We probably raised like 250 grand on a $1.5 million valuation, something in there. And from that point on, most of the fundraising was primarily driven by needing to buy hardware and then just headcount, You know we weren't spending any money on advertising or anything like that.

0 (41m 48s):
So when you, I mean when, when you guys were really You know now in the thick of it, You know you launched in, in the middle of 2005 and you're growing organically. How, I mean, tell me a little bit about what, what do you remember about just the work environment? Did, first of all, did you guys, initially you were doing this out of your apartment, but at what point did you actually get like an office to work to work out of together?

4 (42m 17s):
Yeah, so for the first two years we didn't have an office. And I remember just traveling around the world, bumming around Europe, and when we came back from traveling in You know, late 2006, the community was growing enough that we needed to hire more people to support it. And we're like, well, let's get a small office. And so we started looking and ended up finding a place near the, the Brooklyn Bridge and we were just gonna get part of this floor and we ended up renting the whole floor. And I was literally, for a period of time living there and it was You know an office building, so they didn't heat it outside of nine to five.

4 (43m 2s):
And that first winter, I remember You know sleeping on a little blowup camping pad, and I'm freezing and I'm working blissfully You know 18 hours a day on, on this project. And then You know the rest of the people would would come in in the morning.

0 (43m 20s):
And, and I I I may have missed this. So let me, let me ask about this. You were traveling in the first, a lot in the first year of Etsy's launch. Why, where were you going? What were you doing?

4 (43m 34s):
So part of it was to just kind of go visit all of these different craft fairs and I would walk around the craft fair handing out these little postcards that said what Etsy was and a hundred percent of the people had never heard of it and didn't know how to pronounce it. And so part of it was just kind of traveling to start connecting with the community, but just this sense of like, oh, our community is online, we're spanning different time zones and we can kind of check in and work from wherever we want. I guess that was a glorious glimpse of remote work way back in like 2006.

0 (44m 9s):
How were you, I mean, You know when you would go to craft fairs outside the us how were you accommodating those sellers? I mean, were you able to, 'cause today it's easier obviously to You know it's just the infrastructure there on a Shopify or whatever you want to use. But how did you have like somebody in, I don't know, Germany selling pottery sell to somebody in the US and then also accept dollars and how, how did, how did you guys make that happen? Was that, I mean, it must have been really hard.

4 (44m 42s):
So as much as we disdained eBay, we were definitely standing on their shoulders in a couple different ways. And one of them was our exclusive method of payment was PayPal. And so if PayPal worked in that location, then we were able to just ride those rails. Another piece of it, which I think could have ended up making things a lot more complicated but didn't, was that Pier Omidyar decided not to patent all of the basic mechanisms of e-commerce at that point. And so You know we were able to learn a lot from how eBay did things and make ample use of one of their services. And so Etsy was definitely kind of built on the shoulders of, of eBay Hmm.

4 (45m 23s):
In that way.

0 (45m 24s):
And PayPal was owned by by eBay by that point.

4 (45m 27s):
Yeah, exactly.

0 (45m 29s):
And I'm, I'm also curious in those early days in that sort of first year and a half and it was really a, presumably even once you opened Etsy Labs, it was still a pretty, probably a pretty small team. How were you dealing with like I, when things went wrong, right? Because I have to assume that You know there were probably You know more than, than a few examples of people getting things they didn't like or You know not being happy with the, the product or not feeling like they get their, their money's worth and they would complain to you guys about it. How did you guys handle that?

4 (46m 4s):
Yeah, so lots of different ways things can go wrong, especially when you're building a marketplace like this. I was just rereading a lot of our early blog posts and most of the ways things were going wrong was the website itself wasn't functioning. And because the scale and the growth of the marketplace was a gentle enough slope, we could learn the hardest lessons when the stakes were lower. And I really like that kind of crawl, walk, run approach to building a business in general. On the seller's side, again, we were able to leverage PayPal. PayPal had different kinds of dispute resolution procedures. And so I'm not proud that we did this, but we would basically just kind of kick people to PayPal's customer support and say, look, You know if you wanna refund, you have to take it up with them.

4 (46m 55s):
And that insulated us from a certain amount of that. But that said, if we became a place where it was just, oh, this is scammers and shoddy goods, then it would've really hurt the brand again. I think the, the slow like growth approach to this helped us there because we didn't really have to deal with high levels of fraud until You know significantly later.

0 (47m 22s):
Yeah, this isn't when the internet was still innocent.

4 (47m 25s):
I know, I miss those days or more. Yeah, yeah,

0 (47m 28s):
Yeah. 'cause you, because it probably was really earnest community of, of makers, right? And so you probably didn't have to worry too much about people just being jerks because that would come later. And, and so, and in terms of like curating, I mean did, did you guys have any standards for what was allowed? Like You know, did you have rules about what you could and could not sell? Obviously it had to be initially I think it had to be handmade. But I mean, could people sell You know, You know for example, like handmade glass tubes to smoke pot out of You know. Did you have any rules?

4 (48m 8s):
So in the beginning it was more, here's our list of categories and if it doesn't fit into one of these categories, it shouldn't be on the site. And obviously you can get a bit creative with that. My general view on that stuff was again, just like celebrate the diversity of it. One of the funny jokes that we had was we defined the vintage category as something more than 20 years old. And when people were challenging what that was, and we were trying to clarify the terms of service, there were plenty of VHS like players that were 20 years old. And so it's like under our rules you could list AVHS player on Etsy and it just felt so wrong. Like someone listed a Ferrari on Etsy once and I was just like, and not even in the vintage category, it's like, well what's interesting is You know you.

4 (48m 55s):
It's like the marketplace itself develops this kind of immune system. And so when they list that hundreds of people flag it, it's just this beautiful expression of, of humanity in all of our foibles and imperfections. And I think ultimately we tend to love things for their imperfections.

0 (49m 13s):
I know that that pretty You know early in the early days some of your co-founders left. But how did you guys, I mean how did just the sort of interpersonal relationships You know how, how did you guys get along? 'cause it's stressful, right? Building something together, especially when there you start to get investors behind you. How, how was the relationship?

4 (49m 38s):
Yeah, in the beginning there was just this sense of incredible sense of comradery and we're all in this together. It doesn't mean to say there wasn't plenty of arguing, there were just so many things we were doing that it was the first time everyone at the company had done it and we would be making these first timer mistakes. And Jared was recently sharing a story with me where when we were in Noe Valley and walking to Get lunch, one of the other guys was just berating me about something and Jared thought he was witnessing the dissolution of the company. And after lunch I was like, no, that's just normal.

0 (50m 13s):
When we come back in just a moment, Rob confronts a new normal that he did not see coming. He gets fired. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This.

KiwiCo (50m 33s):
It is so important to give children gifts that inspire them to learn more about topics they love. And that's why I love KiwiCo with super fun science, technology and art projects, KiwiCo is perfect for inspiring creative confidence and a lifelong love of learning. I've used KiwiCo with my kids for many, many years now and it's been amazing to see how they've built these really sophisticated engineering projects that have been designed specifically for their age ranges. KiwiCo projects are designed by a team of educators, makers, engineers, and rocket scientists who brainstorm hundreds of ideas to create the most exciting, age appropriate and educational projects. And the projects are tested and approved by kids. No crate leaves without their thumbs up. Discover hands-on fun with KiwiCo. Get your first month free on any crate line at KiwiCo dot com slash built. That's your first month free at KIW ico.com/built.

ZipRecruiter (51m 41s):
Whether you are a small business owner growing your team or an HR director hiring hundreds of people across the nation, you have one of the toughest jobs there is. But what if I were to tell you that there's something that can make your whole hiring process faster and easier? It's ZipRecruiter and Right now. You can try it for free at ZipRecruiter dot com slash built. Instead of you doing all the hiring work, ZipRecruiter works for you. Once you post your job on ZipRecruiter, it sends it to more than 100 job sites so you can reach more of the right people. It's powerful technology scans thousands of resumes to identify people whose skills and experience match your job hiring heroes. Let ZipRecruiter help make your job easier. Four out of five employers who post on ZipRecruiter get a quality candidate within the first day. See for yourself. Go to this exclusive web address to try ZipRecruiter for free. ZipRecruiter dot com slash built. Again, that's ZipRecruiter dot com slash built ZipRecruiter the smartest way to hire.

0 (52m 55s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 2008 and Rob is starting to realize that as the CEO of Etsy, he's kind of in over his head. So he eventually decides he needs to bring on someone else to help grow and focus the business.

4 (53m 13s):
You know, again, I'm at this point 28 and I don't know how to interview someone for this level of job. And so I started interviewing someone with more experience for ACOO role and ended up hiring Maria Thomas from from NPR. Hmm. That was a really interesting cross current in this office full of You know younger folks and who are just kind of very earnestly going all in and are very much part of the community that they're serving. And then Maria entered and just brought with her a very different culture.

4 (53m 57s):
You know, I still remember the first all hands meeting we had where I introduced her in her opening speech. She kind of said, the most important thing for us to do is execute, execute, execute. And I could just kind of see the air go out of the room. Like that's such a strange word to focus on. And I tried to kind of make it into a joke and she had her way of doing it and I wasn't about to assume that like, oh, this is wrong for Etsy. and so watching her work and giving her the space she needed to run operations, I definitely learned a lot. And it reached a point where I was like, look, You know the way that you're doing this is so different from the way I'm doing it.

4 (54m 39s):
I think you should just do it. So you should be the, the CEO. And looking back on it, it's quite easy to see like You know that culture piece was too important to be a mismatch at that phase of Etsy's growth. And so she ended up, yeah, not being the right fit in that role. But I initially transitioned to being Chief Creative officer and then just a board member. Right?

0 (55m 3s):
Yeah. I I should mention, I I I, I haven't seen Maria Thomas in at least a decade, but I I I knew her a little bit when, when both of us worked at, at National Public Radio. She had been the head of digital media there. And, and so she came on initially as COO and then, and then essentially became CEO. But you, you said that it wasn't the right fit. What, why, why, I mean, you wanted a professional to come in and You know, make this company stronger. So You know, first of all, what was it about her? I mean, clearly you, you, you had felt that she was the right fit for, for an operational role. So you must have liked her. You must have thought that You know that, that you must have gotten along.

4 (55m 43s):
Yeah, we got along. I I definitely enjoyed the early discussions. The, the culture piece becomes evident in a couple key ways. And remember that Etsy's Commerce is very much kind of standing on the shoulders of the community side of Etsy. and so that community, especially the community of sellers, she just wasn't a part of that. And at that particular point, there were just too many consequences that fell out of that, where she didn't see Etsy for what it was and what it needed to be.

0 (56m 23s):
I, I mean, in You know, from what I understand and what I've, what I've read about the company, I mean, during that period, I mean it was a, it was a potentially tough period 'cause this was the recession of a financial crisis. But remarkably Etsy actually really benefited from people not going to traditional retailers and looking at Etsy for maybe ways to save money. So actually it turned out to be a pretty good time from a financial perspective and a growth perspective for Etsy.

4 (56m 51s):
Yeah, I always did my best to insulate the majority of the company from any kind of financial concerns, even in the early days working with the engineers, they would tell me how much money we needed for hardware and I would go out and raise the money. So there really wasn't much of any financial pressure on the business, building it through the, the recession, and it was approaching profitability at this point. Again, You know we're a marketplace. This business model's kind of baked into how we run. And, and this interesting shift happened probably starting with Maria, where this sense that like, who's your primary customer? And for me, Etsy's primary customer was always the sellers because they were the ones that we were generating You know, collecting our revenue from.

4 (57m 34s):
And the buyers were our sellers primary customer. And so our role as a company was to support our sellers as best we could. And you look at a marketplace like I would say Etsy Now or eBay, and the primary customer is clearly the buyer where the whole experience is optimized on the buying side to the point where You know I pay a listing fee and here's my item, but the website is going to place other items on that page that are similar because it's primary You know it's catering to the buyer now it's not really there to support the seller.

0 (58m 8s):
And that really started under Maria, that what she was like, we need to focus on the end buyer, the person going to the website.

4 (58m 15s):
Yeah. I think that shift started happening then. And is that wrong? I don't think so.

0 (58m 23s):
No. I mean, I, I I, it sounds like there was a, there the tension came from, I mean, you're the, you were the founder and then you brought in a professional COO who becomes ACEO, but you're still there. and in some ways, I think you would even admit this, it almost never works out because when A-A-C-E-O is brought in and the founder still has power, it creates a lot of conflict. I mean, usually it works out when the founder leaves and a new CEO is brought in. But when they're both there, because the people in the company don't know who to go to, I'm sure half the people, maybe lots of people in the company were going to you. And they were like, Hey, I'm not really happy with this decision that our new CEO is taking.

0 (59m 6s):
And and you were like, yeah, well, let me see what I can do. I mean, does that, is that fair? Was that happening?

4 (59m 12s):
I'd like to think that wasn't happening. Even just at the most practical level, I didn't stay in the CCO role for very long. I completely removed myself from the day-to-Day operations of the company. And I didn't wanna do anything that was gonna underpin the authority of this person that I just suggested to run the company. I cared deeply about the company more than anything else.

0 (59m 39s):
So she eventually steps down and you are brought back in to become CEO in 2010. And did you feel like You know, I mean, oftentimes You know that that could have been a great opportunity for, you had two years to watch a professional run the company and to learn things and maybe gain more experience and come back in with a sort of a renewed vigor. And so when you came back in, in 2010, You know back to running the company, did you feel like, okay, I got this?

4 (1h 0m 14s):
Yeah, so that was a really interesting time for me because I'd spent a year being immersed on the community side of Etsy again and just making things. And when I was asked to return, I was like, if I go back and do this, it needs to be in a much more mindful manner, not this kind of ad hoc, let's just do my best and everything's going a hundred miles an hour. So I remember really thinking about that. And then when I rejoined, Etsy was in a new office, You know they totally moved offices. The office was concrete floor in fluorescent lights, and I was just like, oh man, that didn't feel right.

4 (1h 0m 57s):
So we put a wood floor in and put You know warmer bulbs in the fluorescent lights. It sounds so trivial saying it now, but like the office didn't reflect the ethos of the company. And then she'd hired a lot of senior people where I think taste is one of the most ineffable things about the human condition. Like what gives someone some kind of taste and not another. And so You know her, whatever was guiding her hires for people to run things like marketing and customer support or anywhere else just also didn't fit. So rejoining was a bit of kind of getting it back on the rails and that part felt good.

4 (1h 1m 39s):
So I wanted something to kind of show when I was returning that we're gonna make some changes. So I remember like throwing a coffee mug up into the air and this look on everyone's face when it's just in the air before it drops. Like that look of expectation and excitement and then You know, then it smashed. But I was like, that feeling is what we need to have here as we're, as we're building Etsy. Hmm.

0 (1h 2m 5s):
You were basically 30 years old when you were brought back and You know, but, but you had start, I mean, You know you started the company five years earlier. See there was, it was a lot of, even in the trenches with a lot of people, and I, I imagine it was probably people were excited, but there were also, I mean, and I'm sure you remember this well, while you were CEO, there was an article that came out and I think in Inca Magazine is critical and it was a, you had some quotes in there that were a little bit, shall I say, unfortunate you, you said You know I speak to people in the business world and technology world, but I don't admire them.

0 (1h 2m 46s):
You were quoted saying You know, I think trying to maximize shareholder value is ridiculous. Even if you did believe those things and felt that way, sometimes you kind of You know, wanna not say that?

4 (1h 2m 60s):
Oh, yeah. Profile. And you need to learn the lesson to not say those things. So at that point, yeah, I didn't, I was used to, well, first right. Taken out of context and contextualizing those things with what comes before or after them helps make more sense for them. Sure. That's one piece. Another for sure. Still learning. I didn't even know that if a reporter was recording you, they don't have to run any of the quotes by you before publishing them. And yeah, that was very humbling. Like lots of lessons to be learned from that experience.

0 (1h 3m 34s):
I am, I don't, I, I hope this is not like piling on. I'm not, I'm, but this is important because we're talking about You know now more than 10 years ago, but, and what you've learned from it and, and obviously how you've grown, we'll, we will get to today, but You know one of the things in the article, and again, I'm sure there are people who could say You know things about anybody, anybody listening me, anybody. But somebody in the article said working at Etsy was like being in an abusive relationship. In that same article, do you, do you, you were kind of described as being erratic and You know you'd have a You know 20, 30 ideas a day and and You know Change course and you weren't a great manager.

0 (1h 4m 18s):
Do, do you think that, I'm sure some of it, maybe a lot of it was unfair, but was there some of it that was accurate?

4 (1h 4m 25s):
Oh, I'm sure. And no worry, no worry about piling stuff on. I am amazingly self-critical. I can't walk by a stick without picking it up and finding some way to hit myself with it. So these were things where like what's your, let's see. I think everyone's frame of reference for these things is, is different. And I was trying to get a better sense of You know how to manage and all of these things. I don't ever remember once yelling, I just don't raise my voice at all. And then You know, you read these biographies of Jeff Bezos or Steve Jobs and they're screaming at people that they're more odds in front of the whole company and, and all of this stuff.

4 (1h 5m 8s):
And I'm just like, is that what being a a like You know in an abusive relationship looks like? Or is it something a lot quieter and a lot softer and You know? One of the things I did that I remember bothered a lot of people was we were You know. We had these conference rooms with lots of glass on them so you can see in, and there were these meetings where it very clearly to me at least You know, half the people in the meeting were just like, the shipment over half an hour ago. And like it's just dragging on. And so I was working late one night, I don't know, probably eight or 9:00 PM some people in customer support are still there. And I was like, let's just remove the chairs from the meeting room because if it's not worth standing up for, you shouldn't be having meeting.

4 (1h 5m 53s):
Yeah. You know to me, this is just something that's a bit cheeky and You know, lo and behold, like the next day the engineers are doing some kind of like long triage of something that happened and there's no chairs in the room and You know eventually they just end up bringing the chairs back in. And so I'm sure that, and I, I doubt I even understand all of the different ways that I You know to frame it positively needed to improve. I did really feel like I was on the path to learning that. And You know, again, I'd stepped aside once I was not holding onto that position with tight hands.

4 (1h 6m 33s):
Like I was coming back to it and saying like, let me do a better job here. So I gotten ACEO coach and eventually hired another COO Adam free again. In the back of my mind there was a piece of me that's just like, the culture needs to change and that's the direction that it needs to go in.

0 (1h 6m 54s):
So. Alright, so you're You know you're working on your leadership and this article comes out, which obviously wasn't a great article, an Inc and I guess a couple months later you, you are fired by by Etsy Sport and this, this came as a real shock to you. You, you did not see it coming at all. Tell me about, about that. I mean is is that the case? Did you not have any inkling or indication that that was on the horizon?

4 (1h 7m 27s):
Yeah, absolutely no idea that it was even within the realm of possibility that would happen. And again, this is one of those situations where looking back it's much easier to see things. Hmm. So Adam had joined as COO and pretty early on in that relationship, You know, we started trying to figure out what that dynamic was and not just amongst ourselves, You know going to a kind of executive coach working stuff out. And I think we both felt that there was a bit of that culture mismatch and I definitely didn't support him the way that I should have You know.

4 (1h 8m 13s):
I remember this meeting where we had to reclassify all of the customer support workers from being like full-time salaried to having to keep track of their hours and it's ostensibly for labor laws to protect them, but it also created this whole like second Class of worker inside the company and it sucked like having to do that. But Adam was kind of leading that, that process. And I remember this meeting where it was being communicated and I was standing in the audience and he was standing up front with the head of HR and they were trying to pitch it to the customer support team. They were dressing it up as this like, this is an improvement and You know just not Etsy's culture.

4 (1h 8m 59s):
And I was standing in the audience and I had the same reaction to it that they did and I obviously like hadn't been involved enough in preparing what the presentation should have been, all of that stuff. And You know, I remember talking about that with Adam afterwards and I was like, look, the way to do that is like slide one says this sucks and slide two says this really sucks, we don't wanna do it. And he just like talked to him like, don't wrap it up like that. And I'm not even saying my way is like quote the right way to do it. It's just like knowing the people in the room. So that was one piece was like my relationship with with Adam wasn't great. The investors were checking in with him. Mm. And I had a biweekly lunch with Fred You know one of the investors.

4 (1h 9m 44s):
Fred Wilson? Yeah, Fred Wilson. I thought I was just going to lunch to chat about Etsy and, and went to their office and met him and he told me that I was fired, but he didn't tell me why and He just said, we have to do this And I remember saying like, you don't have to do this. Like you're choosing to do this. And the whole process felt like it was something straight out of a a Kafka novel.

0 (1h 10m 12s):
Yeah.

4 (1h 10m 13s):
And I'd already stepped aside once. So I mean I remember when Fred was like, you need to go. And the strangest part of that experience to me was You know. He's like, do you want to do you wanna resign? And I'm like, what would that look like? And he said, well you would stand in front of the company and You know, tell everyone that you've decided to leave. And I'm just like, who would believe that?

0 (1h 10m 33s):
But Rob, I mean at the time didn't anyone sit you down and clearly explain to you why you were being fired? I mean, I mean this was 12 years ago now, right? And I don't, I don't know, maybe, maybe you've had a chance to get more insight into it by now, but, but looking back, did you have any idea? Were you pretty much in the dark?

4 (1h 10m 55s):
So You know, I've tried to reverse engineer why I was fired so suddenly and hasn't been easy. But I did reach out to one of the investors in advance of this interview to try and learn more about what actually happened. And he did shine a little bit of light on the situation and You know the feedback that he gave me. Sometimes I was too involved, sometimes I wasn't involved enough and sometimes I was a bit unkind and You know. Fair enough. I would've greatly appreciated that kind of feedback at the time. Yeah.

0 (1h 11m 33s):
So you were, you were out and I imagine, and it obviously came as a shock to you and I imagine it was also just emotionally very challenging 'cause it's it's like, it's like a death.

4 (1h 11m 46s):
Yeah, I was wrecked for quite a while. I mean, I'd obviously like built up a lot of my sense of self-worth around. Like here's what I do, my identity wrapped up in it. My friends where I lived, I mean I remember this moment, You know before this happened where I was living in Red Hook Brooklyn and I would ride my bike everywhere. Then I'm just riding to, to work and it's foggy and Manhattan's to my left and I'm just looking at Manhattan and biking to work and You know my fiance was at home and I was like, wow, I, I figured it out. You know I made it and this like feeling of accomplishment and in stability and then it's just like, nope.

4 (1h 12m 32s):
You know everything we think is is solid can just kind of crumble in that sense. And yeah, it makes it hard, but I've also come to peace with it. The anger's gone. It's just sadness that lingers.

0 (1h 12m 47s):
You left presumably still with a significant amount of equity in Etsy. Right? So you had that, I have to imagine. Yeah. And which You know isn't obviously doesn't entirely mitigate the, the pain, but certainly helps a little bit. And did you feel like just from your own, I don't know, for, for your own mental health, did you feel like you just, there has to be a cut, a clean break and you just You know it was like a breakup with a, a partner where you just stopped any kind of communication or following it or just you just tried to put it out of your life in, in any way possible?

4 (1h 13m 28s):
Yeah. So those two different things are connected that you said. So You know I had some equity, I didn't have a huge amount You know and the company went public. I didn't even make the threshold of shareholders with over 5% that you have to disclose. So You know I had some equity in the company, I couldn't do anything with the equity You know I couldn't sell shares. And then once NC went public, my shares were locked up for a year anyways while the share price was falling. And I was trying to communicate with people at the company to kind of arrange some kind of secondary sale. So that was interesting. Like You know now I have to talk with Fred about trying to sell some of my shares. And You know Fred was very professional about all of that.

4 (1h 14m 10s):
Yeah, I think that has to do with my own personal coping mechanisms too. Like compartmentalization was there a bit. I, geographical compartmentalization really helps. So just getting out of Brooklyn was really helpful.

0 (1h 14m 23s):
You, when you moved up to upstate New York in the Catskills, you got really involved in the community. Like, and, and I, I mean I know for example, like you helped build a preschool like you, I guess probably was a, to solve a problem you had, which was you had children and you wanted a good preschool.

4 (1h 14m 40s):
Yeah. So what was interesting was that whole piece of my identity that was built around, I work at a tech company that has no cachet and Catskill New York and that was great and worked with a, a group of moms to start a preschool and then eventually start the Catskill Montessori school, which has over a hundred families at it. I've also been doing some work in the local, with the local public school and yeah, reconnecting with this sense of place and sense of purpose outside of, I live in a big city and I'm working at a tech startup.

0 (1h 15m 17s):
So I guess you, in, in our conversations before this interview, you mentioned that you're working on something at the intersection of technology and humanity. You mentioned it's still a secret. Is it still a secret? Is, can you talk about this? 'cause it sounds like this is your really, your biggest endeavor, You know in a, in a big way since you left Etsy.

4 (1h 15m 40s):
Yeah. This is what I hope one day to come back on this podcast and talk about and show all of the lessons that I've learned. Yeah, the new endeavor. I'm working with a pair of absolutely brilliant engineers. One of them a close friend from, from Etsy, and it's at the intersection of early childhood development and in technology, the general thinking is, there's this famous story where this journalist asked the Wright brothers, why did you succeed in building the world's first flying machine when thousands of people have been trying why you, there's nothing special about you guys. And they think for a minute and they say, well no, there is something quite special about us as children.

4 (1h 16m 24s):
We had access to our father's workshop and we encountered these tools and if we didn't have that as experience as children, we wouldn't have gone on to do what we did, which is what led us here. And You know there's this long history of making beautiful hardware for children in order to kind of calibrate their senses and learn about the world around them. You have frails gifts and Montessori sensorial materials, but no one's updated that hardware. So I'm trying to, I think there's a whole continent of computing in between the blocks that children play with and the way technology currently lands in their lap, which is just phones and tablets and reduces them to poking at pictures under glass.

4 (1h 17m 7s):
So we're exploring this continent of computing and don't have anything specific to share yet. We're starting to work with the school up the road now, but hopefully you'll be hearing about that shortly.

0 (1h 17m 22s):
Going back to the Wright Brothers thing, there was no reason why You know why, why those guys were the ones to make it except for what they said, right? They started out playing around in their dad's tool shed there a similar, there's no reason why Etsy was gonna make it. I mean it, there, there probably were 10,000 reasons why it should have failed or could have failed because it just, it was too early and the, the, the business model wouldn't have worked. But today it's a powerhouse. I mean, it is a You know it is a publicly traded company with a You know, You know its market cap is at $8 billion as we speak today. And You know you were raising it at one, one and a half million dollars.

0 (1h 18m 5s):
So the, you're certainly, your investors did work very well, You know certainly your early investors did extremely well. I mean, it's, it's a powerhouse, I don't know, what do you, what do you make of it when you look at it today?

4 (1h 18m 18s):
Yeah, there's this kind of error of inevitability to it with the 10,000 ways it could have gone wrong. It almost seems like it's the inversion of that where we did 10,000 things that could have pushed it off the rails and it didn't go off the rails. You know, including You know management stuff and my own shenanigans. So how did it persist? And I think ultimately the, the heroes of all of that are, are the sellers and that You know in many ways that's who we should, we should all tip our hats to. So here's this publicly traded company and the people who are running it, I'm guessing are not part of that community of sellers that they're serving.

4 (1h 19m 2s):
And I would also venture to guess that You know Etsy's primary customer. Right now isn't the sellers, it's, it's the buyers. And so it's gonna keep optimizing along those lines. So it's just different. It's obviously put a huge financial cushion under me. You know I come from peasant Ukrainian stock and now have more wealth than the prior 50 generations of my family or whatever. And one thing that I really enjoy is the fact that You know there's a secret that this word that I made up is on the lips of so many people. Just the stark contrast of going to those craft fairs in 2006 and handing out these flyers Yeah.

4 (1h 19m 46s):
And nobody knowing about it to now being at a concert and knowing that, like anyone I walked up to say like, Hey, do You know about this thing? They'll have heard it.

0 (1h 19m 58s):
When you think about the journey you've taken and, and You know what it's enabled you to do, despite the You know the very traumatic exit. How, how much of, of, of your success and and where you are today do you attribute to your work and your intelligence? And how much do you think has to do with the luck that you, that You know broke your way?

4 (1h 20m 22s):
Yeah, such a great question. How much of it is under my control, which is my own hard work, and how much of it is out of my control, which is luck, and the older I get, the more it feels like there's at least one other force in play, the kind of karmic force or providence or whatever. So without all of these different forms of luck of being born in the United States, of being born in a You know middle class family of this really strange path that I took through school of literally handing my rent check to my landlord when he happened to be holding a piece of paper to make a proposal for a website.

4 (1h 21m 9s):
Like how can you look at that and not think it's both luck and some form of providence? So I think that's the prerequisite. And then all the hard work is what is what follows. And you get to lean into both.

0 (1h 21m 25s):
That's Rob Kalin, co-founder of Etsy. By the way. When, when you guys were at Etsy, what was like the weirdest thing that you saw somebody put on there? Like, and, and, and you were like, I don't know if you should allow this thing to go on sale at the site?

4 (1h 21m 46s):
There was one Class of items that took off that I didn't even know was something that existed and that is penis cozies and they are hand crocheted cozies for male genitalia. And generally the community was totally supportive of that. And I thought it was a rather lovely expression of all of the different values and cross s at play in the Etsy marketplace.

0 (1h 22m 21s):
I, I don't even wanna imagine what somebody needs that for. Wow. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And as always, it's free. This episode was produced by Kerry Thompson, with music composed by Rum Arablouei. It was Edited by Neva Grant with research help from Sam Paulson. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, John Isabella, Chris Messi, Carla Estevez, and Malia Aguello. Our engineers are Gilly Moon and Patrick Murray. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This.

Wondery (1h 23m 4s):
If you like How I Built This, you can listen early and ad free Right now by joining Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts. Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon music Before you go. Tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey. Deep in the enchanted forest from the whimsical world of Disney, frozen something is wrong. Aaron Dell is in danger once again from Dark Forces threatening to disrupt the peace and tranquility. And it's up to Anna and Elsa to stop the villains before it's too late. For the last 10 years, frozen has mesmerized millions around the world. Now Wondery presents Disney Frozen Forces of Nature podcast, which extends the storytelling of the beloved animated series as an audio first original story complete with new characters and a standalone adventure set. After the events of Frozen two, reunite with the whole crew, Anna, Elsa, Olaf, and Christophe for an action packed adventure of fun, imagination, and mystery. Follow along as the gang enlist the help of old friends and new as they venture deep into the forest. And discover the mysterious copper machines behind the chaos and count yourself amongst the allies as they investigate the strange happenings in the enchanted forest. The only question is, are Anna and Elsa able to save their peaceful kingdom? Listen early and add free to the entire season of Disney Frozen Forces of Nature Podcast, along with exclusive bonus content on Wondery. Plus, join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or Wondery plus kits on Apple Podcasts.