2 (0s):
Hey, I am so excited to tell you about to how I built this live shows coming to San Francisco and Seattle in just a few weeks in San Francisco. I'll be speaking with Ken Grossman founder of Sierra Nevada Brewing Company. That's happening Friday, March 27th at the Sydney Goldstein theater and that same week on Thursday the 26th of March. I'll be in Seattle and Benaroya Hall talking to the founders of a sub pop the label behind artists like Nirvana and Death Cab for Cutie and sound. Garden Jonathan Parliament and Bruce pavitt will sit down with me to recount their story theater going to be incredible show. So if you are a fan of Sierra, Nevada or 90s music or Nirvana or just of the show be sure to join us on this West Coast Swing for more information or to get your tickets head to NPR presents dot-org and I hope to see you

1 (50s):
there.

2 (54s):
All of a sudden I was packing up my

1 (57s):
window office on the 42nd Floor of Fox Plaza, which is the iconic building in Century City and literally the next day pushing sawhorses and plywood into a windowless phone Closet in a warehouse with Kevin and I remember pushing a saw horse behind him thinking should I really have done this?

2 (1m 22s):
From NPR it's how I built this show that innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz and on today's show how Julia hearts and her husband Kevin launched their ticketing platform Eventbrite from a closet and a San Francisco warehouse and today manage events in a hundred and seventy countries.

1 (1m 49s):
around the world

2 (1m 56s):
There's a famous quote by Warren Buffett about his investment

1 (1m 59s):
strategy when he looks for investment opportunities. He looks for quote economic castles protected by unbreachable moats.

2 (2m 8s):
So in other words huge companies of scale that can withstand or

1 (2m 12s):
even quash any potential competitor and getting over that mode is meant to be hard and sometimes the only way to penetrate the castle is Crossing the drawbridge but by going in through a side door sort of like the way

2 (2m 27s):
Munoz part of a launched Five Hour Energy if you heard that episode, you might remember that when Munoz got started the energy drink Market

1 (2m 35s):
was dominated by a Red Bull and Monster. There was no way a

2 (2m 39s):
small upstart like his

1 (2m 41s):
was gonna compete with the big eyes for shelf space. So instead of marketing 5-hour Energy as a drink Munoz turned it into a different kind of product in energy shot. And before his competitors could even react he'd created a whole new kind of product in the energy drink industry and in kind of a similar way when

2 (3m 3s):
Julia and Kevin Hart's decided to get into

1 (3m 5s):
event ticketing the obvious competition of course was a massive company called

2 (3m 10s):
Ticketmaster a company with lots of control over large events at stadiums and Arenas, but

1 (3m 17s):
Julian Kevin noticed that Ticketmaster wasn't all that interested in small and medium-sized. It's and when they saw that opportunity, they realized it could be their way across the moat that Ticketmaster had built around the ticketing business

2 (3m 32s):
and while Ticketmaster is still the biggest player in

1 (3m 35s):
the ticket space Eventbrite is no slouch today 14 years since it was founded Eventbrite is a publicly traded company with a market cap of nearly

2 (3m 45s):
two billion

1 (3m 45s):
dollars, but for Julia Hearts

2 (3m 48s):
much from her early life suggested. She'd

1 (3m 50s):
become an entrepreneur in fact Growing up in Santa Cruz, California. She was really into broadcast journalism and applied to college thinking she'd eventually get into television

2 (4m 2s):
news

1 (4m 3s):
first. I applied and was admitted to Pepperdine in the early admissions timeframe, but I couldn't afford to go to Pepperdine, but I also wasn't in the bracket that would get full financial aid and my mom said, you know if you really Have your heart set on Pepperdine you should write them a letter and tell them that and I remember thinking like Mom come on, they're not going to that's not going to work and thank God I took her advice because I wrote a letter and with no other warning a full financial aid package showed up. Wow, I couldn't believe it.

1 (4m 44s):
And so basically what that meant was I took on a ton of debt student loan debt and I had three jobs And my parents obviously contributed everything they could so it was a group effort and I sat through my first semester of classes that were, you know, your basic college courses and then the second semester I had made a big change in didn't realize it at the time which was to actually concentrate on television production as my focus.

2 (5m 16s):
All right, so you are at Pepperdine and you get into interested in in television, I guess. You were in college, you get an internship on friends like the biggest show one of the big stars ever. Right? Like what was that

1 (5m 31s):
like, so it was pretty surreal because it was at the height of you know, the friends popularity as a show it was as exciting as you can imagine and there is Jennifer Aniston and Courteney Cox and you know, these huge celebrities within Arm's Reach and my job on the set of friends was to answer the set phone. Which was this big wireless phone that I would carry around and connect to whoever was on the line to the person they wanted to speak with and it was still today the most terrifying job I've ever had in my life because if you have the set phone number for friends, you probably not someone who's super patient.

1 (6m 15s):
Yeah about who you're looking

2 (6m 17s):
for, right? So I guess in your senior year you end up at MTV that's That would prove to be an important internship like an important turning point for you was a different kind of job or

1 (6m 29s):
internship. Yeah. I mean, I think that between friends and MTV and landing at MTV and in my senior year I discovered two things for myself one was I was not passionate about production and everything that goes into actually filming. The second thing was I just wasn't passionate about celebrity. And so when I landed at MTV and the series Development Department it was as if I finally found the perfect place because development really marries business and creative and being anchored in a network and especially in a cable network was really exciting and dynamic and I'll never forget I was there when when we got this demo tape and from this Guys who are doing just really stupid stuff and it turned out to be jackass and that was an incredible experience to watch something go from demo all the way through to series and and I have a lot of really great memories from that experience.

2 (7m 45s):
Wow. So you were present at the creation

1 (7m 48s):
of Jackass. I was a witness. I mean, I don't yeah, it certainly didn't have Have any contribution that was significant but I witnessed something that was groundbreaking it was different. It was weird people didn't know how to feel. I remember the weekly phone calls that we would do between the network the standards and practices Department OSHA the lawyers and then the guys and they would in the course of a week come up with maybe two full pages of As for stance and just the description and the brainstorming around how one would pull these stunts off was so entertaining it was irreverence that it's at it's very

2 (8m 35s):
best. So you end up going to work from TV after you graduate right arm, which is a pretty great job, right? And did you end up working on that show or with that show?

1 (8m 45s):
So I did I graduated on a Friday and was employed by Monday. I've been working. Since I was 14 with no break and that was a really fortunate thing that I was able to just pick up where I left off and join the team as an assistant and so I was in the development department and we jackass was one of our shows amongst several others that we worked on to put on air and being a development executive is not unlike being a VC, I guess of several stages. So, you know you start with Seed where you're cultivating talent and you're taking a lot of pitches. And then you help to cultivate the idea and then you get to a place where down the line it may become a series and our job was to take it from concept or person to series and then manage the series as it was on air.

2 (9m 41s):
I guess you stayed there for a couple years and then got sort of recruited by FX networks to work there, which is pretty cool. I mean, it sounds like the trajectory of your career. Was you were going to end up working in Hollywood working on TV development projects and eventually become an executive. Maybe did that seem like that was your kind of your path?

1 (10m 5s):
Yes, and you know for me definitely on I think a very strong trajectory. I joined FX as a manager of current series and worked on Nip/Tuck Rescue Me and the shield which were all incredible pieces of content so formative. Years for me and certainly, you know something I'll never forget but in total my whole career in Hollywood was five years set against the backdrop of Might now the balance of my life. It was a brief stint. However in those five years, I really loved the work

2 (10m 39s):
guess like 2003 you're invited to a wedding for a co-worker and you're seated next to this guy named Kevin who would become her husband. Is that more or less? What happened?

1 (10m 52s):
Well, so these two particular people who were getting married had been really big brother and big sister figures in my life. And so I was tapped to deliver an excerpt from Corinthians at the altar and I did not grow up in a church. I do not know the Bible so there I'm a little bit all around anxious about this particular wedding and I got to the church and I realized that I didn't bring A copy of the excerpt I wasn't sure if it was at the altar and so I thought like okay. I've just said at the end of the Pew so I went to the end of a Pew and I asked this guy to move over so that I could sit at the end and I was sitting there pretty stressed out and this guy started striking up a conversation with me and that was that and then I went up to the Altar and the thankfully my reading was there and I got through it and it came back and I was so relieved.

1 (11m 53s):
And and this guy turned to me and goes you are amazing. I'm so proud of you. Remember finally sort of focusing on him and being like, okay what is going on? You know, like he's just so friendly and not creepy friendly like earnestly just so friendly but didn't even know his name. And so he introduced himself as Kevin and I remember standing on the steps of the church after the ceremony and it you know, we're throwing rice at the bride and groom and they were running down the stairs and I saw Across the way and I thought oh, I'll never see him again and we were standing on the lawn at the reception and he brought me over a drink and then I realized like oh, no, I'm not actually gonna get rid of this guy tonight like this is you know is like just a fleeting thing.

1 (12m 43s):
And that was it. I mean that literally was it Kevin and I have been together ever since

2 (12m 49s):
and at the time I mean, he was like a start-up guy, right he was working on this. This thing's pronounce Zoom exo-m. It was like a like an international money transfer service. Right?

1 (12m 59s):
Right, but you were working at FX networks and

2 (13m 2s):
Lala and he's in the Bay Area. So you begin this relationship and he must've been like working insane hours in the startup going around like, you know looking for investors and was he you know, was he doing all that stuff all the time.

1 (13m 15s):
He was it actually worked for us to be long distance because during the week he would work 24 hours a day. On Zoom from his Loft they worked literally from this closet that was off the bathroom in his Loft and Soma and I would do you know my television thing and that also included going to nighttime events. And so we just worked really hard during the week and then on the weekends, we would get together and spend this really quality time together and he would come down and he would go through his 85-page slide deck for funding and He would attend movie awards with me, and it was just interesting to year kind of study in these very different worlds.

2 (14m 0s):
Did you I mean you eventually I think tears into your relationship you guys decide to get married, which meant that one of you would have to move and I guess you decided it was going to be you that you were going to move back to Northern California and kind of leave your job at FX behind.

1 (14m 18s):
We had a moment where we imagined I would still work in Hollywood. You would still be working on Zoom. But doing it somewhat remotely But ultimately what ended up happening is. I knew I was in the wrong industry. There was something nagging at me when I would learn more about the tech industry from Kevin or I would see these early ideas come to life. And the thing that was nagging at me was something was moving faster than cable. Asian and I love velocity. I just felt disruption coming.

1 (14m 59s):
It just was very clear that something was going to disrupt traditional media. And so I thought that I needed to just find a career here in San Francisco that married my experience and television, you know with maybe the future of media. Yeah, that was the

2 (15m 19s):
plan and so I guess at the time there was a Some people remember this there was this television channel called current which which was sort of it was partially owned or run by Al Gore and hit some investors involved and they tried to recruit you right or you found them and considered working working for them.

1 (15m 40s):
That's right Joel hiya Dan and Al Gore had a great vision. And in fact I met with them. I mean it was a it was really exciting and I was offered, you know middle management position on the founding team and then I got the offer and you know the numbers that I remember roughly speaking our I was making $80,000 at FX and they offered me $50,000 an annual salary to join and I brought the offer to Kevin to get his opinion and he just I think saw an opening. I'm not sure how calculated he was in this what you just said, you know, you could go work on someone else's startup and make less than you're worth for sure or could build something with me and we you know, make no money, but at least it's our own and you know, we could even invest our own money and bootstrapping something like just I really don't know why or how that sounded more compelling but I do think the Genesis of why Kevin was so convincing there is because his optimism was contagious and I thought why not

2 (16m 51s):
so does that mean that he was He was gonna leave his startup or kind of just stopped working there.

1 (16m 58s):
Yeah, what happened? There was Zoom was about five years old at the time and they finally reached a point where it was clear that they were on their way to becoming a grown-up financial services company and Kevin was not interested in being the CEO of a financial services company that wasn't his his, you know, kind of endgame and so he was already transitioning out of zoom and He was starting to look at what he wanted to do next what he wanted to build next. So he was primed to be in ideation phase and now that I know him a lot better than even when I did in 2005, I know what that means. So

2 (17m 37s):
how did he already come up with an idea? That would be involved with ticket

1 (17m 41s):
sales? No, it really wasn't well-defined. When when I moved up there were several ideas that he had actually prototyped and to some extent had built early versions of one of the things was about this very simple transactional platform to sell tickets to any kind of event and it was really the conversation about why we would go and approach ticketing was much much less about the industry and more about the notion that experiences are so vital to human beings thriving and that became that was the first idea.

1 (18m 23s):
That we had to work on together and you know just so happen to stick but I really didn't give it much thought and all of a sudden I was packing up my window office on the 42nd Floor of Fox Plaza, which is the, you know, iconic building in Century City saying goodbye to this career that was on this uphill trajectory in driving north and literally the next day pushing sawhorses and plywood into a windowless phone closet. In a warehouse in Potrero Hill where we had gotten some free office space with Kevin and I remember pushing us all Hearts behind him thinking I hope he's not crazy.

1 (19m 5s):
Like I there's a reason why he's so excited and I really trust that there's this reason but there was a little bit of you that was thinking like should I really have done this? That was terrifying?

2 (19m 17s):
Yeah. I mean, I mean for Kevin this was I think this was his third startup, right because he had Another company that he sold before launching zoom and then he was also an early investor in PayPal when we all know how that turned out. So really, I mean you you're a pretty great place because initially I'm assuming you didn't have to raise any money and now you guys could just sort of try to focus on on trying to create a

1 (19m 39s):
company. That's why I mean it was incredibly fortunate. So it's important to know that we spent less than a quarter of a million dollars in the first two years of Eventbrite being up and running an Operating that to us was an incredible luxury to be able to invest that type of money into our own company, but we were also really fortunate because we didn't have to Moonlight to grow Eventbrite and furthermore. We were in this space. Like I mentioned a warehouse in Potrero Hill we knew the landlord and he let us be there for free for a certain period of time as long as we let other Of teams know about the space.

1 (20m 25s):
And so what ended up happening is that we started in the in the phone closet and then we graduated to a conference room. And for about a year we were in this conference room moves like a fishbowl and that was Eventbrite and you know, I was pregnant during the times. I have kind of visualize this like crazy just it wasn't luxurious. It was very humble and meanwhile these other startup teams. Darted to know that there was this space and in at the height, we had 12 companies in a 10,000 square foot space and we were all at very early stages of building these companies.

1 (21m 6s):
It wasn't an incubator. It wasn't an accelerator. It was a community and that's a huge part of our

2 (21m 12s):
story when when the idea for what Eventbrite would start to cut take shape in 2006 like when you describe it to people and they're like, hey, what are you working on? You

1 (21m 23s):
say we would say a ticketing platform and I would say that the one of the most remarkable things that has happened in this journey is that we imagine Eventbrite would be what it is today. And that's not because we're Clairvoyant. There's a lot of luck that goes into not having to Pivot or to completely change your business plan or strategy, but we imagine that we could build a self-service platform that would allow anybody to sell tickets to any type of event. Point at a really low cost that was accessible and be able to serve the most diverse community of event creators to

2 (22m 2s):
explain something to me right in 2006. What was a ticketing world like was it was it just Ticketmaster was that it was out

1 (22m 10s):
there? Yeah. So basically there was this big void in the market, you know, either you were using checks and cash collected at the door and tracking your attendees on maybe Excel. Cheats or by hand or you were using really expensive kind of dinosaur software on the Enterprise side. There was no consumer friendly platform in between that could both give you the tools to be able to create and promote and manage your event ticketing as well. As you know, be accessible and something that you could afford using as a small organization and so Essentially, what we were focused on was the SMB Market of Live Events and we just had absolutely zero idea how big it

2 (23m 1s):
was was it just you and Kevin because it gets you launched this in January of 20 2006 you really start working on in 2006. There's just the two of you you and your your soon-to-be husband.

1 (23m 14s):
Well in the fall of 2005 or near the end of that year, we found our Co founding CTO because neither Heaven Nor I are engineers. And we knew we needed at least a third to help us start this company and we found where no Visage through, you know, he was somebody that Kevin had been somewhat familiar with and he was just coming out of his last company and so it just it all worked out that the timing work that we could all assemble ourselves pretty much by the holidays of 2005 and then in 2006, that's really when we officially launching at the beginning of 2006. I would call a renaude like the bravest. Man, you know in business to start a company with a couple that's about to get married.

2 (23m 57s):
So like in 2006, right and January 2006. It was essentially the three of you and what was Eventbrite for like just a regular person. Like how would you interact with it? Would you at

1 (24m 10s):
all you would when you bought tickets? So the brilliant part of the model is of course that we had, you know, our primary customer are what we call event creators. They would be promoting the event page and You'd have ticket buyers come to that event page and buy tickets. And so there was a platform and basic functionality where you could create an event listing in, you know, two minutes. We used to test it on Kevin's father as our first user group and you could promote your event and then you could track your attendees in your ticket sales. And that was the premise of the first Eventbrite product experience

2 (24m 52s):
and who Who was using Eventbrite in the early days?

1 (24m 56s):
Well, the the really the I think we focused on building what I would call the MVP of our product with tech bloggers who are hosting meetups and wanted to start charging for these events and I can't imagine a better User Group sort of tech bloggers and critics to test your product out on so basically what I did was I took their their needs and Wants and their feature requests and distilled those into themes and there was a theme around, you know, being able to publish an event page in minutes and this friction free easy-to-use value proposition.

1 (25m 37s):
There was the promotional aspect of being able to get the word out about your event online without you know, a lot of marketing budget and then there was the being able to get to know your attendees when you're collecting. In catch at the door, you're not obviously understanding who this is what their email addresses you're not getting the benefit of customer relationship and so being able to manage your event as you or manage. Your ticket sales was the third and so it was really around this create promote manage and I think that's what made Eventbrite start to grow organically through both word of mouth and then, you know paid marketing and we did that for two full years.

1 (26m 20s):
It's just the three of us and so

2 (26m 23s):
I mean, what was your business model at that time? I mean was it going to be you know, we'll take a fee or a cut because I mean that's how Ticketmaster more lesser credit card companies work.

1 (26m 33s):
Right? So we decided to charge a per paid ticket fee of two and a half percent plus 99 Cents and we decided to not charge for free tickets. We only charge you when you sold the paid ticket because we figured that would be a great way for people to try out the service. And we would undercut any other competitors who were charging subscription fees for for free events or charging a fee per ticket on free

2 (27m 2s):
events in the early days. Were you really still focused on the San Francisco market like trying to get because it sounds like there were sort of small events happening like a tech blogger would have a Meetup was that where you really were kind of focused on that the local market initially.

1 (27m 21s):
We really started with That Focus however, we were very intentional to roll out Eventbrite in a way that could be used by anyone anywhere in the world. And what we did was we set up this map where we could see where all the ticket sales were happening in real-time visualized and I'll never forget the day when we discovered that someone was selling tickets to a speed dating event in New York, and that was really exciting. Because it meant that we were crossing geographical bound. So we were breaking out of the bay area as well as format and category bounds.

1 (28m 4s):
So a completely non Tech related event and it really started to organically spread and it was pretty incredible to watch it happen again, not overnight by any means it was over several years

2 (28m 18s):
and I mean it was certainly in the early days like small. Money, right like people were selling tickets for like five bucks or 10 bucks stuff like that,

1 (28m 27s):
right? They were I mean, it's interesting that the median ticket price on Eventbrite is around $40. So it's actually higher than you would think. You know, it's always been within that range. And so there were a lot of $5 ticket events and there are a few, you know, $100 events. There were a lots of free events. I'll never forget there was a hundred thousand person free Salsa Congress in Mexico City that happened on Eventbrite when we had no business ticketing a hundred thousand person event and it really opened our eyes to how flexible the platform was and we were following our users they were leading the

2 (29m 9s):
way and so all right, so you and was the idea initially to just kind of see if you guys could fund it yourselves or from the beginning. Did you know that eventually you would have to go out? And look for funding

1 (29m 25s):
we had to take a very incremental approach to everything but I think Kevin and I and Renault decided. Hey, let's see how far we get in a month. And then let's see how far we get in a quarter. And then let's see how far we get in a year and then we raised around of friends and family money basically an angel round less than a million dollars and that took us until 2008 and we had maybe two employees too. Or three employees who had joined us and then we decided to go raise our first round of institutional money. Once we knew that we had a business that could become a company.

1 (30m 5s):
Yeah, and that was 2008 which is really bad timing.

2 (30m 11s):
And what do you remember about? I guess you guys I read you approach like almost 30 different VC firms. Do you do you remember those

1 (30m 18s):
meetings? I do. I mean, I remember us getting to the point where it may Sense for you know the business we had proven up this could this idea could be a business wasn't because we were out of money or dried up the balance sheet. It was more about we knew that this was now showing signs of being something that we could scale. Yeah, and so we went to San tell Road and pitched 27 firms. And what do you remember about the

2 (30m 49s):
questions you were asked by investors. I mean when you went to VC firms or they like this is amazing. This is awesome, or were they were they sort of poking holes in your business model at that

1 (30m 60s):
time. Well, I think that there was an equal amount of confidence or comfort in Kevin's track record because again, you know, he had founded a company prior to Eventbrite zoom and we had that as an advantage on the other side. There were questions ranging from how is this going to work? For you to operate the company as a married couple

2 (31m 27s):
because investors don't like marry couples running companies,

1 (31m 30s):
right? I don't know if that's true today and I would say that if for every positive story like Eventbrite, it becomes less of an issue. Yeah. So what we did to address that is we would come into the room and we would just address that question head on without anybody asking

2 (31m 47s):
us, what would you say? We

1 (31m 48s):
would say Obviously two of us are married. Here's how How we work together? We never work on the same part of the business at the same time and we have complementary skills and we have a set of rules to work through conflict quickly and we didn't we didn't really go into those roles because there was sort of personal but I think our conviction helps investors at least not sit there and wonder if I really want to back a married couple right? The one question that we got about the business was consistently. How big is the total addressable Market because if you have the reference point of you're just trying to build a Ticketmaster know or you're just trying to build a next Evite?

1 (32m 37s):
No, so then what are you trying to do? And so we needed to quickly illustrate what we were trying to do who we were building for and why they would buy what we built and how big that market was and I I'd say there was a very high level of skepticism about how big the mid-market of events were back in 2008. I mean I can

2 (33m 2s):
understand, you know back in 2008. I'm an investor saying so are you guys gonna be like the new Ticketmaster? Why wouldn't that be a good way to pitch what you were doing?

1 (33m 14s):
What's funny? There's everybody has an opinion about a brand that so well known like Ticketmaster, but I would I would simplify it as Ticketmaster strategy is one part of a Live Nation strategy, which is to be vertically integrated into an event its large Arenas and stadiums that typically serve Sports and music but Eventbrite is a horizontal platform that enables a wide array of small to medium-sized businesses and venues and Dividuals to be able to sell tickets on an open platform and I think that we've and underestimated the effect that could have and in scaling something that you know just didn't really exist and it's not like it's like when people say something didn't exist you immediately think of you know, entrepreneurs like Elon Musk who are truly creating something that hasn't actually existed but it doesn't always have to be rocket science.

1 (34m 18s):
It's really about how do you make something that people want to do even Year, and that's really what we were coming from. We were coming from a point of wanting to empower entrepreneurs to make their businesses stronger and there wasn't a solution like Eventbrite at that point. All right.

2 (34m 34s):
So you go to Sand Hill Road over the course of three weeks. You meet with almost 30 VC firms, and I'm assuming you were going there expecting a hoping that you get some

1 (34m 46s):
checks, right?

2 (34m 47s):
And how many of these firms write you

1 (34m 49s):
checks? Well, we went and saw 27 firms and and we received 27 knows or not right now. So we receive zero checks. no checks

2 (35m 3s):
coming up after the break the simple strategy that Julia and Kevin used to convince some of those VCS to give Eventbrite another shot. And also why the founders later took the company public even though lots of people told them not to do that. Say it with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built

1 (35m 22s):
this from NPR. Hey

2 (35m 43s):
everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible first to Microsoft teams. We all know meetings struggling to pay attention files seem impossible to find and if you're not in the room, you're not in the know welcome to the new way to work together Microsoft teams where you can contribute to meetings from anywhere chat with coworkers, you're never out of the loop and find all your files and even edit them in real time in one convenient. Place when you are ready to unleash the power of your team open teams, learn more at microsoft.com teams.

1 (36m 21s):
Support also comes from Uber Uber is committed to safety and to continuously raising the bar to help make safer Journeys for everyone for starters. All drivers are background checked before their first ride and screened on an ongoing basis and now Uber has introduced a brand new safety feature called ride check which can detect if a trip goes unusually off course and check in to provide support to learn more about boobers commitment to safety visit uber.com safety. Listen to Planet Money for all kinds of weird and interesting stories that just happen to teach you a bit about money and the economy and how the world Works Planet money from NPR subscribe

2 (37m 4s):
now. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR guy Roz.

1 (37m 12s):
So it's the end of 2008

2 (37m 15s):
and Juliet are co-founders have just made 27 pitches to VCS. And none of them are interested in investing in Eventbrite. But one thing Julia learns is that there

1 (37m 25s):
are different ways to get rejected when people hear our story it's hard for them to really imagine, you know, 27 knows the thing I learned back then is it's so Important to give a fast know rather than nothing at all because certainly not 27 feces did not call us and say hey, you know what? It's not for us for these reasons or not right now, but would love to see this this and this there was a whole host of ABC's you just sort of didn't respond at all. So I think that was a really good lesson for me to experience that type of rejection and non rejection rejection to know which one's

2 (38m 7s):
better so but I'm curious about those rejections right because To some extent right when you meet with with investors your sort of seeking their approval. Like if they give you money, it's another way of them saying it we like this idea we believe in it and here you go. But when all 27 of them say, we're just not ready to do this right now a part of you feels and I've had this conversation with other Founders, you know part of me feels like well am I wrong like did that ever cross your mind?

1 (38m 38s):
I'm sure yes, I mean, I think I remember us. Got checking whether or not we all all three of us had the conviction to keep going huh? Because we knew that it was it was going to be tricky. We weren't out of money like I mentioned so what we did was we left our our 2009 operating plan with every VC that we met with and that was sort of seen as you know, a little risky music because nobody knew what 2009 would hold and then our plan B was to take a more. An approach to scaling and 2009 go back and see those VCS around the same time in the fall and we hunkered down.

1 (39m 21s):
Yeah, by the way, let us not forget that we had an infant, you know into who 2008 so I kind of forget that part. I mean there are pictures of us working on our 2009 plan, you know, and she's like in the corner on a play mat. So I think we probably were also just to sleep deprived and busy to even have time to worry if that makes sense. And so we just kept going and thank God we did because 2009 ended up being one of the best years of event brights history.

2 (39m 55s):
What why what

1 (39m 56s):
happened? I think we had a few unlock. So one thing that happened was the recession was looming and then finally upon us and we started to see people who had lost their jobs start to use Eventbrite to teach their Two other people in order to make a living and also social media started to become a real thing. One of the things that we that happen in 2009 is we started to see Facebook become one of the top ten drivers of traffic to our site. So we went and did some investigating we found out that event creators were using Eventbrite to sell tickets, but they would then take all of their event details and republish them into face.

1 (40m 42s):
Facebook as a Facebook event and Link back to the Eventbrite page to sell the tickets and so effectively we were the Commerce engine and they were using Facebook as the promotion engine. And so we were meeting our event creators and we were solving the friction or taking the friction away and making it easier for them to promote their events on Facebook. I'm curious who

2 (41m 5s):
I mean that year when you know, the economy is collapsing unemployment starts to ratchet it up. What kinds of events were people doing? Like would it would be somebody who's like I'm an accountant and I'm holding an event to talk about basic accounting and they would just like, you know sell tickets and have people meet at like a church hall or something like

1 (41m 25s):
that. That's exactly right. We had a lot of financial skills courses. I mean just to go on that example. We saw some arise in entrepreneurial type events where folks were, you know selling their independently. Made Goods or teaching say yoga certification or networking became, you know paid networking events became a big a big deal. So at that point we were I think had density in the coast regions of the US and then we were starting to light up and London and Melbourne and a few other places around the world, but it was not nearly as Global as it is today when

2 (42m 9s):
you saw the combination of And this really interesting people losing their jobs and trying to figure out how to become entrepreneurial, you know host events. And whatever. Did you guys have a revenue goal that year? I mean you said you to plan for 2009. Do you remember how much revenue you felt like you needed to make that year to meet your

1 (42m 31s):
goal? We always had a revenue goal. So from the first month that we started working on Eventbrite. We would have our Revenue goal up on the Whiteboard and every month we would meet meet in a quasi board meeting to report on our progress against Revenue. So what I do know while I don't have the exact number for 2009 in my head, I know gross ticket sales was around 10 million. That's total gross ticket sales that's gross volume and then derive our fee from that roughly speaking our fees about three dollars per ticket, but so are actual revenue or net revenue is much smaller than that, but we were About break even at the start of 2009 we continue to hire so we needed to bridge that Gap a bit, but I do recollect that we surpassed the plan that we set for ourselves in 2009.

1 (43m 27s):
We started pick up steam. So we went back to not all 27, but probably about 12 of the VC firms that we felt, you know would be good people to talk to and to continue the Ian, so you went back to some of these

2 (43m 45s):
VC firms armed with data, you know showing them that look since we last saw you we've done 10 million dollars in Gross ticket sales, and I'm assuming the response

1 (43m 55s):
was different a year later. It was I was surprised by how doing what you said you were going to do meaning the 2009 plan that we'd left with them at the end of 2008 was a novel idea. Because it was met with a lot of wow, you know, I mean it really made just that fact alone like and doing what you said you were going to do I think was pretty much all we needed to say I mean, obviously there were more questions about what we learned in that year and the market and future plans for growth, but it was it was quite impactful.

1 (44m 35s):
What happens to you get a to get a check. Yeah. I was a quicker process. So I think it was maybe four weeks. Weeks and we were confident enough to say that we are accepting term sheets on a certain date and we received three term sheets and we raised six and a half million from Sequoia capital in that

2 (44m 59s):
round. So alright, so you have this six and a half million dollars you can you can start to hire lots of people quickly, I guess

1 (45m 9s):
well, and yeah when we created the plan we Aggro from Thirty to a hundred people by the end of 2010 and that was breathtaking to me because at least to me my reference point was 30 is a team a hundred company. Let me there's no denying that Hunter people whose company and you know, we could sit around sort of one large table and eat, you know from a few pizza boxes as 30 and as a hundred we needed systems and facilities and you know, we needed to like get our act together. And I felt like we were going to inevitably go through a really tough time scaling from Thirty to a hundred people and I wasn't sure how we were going to do that and you know maintain this great culture did you this is this is

2 (45m 59s):
more of a like I'm trying to get into your head a little bit. I sort of try to think of myself in that situation. Like what would I how would I feel and how would I make I was right and you were 30 you had this huge responsibility. And did you ever have any anxiety over? I don't know being a leader. I mean all the time,

1 (46m 26s):
you know, it's I had hi. I think most human beings have moments of not feeling old enough or prepared enough or experienced enough to be in a place of authority. I think if you're a parent you feel that way. I think if you're a leader you feel that way and I didn't let it get in my way. I think building something from scratch allows you to expand and grow with the progress. That's why when I look at other companies that have had this sort of hockey stick growth or let just that rocket ship that would be difficult

2 (47m 2s):
kill. I'm wondering did you and Kevin ever have tension or fights or arguments mean I would imagine that given that he'd run businesses and private a way of doing. I mean that there might have been times where you weren't doing it the way he thought it should be done and was there tension I mean, I would think that would be normal.

1 (47m 22s):
There's definitely been tension. I think less than you would imagine so we were very intentional when we started the company and we set a few rules as I mentioned and one of them was if we ever were frustrated or at an impasse we would stop what we are doing Turn the Lights Off. And I'm not kidding lay down on the ground and hold hands and talk about it. Wow. Now this is when we didn't have any office mate.

2 (47m 48s):
Okay. Yeah. Um, so obviously we're not doing that today and we do that at home. It's a good technique. I'm going to try that.

1 (47m 55s):
Yeah. I was like so ridiculous that it would break the tension and if we could even you know, stop laughing we would talk through what was really going on but you know that that was a great mode for us in the very early days when we were scaling the Either to a hundred and two hundred and three hundred and he was CEO and I was President. I think we were just really good at not having disagreements in front of people and dealing with that on our own time, and we're very strong communicators with each other and so for any co-founder team, I think it's really important to understand that you know it to openly debate is one thing but to disagree or have beef with each other in front of your employees because it's just not Octave that's the guiding principle that we've used.

1 (48m 44s):
I think now for quite some

2 (48m 46s):
time Julia once you guys had a lot of capital to work with was that I mean did you start to really take off at that point was it was a growth year after year after year of growth? Because I know you 2012 you hit your 50 million tickets sold and and then you do a billion dollars in total gross ticket sales that year and next year's two billion dollars. I mean, it sounds I don't mean for this to sound. Seamless and easy, but it sounds like that was it. I mean you guys were just on this growth trajectory.

1 (49m 18s):
We were Off to the Races for sure. I mean again, one of the I think unique things about Eventbrite is that we haven't had to Pivot we are doing exactly what we intended to do and lots of things change new, you know Technologies change, but the actual concept is exactly spot-on to what we had intended to build for for the event Creator Community. One of the things that was Markable for me to observe was just the validation of having a sequoia Capital come in seemingly kind of how easy it was to raise after that with their seal of approval and I think that you know, we took advantage of that. We raised private Capital sometimes when we didn't need it because we wanted to ensure that we would have it when you know the bottom fell out again the

2 (50m 8s):
if we were doing the movie version of them Pride at this point, you know, Like the next year's two billion done for billions in ticket sales and then 10 million ticket sales 2015 Kevin he decides to take a leave as CEO and that was temporary and initially, I guess he had a medical condition and then he basically says, you know what I actually want to step down and you become CEO and 2016 at that point. I have to imagine it probably felt like the right natural. Oil seamless move for you, or were you or were you I don't know was any part of you

1 (50m 47s):
hesitant. You know II wasn't hesitant to step up because it was the right thing for the company mind you we also we're dealing with life, right? So it's there's this duality of doing what's right for the company. And also we also needed to put Kevin's health first and foremost and you know, I needed to wear both hats which was wife and co-founder and that was that was a really really difficult

2 (51m 15s):
time. He's okay now, of course, he's healthy. Right doing well.

1 (51m 19s):
He's great. Yeah, I think I think he's a testament of why it's so important to put your health first. Yeah, I think that you know for us it's you know, life is very very short. And while we've been lucky enough knock on wood to not lose, you know, any loved ones too early. We just to some extent it's a little bit of a blur but it wasn't a joyful time. Let's put it that way so I wasn't stepping into this role. With a smile on my face / say maybe it was a brave smile, but you know behind the scenes I was

2 (51m 52s):
terrified. Yeah, so you step up you become the CEO by 2018 your revenues were about 290 million dollars that year September that year Eventbrite goes public you go. You take the company public was this sort of like, you know, you here when founder start a company they say, all right. Well the investors An exit it's either going to be a sale or you go public was that the point you reach where you know, your investors needs to return. And so this was a way to do

1 (52m 25s):
it. You know, it was always part of our plan to go public meaning we wanted Eventbrite to be a public company. And so this wasn't an agenda that was brought on To Us by our investors, but rather, you know our

2 (52m 42s):
own agenda, but I'm just I'm curious about going public because that is a Different kind of stress and and I mean all of a sudden it's not just private company in you're answering to the board and investors. Now, it's you are a publicly traded company with thousands and thousands of shareholders. I've asked CEOs and entrepreneurs who taken companies public all the time. Like why would you want that stress? And also you're answering to a whole new constituency now?

1 (53m 11s):
Yeah, I mean, I have thought about that a lot and Like to back up for a minute. I hurt I don't think ever once heard in the nine months. We were preparing to go public that going public was a good idea.

2 (53m 29s):
Everybody said don't do it. Everyone said

1 (53m 31s):
don't go public but the process of going public was really helpful for us. It forced us to codify who we are and what we're building and why people are buying what we're building and what our strategy is for the future and it's not as if we weren't Doing those things, but I think along the way as you're scaling and building an evolving that can get a little bit fuzzy around the edges and I loved the crispness that was the output of the work that we did on the IPO and the impact that had on the company. And so when we did go public a lot of what's happened to us in the last year's basically when everybody was talking about but it's it hasn't caused any regret and want to add

2 (54m 14s):
some context because you mentioned what And over the past year and we're having this conversation at the end of 2019. Yes, and I think the day that your stock debuted is $23. I think it ended that day of like 30 almost 34 dollars. It was a great first day and today the stock price is like down to a little under $20 a share and that's the question I have right? There's a whole visibility that is right. I mean that's stressful right? Your people are all and you've got shareholder saying hey why? Why is a stock down you know, what's going on? Why I bought it for $35 and now it's a $19 and and when you know, what do you say

1 (54m 54s):
believe me? One of the most painful situations in my life has yet to be resolved which is this wonderful man who works at the hotel next to our office and he's such a kind man and he bought into our IPO, you know bought stock and so I get to I see him every day and I'm visually visually reminded Of the loss that he incurred and that for me is, you know a great motivator and but I look at it as it's my responsibility to grow the value of Eventbrite. And if you can't take the heat of that responsibility, then you absolutely shouldn't be a public company CEO and I think I'm always learning something new and certainly this year has been a year of learning lots and lots and lots of new things but I'm not hating the game right?

1 (55m 44s):
It's that I it's really Like something that we chose eyes wide open and so I don't spend any time lamenting about being a public company. I think that's so boring and

2 (55m 55s):
unoriginal when you are how many people work for Eventbrite now around the

1 (55m 59s):
world roughly

2 (56m 1s):
1100. Wow, so I mean, that's a I mean that's a serious number of people that you're the CEO. You're the boss. It seems to me that you are probably better structured to withstand economic headwinds, which everyone says is going to happen. Because you've already been there because it's not you're not making a product that people buy it's something that is a people will need whether the economy is good or

1 (56m 28s):
bad. Well, I think we benefit from the innate human behavior of gathering and the fact that we've been doing it for thousands of years for sure and the global nature of live experiences. I would say that where I worry is we yes have seen really bad times, but we were were very small back then and you know my responsibility to a million event creators and 1100 right Lang's and thousands of shareholders is an order of magnitude larger than the responsibility we had in 2008 and 2009 was just Austin a few folks, so it's different and certainly I don't think Eventbrite is completely impervious to another, you know, big economic meltdown, but I feel pretty confident.

1 (57m 16s):
That that will be able to weather the storm whatever the storm whatever shape it maybe or category, you know, it's it's anyone's guess at this point. Although everybody seems that to know that it's coming.

2 (57m 30s):
Yeah, you know, you left your job in 2005 and here you are, you know public company 1,100 employees valued at one point eight billion dollars. How much of this do you think is because you just really Are smart and worked really hard and how much of it do you attribute to just being

1 (57m 50s):
lucky? I would say that 70% of this was work ethic and and staying focused and I would say 30 percent is about luck and whether that's luck of you know, meeting the love of my life and co-founder and co-parent back on that fateful day in May of 2003 at a wedding or the luck of Finding really wonderful people to build this company. I think there's a lot of a fortune and that comes to people and it's about what they do with it. And I think the other way around to when you hit hard times or you feel unlucky, you know, you have to put it all into perspective and there's always something to feel

2 (58m 37s):
lucky for that's truly a Hearts co-founder and CEO of Eventbrite Eventbrite has 14 offices around the world and the form Powers millions of events each year, which is kind of impressive but for truly has kids the thing that makes their mom truly impressive is what she did in college working on the set of

1 (58m 58s):
friends my daughter my love and a hat and a half year old who's watching friends. Like it's a show that she just discovered to watch. My husband said did you know Mommy worked on the set of friends? And yeah, so now I'm

2 (59m 12s):
that is one of those moments where I feel kind of cool with her. I'm like wow. And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from our sponsor Kohler toilets with smart features ranging from warm water cleansing automatic air. Freshening Kohler intelligent toilets are designed to provide an elevated experience more at Kohler.com intelligent

1 (59m 52s):
toilets. Check out our daily crash course in economics the indicator in less than 10 minutes. We tackle important topics like unemployment the housing crisis and how Justin Bieber saved the Icelandic economy NPR's the indicator from Planet Money listen

2 (1h 0m 10s):
now. Hey, thanks for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and today our story starts with tommnow Delaney who for 20 years had a dream job in the fashion industry. He traveled the world hung out on beaches with glamorous models went to lots of cool parties, you know the whole thing, but around 2010 tommo was ready to walk away. I already reached a point where I thought there's more to life than standing in a studio listening to 12 people discuss which pair of shoes should be put with that dress and at that point what Tom oh wow. Let's do more than anything else was to just be a dad to stay at home with his kids in New York. So he did and he loved everything about his new life except meal times because both of his kids Davey and Dot were super picky eaters.

2 (1h 1m 0s):
I spend my time looking at the kids food options in Whole Foods wondering whether there's anything on those shelves that they would eat Tamo would sometimes talk about as mealtime struggles with an older friend named Peggy and one morning Peggy. I had an idea for him. She said I was watching shots and last night and two women successfully pitched an idea for neon colored edible cookie dough and it was full of artificial colors and flavors. And she said so I started to think about what would be a healthier version of this, you know kids respond to color. So how do we get them to respond to food by color? But food that's healthy within a day tommo and Peggy came up with an idea to take fruit and pulverize it into brightly colored purees can like the consistency of sir.

2 (1h 1m 43s):
But without all the sugar yeah, we immediately thought the yellow is going to be Peach the Reds going to be strawberry than the blues going to be blueberry. Her idea was to put the pureed fruit into these squeezable tubes and then kids could paint with it onto their food, you know, it is on one level a paint set, even though ultimately it is just a condiment aimed specifically at children. But remember camos only professional experience up to that point was in the fashion industry. We had no idea how to get into the food industry and we didn't know that we needed a copay. Packer I didn't know we needed a food scientist. I was making this stuff in my kitchen literally buying pounds of organic fruit from the local health food store and pureeing it in a Cuisinart and Tyler's first Big Challenge was getting the pureed to the right consistency.

2 (1h 2m 26s):
So it would work as paint not too thick and not too runny So eventually through a connection he found a food scientist to help them come up with a formula. He was sending me samples in unrefrigerated boxes. I distinctly remember there was one very very hot day. I got a box from FedEx. It's from him and I opened it and it was full of these little Tupperware parts and he mixed the fruit puree 50/50 with coconut oil and it was slopping around like salad. You look like salad dressing that it's settled and I just thought this is a disaster my God what is going on here? But within a few months Tamo found another food scientist to use some natural additives to get the consistency. They need it and then with some donations from friends and family tommo found a factory in Canada to put the puree into Oops, he called it naxi food paint.

2 (1h 3m 15s):
And finally, he was ready to test it. What we did was just rely on friends. We relied on dot literally dots friends from school and their parents to say would you video your kids drawing with this stuff and tasting the stuff and that first group of kids like the naturally Sweet Taste of the fruit. And as you might expect they really like drawing on their food lots of smiley faces. Lots of eyes lots of smiles son made of peaches. So at this point a contact in the food industry Given a list of 31 vires at a National Grocery chain. So tommo picked up the phone and made that very nerve-wracking first call and I said hi. It's Tom open oceans. I'm calling about food paint. I was wondering whether you've got the sample and she said there's a pause on the line and she said yeah, I did.

1 (1h 4m 0s):
Yeah, I kind of went downhill from

2 (1h 4m 2s):
there. She said I don't really understand the idea behind it. I don't really understand the execution. I'm not sure about the packaging and she just went on and on and on and my heart was thinking Lower and anyway tommo eventually got into some stores, but about three years went by where he did not get a lot of traction with naxi, but then just last year he was at a Food Expo and met a guy from Walmart. And from that meeting. He eventually got the food paint into a hundred and Seventy-Six Walmart's across the country. It did fifty five thousand dollars in sales last year and by next year tommo is hoping to turn a profit. Sometimes it's felt like I've been sort of fighting my way up.

2 (1h 4m 43s):
A steep hill in the middle of a rainstorm in the pitch darkness and there's trees blowing down the hill towards me and driving rain, but I'm still climbing the hill. It's Tamo Delaney the founder of Nashi for kids to hear more about it or her previous episodes had to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org. Of course, if you want to tell us your story go to build that npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe at Apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcast. Casts and while you're there, please do give us a review. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or add guy Roz our show is produced this week by Casey Herrmann with music composed by rumty.

2 (1h 5m 27s):
Narrow Bluey. Thanks also to Candice limb, Julia Carney neba Grant Jeff Rogers and Sequoia. Carrillo are in turn is rainy toll I'm Gyros and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.