3 (0s):
Hey, it's guy here. And before we start this brand-new episode of How I built this. I just want to let you know that we started a regular video conversation every week with different Founders to talk about the creative ways that they're building resiliency in the midst of this crisis last week. I talked to six incredible chefs from Daniel whom of Eleven Madison Park to Alice Waters of Chez Panisse and Jose Andres who's been donating meals through his nonprofit World Central Kitchen. You can join the conversation and ask your questions by going to Facebook. Dot-com how I built this and you don't need a Facebook account to watch this week. I'll be talking to Tim Brown and Joey's will injure the founders of all birds and also to Stewart Butterfield the founder of slack.

3 (42s):
You can join me on Wednesday and Friday at noon Eastern 9 a.m. Pacific by going to facebook.com how I built this and hope to see you there now sitting in my hotel room in Singapore and I was I was testing out one of the Prototype builds and the radio range was not good at all. He was supposed to have a range 10 feet or 15,000 the hope that would have 15 to 20 feet range. But the range was actually like two inches. Gosh. We've got a ship this holiday season. Like I've got tens of thousands of these people waiting and I'm thinking wow, this is it we're done

1 (1m 30s):
run. NPR it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They go I'm guy rosin on the show today. How's the Nintendo Wii inspired James Park to build a device and then a company that would have a huge and Lasting influence on the health and fitness industry

3 (1m 53s):
Fitbit. So it's taken me a few weeks to get motivated about exercise this whole pandemic thing just had me in a state of anxiety and it messed with my routine, but I was inspired to jump back into it about two weeks ago after watching my eleven-year-old proudly announces daily step count recorded on his Fitbit now Fitness isn't all that important to him. He's 11, but the gamification of Fitness the idea that it could be fun to hit 5000. 10,000 steps a day. That's what matters this is the stroke of insight James Park had soon after he stood in line in a Best Buy in San Francisco to buy the brand new video game system called Nintendo Wii and you'll hear James explain the story a bit later.

3 (2m 40s):
But what do You Realize by playing the Wii is that you could actually change human behavior around exercise if you turned it into a game and thing is up until James Park and his co-founder Eric Friedman founded Fitbit and 2007 there really weren't any digital fitness trackers that were designed that way it took a few years for James and Erik to gain traction, but by 2010 2011 Fitbit took off at one point their Fitness devices accounted for nearly 70 percent of the market and by 2015 the company was valued at more than 10 billion dollars, but that same year the Apple watch was released and Fitbit and its market share got hammered.

3 (3m 25s):
When I spoke to James Park a few days ago, he was in San Francisco living in an Airbnb. I'm in a temporary Air B&B because my the place that I typically live in has been flooded out by malfunctioning washing machine. I woke up at 1 a.m. In the middle of this whole thing you could have flooded washing machine what like you woke up in the middle of the night and there was water everywhere. I know amazing timing. Yeah, I woke up at 1 a.m. And I just woke up to the sound of water gushing everywhere. Let's go. Coming through the ceiling. It was a massive flood. Okay. So on top of Sheltering in place and running his company remotely James have to move out of his apartment in the middle of the night and then set up the microphone and gear we sent him for this interview.

3 (4m 10s):
He started to tell us about his parents who emigrated from Korea when James was for back in Korea. His dad had been an electrical engineer and his mom was a nurse but as with many immigrants they had a hard time getting those same jobs in the U.s. So instead his parents became small business owners. The first conscious memory I have is my parents actually owned the wig shop in downtown Cleveland. Wow, it had that have they get into that. It was just it was just a way to kind of earn a living. Yeah, I think a way to earn a living and you know, the typical immigrant story is you have friends who live in the country that you're immigrating to and I think my dad had a friend who worked in week wholesaling.

3 (4m 53s):
So that's where he started out. They were selling wigs to people who live in downtown Cleveland African Americans mostly women and I remember my mom she'd spend a lot of time just looking through black fashion magazine styling hair beating them Etc. So they had a wig shop dry cleaners a fish market at one point. We moved to Atlanta and they ran an ice cream shop there. We sold tracksuits starter jackets fitted baseball caps, you know thick will chains sort. Hip-hop. Urban Wear, right? Let's see. Yeah, we got this old FUBU jeans. Yep. I remember that and they could switch from one genre or one type of business to another and really not skip a beat ya and will your parents do they expect you to perform?

3 (5m 41s):
Well at school was that just a given, you know, I think they had an incredibly high expectations and as a kid, I think I remember my mom telling me when I was pretty young. I don't know five six seven that she expected me to go to Harvard so wow. Yeah, I don't think I don't think I quite knew what that meant back but you could tell that their expectations are pretty high from from the very beginning James did in fact meet his mom's expectations. He did go to Harvard he put in three years studying computer science, but after his junior year, he got a summer internship at Morgan Stanley and then ended up deciding to start his own business and then we'd hoped to finish his college degree.

3 (6m 22s):
He never went back, you know. As had a little bit of a stubborn streak and that was when I was trying to figure things out try to try to think of ideas. I think there is a lot of opportunity a lot of problems to be solved and I was also looking for a co-founder at the time. So those are two critical ingredients and idea and a co-founder. This is 1998. This is not 2015 when these kinds of conversations seems so comment. Like this was unusual in 1998 for a young person. It was just less common for young person to just To say I'm going to look into a tech startup and try to find a co-founder and just take some time to think about these things. Like I would imagine your parents were nervous.

3 (7m 5s):
I'd be nervous as my 20 year old said to me I'm not going to go back to college and I don't really know what I'm gonna do. I'm just going to think about it. Yeah, they were understandably pretty upset angry. Even I'd say and you know, the irony is that they probably took away more incredible personal risk moving from Korea. The and states and you know running these series of businesses which are commonly done button, but not easy in themselves and pretty high risk, but I do understand obviously the perspective at the time. Okay, so you decide you want to start something up and I think you you eventually landed on on e-commerce, right? Yeah. That was not a groundbreaking thing at the time.

3 (7m 47s):
Obviously Amazon was around Etc a lot of e-commerce startups, but you know settle down this idea of making e-commerce a lot more seamless and frictionless and came up with this idea of a electronic wallet that would automatically make purchases for you could work with a lot of different eCommerce sites. And you know the goal there was that we would take a cut of of every transaction. Right? And what was a company called that was interesting. We originally named Ditka poof. That was how it was incorporated until a lot of people said, you know, that might not be the best name for a company sounds like you know, we called it kaput because it sounded like magic etcetera could poof like things were done.

3 (8m 29s):
You know, your transaction was down till you come back of your money is gone. Yeah, exactly exactly. I'm of crazy names like Yahoo! Etc. But we decided to change our name at some point and we changed it to apathy which was so Healy for fast. And so that was the that was the ultimate name of the company in and you guys were actually able to raise a fair amount of money, right? We did we ended up raising a few million dollars from some individuals and some from some Venture Capital firms as well. And we hired some people we found a cool renovated Firehouse. That was nice really really amazing place to hang out in for many many many hours of the day and we hired up to it was close to about 30 people.

3 (9m 18s):
Wow, one super important thing that happened. I was you met Eric Friedman, right the guy that you would eventually launch Fitbit with I did and you know, that's probably one of the more fortunate turns in my life Eric. We didn't know each other at all before before the company Epi see he was actually just graduating from Yale. Computer science and I interviewed him. I like them a lot and he ended up ultimately becoming the first employee at the company. Okay, so you hire Eric. I think the company lasted like 18 months or or little lesson two years. Yeah. Yeah about it about 2 years and a lot of ups and downs during that period and you know, if I had to think back I would attribute two-thirds of the challenges and problems we face as a business.

1 (10m 7s):
You

3 (10m 8s):
to myself just because I had never managed people. I didn't really know how how to run a business even if it was only the technology side and you know at some point that that calm crash happened. Yeah, and all of our potential customers the whole industry the whole economy started taking a downturn. So this company sort of sputters out in 2001 and when that happened were you Did you think okay I should go back to college now and finish my degree or I gotta start something else. What where where was your head at that point? Well, it was a really challenging personal time for me, you know at towards the end of the company we obviously had to lay off most of the company and trying to doing it in a way that was you know, compassionate was really really difficult.

3 (11m 3s):
I don't think the thought of entering school or going back to school pop. Into my head at all, and I don't know why I think it was because despite this this very emotional failure. I knew this is what I wanted to do. I had a firm conviction about that. And so I knew I wasn't going to go back. So would you do so we all ended up working at the same place? Actually, it was a company a pretty large company called Dun & Bradstreet at the time very stable company and we were all pretty fortunate. To be able to find work there as Engineers. So they time working at dun Bradstreet and then what at night sitting around just brainstorming.

3 (11m 46s):
Yeah, it was you know, we go into work during the daytime and then we'd come home in the evenings code different things try different things how you know, so it's a pretty intense work. I think in terms of the numbers of hours. I don't think anything changed from our first start up to to trying to figure this this next one out and before too long you decide to do another start. This time with Eric Friedman from your previous company and then another guy named co-con cuddle. Ooh, I think this was like 2003-2004. Yeah. Mm. This was about 2002 actually. Okay, and this time the startup was like a photo editing kind of platform like sharing platform. What was it called?

3 (12m 27s):
The company's name at the time was called he picks and the product itself was called electric shoe box because you know, a lot of people put their old photos in shoeboxes, and this was just Going to be a digital. Yes. I still have them as you boxes is digitized. Yeah, probably I should I know and so, you know electric shoe box is just going to be a digital version of your shoe box. And and what could you do? Well, there are digital cameras. Where were coming about that. Then it still wasn't easy to connect them upload photos like it was getting any easier but nowhere near what it is today, obviously. So the whole idea of electric shoe box was to make the whole process of getting photos.

3 (13m 7s):
Off your camera a lot easier and more importantly. We wanted to make the process of sharing these photos with your friends and family a lot easier. So did you raise money for for the product for the electric shoebox? We did we ended up raising money primarily from one of my friends from middle school who was a mutual fund manager in Boston. And so he put in a bit of money. Not a lot I think about at least for him is about a hundred thousand and we had a bunch of say things ourselves that that we were going to use and in anticipation. I also opened up a few more credit cards as well and it was just really the three of you like sitting at your computers and just tapping the keys like all night.

3 (13m 51s):
You pretty much know that I mean all we did was we would wake up in the morning walk over to the third bedroom and just start typing away for 12 hours. We take meal breaks. I remember Eric did a lot of cooking. We need our dinners on some TV stands watching TV. That was a good break for us watching Seinfeld and then go to bed and then repeat it, but I'll only day. All right, so you come up with this product. And by the way, how are you going to make money off of this thing? This is a free service a free. How are you going to pay for it? It was I guess what you call today would be called freemium software.

3 (14m 31s):
So it would be free for a period of time and then the trial period would end and then you'd have to submit your card information to continue idolizing software got okay. And so our primary goal is making sure that a lot of people knew about the software. So we put it on shareware sites Etc. And then we spent a lot of time debating, you know should be sent out a press release and I remember it was a huge debate because sending out a press release was going to be about $300 and that was a that was the level of expense that required a vigorous debate at the time. So he said, you know what without getting the product know How are we going to be successful? So we wrote up a press release and we put it out and actually it was probably the most pivotal decision we ever made in that company's history.

3 (15m 21s):
Yeah, because the first email came in a few hours later. I think the second one came in a day later, but we got two emails one from CNET which is a huge digital publishing company and then we got another email from Yahoo saying hey we We just heard about this launch of this this software product and you know, we'd like to talk to you guys more about it. Wow, exactly. This is coming from their corporate development arms, which typically no deals with MMA with with buying you buy companies. Yes, exactly. Like whoa, this is Magic has this happened 2005. It gets purchased by seen it.

3 (16m 1s):
They make an offer to buy this company by this product from you guys and you sell it to see net was Was it life-changing money? Did that mean that you never have to work again? It was it was definitely a good acquisition for for all of us at the time. You know. Remember you were three guys working out of our Apartments. I was at the time about $40,000 in credit card debt as well. So we were we were down to some desperate times and we were negotiating numbers and they threw out a number which was You know, the first offer was 4 million and wow.

3 (16m 41s):
Wow, that's that's amazing like God. I can't believe we built something. That's that's worth this much at the time. You're just stunned and then we quickly got to okay. How do we negotiate something? So you sell your company to see net in 2005 and you've got some money in your pocket and and you move to San Francisco to work for CNN. And did you enjoy it? I mean it was probably like a huge company at this point, right? It was a huge company, but I think the moment at least for me that I moved to San Francisco and I instantly fell in love with the city and Cena even though is a larger company.

3 (17m 22s):
I actually found it to be an amazing time. I learned a lot. No, I got some Management training ended up managing a small team of people learned a lot about how technology scales to millions millions of users how you market products. So I really enjoyed my experience there. I think it was pretty formative. So why did you leave seen it so we left seen at just because of I guess you could you could call it a bolt of lightning in some ways. It was December. Of 2006 and in tendo had just announced a Nintendo Wii and I remember coming home putting it together in at the time.

3 (18m 7s):
Nintendo had come up with this really Innovative control system using motion sensors. Yeah accelerometers to serve as inputs into a game and after using it especially in the you know, we fit which was a sports game. I thought wow this is this is incredible. This is amazing. This is magical like you New sensors in this way, you can use it to bring people together and particularly for we fit it was a way of getting people active of getting them moving together and I was just blown away by this whole idea really excited about I couldn't stop thinking about it and after some time of playing Wii Fit and the we and a lot of other games.

3 (18m 48s):
I thought you know, this is great. It's in my living room, but what if I want to take this outside of the living room and I kept thinking about that Idea, like how do you take the Wii Fit outside outside? Exactly and wow, so I couldn't let it go and I ultimately ended up calling up Eric and we started talking about this idea for four hours and hours and we couldn't stop talking about it. I how do we capture this magic and make it more portable. How do we give it to people 24/7 and that was really the Genesis of Fitbit. So the technology I mean pedometers have been around forever.

3 (19m 28s):
Right was that your sort of where your head was was going or thinking? Okay. Maybe we just create like an electronic pedometer buddy. I think even electronic pedometers were around in 2007, right? Yeah pedometers were definitely around back then actually had been around for probably a hundred years. One of the things though is that they weren't something that people would want to use or to where they were. Very big there are pretty ugly. They look like medical devices. A lot of senior citizens were like use them. Yeah, they weren't a very aspirational right device. So, you know wasn't something that people were excited to use and so I think that's why that whole category of device just never really had any Innovation and there are also much higher end devices.

3 (20m 16s):
You could buy much fancier running watches GPS watches Etc. But those are really expensive for people there are Covid 400 dollars at the time. Hmm. So you you have this idea and that means you have to raise money and this is the going to be the third time now that you've had to do that for a business and I think I read that you raised like $400,000 to launch this and I don't I mean, I don't know a lot of Hardware but that doesn't seem like it was going to take you very far in like building a physical product as we quickly found out. Yes. We had grossly. It the cost of taking this to Market and what what did that initial amount of money how far do they get you into actually conceiving of what this product was going to be?

3 (21m 6s):
It got us to a prototype right some rudimentary software get some industrial Design Concepts done and some odd and one of the Prototype look like was it does it look like a Fitbit? It looked absolutely nothing like a Fitbit. So there there are two things there was a actual somewhat working prototype and then there is an industrial design model which is the piece of plastic plastic and metal that right that was supposed to look like the ultimate product. And so that actually looked really really nice but it didn't work guess it was just totally non-functional we'd always have to tell people before shot at this this doesn't work. I guess they get all excited looking at the model but no no that doesn't work. The thing that actually worked look like something that came out of, you know a garage literally, what did it what what did it look like?

3 (21m 54s):
It was you know rectangular circuit board little bit smaller than your pique knit had a motion sensor. It had a radio. It had a microcontroller which was the brains of the product yet and it had a rudimentary case which was a Balsa with box. Wow, so you would take to investors a circuit board in a balsa wood box as your product to that. That was the Prototype and actually that was what we had demoed when we first announced the company. That was the Prototype that was actually being used at the announcement. Wow. How did you even get it to that point? Like cause you guys are both software Engineers. How did you develop a physical product that even even a sort of source of crude prototype could track movement.

3 (22m 41s):
Did you have other people help you do that? You know that was her big task was to find the right people who could help us. So I knew the founder of a really great industrial design firm in San Francisco called New Deal design. His name's goddamn it. And then on the algorithm side because it was going to take a lot of sophisticated algorithms to translate this motion data to actual data that users would be able to understand I ended up asking my best friend from college add because he was in grad school at Harvard at the time and he said wait, I think I might know somebody and it ended up being his teaching fellow. His name was Shelton and we talked and was like, wow, this guy is super smart.

3 (23m 22s):
We need to get them working. Algorithms. Yeah, so he he ended up working on the side while doing his Ph.D. Helping us out with a lot of the software. So, I mean you leave CNET in 2007 and you've got 4,000 to come up with a prototype that that quickly run out of that. So it's 2008 and of trying to raise money and how much how much is your rate? I think our first round was about two million dollars, which was not going to take you that far. If you wanted to develop a physical product that was super sophisticated a piece of Hardware. We thought we could do it. We thought we knew a little bit more about the hardware business. We put together another business plan budget. You know it was it was actually pretty challenging time to raise money as well because of the financial crisis.

3 (24m 7s):
We are sadly it was the fall of 2008 when we're trying to raise raise money. Yeah, and you know, one of the I guess the good and bad things about VCS is the good thing about VCS. They're incredibly healthy people. They're super fit but it also made it difficult for a lot of them to understand the value of the product because what we're trying to do was it wasn't a product meant for super athletic people. It was really meant to help normal people become more active become healthier Etc. And it was hard for a lot of them to grasp why that was valuable they'd asked. Well did it do X or did it do y and that enthusiasm you'd say? No, it doesn't do any of that and so it's very difficult for a lot of these super fit VC's to understand the value of the product even though a lot of them claim.

3 (24m 53s):
They don't try to put their own bias on these products naturally human to do that and did you know right away that this was going to Be any now they're fitbit's our watches mainly right that their wrist there on your wrist. But at that time you were thinking that this was just going to be something you would clip to your your clothing, you know, something to clip to your clothing for men and then what we found out in talking to a lot of women was that they wanted to tuck it away somewhere hidden. They didn't want people to see it and we said, okay, where would you want to put it and said, well a lot of our pants don't have pockets, so can't be in our pocket. And so Preferred place was actually on their bra, right?

3 (25m 35s):
So a lot of the physical design that we had to think about in the early days was how to come up with a product that would be very slim slender and clipped people's bra and hidden in Hidden and clip the bras pretty easily. And by the way, how did you come up with a name Fitbit that was a you know, it's never easy to name a company and it's even more challenging just because of domain names, right? That's something that's typically a lot of the limiting factor in naming a great company and So we would spend hours and hours and days just going through different permutations of names some and some awful ones as well. Like at some point. We got onto a fruit theme. So we were thinking like fit Berry or Barry fit or fit kado or you know, just some just some really awful names and no one made kado V Cod.

3 (26m 24s):
Oh, yes history might have turned out a lot differently for sure. So I was just taking a nap in my office. One afternoon. I think I was actually napping on the rug because I was so tired and I woke up and it just hit me it was it was Fitbit and the next challenge was actually the domain name the domain name was not available and it was owned by this guy in Russia. Like oh my God, how are we going to get this domain name? We'll just we'll just email the guy and see what happens and he said well, how much are you willing to offer? I said? Oh God.

1 (27m 2s):
Now,

3 (27m 3s):
how about like a thousand bucks? He's like move about 10,000 and I said, oh, I don't know. That sounds like a lot about mm. He's like, oh, okay. Mm deal. I think I was literally like two or three emails that we sent back and forth in this negotiation really the best $2,000 you ever spent in your life except for the 300D spent on the press release a couple years earlier. Definitely a definitely a good return. You've probably spent many millions of dollars on other things in your life that were not as good. Of a deal is that $2,000? Yeah, it's tens of thousands on concern, you know name and consultants and focus groups and trademark searches and all of that. So it's kind of funny. Hey as they say small companies small problems big company big problems.

3 (27m 47s):
Exactly. So, where do you begin? I mean, you gotta admit make it your find a factory. You gotta find designers. What do you where do you go? Yeah, very good. Very good question. So we obviously

1 (28m 2s):
He

3 (28m 2s):
had zero connections the challenge though is not actually the connections to the manufacturers but finding a manufacturer who we could actually convinced to build this product because we didn't have a background in Hardware. Yeah, and so would they actually want to work with us? That was the biggest concern at the time? So, how did you find them? We went out to China. We went out to Singapore and we were never going to be able to get the fox cons to get to go to a smaller place. We had to go to a Other place would be more Nimble more flexible who'd want to take a Financial Risk. And we finally found a great manufacturer based in Singapore called racer Technologies. And in the good thing is actually is the best of all Worlds.

3 (28m 44s):
The headquarters was in Singapore most of the management team and the engineering staff was in Singapore, but they had manufacturing facilities that were in Indonesia. So the labor there was going to be lower cost than the other Kippur. All right. So so 2008 you've got the name Fitbit. You go to TechCrunch to present Kellogg, you know unveil this product and what what was the product that you were offering we said, alright, we've got to sync all the Fitbit and it does this. What did you what did you say it did at that point. So our pitch to the crowd at TechCrunch and ultimately to a consumers was that it was a product that would track your steps distance calories and how much you slept and would answer some basic.

3 (29m 32s):
The questions about your health was I active enough today that I get enough sleep. What do I need to do to lose weight Etc. And you know, one of the more important aspects was this idea of a community as well join other people who own fitbit's your friends and family and you could compete with each other and was on wireless like you don't really have to do anything. All you have to do is wear this device. You don't even think about it and all this magic would happen. So that was the promise of that at the time there was a lot of excitement there, but I'm wondering What are you nervous to do these presentations that you have to like prepare like crazy or or did you just find your ability to like be this person you had to be on stage when you got up there?

3 (30m 15s):
Yeah, I think there was no other choice. So it was just something we had to do and you know, I think are you better at it than Eric or is Eric better at it than you I think we're both good in our in our different ways that just fell upon me. I don't even know how we decide, you know those things but actually what Was running through our minds was not what we were going to say and how we're going to say it but whether the demo would actually work. All right on stage cause again it was it was a little sketchy was still very early. It wasn't it was still in the in the wooden box and the balsa wood box balsa wood box face, right. So we're just worried that the demo would just fail or crash but it where I was it worked and actually if they crash in the middle of the presentation because the whole demo was about me walking on stage the device would be Lightning stats and at one point I would turn to Eric and say here Eric.

3 (31m 5s):
Why don't you refresh the page and show that all the stats have been uploaded magically do this wireless connection. And so the demo actually crashed while I was talking and Eric was furiously trying to reboot his computer during this period I don't even know anything about it, but ultimately, you know the demo did work and so to many people it seemed like magic. Yeah literally people started clapping it was it was really amazing so originally, right Or TechCrunch Eric, and I you know, we made just a verbal bet. You know, how many pre-orders are we going to get after this conference? And we now to make the company public and you know, I think Eric said I think we'll get like five pre-orders. So it's like the device isn't even available people can have to give us your credit card information.

3 (31m 49s):
And I said, you know what? I'm not as pessimistic. I think there's going to be like 10 15 20 and so we got off stage and by the end of the day we had about 2,000 pre-orders well, When we come back in just a moment James and Erik have a prototype in the balsa wood box and they don't exactly know how they're going to get from there to filling thousands of pre-orders. But a lot of people are expecting them in time for Christmas. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsor signature Hardware signature Hardware helps Inspire home renovations to spruce up your space signature.

3 (32m 36s):
Hardware's online Resource Center is prepared with DIY and how to guides for easy updates in your own style with statement pieces that are classic or on Trend whether it's changing out cabinet hardware or hanging style is shelf brackets, their customer service team is there to help guide you through the process head to signature. Hardware.com NPR for inspiration on your next renovation. Thanks also to better help online counseling by licensed professional counselors specializing in isolation depression stress and anxiety visit better help.com built to learn more and get 10% off your first month.

3 (33m 22s):
The biggest story in the world is a science story and keeping up with all the latest coronavirus research. It's a lot. So on shortwave we translate the science. You need to know in two short daily episodes. Listen And subscribe to shortwave from NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's 2008 and James and his co-founder Eric Friedman show off their Fitbit Prototype at TechCrunch and it makes a huge Splash problem is they have no finished product. They haven't even figured out how they're going to make it and pre-orders are pouring in and they just kept coming in.

3 (34m 7s):
It was crazier like, oh my God now we gotta it's not just dozens of these units we have to It's now a thousands and more and more everyday and so we were still thinking Christmas of that year that we are going to start shipping out units and it rapidly became clear to us that we weren't going to make Christmas. And so we're thinking okay. How do we keep all these people happy while we pull this off. So this was before Kickstarter and Indiegogo and all that. So we kind of had to improvise. We're like, okay. Why don't we just block? About the whole process and just be very open and transparent about it.

3 (34m 47s):
So we started a Blog and I wrote maybe weekly updates on how things were going challenges and delays that that we're facing and I was really surprised actually, you know, it worked it made people understand what we were going through. Yeah, they are literally seeing the thing being made the sausage being made behind the scenes and I think that people that kept people really engaged

1 (35m 12s):
The

3 (35m 13s):
process so you have basically a bunch of contractors and Freelancers and you guys are going back and forth to Asia and your you got people working on the software to transmit the data to the web. You've got some people working on the hardware presumably in Singapore trying to shrink down the motherboard to something that is 2 inches by 1/2 inch and what are you just constantly running into failures like you would think that all here it is and then Like somebody would hit the go button and then it will just fizzle out. It wouldn't work. Yeah. I can't even enumerate the number of challenges with the product that we had and go please start, you know in some ways a lot of people I think when you think about Hardware it's like, oh, I'll find a manufacturer in China.

3 (35m 60s):
Yeah, I'll throw over sign. They're just they'll just run with it, you know, and then let us give me the send me the bill and then yeah and they'll just crank out thousands tens of thousands of this but you know, that's that's never networks if it's a Like a suitcase we've done away, right? So it works if it's that thing if it's that thing or something that that's very similar to something that they've built before. Well, that's that's that's a different story than this thing that this manufacturer never had built before so they would send you things and say, yep, we got it and then you would get it and it sucked. It just didn't work. Yeah, we would have wait for them to send it. I mean either myself or Eric would be in Indonesia or Singapore at and at any given We trade off different weeks and we were out there on the production lines pretty much inspecting every every part of the process.

3 (36m 51s):
But we're you convinced this thing was going to work or did you have doubt I was out. I was absolutely convinced. That was we have no doubts that this is that this is no doubt because we were getting proof every day that this was something that was going to be big and I think the first evidence of that was a TechCrunch we had 2,000 pre-orders and we're Ting pre-orders everyday, I think by the summertime we had we had about 25,000 pre-orders at $100 per unit. That's that's a fair amount of Revenue if we could shift these units and how much is it going to cost you to make each unit. That was a very good question. We didn't know that hopefully under a hundred years. You didn't know you were selling them for a hundred.

3 (37m 33s):
But you know, how much is going to cost you? We had a we had a sense of the bill of materials. I think we were trying to shoot for a gross margin of about 50 percent. So we're targeting

1 (37m 43s):
Know the

3 (37m 43s):
full cost of the product including shipping Etc being no more than fifty dollars. So that's what we're targeting a lot. That's that's high. It's a high cost. It's a high cost. But you know, that was a cost that which we felt we could sustain ourselves as a business. How did you and Eric manage your relationship and friendship? I mean with the stress of this delay and inability to meet demand and all these like was attention at all between the two of you. Are you guys totally on the same page? You know, I don't I don't think there was that much tension. I mean a lot of stress but not not tension. I think we trust in our ability to you know help each other out and there are periods when either of us would be pretty down on the In the product and luckily we weren't down both of the same time and and that's why it helps I think to have a co-founder.

3 (38m 38s):
So there were times are you were really down and he can give you a pep talk and yeah Zach get him and I wonder why he wasn't and and there's some pretty dark times right before we shipped their remember we were months before we thought we could finally get the first unit off the production line and I was sitting in my hotel room in Singapore and I was I was testing out one of the Oh type builds that that racer had produced and the radio range was not good at all. He was supposed to have a range of feet or 15 one. That was the hope that I would have 15 to 20 feet range. But the range was actually like two inches god with to the antenna in the device had a 2-inch Ray.

3 (39m 21s):
Yeah, it would only work at two inches and I'm feeling we've got a shit this this holiday season like I've got tens of thousands. These people waiting on God and so I'm just freaking out in my hood my whole entire have a cord and just plug it in. Exactly exactly. It's okay, so I couldn't sleep that night obviously and I took the unit apart like I had a multimeter and I was measuring different voltages and currents and what I realized was, huh? The Keeble for the display was kind of flexible and long enough that maybe it was actually drooping down and touch seeing the antenna and that will cause reissue interferes creating interference and I could kind of see that when you put the whole thing together that it might troop down and I thought okay, how do I create a shin?

3 (40m 12s):
That would prompt the antenna up? So I went to the bathroom grab some toilet paper roll the little bit of it in a ball and stuff that between the antenna and the display cable. Yeah, but the device back together And it started working like wow, I enjoy was great was so you have to separate one wire from the antenna and that was it with toilet paper was like toilet paper. Yeah, that was it and I still couldn't sleep. So the next as early as possible following morning. I raced into our manufacturing said, okay, I think I found the problem but obviously a toilet paper is not a scalable high-volume situation. So they went back and figured out how they could make this.

3 (40m 55s):
Manufacture ball, so they ended up creating these little tiny die cut pieces of rubber that they would glue onto the circuit board to keep the antenna away from the display cable. Wow. Yeah. Wow, so that was basically was just inserting something in there and then it worked. Yeah, it wasn't exactly duct tape. But that was the equivalent pretty close was pretty close to. All right. So you guys launch this product in Christmas of 2009 and it was a pretty successful. Peaceful product launch you had 25,000 orders and sounds like you're Off to the Races, but I guess even like with this success.

3 (41m 36s):
Did you when you went out to raise money? This is 2010 were investors more excited or was it still a challenge to get more investors in it was still it was touch allenge and at the time it wasn't you know, okay, I guess you guys are having some success like consumers are buying the product Etc that And they congratulated us on the right, but they were very scared of Hardware businesses. I think there had been a lot of really high-profile failures in the consumer electronics Industry. And so it was very difficult for us to raise money. I remember we had a spreadsheet of Target VCS. I think there are 40 names that we put on that list and literally we went to number 40 before we were able to raise money and just giving this Same pitch again again answering the same questions same pitch driving, you know, we're in San Francisco driving down 101 to Sand Hill Road constantly giving the same pitch to 40 VCS.

3 (42m 38s):
You know, that's probably the one thing I didn't like about that whole time period was I hate seeing the same pitch over and over and hearing the same questions and same objections Etc. So that that was not a fun or stimulating time for me. Yeah. All right. Eventually the 40th investor does decide to give you some money. I think you raised about a million dollars. And at this point were you able to then have like a proper office and a Ana staff? Were you able to kind of begin to recruit real full-time engineers and developers and people like that? We were we did that after the with the round that was right after our first two million dollar institutional round the hired a bunch of customer support Personnel interviewed and hired our first head of sales.

3 (43m 31s):
I you know interviewed and hired someone to finally run all of our manufacturing and operations, which is still a job that I was doing like I was still issuing all the PO managing the inventory and I think we're really fortunate because the early management team that we hired in those days pretty much made it up to and past our IPO which I think rarely happens. It's so crazy to think about now, but I think early on right with with the Fitbit. The idea was to be part of a bigger community. So like the data from your activity would be available. You would just go to a site and you could see and you could see everybody else's because the idea was we're all part of this together, but I think like early on right some like users were tracking like Saks and when you started to hear about these things was your reaction like, oh my God, never even thought about this being like a Privacy thing I always thought that people would just want to share stuff.

3 (44m 27s):
Yeah, I think we this was still kind of the early days of sharing sharing things like that and I found about it because I saw this tweet about some going. Hey, if you do this Google Search, you'll see because Google is indexing or other public Pages or people logging things that people made public you could find out all the sexual activities that people are locking up Fitbit and I saw that I'm like, oh my God. It's not good. Yeah, so that ended up being the first real PR crisis for the company and it was happening over the Fourth of July weekend. So I had to call an emergency. Oh man, you know, we had to scramble to delete all that stuff turn everything private because the default setting initially when you go to Fitbit was it's not private.

3 (45m 15s):
It's open. Yeah idea is it was going to be a big community of people trying to get fit? Yeah. I mean, we made a lot of things private by default. So we made sure Sure, that people's weight was Private because we thought that would be sensitive but we didn't think that oh people's activities. There wasn't any harm in doing that and we just didn't realize that people would start things and just to be clear like people who log sexual activity. This is not like a category that you offered up. It was just people were voluntarily deciding to just log that as one of their activities. What was it was a category, but it wasn't something that we had realized. So we use this. Database from the government that was like thousands of different activities that people with.

3 (45m 58s):
Oh, I see I can so it wasn't an option. We just didn't think people would with volume which is naive about that. We were naive like, okay. This is a government database of activities that must be fine. That was that was quite a shock and a wake-up call for us. So Fitbit for the first couple years was a still a clip mainly a clip and then I think really 2011 you release the first product Christmas of 2009. You got 2010 by 2011. I read you just this is exploded like 5x growth from 2011-2012. You went from fifteen million dollars in Revenue to 76 million dollars in Revenue.

3 (46m 43s):
What was going on? Was it just this self-generating phenomenon? Like were you surprised by it? Were you investing in marketing was it just unearned media just people reporting on it. What was On I think the primary reason is you know, because we had baked in the social element this community element into it from the very beginning. It ended up being a very viral very viral product. So one family member would get it and to really realize the potential, you know, the community aspect in the competitive aspect. You have to have someone else as well. So they'd either buy it for their spouse or their parents and they would start competing and then they'd buy it for their Her friends and they try to get their friends to buy the product.

3 (47m 27s):
So it's so they can each see how many steps you were people at that remember this. I remember this NPR people were wearing fitbit's and they were talking and there was I think there was even people are encouraged to get fitbit's exactly so it was it was very driven by word of mouth. And in this viral spread was was a huge driver of our growth in those days. Um, I think bye-bye 2013 you had some competitors coming in the Nike Nike was making one and and jaw bone was making one. And I mean, I remember going to the Ted conference in 2013 and getting a job own in my gift bag. Were you worried about the competition that pointer or not?

3 (48m 9s):
Really? Yeah at that time. I think people were looking at the success and you know, there was even a name coined for the whole category, which is Quantified. Off, right. How do I use sensors Etc to measure everything that I'm doing in my entire life? And so that attracted a lot of competition and she said and I'd have to say the competitive aspect was was definitely worrying at the time, especially with Nike and job Seekers are so huge. They were cute. I mean Nike obviously it's a multi billion-dollar multinational company with a lot of media dollars. I remember when they announced the FuelBand, you know, they had all these celebrities. 40 athletes at the announcement and were like, oh God that's insane and yet by 2014 you had 67 percent of the activity tracking marketplace, right?

3 (48m 58s):
I've been Fitbit was just totally dominating the market place. I mean, we're you and Eric doing like like Victory laps and high-fiving each other and thinking back to all those like all those doubters and what was going on. I think we're still pretty I don't know if scared so weird. I think it's still very very cautious. You know, nothing was was guaranteed. There was a lot of competition that was emerging. We start a lot of internal challenges in the business, you know, scaling production scaling the company Etc. So again, a lot of fires for us to be solving on a day-to-day basis and remember occasionally, we'd always check in and say hey, when do you think we'll know like this is this what kind of make it?

3 (49m 42s):
Yeah, and we decided Well known six months and we kept saying that every Six months, so it was pretty much an an ongoing thing, you know, pretty much up to the IPO. 2015 was a huge turning point for you in many ways your public think your market cap. I read a certain point which 10 billion dollars that year 2015 Apple to Apple watch is released and they stop selling Fitbit in their stores at the time you were quoted as saying, you know, I don't really not really worried about this because huge markets a 200 billion dollar market.

3 (50m 25s):
You know the Apple watch is just crammed with a bunch of stuff for smart watches are crammed with a bunch of stuff. And what we're doing is something simpler. Was that what you were saying publicly because I don't know did you you felt like you should be saying that or did you really think that was true that this that the Apple watch wouldn't actually have much of an impact, you know, we were definitely concerned. I mean this was the preeminent technology and especially hardware company at the time with an amazing brand we have faced off. Phillips and Nike and jaw bone which were you know in the rights very big competitors, especially Nike we did feel very strongly that our product had very clear advantages.

3 (51m 8s):
It was a simpler product if you looked at the Apple watch that was announced at that time. I think everyone will admit maybe even Apple that it was a product that didn't quite know what it was supposed to be used for. So with the launch of the first Apple watch. I don't really think that at that had an actual impact on the trajectory of the business. It wasn't the product that it would later later become and the industry wasn't where it would eventually evolve either. I mean, but eventually the industry did change right? I mean, I mean Apple watch got really popular think like by 2016 Fitbit stock drop by like 75% over the course of a year when you and Eric were running a Publicly traded company and the stock was just like tumbling.

3 (52m 0s):
So what did you think? I mean, I can't imagine that was pleasant for you. No, it was definitely a stressful stressful period And You could argue. Well, we maybe we shouldn't even have been valued at 10 billion in the first place and I think a lot of times it's a question of you know perception, right if we had never hit that ten billion and we had steadily grown into you know, the two billion I I think people's perceptions and you know, just psychology about the whole situation would have been different. I'm going to 10 and falling to to yeah, and it was a very challenging period because it's a private company despite challenges your valuation doesn't change very often it only changes when you raise money, which should happen once a year once every two years.

3 (52m 48s):
So if you hit a bump in the road your employees don't really feel it. We had a product recall where if I've been a public company or valuation would have plummeted immediately but at the time of the private so we just told the employees. Hey, look this is the challenge. It's pretty serious. But here are the steps that we're going to take to get through it and everyone kind of rallied together. But when you're being measured every day in real time stock price by the stock price, you're not really given a lot of breathing room to try to fix things even though you were introducing new products. he was declining every year from the time you went public and I read an article about something that you did in 2017, and I'm really just curious to get your take on it cuz I actually think it's really Courageous but but also probably super stressful and difficult which is you asked your employees to submit a an evaluation of the company and of you and and then you sat in front of them to hear the results of the this evaluation and it wasn't good you had you even had some employees who wrote letters to the board asking that you be removed as CEO.

3 (54m 6s):
I can't imagine that was easy for you to hear. You know, I don't know if I heard that particular feedback directly, but clearly the survey results were not great. You know, I kind of half jokingly think, you know probably used to hearing very critical feedback because of my parents. I don't think there's a moment where they were truly happy with anything that I did. I remember even when I took the SATs and I got my score back it was it was a pretty good score, but my dad just honed in clearly the areas that that had not done well. So I don't think I have a huge ego. I mean, I do have an ego. I think it's human to have one. Shut my primary focus was how do I how do I get things back on track you had there was a quote from somebody in an article is anonymous quote said, you know, we were focused on as a certain point or focus on the right things.

3 (55m 2s):
We had the ability and have the ability to know a lot about our users which you do, but our users don't want to be told What they did in other words, they don't want to be told. Hey you exercise you did 10 steps and today they want to be told what to do like how to get better. So and the quote was this was the greatest missed opportunity. I know you've made a pivot since then but was that a fair assessment at the time 2017 that you were just you were to focus on telling people what they've accomplished rather than telling them what they need to do. Yeah. I think they're ultimately kind of two big things. Things that were driving the headwinds in the business.

3 (55m 42s):
First of all, I think we were really behind in launching a competitive Smartwatch the time like people were transitive to to act competitive Temple. Yeah. It was clear that the industry consumers were moving to that category and we are seeing that in our sales. So in appear in a very short period of time our tracker business fell by 800 million dollars in revenue and you know, Time at our Peak we're doing about 2.1 billion. Well in Revenue, so we had 800 million-dollar hole and we finally launcher Smartwatch, but it was only sufficient to fill that hole very barely.

3 (56m 24s):
You know, we hadn't we hadn't transformed the software into giving people guidance and advice and it also ties to our failure at the time to quickly diversify Revenue stream Beyond just Hardware. Two Services Biz like a subscription exactly. Yeah, we were so focused on growing our Hardware business because that was what was bringing in the money. That was very Taylor's wanted Etc. And you know, one of the mistakes I made was not setting up enough time and the focus to building this subscription part of the business that actually answered those pivotal questions for for our users as many many companies find themselves in a successful companies that have a successful Legacy product was crazy talking about a legacy product for your company, which is only 10 years old or 12 years old.

3 (57m 16s):
But but you know the you can argue that the Fitbit product is your legacy product, right and that as any company with Legacy product realizes they've got to make a pivot like for American Express. It was traveler's checks for a hundred years, right? You know, that's how they made their money and they had to Pivot into other things travel Services of credit cards and so on. It sounds like in 2019 you really made a pivot into thinking about Fitbit not as a hardware company that makes like a Tracker watch or device right Smartwatch. But a company that really is about Healthcare and is designed to kind of pivot into more into Healthcare data and Analysis.

3 (58m 2s):
Is that fair? Is that right? Yeah, I think that's that's fair. I think we stop thinking of ourselves. It's a device company and Reverser Behavior change company because that's effectively what people were buying our products and services to do right was the change their behavior in a really positive way and not only you know individual people but companies as well companies who in the u.s. Especially bear the direct costs of the health care of their employees. So we started thinking about ourselves as a behavior change company and you know figuring out what are the products And services that that really deliver that both to the people and to businesses.

3 (58m 47s):
So we get to the end of last year where Google announces that they were going to buy Fitbit 2.1 billion dollars. We shouldn't mention that at the time of this recording. It hasn't closed yet to me. It makes perfect sense of I'm you or Eric. I would have done it. I would have said two point 1 billion dollars. That's a very that's great. That's a great outcome because now with Google We've got access to their their dollars and their research labs and all the you know, the people who work there in the analytics and our ability to really go to the next level. Why did it make sense for free from your perspective to to sell the Google? Yeah, that's a very complicated and kind of emotionally fraught question, but Last year our board met and it was pretty clear to everybody that we had a lot of challenges in the business.

3 (59m 39s):
We weren't profitable. There was a lot of competition out there from the likes of Apple from Samsung some emerging Chinese competitors, but there was a lot of just great things going on in the company. Like I was so excited about our product roadmap about something, you know things that were in our pipeline all the advanced research that we're doing around health and sensor. Like I would look at our product roadmap every day and just you know, come on way super excited about that and then also be you know confronted with a lot of the business challenges as well. And for me most importantly it was about electricity and I wanted the Fitbit brand and what we did to continue onwards for a very very long time and we just had to figure out the best way to do it whether it was as an independent company or within a larger company.

3 (1h 0m 30s):
That was really what was most important. I imagine that there are some details you can't talk about for for obvious reasons. But as of this recording we're talking in mid-april, there is a hold on the Google acquisition at the Department of Justice is doing a an investigation because there's some interest groups who have said. Hey, you know, we don't think that Google should have access to all this data that Fitbit Fitbit has 20 million users. Is this incredible Trove of Health Data? Is that causing you stress right now that there is this this justice department. Hold up on the acquisition know it's and it's because you know, sometimes the Press does like to sensationalize things, but the process that were undergoing right now with the Department of Justice and also with the EU and in some other countries around the world is pretty normal for Acquisitions of the size.

3 (1h 1m 25s):
In fact, it's required really, you know, the whole reviews about the anti-competitive element and especially around and the wearable market share, so that's just something that we have to convince Regulators that you know, this doesn't reduce competition in the marketplace as far as you know, the situation now with the lockdowns and and the pandemic does not have any impact on Google's interest or commitment to making this happen now, I think everyone's thinking towards the long term fingers crossed is that we do find ourselves through this covid-19 situation and that there is life beyond that maybe a Back slowly but you know, I think everyone is thinking what is this whole category look like in time span of years out and I think what one of the things that covid-19 is shown is that especially if you look at Healthcare this idea of remote Health Care remote monitoring people people healthy outside a hospital Yang is actually really important super it's going to totally change Mets.

3 (1h 2m 26s):
I've had I've had a video call with my doctor just for a quick question, you know, it's actually super convenient exactly and if during these telemedicine visits if they have a snapshot in summary of what you've been up to and what your health is been outside of that visit and almost be predictive in that way. I mean, I think that's that can be really groundbreaking in terms of the way that's being practiced in the way medicine gets practiced and this whole time period is merely accelerating that transition when you think about all of the things that that you have done professionally and Our successes and you made a lot of money. I mean, you're extremely wealthy and wealthier than your parents could have ever imagined you would be or they would be and I took a huge risk to come to the u.s.

3 (1h 3m 13s):
And not all these little mom-and-pop stores. How much of that do you think is because of your intelligence and skill and how much do tribute to lock? You know that's always a tricky tricky question to answer. You know, I think very fortunate to have grown up with my parents. Just having seen them persevere through life. You get the realization that nothing really comes easy that it does take a lot of You know just grinding away at things that at the time seemed seemed kind of unpleasant. So I think those are good traits and very fortunate to have parents like that who sacrificed a lot to put me in some great schools over time, even though they started from some humble beginnings.

3 (1h 4m 1s):
So but also have learned a lot of ways gotten some lucky breaks where things have could have gone the wrong way very very quickly, you know, ultimately attributed to a little bit Of little bit of all of that. I think it's not fair to say that everything is luck because then I think you start to Discount the actual things actions that you can take on your own to affect the future and that's really important. It's James Park co-founder of Fitbit. And here's a number for you 34 million 640 2772.

3 (1h 4m 43s):
That is how many steps James has tracked since he first put on that balsa wood Fitbit Prototype at least as of this recording. It's about fifteen thousand four hundred and thirty miles or twenty four thousand eight hundred and thirty two kilometers. And thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or as guy Roz. This episode was produced by James tell who see with music composed by routine Arab Louis. Thanks also to Sarah saracen Candice limb, Julia Carney neba Grant Casey Herrmann and Jeff Rogers.

3 (1h 5m 24s):
I'm Gyros and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.