1 (2s):
For many, many years I had on my desk, two, three ring binders, each of them three or four inches wide filled with all the rejections. And I kept them there just to remind me that you could have the best idea in the world, all the talent, but there was some other ingredient that had to do with stubbornness or perseverance. And I don't know where I got that. That's why I kept those notes. And I was just trying to get people to, yes,

2 (34s):
Welcome to how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built. I'm guy Roz and on the show today, how Ken burns built one of the most valuable documentary archives in the world and became one of the most iconic filmmakers of his generation. There's a black and white photo in an old national geographic from the mid 1950s of a young mother, spooning food into her baby's mouth. The baby sits in a high chair, looking straight at the camera and the mother smiles gently at her son.

2 (1m 18s):
It's a photo of true love. The baby in the photo is Ken burns. The young woman was his mother Laila and the man behind the camera who took the photo was his father. Robert Burns. Now, if you read more about this photograph, you'll find out that the family was in France, where Robert Burns was an anthropology graduate student, doing research for his dissertation. There's so much in this photo that captures the story of a young family and a moment in time. But just 10 years after the photo was taken, Ken burns, mom Laila would pass away from breast cancer and her death would have a lasting impact on the family.

2 (1m 59s):
Ken was just a kid, but a kid who grew up to become one of the most influential filmmakers of his generation, the power of the still photo and of archival black and white footage would become his stock in trade. He figured out a way to add just the right amount of movement, music, narration, and sound effects to bring a story to life. In fact, engineers at apple were so inspired by his trademark panning movement that they integrated it into their video software and called it. The Ken burns effect, Ken and his small team of producers and editors have built an unmatched documentary film archive, basically a storehouse of American history, the civil war, the Brooklyn bridge, jazz, the national parks, real war to baseball and many, many more his company Florentine films has brought to life American giants like Jackie Robinson and Lewis and Clark.

2 (2m 59s):
In fact, it's hard to imagine an important American story without a companion film from Ken burns, but it's also hard to imagine any of these films existing without eight key ingredient, which is money. And so in addition to being a creative, Ken burns had to learn pretty early on, had to be a businessman, partly to cut down on costs. He moved his business to Walpole New Hampshire, which is where he still operates today. And even after he developed a close relationship with PBS as a producing partner, Ken still had to knock on doors of corporations and foundations to find a way to pay for each film he was inspired to make, but perhaps most importantly, Ken was uncompromising about intellectual property.

2 (3m 47s):
He did not allow his work to be owned by anyone else. And as a result, Ken burns oversees an archive of films and content that is enormously valuable. Ken was born in Brooklyn, but mainly grew up in Ann Arbor in a house near the university of Michigan, where his dad was an assistant professor of anthropology. And once Ken's mom was diagnosed with cancer, he and his younger brother, Rick had to face the sadness and uncertainty of a life without their mother.

1 (4m 18s):
Since I was two and a half, three years old, somewhere around there, I was aware that something was wrong and it was obviously confirmed by many, you know, trips and time away to the doctor and then in the hospital. And then they sat us down. I can really remember it and just said, you know, and my mom pulled me aside afterwards and said, you know, our pulled us aside said, oh, don't worry. LCU till, till junior high school, which then meant it started seventh grade. And you know, God bless her. She, she missed it by a few months. She died at the end of April, April 28th, 1965. I was in the last month or so of the, I was 11, soon to be 12. And in the last months of, of the sixth grade.

1 (5m 2s):
And so, you know, it was hell guy. I mean, there's no other way to describe it. It was, it was terrifying.

2 (5m 9s):
Yeah. I mean, it's, it's, it's hard to imagine w w what it's like to be a child going to sleep every night with the anxiety of, and trying to process with what that means.

1 (5m 21s):
Yeah. Well, that was it. You don't go to sleep and you stay up. And I have all these memories of stomach aches that lasted all night and trying not to bother my parents or bothering my parents or being unable to go on a school trip, because the second I moved towards the bus, I get anxious and not, not, we didn't have that word. Then I get a stomach ache. Right. And it was literally an attempt, I guess, to stay close and protect my mom. And, you know, it was eating us, both Rick and me and I I'm sure my dad not to mention my mother who was incredibly heroic and, and courageous.

1 (5m 59s):
And she just was a rock. I mean, I found Fannie MacArthur, a letter she wrote to my father's mother just saying, I'm dying. What are we what's going to happen to my boys? Because Bobby, as everyone called, my dad can't take care of us. Well, you know, we struggled after she died. And, and he did an okay job. He tried, he did his best. He could, and we did survive. And we did. Okay.

2 (6m 28s):
Everything that I've read about your dad was that he was brilliant. And as, as you've described in the smartest person, you ever knew, but not, not equipped to handle the, the aftermath of your mom's passing. He was not. You know, and I, I think a lot of people can relate to this. It just, it crushed him. He couldn't function properly.

1 (6m 49s):
I think he couldn't deal with life itself guy. And I think then, you know, the death of my mother also kind of became something to hide behind. It gave him another excuse about why that dissertation wouldn't get finished, you know, and a lot of people who are in the position of actually making diagnoses, but never met him pasture that there was a bipolar component to this so much so that he was actually sought some treatment in the early nineties and was misdiagnosed by a quack and ended up sort of being treated for add, which was then a kind of diagnosis <inaudible>.

1 (7m 36s):
And it totally changed him from a father who was so proud of his sons and what they did to someone who was sort of angry about it. And it was hard to, it was hard to take and whatever the, the meds were or the combination of, of meds. It just, it, it wasn't good for him. And so I don't know how, where his grief really was. I don't, I never saw him cry when she was sick or when she died or at the funeral. I did see him cry when he showed me a movie once. And that's what made me, that's my origin story. That's what made me want to become a filmmaker as him.

1 (8m 17s):
I saw my dad cry for the first time watching, sir, Carol reads odd man out with James Mason about the Irish troubles. And he just cried. And I suddenly, I got it instantly. I was by that time just 12. And, but I, but I knew that it had provided him some emotional, safe Harbor. And I knew, I felt emotions with music that made me feel a certain way and that I wanted, I wanted to do that, I guess.

2 (8m 42s):
Yeah. You mentioned, and I I've, I've seen, you mentioned this in the past, this movie, odd man out, he was really like that. Not just into watching movies on TV, like he was really into it. He was

1 (8m 55s):
Really into it. Yeah. He loved. And in fact, you know, he had a fairly strict curfew for, for record me after my mom died. And he for K fed on school nights, if, till 1:00 AM with all the commercials, there was some movie he wanted me to see and, or he'd take me down to the campus theater on south university. And, you know, I just got this amazing education and he seemed to know and love all these things, not just the famous directors, but he'd also show the lesser stuff of Howard Hawks, you know, who is a great, great director, but he, you know, doesn't come to mind. And so, you know, when I decided at 12, after I saw him cry that I wanted to be a filmmaker, then I just, oh, I just took on that same responsibility to read as much as I could about film theory and criticism and mostly history.

1 (9m 41s):
And more importantly to see as many movies as I could. And by the time I was in late high school, I was keeping like three by five cards on, you know, what I'd seen and arrived at Hampshire college, you know, certain that I would be John Ford or Howard Hawks. And they're like, huh, who are you?

2 (9m 58s):
I think at 17 is when you got your first camera, super eight camera. And, and I'm curious at that time, this isn't sort of 1970 ish, was it, was it really expensive to get a super eight camera? No.

1 (10m 13s):
You know, and I have to check with the mythology department here, guy, you know, my dad gave me a camera. It was not because I was, I was Steven Spielberg who, you know, I know and admire. And I know the way in which he just learned the craft. It was because I seem to be in the movies and keep saying that I wanted to be a filmmaker that I got, that I got a super eight camera, and I really didn't know what to do with it. We'd sometimes sort of have these false starts in some sort of drama or assigned section thing, or I'd go out and I'd want to document pollution in Ann Arbor and couldn't, you know, figure it, nothing ever got finished, nothing ever really got made. And all of the period of time we're talking about my brother is digesting for the most part novels.

1 (10m 58s):
And I'm reading the encyclopedia. I ha I don't know it. I could not articulate it, but I was developing a love of American history. And in fact, somebody who was in my class in the ninth grade world history, and he said, I always remember looking over at you and thinking there's somebody knows what he's going to do. And I'm going, you know, BS now, way I, at that point, I knew exactly I wanted to be a writer and a filmmaker. And, you know, please don't interrupt that dream. It was only the accident of stuff in college that the history came roaring back in such a, just like refreshing kind of flood, a clean cleansing flood.

1 (11m 40s):
And I hadn't realized, and you just realize, oh my God, how lucky am I, I know what I want to do. And I know what I want to do at about,

2 (11m 48s):
I mean, the history piece of it would, would come a little later, because as you said, when, when you went off to Hampshire college in, in 1971, you wanted to do feature films, like, like maybe the next John Ford or, or, or Hitchcock. So you studied photography and film with, with the professors there. And by the way, Hampshire was, I mean, it's obviously still experimental today, but I mean, it was really brand new when you got there.

1 (12m 16s):
Yeah. It was brand new. Yeah. I went for my interview and it had just opened, I mean, there, you know, there were cranes and, or the equivalent of grains, there were holes in the ground with, you know, falsework and scaffolding and things like that. And it was terrifically exciting. I, I grown up literally budding the university of Michigan of 40,000 students. And because of our financial situation, I was just presumed, I'd go there. And I never applied to any other college. And then suddenly I realized just before Christmas of 1970, that I was about to go to the most expensive college on earth and I had no money. So my grandmother gave me some money and a great aunt of mine on my mother's side had died and left me a little bit of money.

1 (13m 3s):
And so somehow I got a scholarship and it all made possible and I would go away for one year. How was the idea? And I went away obviously, and I stayed because I had just loved it and just figured out a way by hook or by crook to do it. But yeah, I walked in there fully intending to be a John Ford or Alfred Hitchcock who Howard Hawks. And, and they were looking at me like I was some strange person and they were all wonderful, still photographers. And they had kind of disabused me of, of, of that in the, in the gentleness of way, you know,

2 (13m 35s):
That, that maybe feature feature filmmaking, wasn't the direction you should add into

1 (13m 41s):
Jerome Liebling, who is the senior faculty member, Elaine Mays was the other choose the first person, we got very, very intensely close to her, but Jerry was sort of a father figure and scary. He just said, they call it the industry, don't they? Right. You know, like implying that, you know, they had silhouettes of Palm trees on their stationary, but really there should be smokestacks. Right. So right then and there, I began to feel like the, my legs were buckling a little bit.

2 (14m 7s):
It's interesting. Cause I, I remember reading about like Quentin Tarantino and his film school was, was working at a video store. It was watching everything, Japanese films and so-called Blacksburg PlayStation films. And, and that's, that's what led him to make films. But it seems like in your case you had read so much film criticism that you, in a sense you couldn't, you came to the realization or the conclusion, I guess that because you knew what was bad about film or what wasn't good enough that, that you would never make anything that could satisfy your

1 (14m 43s):
Oh, that's so interesting. I've never thought about it in quite that way. I do think that maybe that criticism implies good and bad, but there was something about any. And as soon as you make a film, you'll know this, it's really hard to just make a film, however bad the critics think it is. It's just really hard to get a film done. So I'm overly generous to anybody. You can get a film done because I know firsthand how hard it is to do a film. And so I don't think I quite understood that then, but I do know that I had yet to find a way to express what I wanted to do. So here was the beginning of the abandonment of the original dream of Hollywood and feature films and realizing within the world of documentary, I am coming to a fundamental realization that what is, and what was, is as dramatic as anything anyone can make up.

1 (15m 39s):
And so all of a sudden I'm not leaving dramatic films. I'm just saying they've got an alternative universe, which is a new kind of documentary I'm thinking, right. That there's a beginning in the middle and an end and an antagonist and protagonist and a climax and a denouement. All of the laws that we follow are all in Aristotle's poetic

2 (15m 58s):
Hero's journey,

1 (15m 59s):
It's a hero's journey and all the things that go on. And so I realized that that, that We were obligated to tell a story anyway, and then it's just sitting around waiting for the right connection. Right. And the right connection turned out to be completely serendipitously, completely accidentally American history. And then all of a sudden, whatever collision created, the kind of explosion that just, you kind of went literally, yes, I know what I'm supposed to do.

2 (16m 35s):
All right. So you, you graduate in 1975 and I guess, I guess you and a few other students stayed, stayed behind in Amherst started basically making films like for, for like non-profits right.

1 (16m 49s):
Yup. I decided that we in Hampshire we'd start it. We had great teachers, we had some equipment and we had no money. So we, the students couldn't in production, couldn't be given a grant to make a film. So we offered our services for free to nonprofits in the pioneer valley of Western Massachusetts. Right? The first film I worked on for an upper-class person was about the children's protective services in Holyoke and Springfield, Massachusetts. And we followed families around. And then when I had moved up and it was now my time to inherit a film, I made the second film that would be made for old Sturbridge village, the living history museum in Sturbridge, Massachusetts, and I made a half-hour film called working in rural new England.

1 (17m 37s):
It's all live cinematography. We go early, early, early in the morning and stay later after the tourists had left and before and filmed the interpreters in costume living the life of the late 18th and early 19th century, 1790 to 1840 pre-industrial association. And there were first person voices in this film, reading diaries, in addition to a very modest third person narrator. And it, it, it like lit me on fire. And I had a moment with your own labeling, which may be arguably one of the most important moments of my life. Everything about the shooting of this film had been informed by who he was and what he wanted me to be. And he came in to look at somewhere between a rough and a fine cut.

1 (18m 20s):
And he said, it's, it's cut really coming along. I think here I would do this. And I would said, no, I really liked this. And he pushed back and I pushed back and he pushed back and I pushed back and then he let go. And I realized,

2 (18m 32s):
Oh

1 (18m 33s):
No, because it was like jumping off a cliff without a parachute.

2 (18m 36s):
Yeah.

1 (18m 37s):
And that meant no longer did I have daddy in a way holding my hand. And it was a really wonderful moment, but all of that made us all think that we just did not go to New York and apprentice ourselves to some film company and work our way up the career ladder. In fact, later on, as Robert Penn Warren told me when I was working on Huey long, he said, career ism is death. So I've actually never used the word career. I use the word, unless I'm speaking like this, I use the word professional life because he, he had instilled in me this sense that a career was actually a form of imprisonment. There was an arc that you went on and that wasn't what it was about.

2 (19m 21s):
So, so you are really cutting your teeth, right? Learning about how to make these films by, by, since doing it right. At some point, you, with some friends from Hampshire and an Amy Steckler who would become your wife, you, you formed a kind of a collective that you called Florentine films. What was that? Was that going to be sort of like an umbrella company to make documentaries? Like, how did you think about what, what that was going to be

1 (19m 48s):
Collectives of really good word guy? I think that's what it was. The company involved, buddy Squires. Who's still my cinematographer, Roger Sherman, still one of my closest friends and Amy Steckler. And we sort of started a company in 76 called Florentine films. I had originally toyed with something called <inaudible> productions, the goddess of cinema that was on the, the top of a dome of some New Jersey movie palace from the thirties. But we changed it to Florentine because Elaine May's, our beloved teacher had lived in Florence, Massachusetts. And so we called it Florentine films after that. And we, you know, made a company and there was a whole set of films that were lining up ahead of me, whatever they might, might be.

1 (20m 31s):
So

2 (20m 32s):
In your, in your late twenties, you began work on, on the film that really would, would become your breakthrough movie. It was the documentary on the Brooklyn bridge. How did that, how did you get the idea for that film?

1 (20m 48s):
My best friend, David Blustein was a book salesman. He graduated a year before me at Amherst college up the road, and he was traveling new England and basically was, was selling trade paperbacks, not the mass market paperbacks, but trade paperbacks. And he plopped down David McCullough's great bridge, the epic story of the building bridge. We had an ammonia and I read it. And I just said to buddy and Roger, this is what we're going to do next. They thought I was crazy. And, and we just sort of moved ahead. It was sort of had to do with kind of my refusal to give up on it.

2 (21m 26s):
How did you, when you had that idea, right? I mean, you, now, you're going to go collect a lot of images, historic images. You're going to shoot the bridge. I mean, there's a lot of moving parts going to interview people. You had some experience doing this.

1 (21m 44s):
We cut our teeth at, at old Sturbridge village. I knew how to drop a budget. I knew how to tie a tie. I knew how to make a presentation.

2 (21m 50s):
This was a big, this was a much bigger, more ambitious,

1 (21m 54s):
Terrifying. Yeah. And, and I still can recall the unbelievable anxiety that possessed me every single day of not just that, but of the larger unanswered questions about my mom, unexamined stuff about family, just every possible insecurity was put on alert. And in fact, Roger's folks had helped us secure initial $2,500. It allowed us to make a couple of interviews and it was just me kind of doggedly taking the Peter pan bus to New York Sunday night and coming back Friday night and, you know, raising money and trying to get a thousand.

2 (22m 41s):
Where did you raise money from? How did you, I mean, because we're so young, you had no driver, no national name, no one knew who you were in.

1 (22m 48s):
Yeah. Everywhere. I went, you know, people like the Brooklyn museum would say, if there's a film going to be made on the Brooklyn bridge, we're going to make it like goodbye. And I said, no. And so the best story of the money, it was like 500 bucks or 2,500 bucks or a thousand bucks. I once went to a second or third floor. Walk-up on Montague street in Brooklyn, downtown Brooklyn, Brooklyn Heights, and met with the, the democratic boss of Brooklyn who died in jail, I believe, or at least went to jail. And he gave me an envelope with a thousand dollars in it from the Kings county democratic club. And he said, no film is going to be made on my bridge.

1 (23m 30s):
That doesn't have my name on it.

2 (23m 33s):
Wow.

1 (23m 33s):
And so he gave me a thousand dollars and that's the way it was. And then all of a sudden, maybe a year or two later, it was New York telephone. And it was 12,500. And then we were almost done with the film and it was Citibank and they were 30,000. This was unbelievable.

2 (23m 49s):
How did you get those meetings? How did you, I mean, this is before email, you were eating, you were sending letters.

1 (23m 53s):
I was writing letters by hand, before there were computers before they're even self-correcting Selectric typewriters. I was, I was writing them out and I had lied myself, both smartly, but also terribly. It turned out with the department of records and information services of the city, which had the Brooklyn bridge drawings. And they gave me a little desk and I just worked out of there and they were going to be the fiscal agent. So as soon as I had mass the money, they just suddenly said, you know, where's our cut. And I go, oh, and I had to go before the board of estimate, I had to do all this stuff. And finally,

2 (24m 26s):
They assume that that, that you, they had some equity in this.

1 (24m 29s):
Yeah. And it was not equity. They assume that there would be some level of control or more importantly, if there was money coming in, they wanted to cut. And I mean, these things would send me and my heart would be pounding. I lost weight. I was just, it was, I was a wreck, but we finally got to the place where we had amassed enough money to film the archives, to film the Brooklyn bridge drawings, to go to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, to the library of Congress, to places where the archives were. You never, you know, nobody mailed you a print, you went there and you filmed in person.

2 (25m 0s):
And meanwhile, while you were doing all of this, I guess you, you sorta got an offer that could have totally changed the course of your career. I mean, you were, you were offered a job, a real job.

1 (25m 12s):
Yep. And finally, by the, by the summer of 79, I realized, you know, I needed a job. Somebody at the PBS station in New York WNE T offered me a job of $800 a week, which felt

2 (25m 24s):
Like a lot of money. And it's like

1 (25m 26s):
Saying, I'll give you a million dollars a year. If you, if you,

2 (25m 30s):
They offered you a job to be a producer there at WSET.

1 (25m 33s):
And I, and I just said, no, I can't do it.

2 (25m 35s):
But you were broke. You were broke. Right. You didn't.

1 (25m 38s):
But I, but here's the here was a Faustian bargain. I was sitting there with all these reels and we had like 75, 80 reels shot six, each one of the reels is 400 feet, 12 minutes, about a little bit less than 12 minutes. And I realized that I was going to put, if I took, said yesterday, that job I'd put on top of the refrigerator and I would wake up and I would be 45 years old and I will have not have finished the film. And I just said, I can't do that. And that's when we went up, Amy and I went up and found when looking for a house around Walpole, New Hampshire. And then we ended up Amy went back and found the house that we eventually lived

2 (26m 16s):
In. And you did that to save money. Oh

1 (26m 18s):
Yeah. We did that to save money to live there, but it turned out to be great. So I used to say that that was the best professional decision I made moving to Walpole. It's not, it's actually the second best professional decision. The best decision was to stay there. And it's because this is so labor intensive, it requires so much time. It requires so much love that you weren't going to be able to get, if I had to maintain the high overhead of offices in New York, it was just the nature of making historical films, you know? And, and it was, that was the best decision when I said, no, I'm staying here.

2 (26m 52s):
I think, I think the total process from start to finish of Brooklyn bridge was about five years, at

1 (26m 60s):
Least.

2 (27m 0s):
Yeah. And, and, and during that time you had to raise money to make it, by the way. Do you remember how much you raised in total to make the movie?

1 (27m 9s):
Of course I did. Their budget was 100, about 180,000, a little bit more and change 383, something like that. And I calculated, I got paid 2 cents an hour.

2 (27m 17s):
Okay. One or so 180,000 to make it. And that me and you were pounding the pavement going to, you know, Citibank and anybody that you could, you could go to, to make the film. But I wonder, I mean, you were like 28, 27, you know, and, and you admit in middle, you looked even younger. How did you, when you would go to these pitch meetings and, you know, to explain what you were doing and how you need the money, because you needed that money, you really needed it. And you needed the time to make the film. So you were like fundraising and like putting a camera on your shoulder and filming. Yeah. How did you, I mean, how did you deal with the anxiety of, of trying to show people that you could confidently pull this off?

1 (28m 1s):
Well, dealing with the anxiety was impossible. Pull it, convincing people that I could do it. I don't know how it happened. I never took no. I remember that. What would happen? I'll give you an example. I won't name the funder because it's not fair to them, but I was, I had a connection with somebody and they would say, well, unfortunately, you know, this, I really don't think we're at this time interested. And so I call back six months later and I said, Hey, I have great news. Like PBS is going to show this. And they said, oh, wow, let me talk to so-and-so. So they'd kick me upstairs. And I'd be with somebody else for a while. And they'd say, well, I don't know. So I'd leave it alone. Six months later, I'd go back and I'd say, I'm sorry to bother you, but I have really, really great news.

1 (28m 45s):
We've expanded the film to an hour and it's going to be on a national PBS broadcast. Oh my goodness. So funny, I read someplace where some guy goes and what do you need? And I said, 12,500. He goes, no problem. You know, and that's how I did it. I just said, and I'll tell you, I like to speak about the negative space of creation. You know, we have shooting ratios of 40 or 50 to one, right? It's like the, the block of stone brought to the sculptors, his studio, and she works away. And what we see in the gallery of the museum is not the whole thing is it's the rebel on the floor. And she is aware and has to honor the negative space of creation, but the negative space of fundraising I also did.

1 (29m 25s):
So for many, many years, I had on my desk, two, three ring binders, each of them three or four inches wide filled with all the rejections from the SU the Brooklyn bridge film. And I kept them there just to remind me that you could have the best idea in the world, all the talent, but there was some other ingredient that had to do with stubbornness or perseverance. And I don't know where I got that, that, you know how it it's so much easier in the business world or in most of the world to say no, to say yes, is to lay yourself open for criticism to say no is to protect your flank. And so that's why I kept those notes. And I was just trying to get people to yes. And, you know, I was inventing myself and I was inventing the film as I was doing that.

1 (30m 9s):
Yeah.

2 (30m 10s):
Yeah. I'm not, I'm not in any way trying to call into question your integrity, because I did the same things when I, when I was younger. But I'm assuming that you were a little bit of a hustler when you would read. Cause it sounds like you, you know, you had to give it to PBS, but they were not necessarily committed to airing it, but when you would go and talk to people, you would say, yeah, and it's going to be on PBS,

1 (30m 31s):
You know? True. Yeah. I mean, I, I, if they, if they had asked me a question, I would be honor bound to tell them exactly how the dynamic worked, that PBS, when it was finished would evaluate it to see. So yeah, it was all, but I think, yeah, I mean, we're all hustlers who are trying really hard. Everybody at some point has to say, it has to bite off more than they can chew and then learn how to chew it. And that's what each successive, either making too many films at once, or maybe it's making, you know, going from an hour, an hour and a half film to a multi-part series, like the civil war it's biting off more than you could chew and then figuring out how the hell are you going to do that?

2 (31m 10s):
I read the, a story you told about when you premiered the film at the Brooklyn museum, because I think initially the Brooklyn museum, there was not, they did not want to be part of it unless they were going to make it

1 (31m 22s):
The mortal enemies. They were the first call I made because I was advised by someone who had written a wonderful academic book about the, the Brooklyn bridge that this woman who had mounted the beautiful exhibition or had been part of the beautiful exhibition of Brooklyn bridge drawings at the Whitney, Barbara Milstein was there and she was a curator. And so she befriended me and took me under her wing and told me who to see and introduced me to this Congressman and that potential funder, New York doc railway, I think gave us 500 bucks or the people who, you know, float railroad cards on scows across from New Jersey to Brooklyn or whatever it is. I mean, I just, it was just a crazy, crazy world of Brooklyn that we got in. But the head of it, Michael Winnick said, you know, you will, you will not do this film

2 (32m 7s):
Unless we make it right. This is, this was the head of the Brooklyn museum Hussein.

1 (32m 12s):
Yup. We, we will make it. You will not die. And I walked out of his office and he, he was my mortal enemy. And so I had a screening of the finished film. I couldn't even watch. I was so nervous, but I watched people went crazy and Michael Buck, when it came up to him and he said, Ken, I am so sorry. I had no idea. This is a beautiful film. What can I do? And I said, I want you to, to host the premiere. He says done. Wow. So it was, you know, it was, it was really great. My brother was there sobbing because somebody in the family had done something, you know, somebody had finished something and it was beautiful. It's a beautiful film. I love that film. And it's got Amy and it's got buddy and Roger in it. And we worked so hard.

1 (32m 53s):
And I mean, the experiences of that film alone are, are an, a whole book.

2 (33m 0s):
You, you devoted five years of your life to make this film, which was, I think two hours long, right?

1 (33m 5s):
Yeah, no, no. One hour, one hour. Yeah. Wow.

2 (33m 7s):
So one hour long and I mean five years of your life for a one hour film. I mean, I mean, it must have felt like an incredible, I don't know, relief when you, when you debuted

1 (33m 23s):
It. Can I tell you the payoff?

2 (33m 24s):
Yeah.

1 (33m 25s):
So I don't know where Amy was, but I was alone at the house and it was February. And you go out

2 (33m 33s):
February of 82

1 (33m 34s):
Of 82 and you go out and you hope that the wood stoves don't die out. Right. And I came back and I walk in and I noticed your house into my house. And the wood stove is out. And I went on no, and I opened it up and I try to stir the embers. You know, you get it going really hot. And then you turn it down and hopefully it's still there when you get back. But it was out. So that was like a whole big rig and Merle. And then I looked over at the answering machine, which maybe got one message or two messages a month and there were 12. Right. And I pressed the button and at the first one was a hangup. The second wasn't hanging up, next one is, this is the AP in Concord, New Hampshire, can you please call us?

1 (34m 16s):
Here's the number and a couple of hangups. Then Ken, this is the Boston globe. Can you please give us a call? Here's our number. And then it was the APN in Boston. And then it was, and this is where I got it. The guy says, this is somebody from the academy of motion, picture arts and sciences. Can you give us a call? And then this guy who's distributing our film in Los Angeles called up and he says, congratulations, can Brooklyn bridge has got nominated for an academy award. And I jumped up and down. I'd already taken off my coat. I'm in my shirt. I just jump up and down. And then I look and the woodstove is still out, right?

1 (34m 55s):
So I go outside without putting my coat on in February, get a big load of wood. I'm completely distracted. I'm higher than a kite. And I slipped on some ice and I twist and I fall into a snowbank, pretty soft landing. Right. But, and I'm still holding onto this big with both arms, big, huge load of wood. But my shirt has pulled out of my pants at my back. And my back is warming the snow, which is trickling down my pants. And I sat there. And for some reason had something the insight to say, how lucky are you? You are the only nominee who is in this position today, how humbling it was and just don't just don't take it.

1 (35m 40s):
But it was one of those glorious. I was yelling and jumping and doing the kind of pirouettes that people do when they're alone. And don't think they're being watched. And then this nice little slip and warning. And I still remember just lying there, looking up cold as hell, water trickling down my, my backside and just thinking, you know, this was pretty lucky

2 (36m 4s):
When we come back, how can broke some of the basic rules of documentary filmmaking and how, despite having to Curry favor with funders, he was able to keep creative control his work, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this.

The Jordan Harbinger Show (36m 33s):
We've got a bit of an unusual sponsor for this episode. The Jordan harbinger show, which is a podcast we love over here. Jordan show, which apple named one of its best of 2018 is aimed at making you a better, informed, more critical thinker. So you can get a sense of how the world actually works and come to your own conclusions about what's happening. He talks to everyone from neuroscientists to counterfeiters, to astronauts, authors, thinkers, and performers. I also recommend our listeners check out Jordan's conversations with journalists, Celeste, Headlee, and author, Cheryl strayed, both spectacular episodes. And you can also hear the interview. Jordan did with me back in 2020. Jordan's a great interviewer has great guests and focuses on pulling useful practical insights out of his subjects. We really enjoyed this show and we think you will as well. There's a lot to like check out Jordan harbinger.com/start for some episode recommendations or search for the Jordan harbinger show. That's H a R B as in boy, I N as in Nancy, G E R on apple podcasts, Spotify, or wherever you listen to podcasts,

Shopify (37m 37s):
What an incredible sound. It's the sound of another sale on Shopify, the all-in-one commerce platform to start, run and grow your business with Shopify, you can reach customers online and across social networks with an ever-growing suite of channel integrations and apps, including Facebook, Instagram, Tik, TOK, Pinterest, and more. You can gain insights as you grow with detailed reporting of conversion rates, profit margins, and more Shopify is tirelessly reinventing tools of growth for millions of businesses, helping them succeed every day. They believe in liberating commerce for all, because entrepreneurship has the power to drive communities forward every 28 seconds an entrepreneur like you makes their first sale on Shopify. Go to shopify.com/built all lower case for a free 14 day trial and get full access to Shopify. As entire suite of features grow your business with Shopify today, go to shopify.com/built right now that's shopify.com/built.

1 (38m 45s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's late 1981. And Ken burns his documentary. Brooklyn bridge has just been released. And on the night of its premiere at the Brooklyn museum can discover something that at first He

2 (39m 0s):
Can't quite believe.

1 (39m 2s):
So. First of all, when it was over, they asked me if I'd like to go up and answer questions. The first question, some lady shot her hand up and said, where did you get those newsreels of the building of the Brooklyn bridge? I said, ma'am, it was built between 1869 and 1883. This

2 (39m 16s):
Don't know

1 (39m 17s):
There's no newsreels. He goes, no, no, no, no. When the, when the, when the stone was delivered in those scows up to the towers and they're bringing this stuff up and he said, ma'am, those were all still photographs. And she said, no, they weren't. And then I suddenly thought, just be grateful, just say, okay, just move onto the next question. Because it worked everything I was trying to do in animating the still photographs it had worked. She believes she was looking at motion pictures. We'd added the sound of goals. We'd added, you know, distant hammering we'd we'd have, you know, everything had, we're trying to wake that photograph to bring it alive and to move. So for this person's untrained eye, this meant it was moving.

1 (39m 60s):
She was there. And I was going, you know, just declare victory to yourself and move on to the next question.

2 (40m 7s):
But you very consciously were intending to create that effect. That then from a still image to give the impression that, that it was moving, there was movement. It was propulsion.

1 (40m 18s):
Yes. And so you can see that in that Brooklyn bridge film, you can see it in civil war film. You know, there's not a single shot of the hundreds of thousands of photographs taken during the civil war. Not a single one is a battle, not a single one. And yet I'd say 20, 25% of our film is, is during a battle taking place. So what do you use? It's the, it's the blur of the trees. It's the closeup of the Canon mouth. It's the Glint of a ban at, you know, all of those things become the way in which you create this reality in a seamless, I remember the law of the law in quotes of filmmaking film editing was that when a talking head came on in a documentary, you stopped, whatever effects were going on,

2 (41m 1s):
Right? And you just focused on that. And

1 (41m 3s):
You're just focused on that person. And even the music wasn't there. If you even had music, right? It was usually just tramping feet, firing guns, just one or two tracks. And we were doing 15 or 20 tracks.

2 (41m 13s):
It's like layer of layer upon. And I should mention this to people listening, because we're an audio show. Even with this show, we have many layers of tracks. So of audio tracks, it's just like imagine layer of one pop sound on top of another layer of sound.

1 (41m 27s):
We're in the business of, of making those things come alive. That's what I, what I hung my hat on was that ability to do it. And then I said to the editor, just keep Shelby Foote came on to describe the battle of Shiloh. Just keep the sound effects going that way. He's telling us what's happening. Why are we leaving the battle of Shiloh and coming to the present it's happening now? And he goes, but you don't do that. I said, just do it. And so we played it and it, it was like, suddenly you were in it. And it was so,

2 (41m 57s):
Yeah. Can the effect that you became famously known for, which is many people knows the Ken burns effect that sort of taking a photograph and not letting that photograph limit the movement of the film before, before you landed on that, on that technique, did you, when you were working at a Brooklyn bridge documentary, did you ever think let's just recreate scenes with actors? Did you ever think about doing something like that? So, because that was a technique.

1 (42m 24s):
So I did do that, but I limited it. Yeah. It's called a reenactments

2 (42m 29s):
Reenactments. Yes.

1 (42m 31s):
The civil war. There's only one reenactment. There's a horse of going through a puddle. Other than that. Yeah, nothing. So my feeling was that that reenactment can take place on the soundtrack. That is to say, not just the effects you and I have been talking about, but in addition to the third person, narrator, you would have a chorus of first person, voices that are reading the diaries, the letters, the speeches, the whatever it is, and that if you got the right people to do it, you, you could actually add to the kinesthetic, the apparent kinesthetics of this situation, the apparent movement within a photograph and the dynamic sound effects gave it apparent motion. And I hoped emotion, which was much more important to me.

1 (43m 14s):
They, these were not moving images, but you could make them moving emotionally, if you would do all these things. So this, this was a chorus of first person, voices of people that read and people never read before John Hartford, the folk singer just amazing voice, great Hoyt. Axton, you know, people that Kurt Vonnegut, you know, people like that. Arthur Miller was the voice. Brooklyn born Arthur Miller with a thick Brooklyn accent played William Tecumseh Sherman

2 (43m 40s):
W when you, when you were filming those images, right at the archives with the cameras, mounting them on the rigs and moving them the way that we now know what they look like. Did you think it was going to have an impact? Did you think it was going to beat come this thing where you, or was it just something you were kind of playing around with and trying?

1 (44m 2s):
So if you're shooting hoops at the garage, do you sort of imagine, where are you going to be? You kind of do that. You're hoping to go play on a team someplace, but you just, you do it because you think this is the right thing. And you actually, if you spend too much time thinking that it would become what it did become, or didn't become your loss, you just have to have at some point, have some faith that I've chosen, this particular thing. I'm gonna shoot a hundred baskets tonight and see if I can add it in before mom calls me in, right? Whatever it might be, who who's ever it is. In some ways you will this to work. You, you have to believe something will work in order for it to work.

1 (44m 46s):
And particularly things that hadn't quite been done. I mean, Perry Miller, Odonto a woman, a producer made a wonderful film on Gertrude Stein in the early mid seventies called when this UC remember me. And she had actors reading, she filmed the actors reading, and sometimes she'd cut away to a still photograph of Paris. And I went, wait a second. In my mind, I went, wait, why even show the actors at all? Just keep them off camera all the time. They can surface things. So, you know, you're always standing on the shoulders of somebody else's stuff. And if you think too much about what it is you're doing, you don't do it. You can't ride that bicycle. Hey, mom and dad watch me. I got a crash, right? All of a sudden you're thinking about it. Now I'm in performance.

1 (45m 26s):
It's not going to work for mom and dad that I can ride a bicycle. So you really, at some point, just have to give it over to saying, I've chosen this route. We have to make this work. And, and that's what it was.

2 (45m 42s):
You, you were an, now, you now became an Oscar nominated documentary filmmaker at, you know, at age 30. And, and so this was real. This was really real. I know you were to thought it was real before, but now, I mean, this was going to become clearly something even bigger. I know that that it's a sort of almost crass to use this, this, this word, but you had to kind of really think about the business that you were forming, right? I mean, you were, you needed financing, you needed an apparatus. You needed to, to build a business.

2 (46m 23s):
And that would take time. It would happen over many, many years. But did you ever, did you think about what you were doing in any way as a business or would that just, if I asked you that in 82, 83, would you have just looked at me like that's just

1 (46m 36s):
A

2 (46m 36s):
Crap.

1 (46m 37s):
No, but there would be a nice, important, yes, but to it, right? Because we'd been in public broadcasting, we had to gather the underwriting together. And it was really complicated. Still is it's a pain in the neck, but what it affords was a kind of measure of control over that material. So we were willing to sacrifice the kind of outer accoutrements of a business, because it's not really a business, right? It's every project was its own zero sum game. You know, you have a budget, Brooklyn bridge, $180,000, right. You empty that budget. There's no contingency in it. There's no profit margin in it. You get paid a salary, very modest. And, and so does everybody else. And at the end of the day, it's, it's the money's out.

1 (47m 18s):
There's no profit for the company. So you think about it more as this is actually a pretty good model to do what we want to do because the trade-off of the profit margins and the contingencies and the expenses was that we would have total control that we wouldn't ever have to apologize for not being able to do something. And so you suffer a lot, right? You worry a lot. There's lots of anxiety, but Walpole New Hampshire insulated me. And about the time of that nomination, I came across a new Yorker, a photograph that showed three men standing in hell, the flames licking up around them. And one guy says to the other, apparently my over 200 screen credits didn't mean a damn thing.

1 (48m 3s):
I put it right up. It was just like falling in the snow at the news of the nomination. I put it up on the refrigerator until it just, you know, turned to yellow and, and withered away. And so the, the fact that we've been blessedly gone along each project is its own separate LLC. It's its own bucket. There's no profit margin. There's no contingency. We just empty that budget. Everybody gets paid. And essentially we are all still freelance in this company. Right. We exist as long as there is an operating grant production to pay the salaries of people.

2 (48m 37s):
I mean, I know that today it's different, right? Because of, of who you are and, and what you've in your impact on

1 (48m 43s):
The culture. It's not different. It's, it's so hard because what I needed to do in order to keep that team going was not just have one project, but have two or three or now seven going at once. And so it's economies of scale. So it feels like the same, not Sisyphean, but like you're climbing Mount Everest in terms of the financial dynamics of it.

2 (49m 5s):
I want to break it down a little bit because to me it sounds overwhelming. And I, I I'm, I I've got two businesses that I'm part of and that's overwhelming. And, and essentially, I mean, at the beginning it was maybe two or three films at one time, and now it's six or seven or eight. So I want to go back to just the beginning of this, which is, and break it down, which is, for example, when you are going to find funding for your films, every I'm assuming every single person who's gonna, who's going to make a commitment, wants to have some kind of input or control or, or asks the same questions. And what were your terms or your terms basically, look, we have total control.

2 (49m 45s):
You're not going to have any say over what we do. This is basically what we're doing. We need your money. Are you in? Or are you out? It was that we use, you would say,

1 (49m 53s):
Well, essentially you go to people. You're not going, you're not looking for investments. You're going to sources that already understand the ele Monson, airy nature of this, that this is grant production. But, but yes, you do have the pressures of that, but you hide behind those skirts of PBS. They don't allow it. You know, I'll give you a good story. And it's a, it's a wonderful one we got, and this is only happened once. And that was our film on the statue of Liberty. The entire budget was paid for by Liberty mutual insurance. Right. Okay. And so we were showing a fine cut of that film to the guy from mutual. Who'd given us some money, wonderful man, Whitney Lancaster, the third hope he's still alive to hear this.

1 (50m 34s):
And he had brought along his ad guy. And in our film, we had interviewed James Baldwin who was then a guest lecturer teacher at Hampshire college. And he gave this phenomenal thing dealing with all this. You'd think he'd said it yesterday, given all of the stuff that's going on now with regard to race in this country. And at the end of one particular bite, he said, and for black people, the statue of Liberty means nothing. It's a bitter joke, meaning nothing. And so we finished the film and I could hear over here on the back of the very small room, the Whitney just sort of, you know, letting out a breath. He said, wow, James Baldwin. He said that that's worried.

1 (51m 14s):
And the guy, I wish I remembered his name, who was the ad guy said, leave it in. It keeps us from being a puff piece. Don't worry about it. So when he said, leave it in, I freaked out because you don't have a choice it's in. Right. And I would have gone to bat, but I love the fact that he'd gone to bat for me. And there've been many, many times when people have tried to cross the line, trying to influence content, trying to tell us what to do or not do, or that this is a little bit too hard, or this is too this or that. And we just go, sorry.

2 (51m 45s):
I mean, Ken, just, you know, in, in my reading about your life and, and, and the films I've seen, it's almost overwhelming because it's so, you're so prolific and your team is so prolific and you've, you've, you've covered so many different subjects and topics, but I wonder how did you, like, There's no question. I don't, I don't have to read anything about you to know that you are a perfectionist, right? There's no doubt anybody who watches any of your films knows that you can, you can see the Tor almost tortured, painful, you know, birthing of every film because every moment is so thoughtfully put together.

2 (52m 28s):
And so, but, but by the same token, that must make you Sometimes difficult to work with. I don't know. I have no for sure. I'm saying mean things about you, but just because

1 (52m 39s):
We don't have any yelling, that's the Mattson, my number one rule. And at lunch, I washed the dishes at the editing house. And so we speak to people about that. The intensity is shared by everybody. They want to do that. And nobody, because there's no yelling, this isn't brain surgery. And I actually don't think yelling during brain surgery helps either someone drops the instrument or hands you the wrong.

2 (53m 0s):
No, I don't want the doctors yelling weather, no surgery.

1 (53m 4s):
We don't want, we don't want that to happen. So, you know, I mean, I know a lot of filmmakers who are yellers and I don't get it. I mean, we try to have as good a shot, but it is, it is intense only in our shared dedication to get it right. And I am difficult. I'm sure. And other people can tell you that in ways that I don't even see. I mean, my ancestor, Robert Burns said, oh, with some power, the gift to give us, to see ourselves as others see us, but we have happy rooms and people who, the young intern who worked on that statue of Liberty film and was in that room when the ad guy said, don't worry, it, it, it's not a puff. It will keeps it from being a puff piece.

1 (53m 46s):
She is my senior editor

2 (53m 47s):
At

1 (53m 47s):
Lynn Novick and Lynn Novick I've worked with, for came in at 89. We still co-directing film Sarah Botstein who came in in the mid nineties, Jeff Ward, who wrote the first script and in the early eighties, Dayton Duncan, who came in eight of the state and also were refreshed by new folks and people retire and they go on. And so it, I think it's a really good environment,

2 (54m 9s):
But how do you, how do you maintain the quality of what you do and your, your demands that it, that the quality is so high, but also be willing to sometimes. Cause I mean, I think we all, all, all leaders deal with this right. Deal with the pushback sometimes of like, Hey, just let it go or make some common. Yeah.

1 (54m 31s):
Yeah. Well, I think we all do that and I think we're, we're learning. And I think one of the places where I learned is to try to hear that weak voice that says that shot's not working, you know? And, and, and, you know, even though you loved it the last time, it may not be great this time. And I think PBS is the real answer to your question. There's no other place where any of these films could have been made. You know, I could go out to a, you know, a streaming service or to a premium cable channel and say, Hey, I'm making a film on Vietnam. And with my track record, they'd say, how much do you need? And I would say we need $30 million, which is what it costs to make our Vietnam series over 10 and a half years. And they'd say no problem. And they could write it in one check, not the, you know, the 25 that I took to get, but they wouldn't give me 10 and a half years.

1 (55m 18s):
And PBS does. And so that allows us to incubate this constant desire to get it right, to always improve. And after a while, it's self-fulfilling for everybody. Yeah. I do miss a little bit of those old days when we go out to the archives with the scoop lamps and we'd put them up the pictures up with magnets, everything's now digitized and scanned. And you know, there's a, there's a, you know, a little bit of Gertrude Stein's comment about her hometown of Oakland, California. There was no, there, there in a digital world And we're desperately trying to make of their, their,

2 (55m 54s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Ken and his brother decided to take on their own family history project to reclaim the memory of their late mother Laila, stay with us guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this

3 (56m 16s):
On a cold February morning and Indianapolis, Tony <inaudible> woke up, got dressed, loaded his sawed-off shotgun and drove his bank. After entering the office. He quickly found his investment banker and wired the muzzle of his shotgun to the back of the man's head. Tony wasn't there to steal anything. He was there to take his life back. And his plan was so well calculated that for the next 63 hours, the Indianapolis police department couldn't stop it. And so outrageous and potentially catastrophic, but the entire nation couldn't turn away from it. American hostage is a new podcast starring me, John ham that tells the true story of one man who channeled the rage of a nation and took justice into his own hands.

3 (56m 57s):
And as the nation watched live, Tony would become a hero to millions to hear the story, follow American hostage, wherever you get your podcasts, or you can binge all eight episodes right now on Amazon music or wonder he plus

4 (57m 11s):
I'm Dan Jones. And I grew up in a small town called Jackson, Tennessee. And when I grew up, it was totally normal for people to have friends who were politically different from them. In fact, one of my best friends in high school, he was a white guy who was conservative. This guy loved Ronald Reagan. I hated Ronald Reagan. And, you know, we would just debate and argue about it all the time. But we were friends. I miss that feeling that you could just debate and disagree without distrusting somebody without disrespecting each other. And I just want to bring that back. And that is the point of the uncommon ground podcasts. You probably got some people in your life who you used to be able to talk to.

4 (57m 52s):
Now, you can't, everything is just too polarized. I think there is still a chance to have a better conversation in America. I'll bring special guests into the conversation like Megan McCain, Sarah Silverman, Deepak Chopra, and others. Our goal is to find common ground, join me every Wednesday by following uncommon ground on Amazon music or wherever you get your podcasts.

2 (58m 27s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So when Ken burns a series, the civil war came out in 1990. It was a pretty momentous television moment. At the time. It was the largest audience in PBS history, nearly 40 million Americans binged it over the course of a week. And Ken burns became well, really famous. He was invited to the white house and millions of people watched as he was interviewed on the tonight show

1 (58m 56s):
About two weeks after that, my then second daughter Lily, who runs imagine entertainment right now. So just to put this into context and I, she would have been in 1990, she was just short of her fourth birthday. So she's three and three quarters and we're walking down Broadway in New York and she looks ahead and I look ahead and we can see that some people have and are stopping to come towards me. And she squeezes my hand in warning and she says, daddy, those people want Ken burns. And she reminded me that I am daddy. I am me to me.

1 (59m 36s):
And I was Ken burns to somebody else. And so, you know, all of that, the white house visits to, to the oval office with president Bush, the, you know, the, the solutes at this, the on all of that is an interesting phenomenon. I was scared out of my mind before the today show of the tonight show, but it doesn't matter. None of that matters. It just matters how much, you know, in my little town that, and 50 cents gets you a cup of coffee. You know what I mean? It's like, yeah. So the town put on a little thing for Amy and Ken congratulating us on the success of the civil war series.

1 (1h 0m 17s):
And, you know, they made some jokes and that was it. And nobody said anything since which is just the way it should be.

2 (1h 0m 24s):
I wonder Ken and I don't, I don't, again, forgive me for, sometimes I can be a bit psychoanalytical without any formal training, but I wonder if the attention from the civil war and the, the, you know, accompanying kind of just pressure or whatever it might've been may have had an impact on your personal life. I know that you and Amy split in 1993 or, or w what was it just, you know, it happens people.

1 (1h 0m 56s):
No, I think it's, I think you're right to ask that. I think it's a variety of factors. One is I think that my travel is always ridiculous, particularly in those early days of raising money and being away, that's a strain on any marriage, particularly if there are two young girls in it. Right. But I think the more important thing is, is that I had not outgrown the grief of my mother. I hadn't dealt with it in any way, and that's not what a wife signs up to be. They sign up to be a wife and a partner, not a mother. Right. And I think that I would, I don't think I know I was asking Amy to be all of those things, which is hugely unfair.

1 (1h 1m 38s):
And at some point, and I knew this from the very beginning that this would happen, but it was the great fear it had happened. And so what it forced me to do the dissolution of that marriage was to go back and try to figure out about my mom and, and to do at 39 and 40 work that I had an 11 year old couldn't have done. And maybe a 21 year old should have done, but didn't do,

2 (1h 2m 8s):
How did you do that work

1 (1h 2m 10s):
Eman? It was so, so hard. First of all, she died on April 28th, 1965. I re always remember, every year, I'd see the April 28th coming. And then it would go behind me. I was never, ever able to be present on the actual day. And so obviously there was some avoidance and then a therapist said to me where she buried and all of a sudden I realized she's nowhere. My father had her cremated. And then in his, whatever, never picked up the ashes. And then this therapist said, go bury her, find her barrier. So my brother and I undertook this detective work and we, the funeral home had long gone out of business. The guide retired to Florida and died.

1 (1h 2m 50s):
His wife was still alive and said, oh, unclaimed remains were sent to this place. So we went to that place and they said, oh, they may be buried here. And we went to there and they said, yes, she's with 28 other cremations using the euphemism of the industry. But nobody had, they were all poppers and nobody had come. And so we said, can we put a plaque? And they said, let's check. And they said, yeah. So we did and had a little ceremony. We brought my dad. It's when he began to do work. Where,

2 (1h 3m 16s):
Where is she? Where is the

1 (1h 3m 17s):
Blockage? She's in a cemetery outside of Anarbor where she was buried. We couldn't remove her. I then made myself go back every single year with my then young, older daughters. And they got to know her so that when my oldest daughter, Sarah had her first child, and it was a girl, she named her Laila, which was my mother's name and that name. We never said it. We still recognize to this day. So she'll say mommy, but you know, it was draped in black crepe. And now that name just, you know, I say it every day, but you know, the, this April she'll be gone 57 years. That is way too long to be without a mom. But you know, the half-life of grief is endless, but you do, you do make some progress.

1 (1h 4m 1s):
And so I think in my own personal life, that was a hugely important move. And I'm just sorry that Amy had to bear so much of the <inaudible> explored and the unexamined. And, but yet we're very, very good friends now and are our good, good Gregg Nana's and granddaddy,

2 (1h 4m 21s):
I often describe what I do. And this show is, is my own form of therapy. I'm working through things in my conversations with people.

1 (1h 4m 31s):
Yeah, no, no, no. There's no other way. I mean, that's why the process for us here is so, and it's us. It isn't just me, you know, it's not how I built it. It's how we built it. So many people involved and the hard work that all of the films take are the, are the greatest, greatest medicine. I know

2 (1h 4m 49s):
When you were working on the civil war right. For six years. And I know there were other things going on, but I mean, I always, I always have so much admiration for investigative reporters who will spend like two years on one series that will run in the newspaper because I can't imagine the stress and anxiety of working on something so long for that one moment when it's released, you know, like wondering whether it will all have been worth it, but

1 (1h 5m 19s):
That that's, that's the assumption of a kind of zero sum game of, of release because it's the process, it's the process of

2 (1h 5m 25s):
Doing it. Tell me, yeah, I

1 (1h 5m 28s):
Love it. I, people always say that to me. How could you, I mean, th th the Vietnam was 10 and a half years, national park, nearly 10 years, you know, it's just,

2 (1h 5m 35s):
And you never, there's never a moment where you're like

1 (1h 5m 38s):
Only gets, it only gets more. It's not to say there is an anxiety and worry and disappointment. If somebody gives you a bad review or the S you know, the thin skin of this, but, but yeah, no, you, you know, it's really, when a film is finished, it gets a label on it and goes out, and it's yours guys. It's, it's not mine, it's it, it's ours. Our film is the process the day to day making it. And by the time that's out, we are deep into something else. Right. I am promoting a film right now on Benjamin Franklin, and I've locked another film on the U S and the Holocaust, which is coming out in September, but I still have to do a lot of creative work mixing and onlining stuff still to go. And we're working on several other projects that are really compelling us.

1 (1h 6m 21s):
So all of these, they're the same film. They're the same film. It's the same, it's you get up and you try to bring every ounce of your energy and attention and focus to that particular part of the process. And try to put your head on the pillow that night, thinking that you made it better.

2 (1h 6m 39s):
I mean, Ken, you know, you, and this is an I'm just going to say straight up, this is a crass question, but there's a business show. So forgive me. And I think, I think it's, it's a fair question. You have made films that have been very successful commercially, and you've made a good living off of it. But if you did a deal with Netflix or apple TV, or, I mean, you could do a $200 million deal, you could do a massive deal. You could be really, really rich if you, if you wanted to. And I'm not saying that's the point or the aim, but I think a lot of people would provide of reasons for the freedom, for the fun, you know, just the freedom of, of having that money jump at that.

2 (1h 7m 22s):
W are you, would you just rule that out? I mean, well, I ever considered,

1 (1h 7m 26s):
It was a figure you said probably would mean the catalog, right?

2 (1h 7m 30s):
Well, yeah. Well, let's say, let's say, or, or, or a production deal where

1 (1h 7m 34s):
Yeah, no, I wouldn't do a production deal. I'm I want to stay with PBS. I, I like, I like what we do now. I've got a valuable library and, you know, w w who knows what happens there, but I'm, I've, I've made enough, I'm perfectly comfortable, right? So it has to be considerations that have to do with, you know, well, beyond me, people, you know, I have, I have four grandchildren and four daughters, and I expect more grandchildren. And so it's, it's really about them. And also about the things that I care about, you know, other filmmakers, having a chance that, you know, I remember with Brooklyn bridge, it's still as vivid. I mean, just talking to you, made me sick to my stomach, thinking about those days, the Brooklyn bridge and those, the first money is so hard and the last money is so hard.

1 (1h 8m 24s):
And so I, I'm trying to figure out how to, to help other filmmakers. Although I actually have a thought that runs through my mind that how much of that pain was actually helpful to the, to the humility about what this is involved. Nobody's entitled, you know, to the sense that there's lots of people with a lot more talent than me, but, you know, maybe aren't as persevering, tenacious, whatever the word is. And, and that's actually helpful to the whole process.

2 (1h 8m 54s):
I mean, you, you also wisely decided early on that you want to retain the intellectual property of everything you did. So you own all of your films. I mean, that is a hugely valuable archive of content. Yes,

1 (1h 9m 11s):
Yes. And that has a market value. So that's something to talk about and to think about. But, you know, I did that because I don't want to sit in conversation with you and, and duplicate conversations I've heard from sometimes even well-known Hollywood directors that you would know where they're saying, oh, well, you know, if I'd only been able to use that music, or I want it to have this person's heart, if you don't like these films guy, they're all, it's all my fault. If you do like them, then I can celebrate the entire team that's involved, but I don't have to complain about it. And that has to do with PBS that has to do with the way we structured and my insistence that I am not giving up the ownership of the film, because the second you do that, then there's someone else who might say about James Baldwin.

1 (1h 9m 58s):
I'm not sure about that. You know, there's some suit somewhere that would wish that it would not be so uncomfortable to watch, as I hope watching the U S and the Holocaust will be for you.

2 (1h 10m 13s):
Yeah. Your latest film is about Benjamin Franklin. And in some ways he's sort of the ideal candidate for high belt S cause he was an entrepreneur innovator and idealist, which is our tagline is. And so obviously so much had been written about him. So many books have been written about him. He has been examined in from many different perspectives. And I wonder when you come to a character like this, who has been so examined and researched, how important is it for you to reveal something new? Or is it more about taking a different look or, or looking at him from a different perspective?

1 (1h 10m 51s):
It's neither, it's just acknowledging that for the most part, what comes down to us, our conventional wisdom, our superficial knowledge is itself. So pitifully small, that whatever we do will be very new and whatever. So it's just improving on a thing. So people say to me, you know, what was surprising to you is everything was surprising. Like, I didn't know that he had enslaved people in his household. I didn't know that he ended his life as an abolitionist. I didn't know this. I didn't know that this guy is on the hundred dollar bill guy. Right.

2 (1h 11m 22s):
And was Benjamin he's

1 (1h 11m 23s):
Abandonment, right? Yeah. Represents everybody's idea of striving, pulling yourself by her, up by your bootstraps, making your own living. And, and yet part of his, his, his genius is his inventions. None of which he took out a patent on he's into self-improvement about making himself better. You know, he is all about learning, curious about himself and how the outside natural world works and how we can make things that are useful and better for other people. He helps frame. He helps make the constitution happen, including its terrible compromises. He's the guy who helps gently edit Thomas Jefferson.

1 (1h 12m 4s):
So he doesn't say we hold these truths to be sacred, but he says, self-evident, we're in the enlightenment man. Come on. So he's got, you know, and he's a successful businessman. He's a printer, he's in charge of social media for the colonies. Right. He prints stuff up. He publishes stuff. He's the postmaster, you know, it's, he's, he's just an infinitely, infinitely, interesting human being that we need to know more and more about. And that's what our, our deep dive, what,

2 (1h 12m 31s):
I don't know how he did it. This was before Ritalin amphetamines. He stayed at

1 (1h 12m 36s):
He's something else

2 (1h 12m 37s):
When you, when you take on a project, right. And there are multiple projects happening at the same time. Now there's a there's there's, I'm sure a well-worn kind of playbook, but how does it begin? It's like, okay, so you've got this idea and then you there's, you've got to get, you know, the different spokes in the wheel. There's funding, there's the production process. There's deciding how long it's going to be. There's you know, coming up with a, the storyboards and episodes. So where does that seed, when that seed is planted? Like, okay, let's do Benjamin Franklin.

1 (1h 13m 10s):
So you fall in love and you say, let's do Benjamin Franklin. That's a big, yes. It was a meal with Walter Isaacson. And I just said, and I'd read his book. And I said, you know, it's not going to be about your book. It's going to be lots of other scholars. He goes, I get it. I get, and so I walked out of there and I said, yeah, okay, I'm doing Benjamin Franklin. And then it's, you know, you set yourself off on a lot of paths, there's money to be raised. And you're talking something that probably is five years away from broadcast, a film, a small film, like Benjamin Franklin, which is two parts and four hours. So you're you think that's, that's a blink of an eye, a blink of an eye for us, you know, it just, you have to have good quartermasters in addition to good battle generals.

1 (1h 13m 50s):
Do you know what I mean? Yeah. And people who know how to feed the army, people who know how to schedule it so that, you know, the, the, the gasoline catches up to your tanks.

2 (1h 13m 59s):
How many employees do you have full time employees?

1 (1h 14m 1s):
I don't know. It's, nobody's a full-time employee because it's all grant funding. It's, it's all expands and correct contracts. I mean, we do have some people who are clerical, but they're still paid. Like we're going to pay this person in finance for, you know, these two years out of this project. And then at this point, they'll go over to half that project and half a new project. And then that project will take over the next year. So no one is technically full-time including myself, particularly myself. And I've gone at times periods of six months where I haven't drawn a salary because we're coming to the end of a project. And I realized that money can be spent better on something else.

2 (1h 14m 38s):
Can I, I, I really admire your relationship with your kids. It's really important to me. He, as a father say, I'm most proud of, I don't care about pretty much anything else either. And, and, you know, your standing relationship with your collaborators, like Lynn Novick and others, where, where, where are you, where do you kind of, what, what are your shortcomings? I mean, you know, and again, this is not a criticism at all. It's just to say, you know, you have personally, right. You've had marriages that didn't work out,

1 (1h 15m 8s):
I'm a worrier and I'm impatient and I'm kind of dog it. And I assume doggedness can appeal to, to appear to somebody else's either competition or aggression or aggression or sort of certainty. And it's certainly not that from my point of view, but I could understand how that could get the, the benevolence of my opinion. I can get lost in translation. Yeah.

2 (1h 15m 38s):
Your mom, her name was Lila, right?

1 (1h 15m 41s):
L Y L a.

2 (1h 15m 44s):
I know that, that, you know, you had mentioned what winter, last few years of your dad's life. He had a little bit of bitterness about his sons and their success. And that may have been related to the medication he was on, but you can't help. But imagine that ultimately he was really happy for, for what his kids accomplished you and your brother is also an accomplished filmmaker. How about your mom? What are you, I mean, can you imagine what she would have thought of you and your brother today?

1 (1h 16m 16s):
Yeah. That's the hardest one of all. Yeah. I think, you know, I don't know what I believe about. What's beyond what I can see, but I have to know, you know, I was asked, let me turn that around and just say, I was asked by a sociologist in the early mid nineties, what my mom's after three hour interview, what my mom's greatest gift to me was. And I instantaneously said to them dying and I burst into tears because of course, guy did not mean that I wanted her to die, but everything that I am has come out of that tragedy. And so in some ways she gave me everything, not just life, but in her absence, what I've been able to do.

1 (1h 16m 60s):
My, my late father-in-law said it best, you know, he said, you wake the debt. You know, you make Jackie Robinson and Louis Armstrong and Abraham Lincoln come alive. Who do you think you really want to wake up? That's that's, you know, this is her, her great gift. So I have to believe that somewhere she knows. And, and with my daughter, Sarah, naming her firstborn Laila, and having that such a vibrant part of our lives, it just goes on, she looks a little bit like her, you know, I've sent her a picture of my mom. You know, my, my daughter never met her grandmother, let alone, you know, my granddaughter meeting her great-grandmother.

1 (1h 17m 41s):
And so while it has on her, you know, in her bedroom, a portrait of our names at her, and I sort of feel like she's, you know, here part of it,

2 (1h 17m 54s):
When you think about the, the journey you took, right? You ended up at Hampshire college, you meet the sky, you know, Jerry Lee laying and, and, you know, you meet the, the person who would, who you would eventually marry and was pivotal in, in, early in your career, Amy Steckler and all these people that you came across. And these experiences you had that led to Brooklyn bridge, and then the other films for Warren and, and all and baseball, the war, everything you've done. But when you go back and you think about how you got to that place, how much of that do you think has to do with, with how, how hard you worked in your just commitment devotion and how much do you attribute to luck?

1 (1h 18m 41s):
It's the perseverance that that's, it there's, there's serendipity there's luck along the way, but as branch Rickey, the man who did two great revolutions in baseball, he invented the farm system and he brought up Jackie Robinson. He said, luck is the residue of design. And so design comes from hard work of rolling up your sleeves and you're right to name those people. Every film Lewis Mumford was a mentor in, in, in Brooklyn bridge. The shaker elders is in their nineties, Bertha and Gertrude were mentors in our shaker film. Robert Penn Warren was the same in, in Huey, long Shelby foot in the civil war, Winton in jazz. Do you know what I mean? And have said this over and over again, it's probably nauseatingly cliche, but for nearly 50 years, I've made stories about the U S but I've also made stories about us, all the intimacy of us and we, and our, and all of the majesty and the complexity and the contradiction and the controversy of the U S and that is a wonderful space to be in.

1 (1h 19m 41s):
I know that I am greedy for creation. I just keep adding the number of films. The older I get when I should be slowing down should be who says, and I'm doing that because I know I won't be given a thousand years to live. And if I were given a thousand years to live, I wouldn't run out of topics in American history to do so. I'm, I'm doing as many as I can do, because that's what I know how to do. That's what I love doing.

2 (1h 20m 9s):
That's Ken burns, documentary filmmaker and co-founder of Florentine films.

1 (1h 20m 15s):
Thank you guy. This has been fun.

2 (1h 20m 16s):
Yeah. Thank you.

1 (1h 20m 17s):
I hope this was kind of what you want. I mean, it's not what you want, it's you, you've got material that you can use, I guess, as well.

2 (1h 20m 25s):
Yeah. I mean, you're a, you're Ken burns, but I, I did to you what you, what you don't do to your subjects, which is I made you sit butt in chair without a single break.

1 (1h 20m 36s):
I actually stood up the whole time that you did. Cause I, I was, I sat down in the chair and I go, I can't do this. I'm going to have to at least rock. If I can't walk with guy, I got to rock. So I've been swaying to in the flow and the breeze of this conversation.

2 (1h 20m 51s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show. This week, you can follow HIB T on Amazon music, apple podcasts, or wherever you're listening right now, or you can listen to it early ad free by subscribing to Wondery plus apple podcasts or the Wondery app. Another way you can support the show is by filling out a survey at wondery.com/survey. And if you want to follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this. Mine is at guy Ross. This episode was produced by Carrie Thompson with music composed by Raptiva Arab Louis. It was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Claire Ashima. Our production staff includes Casey Herman, Liz Metzker, Alex Chung, JC Howard, Julia Carney, and Elaine coats.

2 (1h 21m 37s):
Our intern is Margaret Serena I'm guy Ross, and you've been listening to how I built this.