4 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

Louder Than A Riot (9s):
Hip hop is always called out the inequalities in America, but even within it, nothing's ever been Equal. This season lot of the Mariah Podcast is tackling sexism, homophobia, and all the unwritten rules that hold the entire culture back. Listen to the Louder than a Riot podcast from NPR Music or wherever you get your podcasts.

0 (28s):
Hello everyone. So some of the brands that we feature on the show offer services that you may only use from time to time, like Zillow or JetBlue or wire cutter, all great resources, but you probably aren't buying a house or researching a vacuum every day. But chances are you're in the kitchen a lot more often. Maybe you don't cook seven days a week, but you might cook something at least once a week, which is where Food 52 comes in. Amanda Hesser wanted to be a resource for recipes and cookware and home goods that could be used 52 weeks a year. And the story of how she did it is filled with pivots that even she never would've imagined.

0 (1m 8s):
We first ran this episode in April of 2021, and I hope you enjoy it. Did you guys get to the point where you were almost outta cash?

4 (1m 25s):
Yeah. You know, that was, that was tough. Yeah, we had a moment at Roberta's Pizzeria.

0 (1m 32s):
I love Roberta's.

4 (1m 33s):
Yeah, we cried over pizza and, but really good pizza. And, you know, we needed to have a conversation of like, where's our breaking point? Because it felt like we just, it wasn't that we had no traction. We definitely had people interested, but we just couldn't get that lead. And then I actually, like, often with things that are bad memories, I sort of shove them into a drawer somewhere in my brain. Sure. And I don't know, maybe it was a good pizza that we were just like, yes, we're gonna keep going.

0 (2m 6s):
Welcome to how I Built This, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz, and on the show today how Amanda Hesser walked away from one of the most coveted jobs in journalism to build a digital media company for recipes in kitchen gear called Food 52. Some of my favorite people to hang out with are reporters. They generally tend to be fun and interesting and a little snarky, but usually with the best intentions.

0 (2m 48s):
And because I used to be one myself, I understand where they're coming from. Reporters actually have a lot of the same skills and qualities required to become a great entrepreneur. They're curious. They know how to become experts pretty fast. They know how to ask questions, how to get around insurmountable obstacles, how to spot an opportunity. And some of them are pretty big risk takers. They stand in, waste deep water in the middle of hurricanes and jump into the middle of war zones. But for all the entrepreneurial zeal embedded in the profession, there is one thing that many journalists chair that is not conducive to starting a business.

0 (3m 30s):
Reporters are deeply skeptical people. They have to be, they're trained to doubt and debate everything they're told. Unlike many of the founders I've met, the very best reporters are generally not fake it till you make it type of people. They're meticulous about getting the facts straight and making sure they're not getting spun by a source. And years and years of doing that well, it can make you kind of cynical, suspicious, even a bit jaded, none of which is helpful if suddenly you decide you want to start a business. So when a story of a former journalist turned entrepreneur crosses my desk, I get excited because it's a reminder that it takes a lot of courage to leave a prestigious job in a newsroom.

0 (4m 22s):
But that is essentially what Amanda Hesser did for a little over 10 years. Amanda had one of the most coveted jobs in journalism. She was a food critic and writer at the New York Times testing recipes, writing reviews, and compiling cookbooks. It's the kind of job a lot of people would've stayed at forever. But around 2009, Amanda decided to take a big risk and start her own venture, a food blog called Food 52 with a limited amount of money and using her own apartment as a test kitchen. Amanda and her co-founder of Merrill Stubbs gradually and sometimes painfully built food 52 into a digital media company, which today reaches about 25 million users a month.

0 (5m 11s):
And along the way, Amanda sort of combined the best of two careers, the relentless drive and intensity of a New York Times reporter and the improvisational instincts of an entrepreneur instincts. She actually learned from her dad in the 1970s when Amanda was a kid. Her dad owned a Chevy dealership in Scranton, Pennsylvania. Her parents took out a massive loan to buy that dealership, and Amanda remembers her dad as a smart and scrappy businessmen.

4 (5m 42s):
One of my memories around that is he created something called the Jello Jump, and it involved filling a garbage dumpster, a clean garbage dumpster Hmm. With orange jello and putting a bunch of numbered keys in the bottom of the dumpster. And so every number correlated with a prize. And one of the prizes was a car. And so in order to get to get your key, you had to jump into the jello dumpster. And you know, he just instinctively knew that this was funny and also would energize people. And the local news media covered it, and lots of people came and it was like, you know, a hot summer day and the perfect day for jumping in a dumpster of jello.

4 (6m 30s):
But yeah, he was, he was really good at

0 (6m 33s):
Getting attention.

4 (6m 33s):
Yeah, getting attention. And there was definitely a sense in the household of, you know, I felt like we, we felt as a family, kind of like the, the pressures of, of what it was like to, to build a business. And it wasn't easy, you know, there was the, the oil crisis or gas prices were up and people weren't buying cars. But there was also, you know, a few years after my parents bought this dealership, it went up in flames and the whole building burnt to the ground in the middle of the night. And it was just a giant fire because, you know, when, when a building filled with cars that are filled with gasoline catches fire, it's just, it's a pretty big disaster.

4 (7m 15s):
So he, you know, they lost most of everything. They had some cars and a lot across the street that hadn't been damaged. And, you know, it was a very sort of defining moment for, I think, me as a child in that, you know, my, I think a lot of people could really feel quite defeated. And, you know, my memory is that, you know, my dad didn't pause for a moment. He, you know, immediately rented a trailer so that he could have a, a temporary office and, you know, continued selling the cars that weren't burned. Wow.

0 (7m 50s):
What, what were you like as, as a teenager? Were you a good student? Were you, were you well behaved? Like to tell me, tell me what you remember about what, what you were like.

4 (8m 0s):
So I, I was a good student and I, you know, I was a very, like, you know, involved in a lot of school activities. I played basketball, I, you know, ran track. I played tennis. I was very active. But I, you know, I think that a couple of things like heavily influenced certainly my teenage years when I was 11, you know, my dad, he had a massive heart attack. And from, from he, you know, he, he survived this heart attack, but it severely diminished his health. And it was a pretty intense period of my life. And I think that, you know, at, at that age, I was, I just had a, a very different feeling about my parents than most teenagers.

4 (8m 45s):
You know, I think, you know, I had a real appreciation for the fact that they were alive. And it was very clear that to me, that like, you know, life was precious and this was, we were lucky.

0 (8m 58s):
Yeah. Wow. How did you, how did you kind of discover your interest in food? What, how did that, how did that start?

4 (9m 7s):
You know, it's always been there. I think it took me a while to realize that it took me leaving home to realize that, you know, even though I, I come from a family with very kind of like, work, like, I would say like a very kind of like working class like values. I, I, the food was always a really important part of our, our family life and kind of everyone cooked or contributed in some way. You know, I think about like, you know, when we would go to my grandparents in Maryland, we would go crabbing and then we would cook the crabs and we would eat them with tomatoes that they grew in their garden. And we never had a store bought cake. It was always made from scratch.

4 (9m 48s):
My mom, you know, she would even bake her own bread and, you know, she always made jam in the summer. And like, my, my mother would go to the grocery store. I, I'm very like, you know, list oriented, like, I wanna get things done. So I, I would always be like, okay, mom, what's the list? Let's split it up. And she said, well, you know, I have a couple things on the list, but I just wanna see what looks good. Hmm. She didn't go in saying like, we're gonna have steak. She would go in and look at, at what she determined, what she deemed, you know, good quality. Yeah. And then decide on what we were gonna have from there. And so I think there was a lot of influence that was built in to my upbringing. And, you know, and it was even something that I, I think was a little weird back then.

4 (10m 28s):
Like, I remember, you know, one of my best friends coming over and her crying at our dinner table because my mom was serving asparagus. And you know, that's not an unusual vegetable now, but certainly in, you know, in Pennsylvania in the seventies, it was, nobody was really eating asparagus.

0 (10m 46s):
Hmm. I, I know Amanda, that, that you went to college at, at Bentley University in near Boston to, to study finance. But I, I guess when he graduated, you, you decided that you wanted to go into, into food, into the food world and, and maybe become a, a chef. Was was that your ambition initially?

4 (11m 7s):
So I, I, I just wanna back up a a minute because between, so between my junior and senior years, my dad died. And that, that was a big, obviously, you know, it was a, it was a devastating moment and, you know, put me, you know, in a place where I felt, you know, quite lost. But I also, looking back, I realized that it was, it was this moment of like, liberation from, like, I felt so lost that I felt like I didn't, I really didn't have to conform to anybody's expectation about what I should or shouldn't do after college,

0 (11m 47s):
In large part because of his death. Because

4 (11m 49s):
Yeah, like, I was so unhappy and, and, and, you know, really wrecked by it that I just, in, in a, you know, odd way, it, it freed me up because I just wasn't, I wasn't, I wasn't driven to please anyone, you know, I was really, I, I think I understood that I had to find my way and that I had to find my way to, to happiness, even if it meant following an unconventional path, you know? And I, I, I remember a, a bunch of my college friends were getting ready to like, do interviews and they were all buying kind of work clothes. And I just thought, oh, that's the last thing I wanna do right now. And it was, it was just one of the many signals to me that I, I needed to push myself to, to find, find what interested me.

0 (12m 34s):
So, so what'd you do?

4 (12m 35s):
I wrote letters. Hmm. I wrote to my favorite chef in Boston, Jodi Adams, who at the time wrote, ran a restaurant called Michaela's. And I, you know, I just said like, I'd love, like I'm, I'm really interested in working. I, I'll work for free. I just, I just wanna learn. And so, you know, she, she hired me and I was like a kitchen runner basically, you know, I, I got ingredients for the line, line cooks, I helped plate desserts, I strained stock, I did whatever. I was just thrilled to be there. I also worked at a bread bakery, and I, it was a, it was like three women, and I was one of them. And we would, you know, get the ovens heated.

4 (13m 15s):
We would mix the bread, shape it, bake it, and then I would drive a truck around Boston in the middle of the night, or like in the early hours, I would say, delivering the bread to hotels and restaurants. And so, and then also I took this food history course at Radcliffe, and I was so in over my head, but what was fascinating about it, and so lucky was that in my class, whereas Corby Comer, who's a longtime food writer and just editor and writer at, at The Atlantic, also another student is, was Cheryl Julian, who is the food editor at the Boston Globe.

4 (13m 56s):
And, you know, I was just like this kid in the class, and they took me under their wing and kinda showed me the way, and it was the, it was really the first time that I saw that, oh, food writing is, this is a, is actually a job.

0 (14m 10s):
And I guess in the meantime, you were noticing that, you know, like a lot of young American cooks were going over to Europe and, and doing these like short training stints at, at restaurants there. And I guess you, you decided that, that sounded kind of interesting.

4 (14m 27s):
Yes. I, you know, it was an alternative way to really, you know, to become a, a chef, but also to immerse yourself in a cuisine. And I spent my spring break actually traveling. I went to Europe and I knocked on doors because, you know, not to age myself, but at this point, there was no email. And, you know, the only way, I mean, I wrote letters to these, these restaurants and bakeries and said, said, hi, you know, like, I really wanna come work for you. And either I got a response or I didn't. And so I would showed up on the doorstep to say like, Hey, you know, I was the one that wrote that letter, and I really do wanna come.

0 (15m 2s):
So from what I have read you, you managed to get, find a scholarship, a grant to enable you to spend a year overseas, like apprenticing in a bunch of different kitchens. And and where was your first stop?

4 (15m 17s):
My first stop was in Germany in a small town in the Black Forest called vinegar. And I worked in a bread bakery there, and I worked there for a few months. And it was a very old school bakery in the sense that in the front, the, the, the people who sold the bread were all women who wore these kind of like, nice dresses. And everyone who worked in the bread bakery was, was a man. And so I, and I lived above the bakery in the bakery owners. He had a spare apartment up there that was filled with his taxidermy prizes from his trips to Africa.

4 (15m 59s):
And so, oh my God. Yeah. And so I would sleep there with these kind of giant animal shadows looming, and when the, the head baker would come in and turn on the oven, it, the whole building vibrated. And that was, that was my wake up call to get downstairs. And, you know, it was, I would say it was not the most pleasant place to work, but it was, it was really, you know, I learned how to make, you know, pretzels and all sorts of different grain breads. And also it was such a weird place. You know, the, the owner would had a very fierce temper. And if things didn't go the way he wanted them, he would often come in shouting. And sometimes he would hit people over the head with a loaf of bread.

4 (16m 38s):
And, you know, it was, it was then, these are the, the, the sort of beginnings where I feel like I was, my, the sort of writer part of, of my soul was starting to come alive.

0 (16m 53s):
And I mean, you must have been, I mean, you, you, you know, I'm imagining you as a, as a young woman, college graduate, recent college graduate, going to these places and wanting to learn cooking, but probably also pretty isolating.

4 (17m 7s):
Y Yes. I, you know, this, again, this was a time that was not that long after, you know, my dad had died. And I, I was doing this thing that no one I knew was doing. I, and I, and because communication was so different then the only way that I could really stay in touch with my friends and family was to write them letters. And so that's what I did, and it awakened this part of me that I didn't even know existed. And that I, I think I would say I actively resisted Previously, I really never liked writing. I never really liked my English courses, or I never valued them. And suddenly I was just writing all of the time and really enjoying it, and also getting interesting, like sort of positive feedback from it.

4 (17m 54s):
And again, it was just a seed that was planted, but I wasn't really intent on doing something about it. It just happened to be something that I was really, like a muscle that I was forced to develop. I was very lonely and I could, this, this was my, my sort of lifeline to people who I cared about.

0 (18m 13s):
Hmm. All right. So you, you're kind of bouncing around Europe at this time, I guess, like working in restaurants and, and some bakeries and, and I guess eventually you land in, in France at the cooking school, LA Vern, the famous cooking school there. And, and I know you, you kind of went there as, as part of like a, like a work study program where you sort of worked for the owner of the school and then cooked for a family. This is, this is Anne Willin,

4 (18m 39s):
Right? Anne Willin. Yes.

0 (18m 40s):
And tell me about what that was. I mean, did you, like, did you live in her house or, or would you show up every day or, or what

4 (18m 47s):
Yes, I, well, she had a giant chateau in Burgundy that it was sort of wonderful in that it wasn't that fancy, it was actually kind of falling apart, but all but, but this very beautiful old 17th century chateau that she lived in and that the cooking school was also in. And so, yeah, anyone who worked there also lived there. And I stayed there for two or three years. I had only intended to stay for kind of a few months, but then she worked, she was working on a new cookbook, and so I decided to stay on and help her with that. And it was during the, the course of that project that I started to really see how food writing worked.

4 (19m 32s):
Hmm. I felt like my attraction and interest in it started intensifying, but more importantly, I felt like I was getting to a point where I felt like I had knowledge to share and I had stories to share. And I had one in particular that I really wanted to tell, which was her gardener, Mr. Mal, who also lived on the property, he grew many of the vegetables and fruits that we used in the kitchen. Oh wow.

0 (20m 2s):
And it was like a walled garden, right.

4 (20m 5s):
It was a walled garden. And had been there actually, I think even longer than the Chateau, it had, you know, there was a found like the foundation of an old ice house. It just like, was this, this whole place was like this Museum of French Life from hundreds of years ago. And he also seemed like this relic of the past. You know, he rolled his own cigarettes. He planted, according to the moons, he was this very kind of cranky grumbling gardener who had this tiny little dog named pos who would follow him around. And I just loved him. I just thought, well, this is the France that I've been looking for. These are the people who like, I wanna get to know.

4 (20m 46s):
But at the same time, time, I was also really cognizant of the fact that even though I grew up with the, you know, upbringing I had where, you know, we cook, my mom cooked seasonally. We, you know, we ate a huge variety of food and everything was homemade, you know, made from scratch. I didn't understand fully the cycle of the seasons and like how it influenced, like what you, you know, if you cooked seasonally, like genuinely seasonally, like what that really would look like. And so my idea was to write about getting to know was, well, basically my idea was first just a project, you know, I asked Anne like, can I stay another year and just follow Mal around and get to know him and what he does and continue cooking?

4 (21m 27s):
And she agreed to it very nicely. And Mr. Wilber reluctantly agreed to it. And, you know, then once I started, you know, following him around and just keeping notes and I, I could very quickly see that there was a story to be told. And I felt like there was a story that like, I wanted to preserve, I wanted to preserve in like, some tiny way this way of life. And I felt like my sort of understanding of how to put at that point of how to put together a cookbook as a way, a framework in which to tell this story made sense. So I, you know, developed this idea to write a book that was, you know, each chapter was a month of the year.

4 (22m 9s):
And, and I told stories about Mr. Me and like what I was learning from him and what I was cooking in the kitchen. And I didn't really think there was anything necessarily innovative about it. I was really focused on this, the preservation aspect. But, you know, it really is, it was one of the earlier cookbooks that, that celebrated seasonal cooking and could have made a point to say that it matters and that it's a, it's a, a better way of, of approaching cooking.

0 (22m 36s):
And what did you do? I mean, you're, you are in your early twenties and I'm assuming you don't, you've no experience, so you have no, probably no book agent. So what did you, how did you, how did you pitch this idea to, to publishers?

4 (22m 51s):
I looked up cookbook agents and then I, you know, wrote a proposal and sent it to all of them and followed up by, by fax and phone call. And one day a fax came through from an agent named Do Cooper, who's based in Massachusetts. And she said, I, you know, I'd love to work with you. I love your proposal. And I, you know, soon had a, a contract. Wow. And, and had the realization of like, okay,

0 (23m 23s):
You gotta write

4 (23m 23s):
A book. I guess I'm gonna, I guess I'm gonna write a book now.

0 (23m 25s):
And I have to assume it was probably a small contract cuz it was your first book.

4 (23m 30s):
It was $10,000 I believe,

0 (23m 32s):
Which probably for you was like crazy money.

4 (23m 35s):
It was huge. I was just totally thrilled.

0 (23m 38s):
And now you've gotta write the book. But around that time, I guess you somehow kind of got on the radar screen of the New York Times. How did, how did that happen?

4 (23m 50s):
Yeah, so, you know, while I was working on the book and I think even leading up to the proposal, I had started pitching newspapers and magazines, you know, and I think that what I was imagining was going to happen after I finished my book was that I would then become a freelance writer. And I actually moved home to Pennsylvania and I lived in my mom's house for a year and wrote my book. And towards the end of that I decided I was gonna move to Los Angeles. Cause I had a boyfriend who lived there. And I felt like that would, that would be a boost to my freelance opportunities because the woods of Pennsylvania was not gonna do much for me. So I started making a plan to leave.

4 (24m 30s):
And four days before I left, I got a phone call from the New York Times from an editor at the New York Times, you know, saying that he was, he had heard about me and was interested in talking with me, which was quite a shock.

0 (24m 43s):
You got this call from an editor at the New York Times Do, who was the editor,

4 (24m 47s):
Rick flas.

0 (24m 48s):
And Rick says, Hey, do you want to come to New York to meet?

4 (24m 53s):
Yeah. And I, you know, I explained I was moving to LA and he said, well, could you come before? And so the day, I think it was the day before I went and the

0 (25m 2s):
Day before you were supposed to move to LA

4 (25m 4s):
To move to LA Yeah. Wow. And I, it was a warm spring day, like a, like a unseasonably warm spring day. And I didn't, the only nice clothes I had were wool pants and a sue jacket that I'd bought when I was a student in London. And so I wore them and I just poured sweat the entire time cuz I was so nervous.

0 (25m 23s):
And he was an editor at the f at the Dining and Dining out section.

4 (25m 27s):
He was actually creating the dining, dining section.

0 (25m 29s):
Ok. This before it even came out.

4 (25m 31s):
Yes. And so they were really, they were staffing up, they were really investing in it. And I, you know, I did the interview and then I moved because I thought like, I'm not gonna get this job. And so about a month later they said, you know, we'd like to fly to New York for a day of interviews. And so they did that and I needed, you know, help from, like, I didn't have a car, I didn't have, you know, so my mom drove, you know, drove me to the city. And you

0 (26m 0s):
Flew back to, to Pennsylvania and she drove you to New York? Yeah,

4 (26m 3s):
Yeah. She drove me to New York and then, because I thought I had this idea that, oh, the New York Times, it's probably has this like beautiful lobby and there are sofas and she can like hang out down there while I go upstairs and do my interview.

0 (26m 14s):
Have that now.

4 (26m 14s):
Definitely not in 1997. Yeah. Oh my gosh. And so we walk in and it's like these, like, it's this tiny little entryway and I, and so I had to call up and say like, you know, can I, I brought my mom, can I bring her? And so I ended up, you know, they, they ended up sitting my, you know, welcoming my mom and being completely gracious about the fact that I was bringing my mom to my job interview.

0 (26m 39s):
And, and, and of course you ended up getting the job right? And, and so presumably you moved to, to New York?

4 (26m 45s):
Yeah, I moved to New York City

0 (26m 47s):
And meanwhile, I I, I'm assuming you're still working on, on that book ba based on the time that you were in France, which would become the cook and the Gardener. And you were, I think you were like, what, 25 or something at the time?

4 (27m 2s):
I was 24 and all of a sudden I, you know, I started a job in an office and I had a cubicle and you know, at the New York Times, you know, the first day I had an assignment, they were like, yep, you're gonna write about mushrooms. And so I just was like, and I had never written a really a news story before. Yeah. And I remember after I handed in my first story, Rick flas was editing it and he said, well, where's your nut graph? And the nut graph is that paragraph, if you look in a newspaper story, that's usually like, you know, the second or third paragraph, and it's basically what the story's going to be about. And I said, what's a graph?

4 (27m 43s):
And, and he literally just slapped his forehead and turned back to his computer because I think he was like, oh my God, what have we done? You know, we've hired this person who knows nothing about this business. And that was true, but again, it was sort of liberating because I just figured it out and also kind of found my way to, towards like, you know, writing the kinds of things that, you know, I felt like I as a consumer wanted to read about. Yeah. And, and you know, the Times hadn't really been doing up until then, you know, I did, you know, I did product reviews. I, you know, I, I I did these like intense tests of like how to cook duck a million different ways. I, you know, and it was, it was a dream job.

0 (28m 23s):
Did it feel super competitive? Did it feel like, oh my God, all these other writers are like Ivy League kids and here I am from Scranton and I don't know, did, did you, did you feel any of that?

4 (28m 34s):
I think people were interested in the fact that I had an unconventional background. Right? And so I was, I didn't, I didn't mind, I actually don't think of the times as a, as a particularly like snobby place about like your resume. It's really about the work you're doing. Right? They're really focused on like what you're producing. It is incredibly competitive. It's not warm and fuzzy. And that was a little bit, that was challenging because not only was I not like, there was, everyone was like much older and had like, you know, kids and just different, you know, they were in a different stage of life. And so it was hard to feel like you were really fitting in, but on top of it, no one was really mentoring you.

4 (29m 16s):
You know, I, like, we never had team meetings. I can't think of like a formal one-on-one that I had with anyone. It was, it was very much like sink or swim. Hmm. It was a little bit of a tough love culture and you were, you were pushed to, to raise your game. Right? So there, there were good things too. And I think I, I guess I'm a, I'm a fan of, of some struggle, but I think for me, like what I, what I found over time was that, you know, when you are writing about other people, you are ultimately, you're an observer. And then actually over time, what happened was I became more of an editor. I moved to the magazine, I I, I started editing there.

4 (29m 56s):
And, you know, an editor, you're kind of helping nurture the observers who are observing the doers. Right. And I, I finally, I think, came to the conclusion correctly that I, I'm a doer and I needed to get back to it.

0 (30m 12s):
I, I know that, that Ruth Reich, who was a, a famous restaurant critic at the, at the New York Times when you were there and, and later became the editor at at Gourmet, described you in her memoir as quote, frighteningly ambitious. What did you, what did you make of that assessment?

4 (30m 34s):
I, you know, I, I didn't love it, obviously, because everyone in the food world wants to be liked by Ruth Rael. Sure. But I also understood it. It was tr it, you know, I was ambitious and I think I've, I've been that way since I was, you know, started talking. And I don't think I've been shy about it. But did you,

0 (30m 54s):
Did you in your mind, think what's wrong with that?

4 (30m 57s):
Well, exactly, and I, but I, I think it goes back to, you know, things that I picked up very early on in my life, which were that where I grew up, you know, and, and I don't say where I grew up, it's really like in my, I would say my family, it wasn't, women were not cel necessarily celebrated. And there was a lot of sexism. And I picked up on it really early and felt like, I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna let this hold me back. And so, you know, I just, just very quickly, you know, as a child, I didn't wanna play softball because girls played softball. So I played hardball with the boys. And I, you know, I just was, I felt very determined from a very early age that I was gonna prove them wrong.

4 (31m 43s):
So when I, it came time for my career, I guess it, it was just ingrained in me that I felt like it was okay to be ambitious. And, you know, I've, I've done a, I've done a fair amount of therapy. And so what actually, when I saw that comment, and, you know, and I, I, I really like, like Ruth and I think that like, you know, people make these kinds of, you know, have this sort of subtext in, in what they're saying of often, but, you know, I felt like frighten frighteningly ambitious, well, maybe, maybe it is frightening to older who sees someone come along who's doing things differently and who isn't, you know, isn't conforming to the kind of norms of how they express themselves around their career.

4 (32m 30s):
And I, I really, I have empathy for that. I under, I understand that it must have been sort of strange. Like, why is the times hiring somebody like this who seems really so focused on success and, you know, d isn't, isn't she gonna kind of like wait for her turn?

0 (32m 46s):
I've seen you describe yourself during that period as, and I think this is a direct quote, I I managed to find ways to piss people off in new ways. Do you think that that is true? Because I, I, I mean, I wonder if, if, if maybe, maybe people you know, liked you and were happy with what you did and that was it.

4 (33m 13s):
Oh, I, well, I like that version. I, no, I, I look back, you know what I think my perspective now is, you know, with some distance is simply that, you know, the New York Times is this storied institution, but it's also a corporation. And corporations, most corporations, you know, things are done with a lot of, you know, there are, there are a lot of layers, there's a lot of bureaucracy. Things take time. And this is, you know, this is none of what I, you know, what I had understood.

0 (33m 51s):
You were a young person in a hurry. I

4 (33m 52s):
Was a young person in a hurry. You know, I, again, I came from a background that was very different. But also, you know, I worked, I had worked in kitchens and, and bakeries were, and you know, in, in a very different work environment where you really had to kind of ask for what you wanted and you, you had to be direct and you had to just kind of go and get things done on your own. So it was very outside of my understanding and comfort zone to like un like to realize that if I wanted to do something like quote the proper way, I needed to, you know, talk to a bunch of different people first and kind of get their buy-in and then, you know, sort of let the process unfold in the way that it does.

4 (34m 33s):
I just, yeah, I, I, I really didn't have patience for it cuz I felt like whenever I see kind of a, a good opportunity, I want to go after it.

0 (34m 44s):
When we come back in just a moment, why Amanda left the safety of the New York Times to start her first online business. And what happened after that business hit a total dead end. Stay with us.

4 (34m 58s):
I'm Guy Raz, and you're listening to how I Built This.

Headspace (35m 14s):
The last few years have taught us how important mental health is to our overall state of wellbeing. The stress of it all has definitely affected me, but I figured out a few ways to ground myself. And one of the tools I use is Headspace. Headspace helps improve your mental health through guided meditations, mindfulness practices, breathing and calming exercises and so much more. These programs can help reduce anxiety, boost your mood, and help you sleep better. I really appreciate how easy it's been to fit Headspace into my life. Wherever I am, I can use my spare time to do a program even when I only have a few minutes. Headspace has helped me and more than a hundred million people worldwide. They can help you too. Listen up, you do not want to miss this. I've arranged something special for a limited time. All of you can try Headspace free for 30 days by going to headspace.com/built 30. You won't find this offer anywhere else. You must use MyLink h e a d s p a c e.com/built 30 to unlock all of Headspace free for 30 days. This is not something they normally do. headspace.com/built 30.

Business Movers (36m 23s):
In the 1970s, Sam Walton stepped away from his retail empire, Walmart, but with Sam Gone, the company nearly buckles under the weight of a power struggle at the executive level. Hi, I'm Lindsay Graham, host of Wondery Show Business Boomers. We tell the true stories of business leaders who risked it, all the critical moments that define their journey and the ideas that transform the way we live our lives. In our latest series, Sam Walton is distressed with how his company is being run in his absence. So he comes outta semi-retirement, determined to take back control and take his company to the next level. Driven by a desire to be the best. Sam grows his company, crushes the competition and transforms Walmart into the biggest retailer in the world. In the end, the man that many once called the Courier of Hillbillies is known by another moniker, the greatest businessman of the century. Follow Business Movers. Wherever you get your podcasts, you can listen ad free on Amazon Music or the Wondery app.

0 (37m 29s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So by the mid two thousands, Amanda Hesser had become a star food writer at the New York Times and she decided to take on a really big project, a collection of recipes that would eventually become a classic and a bestseller, the Essential New York Times Cookbook.

4 (37m 50s):
It was an idea I came up with, I again was itching for something new to tackle and I was thinking about a, you know, a cookbook and

0 (38m 4s):
So like a comprehensive cookbook Yes. That had recipes from the Times.

4 (38m 8s):
That's right. The times it's been writing about food since the 1850s. And in the 18, like sixties, seventies, eighties, they wrote about food all the time and it was actually mostly crowdsourced from readers and it was really detailed and really just like filled with personality and also very surprising. There are things like, there's a recipe from the 19th century for Dulce DeLeT. There's a recipe for Raspberry granita, which honestly will rival the River Cafe Strawberry Survey. Wow. It's so good. Wow.

4 (38m 48s):
And there were just a lot of like sort of surprising gems in there. What I didn't realize at the time was just like how the depth of the archives and that it would take five years of work to, to cook really through, through the archives. And the first thing I did was ask readers in the New York Times what their favorite, we called it the Your most stained recipes. That was the, the, the headline. And we asked people to send them in, sent, like, let us know. And I got thousands and thousands of emails. And then people actually sent me in their yellowed, you know, newspaper clippings or you know, their clippings that they had marked up and then photocopied for me. And, and that became the foundation of what I used to for recipe testing for the book.

4 (39m 32s):
Wow.

0 (39m 33s):
In that project you also met somebody who would be pivotal later on Yeah. In your career. Merrill Stubbs who was, I guess brought on to also work on this book.

4 (39m 48s):
So once I started, once I realized, oh, I have a full-time job and I've just signed up for this giant book project, I'm gonna need help, I asked around, you know, if anyone knew anyone who was, you know, who had some cooking experience who could help me with recipe testing and research. And a colleague of of mine at the New York Times introduced me to Merrill. And Merrill had, she had gone to cooking school in London, she'd gone to La Cordon Blue, she had had her own catering business. She had worked at a flower bakery in Boston. And you know, we had some parallels in our, in our training. And she had just moved back to New York and was looking, looking to figure out what she wanted to do next.

4 (40m 28s):
So it was this kind of amazing timing. I hired her to help me to on with the research and recipe testing and we spent, you know, five years working together on it. Wow.

0 (40m 39s):
All right. So you're, you're working on, on that book and in meantime, I guess this is, this is around like 2007, 2008. I'm clearly you were restless, you are restless at this point. Yeah. And, and, and you sort of start to think about starting a business around this time. And this is a business that I should mention had nothing to do with food. And you got kind of serious about this idea. You were still at the times. T tell me what this idea was.

4 (41m 8s):
Yeah, so I think that there was a piece of me that felt limited by being defined by only like my food expertise. And I felt like I wanted to do something more. And there's a thread in my writing that's about documenting time and history and, you know, it came up in my first book, you know, documenting this year with this gardener certainly is a huge thread in the New York Times cookbook, which is, you know, this sort of document of, of cooking over time. Like I, I've always been and really embraced technology. And so I was really fascinated by the fact that our lives were being recorded in really intense detail and the way it never, you know, in ways that had never been done before.

4 (41m 53s):
Like what, whether it was the music we were listening to or the messages we were sending to each other, the news we were reading, the photos that we were taking and sharing. But it was very fragmented and I felt like at the time, well we're going, you're going to want to have this all pulled together in to some kind of seamless package that you can, so that you can distill your, you know, you could look back on, you know, a year or a day and see, you know, what, what music were you listening to? What photo, you know, what were the photos, what were like, get a fuller picture of your life history. And it was a very big idea. And so I, I left the Times in 2008

0 (42m 34s):
To pursue this idea,

4 (42m 36s):
To pursue

0 (42m 36s):
This idea. And it was called,

4 (42m 38s):
It was called C Winkle.

0 (42m 40s):
And just again, to kind of describe it, it was gonna be like a social media platform where people could p pull all their digital photos together.

4 (42m 48s):
No, it was gonna be this a dynamic timeline where you could like, like hook in your Twitter feed your, you know, your any, like now you could hook in your Instagram feed your what, what your, the news sources that you read, right. And you could like, you know, zoom into a day you could zoom out and, and it would, you know, highlight like, you know, if you zoomed out for a year, you know, and maybe it would show you like the most important what were deemed, you know, using technology, the most important sort of five photos of the year or the five songs that you listen to most. Or, you know, important moments, seemingly important moments based on, you know, distilling, distilling the data. Right. So it was a very, like a big sort of data play and I became fixated with this idea.

4 (43m 34s):
I decided to pursue it. So I started going to, you know, start up meetups and I, you know, I used my reporting skills, right. I, I just started calling people and New York's tech culture then was kind of, you know, it was like a small neighborhood. Yeah. It was really kind of cozy and people were friendly and you know, you could get meetings with people pretty easily and people were generous with their time because they were, everyone was just kind of like fi figuring it out and there wasn't the kind of like intensity and that there is now

0 (44m 7s):
What I, from what I understand you, you also, something quite fortune happened, which was the New York Times, this is the beginning of the financial crisis. They were offering buyouts and you, you took it. So, which I think was kind of, I'm imagining kind of scary to leave the times, but also kind of helpful cuz you were, you got a little bit of cash to live off for a while.

4 (44m 28s):
Yeah. And you know, I, I talked a lot probably ad nauseum with my husband about it, about what I should do and you know, he felt really strongly and this was such great advice you said, you know, because there's such a strong pull when you're, at the time it's so hard to leave. Yeah. And he, he said, you know, you know you're never going to give anything like the time and attention it deserves unless you just cut the chord. And, and I, I just, I so love that he had that, that bravery and trust and belief because you know, here we were, we had twins who were like one and a half, you know, he's a writer.

0 (45m 8s):
He's a New Yorker writer.

4 (45m 9s):
Yeah. He's a New Yorker writer and we really had no safety net. But he, he understood that like I had, like I wasn't going to be happy if I stayed. And I think he was totally right that about, you know, my time and attention. And so I, I decided to do the buyout and of course it was totally lucky cuz it, it helped, kind of helped keep us financially stable for a few months while I went down this path.

0 (45m 35s):
Yeah. When you, when you made the decision to leave the times and go off and start your own thing, cuz that's, that's, that's, you know, that, that takes a lot of courage, right? It's a really good job with a really good retirement plan and they probably match some, some of your retirement money. And it's kind of like, if you don't mess up, it's sort of like a tenured professorship. Like it ca can be a job for life and going out and leaping out and starting something on your own can be scary. A lot of journalists are scared. That's, and and, and, and many of them end up staying in their organizations for that reason.

0 (46m 15s):
What, what do you think gave you the courage to do it?

4 (46m 17s):
I just was feeling frustrated and I think I was at a point in my life, you know, where I was no longer the like young kid on, on staff. I, if I wanted to have the interesting career that I had yearned for, like I needed to make it happen. You know, I I I love reading obituaries and I always love the obituaries of people who have, you know, done like multiple, like distinct things in their career. Cuz it takes that leap, it takes that, that that bravery and also that sort of belief in yourself. And yeah, I, I think there was just something inside of me that instinctively knew that I wasn't going to be happy if I stayed and I didn't know what was gonna happen on the outside, but it was worth taking that risk.

0 (47m 6s):
Yeah. So, so by this point you had found, I guess some people to help with the tech side of building Sea Winkle and, and how did you fund it by the

4 (47m 17s):
Way? Yeah, so I just, I essentially just funded it with my savings and I, I look back at that year as my, as sort of my startup grad school year because I did nothing but spend money, but, and I

0 (47m 34s):
Did. And how much money, do you remember how much it was?

4 (47m 35s):
It was, you know, it was in the tens of thousands of dollars, like

0 (47m 39s):
30, 40,000. Yeah.

4 (47m 41s):
We very, you know, quickly realized like, this is a big thing to bite off, especially with just the state of technology then, I mean, I had almost nothing to add on the technology front. I I was really focused on the sort of concept business side and, but at that point there was no business side cuz there was really no business. It was just about trying to get people interested in the concept and sort of trying to learn what we didn't know and and help kind of pave the way so that we could build this prototype and maybe, you know, raise a around our first round. So that was the way I was thinking about it. And you know, I look back and I, you know, I met with Betaworks, I met with Fred Wilson, I met with all these like amazing investors who you could never get access to.

0 (48m 23s):
Now these are kind of well known investors in New York. Yeah, yeah.

4 (48m 26s):
And they were so nice and so supportive, but also not going to put money into it because they're very smart

0 (48m 32s):
And they were like, this is not gonna go anywhere.

4 (48m 34s):
Exactly. You know, it was, it was not an easy year, you know, I, because of course I was feeling sort of nervous about what I got myself into, but I was also so energized. I felt like, oh, I found my people, right. I was surrounded by people who had ideas and, and the sort guts to pursue them. And, you know, I just felt like, oh, I, I know I'm on the right path, whether or not this is the right company. We ultimately kind of came away at the end of the year feeling like, well this is, this is a really interesting project. We don't see where the business is and this is, and to really build what we're trying to build is going to take a really big technology team and, and we're not really the team to raise the money to do that.

4 (49m 20s):
And one of my, one of my co-founders had to move to California and it just became this kind of like natural, actually kind of seamless parting of, of ways. All

0 (49m 30s):
Right. So this idea, it, it's just not gonna work. And while you had this idea, you are still working on, I mean, you, you left the times, but from what I understand, you're still working on this Times cookbook, right? You were still kind of working on that project and with your partner who you were working with on this cookbook, Merrill, were you guys starting to talk about a business idea or, or were you really in pretty much kind of focused on the Sea Winkle thing and, and, and just doing that?

4 (50m 2s):
Well, we were talking, you know, we spent a lot of time testing recipes, which meant just being in my kitchen cooking. And there was a lot of time sort of in between steps to just chit chat. Yeah. And one of the things that really interested in us in, in the Times was this was the old archive and how the parallels between what was happening on Twitter and what was happening in the newspaper in the nine 19th century was really like fascinating to us because it was user-generated content recipes were written in a very tweet like form in Yeah. In the, in the 19th century because people already knew how to make a pastry dough. So you just had to write a shorthand instructions.

4 (50m 43s):
And we thought, oh, well that's so fascinating. It's kind of like history repeating itself and, and it, and you know, it made us sort of talk, you know, we talked casually about like where do, like what sites we like and you know, where we're, where we're going online and kind of just what's happening in the food world. And, you know, I had this idea and about a way to, you know, crowdsource and curate and I, I know I told Merrill about it and got her thoughts and then decided, you know, I think there's something in this. And so I went to her and asked her if she'd, if she'd like to, you know, start this company with me.

0 (51m 18s):
So once the Sea Winkle idea kind of fizzled out, it, it sounds like it sort of like dovetailed into this new idea of, of a food website and, and I guess with, with this new company, you were gonna be going in a completely different direction than, than you had been going with Sea Winkle.

4 (51m 37s):
Yeah, so one of the takeaways that came out of Sea Winkle was that I felt, I could see that there were two kinds of founders, there were founders who were just great at selling an idea, and the idea might not have my much substance, or they might not know a lot about whether or not it can work, but they can really just like spin a yarn, get people engaged, and then, you know, they have the confidence that they'll figure it out as they go. Yeah. Right. Yeah. And I unfortunately do not have that dna, but the other kind of founder tends to like, want to like do proof of concept, you know, bootstrap, they want, they're, they're the students who sit at the front of the class and like, they wanna, they wanna know what they're doing before they, they tried to sell it.

4 (52m 21s):
And I just understood because I had done tried to do the opposite with Sea Winkle and in process realized, okay, no, we've gotta really like build a prototype and no, you know, like I, I found myself gravitating towards like wanting to prove something out before I took anyone's money because I take that really seriously. It's not, it's not a game to me. I don't, I don't wanna waste anyone's money. And so knowing that when it came time to try to start a different company, I felt like it was very clear that we wanted to bootstrap as much as we could so that we could prove that there was, there were legs to this idea and then we could go and raise money.

0 (52m 59s):
And just to be clear, Amanda, your, I guess your initial idea was to do a website where you would crowdsource ideas for recipes. And, and as I understand it, in order to help you launch this as a business, you wanted to start, start it by writing a, a

4 (53m 16s):
Cookbook. Yeah. And one of the things that I knew how to do was to sell a book. And because I felt like there was a, a, a kind of clean way to test the concept of a new, a new kind of business and a new kind of med food media company by using the construct of a cookbook, you know, and that you could, you know, create a cookbook through a website, have it be crowdsourced, test out ways of curating it, and really see if people, if it resonates with people. Yeah. And I felt like even if the idea did not resonate as a business and we did not see the other opportunities that we were hoping to see, I knew that we could come out with a good quality cookbook, but I really, you know, we were betting on it becoming a business and, but we didn't want to have to try to raise money.

4 (54m 7s):
And so that's where we use the advanced money, which is what you usually use to pay yourself as an author. Sure. In a while you're writing the book. We spent all of that on building the site and operating it for the first 18 months. I,

0 (54m 20s):
I wrote a quote that you gave to somebody and back, back at the time and you're like, Hey, you know, listen, the economy's tanking. I just had twins. What better time to start a business? Yeah. You know, like, obviously we were saying that as a joke, but that was a, it was kind of a, a crazy time 2009 to start a business kind of nuts.

4 (54m 40s):
Yeah,

0 (54m 40s):
But not, not really. We know that, that we now know that like, I mean, Airbnb and Slack and all these companies started around that time, but, but our instinct is to say, oh, what a terrible time to start a

4 (54m 52s):
Business. Yeah. And I, I think that there were two things that were key here. One is actually that I am financial security is like an obsession of mine. Yeah. And it's really important. But I do think that I also really understand that it's, well, there's two other pieces. One is that I am also equally obsessed with doing things that I care about and that I feel inspired by. And I, I think from growing up and seeing my parents like, take this risk, I could see that you can't, like if you want that financial security, like you have to, you have to put in the work and you have to take the risks.

4 (55m 38s):
And so that's really like, I think what I was bel you know, believing, like I knew it was, it was a giant financial risk for my family. You know, in the, in the situation where we were with two young kids and a mortgage, and my husband with a writer with no bu who was a writer with no benefits, you know, neither of us had benefits. So we, you know, we had to just, you know, pay for those on our own. And so our bank account was just like, it was just like this ticking time bomb. It was just dwindling. Yeah. But again, I was really determined and I just kept, I sort of really kept that in the background as much as I could. It was definitely like, you know, inspiration to get me outta bed every morning. But like, I really needed to focus on like, building something great and not focusing so much on either our dwindling bank account or how we were gonna pay for things in the future.

4 (56m 23s):
Future.

0 (56m 24s):
Yeah. And I mean, I, I, I'm, I'm trying to, trying to, to, to imagine how you would describe this to people. Like if I saw you in 2009 and I was like, Hey, what are you working on? And you would describe it to me and I'd say, oh, okay. So it's a website with recipes. Is that, is that what people would say to you?

4 (56m 40s):
They would say it's a blog.

0 (56m 42s):
A blog. Okay.

4 (56m 42s):
Yeah. I got it. And you know, that's, I I'm really glad you brought this up because it's something we still talk about at the company that it's hard to describe what we do. And I spend a lot of time re like reminding people that that's okay. Because actually when you're building something that's new and that's different, and that's gonna be the, it's going to really feel natural in the future. Like, people aren't gonna necessarily have an easy way of describing it. They always want you to be the Uber of something or they want you to be something that's already just familiar to them. But we were trying to build something that just didn't exist. Yes. There are components of what we do that have been, are sort of timeless. Right. Recipes helping people with their cooking and home life, you know, connecting people to each other.

4 (57m 26s):
Like our mission is timeless, but the way we're executing on it is, is very different. And so, yes, we spent a lot of time and sometimes I would just kind of, you know, certainly socially, I was like, yep, it's a, it's a food blog, you know? But, you know, with, when it came to like, investors and, and you know, really trying to sell it from a business, you know, on the, as from the, from the business perspective, it was, it was challenging and, you know, and sometimes it still is, like, I still have to defend. Like, people are like, yes, are you a commerce business or are you a media business? And I'm like, we're both and we're also many other things. Hmm.

0 (58m 3s):
So, I mean, so clearly you were setting out to build a different kind of media company, but, but, but what exactly would that be? I mean, were like, what were you imagining it, it could be at, at that time?

4 (58m 16s):
Yeah. So we felt like the flaws of traditional media were very apparent, right? Like, like having a single revenue stream was not going to be lasting have, which would, you know, in traditional media is just advertising. We also felt like traditional media was really just broadcasting at people. And that with the, with the digital age, people wanted something different. They wanted an interaction and separate from kind of, you know, technology and media just in the food world itself, food had become, had really sh gone through this sea change from being this kind of niche area of interest for some people to becoming threaded throughout our culture and really threaded into people's identities.

4 (59m 6s):
And we felt like no one was really acknowledging that where you saw it was online, there were all of these bloggers who were, you know, now these blogging platforms developed in the, in the mid two, you know, two thousands. Yeah. Yep. And people started all of a sudden out of the, the woodwork, you know, traditional media was like, kind of like, we are the gatekeepers. We, we are the experts and you're just, you're kind of a home cook who follows us. Yeah. Then all of a sudden you saw all of these people who know a ton about food and who are like lawyers by day or you know, who, who just do this on the side. Yeah. Or who, or who just, it's like their total life passion, they just don't like, make money off of it. Right. And they have a lot of stuff to share. And we felt like that was really inst interesting.

4 (59m 48s):
There was like this constellation of creators and knowledgeable people who did not have a platform. And so that was really where our heads were. We were like, okay, we wanna give those people a platform to express themselves, but a place that's centralized so that it's like, it becomes this hub where you can connect with other people, you can get a bigger audience. You can create the, the sort of foundation of a really powerful media company so much more efficiently. Because you can do it through user generated content as long as you figure out a way to curate it.

0 (1h 0m 25s):
How did you pitch this to potential investors? What were you, I'm an investor and I'm like, okay, nice to meet you and I and tell me what you're, you're doing. What would you say?

4 (1h 0m 35s):
We described it as we're creating this hub for people who care, who see food as, you know, a central piece of their lives. And you know, it's a place where, you know, you can connect with others, you can, you can discover, you can learn, you can figure out what to cook for dinner. You can go for inspiration. And I think it's one of the things I just wanna point out is that we did, yes. When we launched, we were super focused on recipes and specifically recipe contests as a way to generate content. Contests. Yeah. Contests.

0 (1h 1m 7s):
You would submit recipes. Yes. And you would, you would, you would cook them or, or you would judge which recipe was

4 (1h 1m 13s):
The best. Yes. A anybody was welcome to participate. Right. It wasn't this like this kind of gatekeeper mentality that, you know, we had sort of co we, we were responding to. I wanna note though, so we launched in September of 2009, and by December we launched a shop because we wanted to put a stake in the ground and say like, this isn't just going to be recipes or content. This is like, we're just getting started. We're going to also be a place where you can discover like a new ingredient or a new piece of cookware or something, you know, beautiful for your table. And that this was like, this was taking cooking and really like playing it out in every kind of scenario of your life.

4 (1h 1m 57s):
And so that was a, it was like an important piece now at, we didn't transact with customers then we just had a shop where we had a friend of ours who would curate every day. She would curate like a new product and then it would go into the shop and it had, you know, categories just like any e-commerce site. But if you clicked on a product, we would tell you about it. And then if you wanted to buy it, you, we would, would send you off to another site. Now that's really common now, and there's a whole, people get affiliate, you know, commissions for that. Yep. Sure. But we didn't do that because we did a affiliate didn't exist. Systems like, well they sort of barely existed and they were wonky. B we really, it was so important to us to build trust.

4 (1h 2m 38s):
We And

0 (1h 2m 39s):
You wanted to be like neutral like journalists. Yes. You didn't want people to say, oh, they're just getting paid to

4 (1h 2m 43s):
Promote us. That's right. We wanted them to like trust our aesthetic, trust our point of view. And that was something I, I feel like so much of traditional, like the amazing parts of traditional journalism informed how we built this company. Sure. And that was like, you have to earn your authority. You have to earn the trust and, and the way to, and you, you need to have like a really like distinct aesthetic invoice for people to recognize you. We wanted it to feel like a home like you, like you come, you come to the site and you're like, oh yes. Like I know that like if you saw a food 52 photo photo out in the wild, you would know that it was a food 52

0 (1h 3m 21s):
Photo. And food 52 refers to 52 weeks of the year.

4 (1h 3m 24s):
Right? That's right. Like, we're with you 52 weeks of the year.

0 (1h 3m 27s):
Right. But you're like, like let's say I was an investor, right. And you were gonna come to my office cuz you went to investors in 2010 looking for funding. And, and I would, I would, I would ask you, and I hope this doesn't like reawaken traumatic experiences or, or long buried bad experiences. But, but I would say, okay, well how are you guys gonna make money? Right? You, you've got a website, but like, are you gonna, are you gonna do advertising? I mean, I mean, I'm assuming initially that at least that was the plan, right? Yeah.

4 (1h 3m 57s):
We were absolutely focused on that as our, our initial primary revenue stream and that commerce would come later and, you know, there would be cookbooks and there would be events and there would be other things. We didn't have like a big track record to prove this. And we were also, I think most more importantly, we were two editors coming from traditional media. And media was just not like, it was in 2009, 2010. Like nobody wanted to invest in media. Yeah. You know, there's just the, there are these shifting wins in venture capital.

4 (1h 4m 37s):
And I, I think that like every time we went out to raise, we were always at the like, bad side of the shifting wind. But I think that in in, you know, in retrospect you end up kind of with the right investors, right. Because you get a lot of nos, but you push, you know, if, if you can, if you can push through, you know, you, you end up with the, with the real believers.

0 (1h 5m 1s):
Were, were you, I mean, I, I have to imagine in this, in, you know, by the summer of 2010, you're pitching and pitching and pitching. And, and from what I understand, you, you, you were not successful. Did you guys get to the point where you were almost outta cash?

4 (1h 5m 15s):
Oh, yes. And we were also putting our own personal money into it. So, you know, that was, that was tough.

0 (1h 5m 22s):
Did you get to the point where you were like, maybe we should pack this in? I mean, you'd been through Sea Winkle, you saw that that wasn't working, that that wasn't gonna work. Did you ever get to the point where the two of you were like, maybe, maybe this just isn't gonna work?

4 (1h 5m 34s):
Yeah, we, we had a moment at Roberto's Pizzeria.

0 (1h 5m 39s):
Oh, I love

4 (1h 5m 40s):
Roberto's. Yeah. We cried over pizza and, but really good pizza and, but you know, we just had a conver I think, you know, we needed to have a conversation of like, where's our breaking point? Because it felt like we just, we had, we didn't, it wasn't that we had no traction, we definitely had people interested, but we just couldn't get that lead. We couldn't get that one person to be like, I'm gonna, like, I'm gonna champion this round. There were a lot of people who were like, yeah, I'll put in 25 k or I'll put in this or that. And then I actually like, because I'm often looking forward, I, I feel like sometimes I'm not very good at being reflective and often with things that are bad memories, I sort of shove them into a drawer somewhere in my brain.

4 (1h 6m 22s):
Sure. And I don't know, maybe it was a good pizza that we were just like, yes, we're gonna keep going

0 (1h 6m 27s):
When we come back in just a moment. How Amanda was slowly able to build food 52 out of her apartment where she did photo shoots in the bedroom and tested barbecue recipes on the balcony. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

0 (1h 7m 8s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So by late 2010, Amanda Hesser and her co-founder, Meryl Stubbs had had no success pitching their idea to investors and were just about out of cash. And it all led to a sad conversation at a pizzeria where they almost called it quits, but they didn't. And six weeks later they finally managed to secure an investment

4 (1h 7m 36s):
And it was 750,000.

0 (1h 7m 38s):
And this is from Friends, family Angels, anybody you could find

4 (1h 7m 43s):
Actually, it wasn't really friends and family, it was actually mostly institutional or professional angel investors. We wanted this vetted by people who do this all the time and who, you know, could be really adding to the business.

0 (1h 7m 56s):
And with that $750,000, were the two of you finally able to pay yourselves a salary? Cuz I imagine that you were, you know, you probably were making a pretty good salary at the times when you left. Were you now finally making the same salary?

4 (1h 8m 19s):
Oh, no, no. You know, I, at this point I was like, financially gasping for air. You know, it, it wasn't pretty. But obviously having the funding felt like we were, we were heading in the right direction. But, you know, we, we didn't wanna be spending the money on ourselves. Like we, you know, so we gave ourselves $50,000, which is what I made in 1997 when I was hired at the New York Times. Wow.

0 (1h 8m 47s):
And what were you able to do with the rest of the money? Were you guys able to hire people?

4 (1h 8m 50s):
Yeah, we, we were able to begin hiring. We hired sort of engineers and editors and yeah, we just, we were able to then start like building more because we had, we had nice traction, but we also, I think, you know, we understood that we were up against, we were gonna build the company differently than what the expectation in venture capital was, which was, which is that, which is to put a lot of money. Well, at the time, and I, again, I'm, this is probably a, a gross generalization, but the, it was to, you know, you'd put a lot of money into paid marketing and also you would crank out content at an insane rate. You know, this was, this was the begin, like this, this was the age of Huffington Post when these like sort of new kinds of media organizations started really gaining steam.

4 (1h 9m 37s):
And, and they were, they were just increasing content volume, you know? Yeah. By the such a ma a great magnitude. And, and we didn't wanna do that. Like we, we wanted to build a brand and a relationship with people, and we wanted to do it organically, and we knew it was gonna take time. And so we were really careful about how we spent the money because we didn't just make a bunch of hires or spend a bunch of money on marketing. In fact, I don't even think we spent any money on marketing for years because we just didn't have it. It was, we were really focused on just keeping the business going while we, you know, built this new path.

0 (1h 10m 12s):
Now here's the thing. I mean, you are, I'm, I'm trying to figure out how you guys were kind of building, building out the site and, and, and the, the aesthetic of it, because you had to make recipes, you had to make things and then photograph them. Did you guys do this in your own kitchens? Did you rent a kitchen? Where did you start to do that?

4 (1h 10m 33s):
So we did this in my apartment where I still live every Tuesday was our photo shoot day. And so we, and that, you know, in the beginning was Marilyn and me and I think one other person. And we would, and a and a photographer who we hired and we would, you know, cook all the recipes and style them and then shoot them in my bedroom.

0 (1h 10m 53s):
In your bedroom?

4 (1h 10m 54s):
Yes. Because that was, that, that was where the best natural light was. We had the Northern Light, and so we would clear off one of our bedside tables and set it up and, you know, and I, and it was really important to us that it was done in, in a home environment, that it wasn't overly styled, that it had style, but it wasn't, it, it felt real, because I think we were trying to get across the message that this is really about like real people in their homes and, but we're with the, the sort of elevated, you know, a little bit of elevated styling and you know, really beautiful photography that you, that you can get. W

0 (1h 11m 30s):
What were you making?

4 (1h 11m 32s):
We were cooking, you know, recipes that our community were uploading to the site and, you know, that we were, you know, kind of vetting through our curation process and

0 (1h 11m 41s):
Like cakes or they were Oh yes, everything entrees or,

4 (1h 11m 44s):
Oh, sorry. It was like everything from, you know, salads to cakes to stews, bras, grilled food, you know, I had a little grill out on, we have a little terrace, so we, I have a little Weber grill out there. And so sometimes we'd have to go and shoot out there and, you know, but it ultimately, it's really, it was stuff that can be cooked in a home, because that was, that's our premise, right. We're really all about the home.

0 (1h 12m 7s):
In, in that first year or first two years, most people were going to the site, presumably just not just but to get recipes. Do you think?

4 (1h 12m 18s):
Recipes, food articles. Yeah.

0 (1h 12m 20s):
And given that you didn't have budget for marketing or you weren't spending money on marketing, were you able to get attention because you were Amanda Hesser of the New York Times?

4 (1h 12m 30s):
I, I think it helped in the beginning. We had a very lucky thing happen early on, actually, before we launched, we had a splash page up where we could collect email addresses and we did a video that was just a video tour of my, my Kitchen. And because we wanted, that was, that was another element. We wanted people to like, be able to upload their own videos, show us what they were doing, you know, show us their kitchens. Again, we were just trying to sort of plant little seeds of the different things that we felt like, you know, could be done. We put that video up on Vimeo and didn't put a password on it because we were like, you know, nobody, nobody knows us.

4 (1h 13m 10s):
Nobody knows we're working on this. We just felt like food people aren't on vi Vimeo necessarily. Well, it turns out that somebody from Sirius Eats, which is another website, was on Vimeo and found it and published it, and that was, and, and it was essentially like, Hey, you know, Amanda Hesser and Meryl Stubbs are up to this on this. They're working on something new and you know, we've got like the first scoop on it. And wow. It was sort of this gift because what happened was thousands of people signed up on our splash page, and so, which allowed us to do a closed beta where we could let like a couple hundred people in per day. So that when we finally launched, we already had, you know, like 10,000 I think, community members.

4 (1h 13m 51s):
And we got a lot of good media coverage. In fact, I remember Goop wrote about it on our, our launch week and Daily Candy did, and both of them like broke our site. Like they, they, our our site went down because we obviously didn't have the most amazing technology at that point.

0 (1h 14m 10s):
When did it become clear to you that advertising was not going to, advertising alone was not gonna be able to, to, to sustain it?

4 (1h 14m 20s):
I think that was clear very early. And I, I think that there are a lot of, a lot of people actually still say to me, they're like, oh, right, so you, you know, you added a shop so that you could, you know, have like a different for revenue stream. And it's like, well, no, no, that's not, that's not why we did it. We really were focused on like, what, like if we're gonna say this is a hub, we're creating a real hub. We have to be able to serve people in a lot of different ways. So we focused on how we wanted to serve them and then we figure out how to monetize them in the beginning it's just that like advertising was an very established mechanism for funding media right. Online. And it, it was, of course, we needed to develop that as a core revenue stream, but if we were only gonna build our business around that, we were just gonna be a media company and that wasn't,

0 (1h 15m 9s):
Hmm. And, and, and of course over the years you've, you've I think largely moved away from ads and, and, and you now get the bulk of your revenue, I'm assuming from, from your online shop and, and your partnership with, with hundreds of, of brands where you like sell food and home goods and, and you do videos and podcasts and, and events and, and all kinds of things. And I'm assuming that that's meant that throughout the years you needed to raise a lot more money, right? I know around 2017, you, you started to raise money for a series B round. Yeah. And from what I, I understand there was a, a little bit of a crisis because one of your lead investors at the time, basically like pulled out, right?

0 (1h 15m 50s):
And, and from, from the quote I read, he said something like, like, you guys weren't focused. And, and I, and I guess this investor kind of ghosted you. What, what happened?

4 (1h 16m 4s):
I, I don't know fully what happened because I, I haven't heard the other side. Sure. I can sort of only glean from the signals, but we had in, you know, previously tried to understand what our board, like, how they thought about exits and like what were like, what was on their mind. And it's always a delicate conversation. And I think that conversation for this particular investor, like signaled that like, you know, somehow like perhaps we wanted out, which wasn't the case. So then when we wanted to raise money, I think he felt like it was like those were, those were maybe con for him confusing messages.

4 (1h 16m 48s):
And, you know, it was, it was a very strange experience because I think up until that point we'd had very supportive investors. Hmm. And so it was really just like, I think somehow we, we like lost his gaze and, and you know, he just checked out.

0 (1h 17m 8s):
I mean, this is 2017, you lose the confidence of a former lead investor. That must have been, I would imagine stressful at the very least.

4 (1h 17m 21s):
It was really stressful. I mean, I was on spring, like winter break with my kids and I, I just had to like forge on and try to, you know, put a smile on my face and refer them and like have a good time that day. But I was really tortured inside. We've had so many, like, honestly like gut wrenching, te terrifying moments. It's like, you know, I think that it in some ways that you, you kind, you do build up a, a, a thicker skin for them, but they're also in some, like, they, they sort of hit you harder over time because you just, like, they're, I I fully expect that like we, we will have other, you know, other challenges in the future too. It's like I'm, I'm ready for them, but I'm, but, and I probably am more steeled for them.

4 (1h 18m 4s):
But they're, they're, they're pretty horrifying because they really can change the fate of a company,

0 (1h 18m 11s):
Amanda, by your own account. And I say this as somebody who totally identifies with this, and I appreciate your vulnerability on this. You have said that in the early days of this business, you gained a reputation for being difficult, are driving and not at all warm, which is a reputation, not a reflection of reality. Of course. How did you, how did you discover that that was your reputation or that your perceived reputation?

4 (1h 18m 45s):
Well, I would hear about it, but I would, it, it, you know, once we started doing employee surveys and I, you know, reading through them, you know, could sometimes be quite painful. And I don't think I even realized it. It was just, you know, again, like it certainly was how I was raised. You know, it was definitely not a like, you know, it wasn't super, it was a lot. There was a, a tough love element to like how I was raised, but also, you know, my work experience to before starting the company was, you know, at the times, which is definitely not a warm and fuzzy place. Yeah. And I've always been, you know, kind of assertive and, and ambitious.

4 (1h 19m 27s):
And so, you know, it just took me a while to understand that how I think as a leader you have a different impact than you do on some, you know, when you say something than you do when you're a colleague. And I think once I started to see that it just, you know, it was, it was very clear that I, I should work on it. I just, there was one, one employee survey that where someone referred to Merrill as the nice one and I thought that was, I mean, we, we joke about it still, but not, I'm not something I'm proud of, but I can laugh at it at least. You know,

0 (1h 20m 3s):
You guys did eventually raise money for a series B round by this, this point you had like more than 50 employees. You know, it's expensive to create a content site. You've got photographers and videographers and I mean that, I have to imagine you were still had to be super careful with money.

4 (1h 20m 23s):
Yeah, we've always been super careful with money and I think through the B round we had raised only $13 million. That's a really small amount. I mean, it's a huge amount of money in my, in my view. But it, you know, in this world, in the industry, it's, it's a pretty small amount to fund a company of our size. And, but yeah, so we've always had to be just, you know, really pretty scrappy and you know, we've never been that sort of shiny new object that like, you know, where everyone wants to, you know, where we were never the employer who was like paying the most or who had the, the most, you know, the snazziest

0 (1h 21m 1s):
Perks, the punk tables.

4 (1h 21m 2s):
Yeah. We just, you know, we had snacks. We, we had good snacks, but, but you know, we didn't have the other, all the other kind of accoutrement at that, you know, that certainly people look for in startups

0 (1h 21m 14s):
In 2019, a big part of the, the business was, was purchased, a majority stake was purchased by an outside investment group. And I think you guys were valued at a hundred million dollars, which, and also in a huge infusion of cash into the business. This happened in, in before the pandemic. Shortly before the pandemic, a few months before. But I have to imagine that really has enabled you to actually supercharge a growth.

4 (1h 21m 40s):
Yeah, I mean the structure of that investment, you know, meant that yes, we got a bigger, certainly a bigger infusion of cash than we we had ever seen, but there were all, you know, it wasn't the invest total investment amount. A lot of the investment went into, you know, buying out existing investors, former employees who had, who had vested stock and things like that, which were amazing and really great to be able to do at that, at that, what I really feel was a turning point for the company. And yes, but it has, but it has given us, you know, funding to, you know, grow our team in, you know, invest in more senior leadership, which has been really amazing.

4 (1h 22m 22s):
And to be, you know, invest in, in new areas of the business

0 (1h 22m 27s):
Bearing in mind who listens to this show, which is, you know, it's a big audience, but it's also a lot of people are starting up their own businesses are looking for inspiration. Did you guys eventually, were you able to, to reach profitability or, or not quite yet.

4 (1h 22m 43s):
So in 2020 we did. And wow,

0 (1h 22m 47s):
So that was the first time you guys, that's that's pretty great. I mean it, and it's, it's a reminder that this can take a long time. It

4 (1h 22m 54s):
Takes a long time. Take a

0 (1h 22m 55s):
Long time to hit profitability, especially with a media company. Yeah.

4 (1h 22m 59s):
And every year we'd have kind of more profitable months than the last, but we weren't entirely profitable, but we, you know, we were definitely on the path toward it. And, you know, in 2020 was a really, you know, for companies that are focused on cooking and home, naturally those were companies that people were very f were very interested in and needed help from and support from during the pandemic. So, you know, we had a lot of really strong organic growth last year.

0 (1h 23m 35s):
So it takes a while. It's a, it, I mean, you know, and, and to stay with it for 11 years until you get, become profitable, that also takes a lot of grit. I mean right. Because, you know, it, it it can that i i that idea can be stressful.

4 (1h 23m 55s):
Yeah. I, I think again though, I, I really am focused on the long game and I, I think it's important to, I don't, we, we, the way we've run the business is really like focused on like writing, running it as lean as possible, but really staying focused on the long game. Cuz there are going to be years, you know, even if you're profitable, you might decide, well, in order for us to get grow to that next stage, we're gonna intentionally spend and invest in that growth. And that means the next year we're not gonna be profitable. Companies do that all the time. And I, it's just so I think that I'm, I'm, I'm focused on the health of the business and not overly obsessed on profitability yet

0 (1h 24m 36s):
When I, I know that your co-founder Merrill stepped down as president. I think she's still involved with the company and is on the board. Have a, about you, I mean, I know that you're committed to this and, and you know, you've gotten an investor on board who wants you there, but imagine at some point, you know, you, you will probably wanna move on and, and, and maybe start something new or maybe not, I don't know. What do you, what do you think?

4 (1h 25m 2s):
I'm so happy doing what I'm doing and I sh I'm sure that anyone who's listened to like my, my history, you know, yes, I had been restless many times and I'm always looking for thing things that are different and new and ways to innovate and I'm, but that's the beauty of, of starting a company, right? Is that ev like there are new problems to solve every day and there are new challenges and you know, I think that in the beginning, you know, I had, I, I mentioned earlier that I had wanted to like do something that was outside of food initially, but I think, you know, I've come to really value that I have domain expertise in an area that really matters to me and matters to my, like my life outside of work too.

4 (1h 25m 44s):
And so it's really, I am excited to push this as far as we can. And, and Merrill she left at sort of this perfect time. I, you know, it was like she left when we, you know, we got into a point where it felt like we had built something really great together and, you know, and she wanted, wanted to take some time with her family and like kind of figure out what's next. So, you know, not everybody, you know, can, or, or decides to leave at, you know, at a, at sort of an ideal time. I feel like we, we, we both lucked out, right? She, she was able to leave at a time when she can feel like, wait, wow, you know, we did build this great thing and it was at a time when I, you know, like we had this, we had new funding where, you know, I could really like build up my leadership team and you know, because when with her leaving, you know, there was definitely gonna be, there were gonna be some gaps.

0 (1h 26m 40s):
I know that you kind of, you had this, you, you kind of grew up in this entrepreneurial family and, and with your dad who was, you know, as you describe him, this kind of charismatic, more of a risk taker. But, and, and of course he passed away when you were so young and I don't know, I I I mean, do you ever think about what, what he might have thought of of, of you seeing you as a, you know, running, running a business and having started this business and, and where it's gone?

4 (1h 27m 12s):
I think he would've been super excited and it, that's sort of devastating because he never got to see it. And I was pretty, you know, like in a, not a great state when he, when he died and, but I, I think, you know, he was always like a a, he was such a like conflicted person in that, you know, he, yes, he was sexist, but he was incredibly supportive of me and to always told me I could do whatever I wanted. And yeah, I think that he would've been so pleased and yeah, I'm, I'm sorry he can't, he can't know.

0 (1h 27m 47s):
But your mom who, who was like, why are you because right. She was like, what's my daughter doing in life? Then you got this job with the New York Times and she was so proud of you and she must have been so concerned when you left that job.

4 (1h 27m 59s):
Yeah, she, she was, I mean she, I think she was really frightened and unhappy that I left the times my mom is just, you know, she, she's of a generation where women weren't encouraged and my mom is a really like ambitious, smart, savvy person who, you know, unfortunately like hasn't gotten to pursue her dreams. And so I think, you know, she's been a great supporter. She, she definitely has like a, a tough love way about her. But, but I also think that's been really inspiring for me. And I think that like, yeah, and part part of of my goal is to like, you know, prove that we, you know, women can, can do these things, right? And, you know, show my mom and like, kind of take advantage of the fact that I, you know, like of the opportunities that she didn't have.

4 (1h 28m 44s):
Cause I think that's what she would want, right? And so I think that's why when I left the New York Times, she thought like, what are you doing? Like, you, like you have this amazing job, why would you ever leave? And so she, in her, her way, she would refer to Food 52 as a my project, even when we had 20 employees,

0 (1h 29m 5s):
Your project.

4 (1h 29m 6s):
Now she calls it a company and she's very happy, but you know, it, it took a few years.

0 (1h 29m 11s):
Well, I I ask pretty much everybody who comes on the show this question. And I, and I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm in the process of modifying it, but I'll ask you a version of it, which is, when you think about your story and your journey and, and the success you've had, how much of that do you attribute to how hard you worked in your skill and how much do you attribute that to luck? And how much do you attribute that to, I don't know, other things your, your lot in life, the advantages you might have had. What, what, what do you think?

4 (1h 29m 39s):
Yeah, I I think it's a really a blend of all of that. I definitely believe that in luck, and I think you, you have to show up in order to be, be there to be lucky. And so that kind, like, they're all tied, right? They're all to me like so tied together. I even think, you know, like my birth order has a big impact on like what you end up doing. Like I was the, I was the last child, you know, in my siblings were all born right in a row. And then there was a five year break, and then I was born. And so like, I mean, the joke in the family is that I was the mistake, but because my parents had sort of been done with parenting, they took much.

4 (1h 30m 19s):
I was sort of like, this kind of fun, oh right, you know, parenting is fun and it's interesting and now we have more time to pay attention to you. And like, so I think that that had a big influence on my feelings of that I, that I could do things and that I was empowered and that I didn't have to follow all the rules and, you know, a and I think that really kind of fed into my entrepreneurial side.

0 (1h 30m 43s):
What are you cooking these days?

4 (1h 30m 46s):
Actually, it's funny, I'm making a cake tomorrow. I find that doing cakes these days is very gratifying and, and sort of soothing because, you know, I can measure and it's like, and then this magical thing happens in the oven and it poofs up and it becomes something that, you know, we can ha you know, that pleases everyone. And yeah, I, I have found that, that cakes are, I, i, I wish I could tell you that I was like still keeping my sourdough starter from early in the pandemic alive, but I haven't been.

0 (1h 31m 17s):
That's Amanda Hesser, co-founder of Food 52. Since I first talked to Amanda, the company hired a new CEO. In this month, Amanda will become the executive chair of the company's board. And by the way, if you saw that movie, Julie and Julia, there's a scene where Amy Adams, who plays the food blogger, Julie Powell, is freaking out because a certain famous New York Times writer is coming to dinner. What

7 (1h 31m 41s):
If she doesn't eat pork?

8 (1h 31m 43s):
She's a food writer. Of course she eats pork, you'll be fine.

4 (1h 31m 47s):
What is she early?

8 (1h 31m 48s):
She's right out time.

0 (1h 31m 49s):
And that writer was of course,

4 (1h 31m 51s):
Amanda Heer from the New York Times. Yeah.

7 (1h 31m 54s):
Come in.

0 (1h 31m 55s):
Who in the movie played herself and who actually turned out to to be the perfect dinner guest. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you wanna contact the team, our email address is ibt id.wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at How I Built This and mine is at Guy Roz and on Instagram or at How I built this. And I'm at Guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by Rachel Faulkner with music composed by Rameen Arab Bluey. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Gareth Gales. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Hermann, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung, Chris Masini, Carla Estevez, Sam Polson, and Kiro Wakim.

0 (1h 32m 40s):
I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey, prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon Music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear@wonderyshop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.