2 (0s):
This message comes from our 2019 lead sponsor of how I built this hiscox who understands every small business is

1 (7s):
unique and Taylor's its policies to your business is very specific

2 (11s):
needs get a

1 (12s):
quote or purchase a policy at H is co x.com hiscox

2 (17s):
business insurance experts. Hey everyone. So before we start the show, I just want to let you know that we are very very close to selling out our live show in Denver, Colorado. It's happening, November 13 At the Paramount Theater and I'll be interviewing Kurt Richardson creator of the OtterBox phone cases. This show is supported by American Express. It's our last live show of the year. So please come see us in Denver on November 13th. If you want to get tickets go to NPR presents dot-org and I hope to see you there. Soap Daymond John story starts with $40 worth of fabric and a four-letter word FUBU for us by us.

2 (1m 1s):
He wanted to make hats and jerseys and jackets for hip-hop artists and their fans and even as his brand began to explode Damon held on to his day job as a waiter at Red Lobster and if you haven't heard this episode or even if you have it is one of the funniest and most inspiring

1 (1m 19s):
Episodes of How I built this is the

2 (1m 20s):
first ran back in April of last year. Take a listen. You come back to New York with $300,000 worth of orders. How are you going to finance that?

1 (1m 34s):
That was the big question right? The I didn't know what I didn't know. I didn't have enough financial education. I didn't even have an accountant at the time. So I went to all the banks I could and I got turned down by 27 of

2 (1m 47s):
them 27 Banks. Oh, yeah,

1 (1m 50s):
it was so bad Loan Sharks were turning me down.

2 (1m 59s):
From NPR it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They go. I'm Gyros and on today's show how Daymond John went from waiting tables at Red Lobster to building FUBU. One of the biggest hip-hop clothing brands ever created. So as with any history, there's some disagreement over what I'm about to tell you but by and large lots of people will say that hip-hop was born in the Bronx probably in 1973 and the Bronx was the center of Hip Hop culture for most of the rest of the decade.

2 (2m 45s):
But by the early 80s hip-hop center of gravity started to ship to Queens specifically a neighborhood in Queens called Hollis. This is the neighborhood where some of the most influential names in. Hip-hop grew up Russell Simmons, LL Cool J. And of course all three members of Run DMC might even remember their song Christmas in Hollis hero to you the

1 (3m 7s):
favor. Okay. So Hollis is kind of crucial to

2 (3m 21s):
understanding how Daymond John was able to build a global brand of hip-hop apparel a brand he started from the trunk of his car because his hip hop culture has started to explode. So too. Did Damon's little clothing label called boo-boo. It's a brand that to date. Has sold over 6 billion dollars in a Peril now today you might know Damon as one of the sharks on Shark Tank. He's confident and smart and always well dressed but you might not know about his backstory his childhood in Hollis and the challenges he faced from a very early age right

1 (3m 58s):
around my about 11 years old 12 years old. My parents separated got a divorce and I would never see a speak to my father ever again. So my mother's dreams of getting a further education. Just didn't happen at the moment. So you

2 (4m 10s):
haven't seen your dad since you were 12. I did not and so it was just you and your mom at that point.

1 (4m 16s):
Just just me and my mom struggling trying to work it out. Uh-huh.

2 (4m 20s):
And and how does she make a living?

1 (4m 21s):
Well, mom was an executive assistant. So she worked for Lehman Brothers American Express and she would have her little side hustle. She would probably you know, so close and try to sell them she would go and open up, you know, maybe a little kiosk at a flea market and buy goods and Resell them. So Mom would do a whole bunch of things such as that to make some extra ends meet but she would also just mainly be a secretary or executive assistant for people.

2 (4m 48s):
Hmm. So see your you're growing up in Hollis in the late 70s early 80s and and it was kind of a tough neighborhood, right? I mean did it did you feel safe as a kid? Like did you feel like you had a pretty normal

1 (5m 4s):
childhood? All right, I'll save it was a great time. It was what I think is the last of those old-school neighborhoods where everybody knew each other and you know, all the kids had to go inside before the lights came on on the on the street lights. I mean, my mother used to always say I had to be either faster than the Concorde or faster than the lights on the Empire State Building. And the reason was that the Concorde would land approximately I think 750 or 7:30 and you know during the night. Wow. Yeah, JFK JFK, so when we all the kids heard the ground Rumble because the Concorde was Landing you had to you. Had to be in the house by the time that rumbling stopped but during the winter months when you know is still Landing that late at night, but yet it was getting dark at 5 o'clock parents to say you need to be home by the time you see the lights come on on the Empire State Building.

1 (5m 53s):
So it was a very great Community, you know, a lot of barbecues and cookouts and fun stuff like that, but that would all change around 86 87 or we stop feeling safe when crack side is a Estate, you know our neighborhoods and we will start hearing of deaths and and things that nation that maybe that's because I'm at 16 or 18 years old and I'm you know, and I'm driving and I'm seeing more of the world but also crack was starting to devastate every neighborhood across the country.

2 (6m 24s):
Yeah. So, how are you living, you know in a neighborhood environment where you had the crack epidemic you had friends who are kind of getting caught up in it and selling drugs and how were you able to hide you?

1 (6m 40s):
I've always been someone analytical and I remember doing the math one day about you know, if I were to work in McDonald's and if I were to sell drugs over the course of five years where when I make more money and look like I would make more money at McDonald's. Hmm because if you look at the drug dealer who has to pay for all the attorney fees and everything else every once in awhile to get caught and if they out of five years if they had to stay in jail, two-and-a-half or three of those years and when you and then you have to look over your shoulder and you end up dead maybe dead then Out and they have no medical how much really would they bringing home? How much are they netting? So I looked at that and I said, well, I'm rather work in McDonald's. Yeah

2 (7m 18s):
you as a kid. Did you Did you sort of dream about the things that you wanted to do the the kind of person you want to become

1 (7m 26s):
earlier on in life. I really dream that I wanted to be maybe a pilot. I really didn't know what else I wanted to be in life. You know. I had no idea until rap music really started coming around and I figured I wanted to be working in rap music. They can but I didn't know how to do that. If I couldn't rap sing dance or produce. It really didn't know how to do that. I try. Well I could dance a little bit. I actually did do some kind of dancing hoping that Run DMC or or LL Cool J. Or Russell Simmons would discover me at one point. I did get an offer to dance for a group named Houdini. There's only tour. Yeah. I got an offer to breakdance for them. And my mother said no way in the world you're going on

2 (8m 5s):
tour. It sounds like you were a pretty good. Kid, like you didn't really fight with her that much. He didn't Rebel

1 (8m 14s):
know. I think I may have one or two arguments with my mother during the court. Maybe I maybe now, I'm 49. I've had three arguments with her and 49 years probably. Yeah, probably two of them were when I was in my 20s.

2 (8m 28s):
Did you um was College ever something that you you considered? What do you finish High School?

1 (8m 35s):
I did I did consider it now, but I'm dyslexic and reading always presented. A challenge science and math. No problem. I could do in my sleep. You know, that was a challenge and I said to myself I'm going to take off one year, you know getting out of the school. I said I was going to take off one year and that one year became five years ten years.

2 (8m 54s):
What were you doing in that in that year off that you

1 (8m 56s):
take in that time? I was working here and there but I also was partying, you know dating as many girls as I could, you know, the normal kid thing, you know 18 to 20 I turn around again. I looked I said I don't have anything. And not only do I not have anything. I don't even have an education to fall back on. So again looking at all the friends I lost and then talking about all the all the kids that I thought were not so bright, but yet they were coming back from college and I was a waiter in Red Lobster serving them and I said, maybe I'm the idiot here. You are a waiter up at Red Lobster. I was a waiter. Yeah. I was having a great time as a waiter, but I was also learning from Red Lobster, you know, they would issue these quarterly books.

1 (9m 40s):
On you know, they're PLS. Basically what was working what wasn't working. I was you know learning how to service people

2 (9m 47s):
reading their quarterly PLS when you were a waiter, I mean, that's how many waiters at Red Lobster or any company will take the time to do that.

1 (9m 55s):
I don't know but that's not my problem. I was reading

2 (9m 57s):
them. So, all right, so you are clearly thinking about bigger things if you are waiting tables or Red Lobster and you're reading their quarterly reports in their PLS like Like you're doing this because you have a plan to did you have a plan?

1 (10m 16s):
I didn't know what the plan was going to be. But I knew they're just like working out every single day and just like anything else trying to educate myself. I had the ability to put various different things in my body or my mind, you know, drugs and rock and roll and rap music and drinking all the time. I could put that in and so how productive I was going to be later on or I can put in p&l statements and The Tony Robbins and listen to Jay Abraham and Think and Grow Rich and seven highly effective habits of whatever people

2 (10m 48s):
bring that stuff. You were listening to Tony Robbins and reading Stephen

1 (10m 51s):
Covey all day all day every day. That's what I would need to that's that's a no I was I was just saying that stuff when I was 16 and often, I would question myself and say did I am I doing the right thing am I on the right path? Because at the end of the day I saw to set my goals pretty low that I just wanted to be somebody who can take care of their family and have a a decent house and I wasn't sure what kind of business I was going to have. It feels going to business be a business at all. But I wanted to have a steady income. I didn't want to just you know, just be roaming the streets.

2 (11m 20s):
Yeah, and how does this idea of making apparel FUBU? How does it even begin? What's what's the story?

1 (11m 30s):
Well, so the funny story is that I will talk about that with my girlfriend at the time. I was living with mushy little bit older than me. She was 30. I think I was 20. She worked for American Express and one of them and very supportive but I would give her my ideas all the time. And you know, I remember she would laugh at some of them and then one day I asked to borrow $800. No, I asked her borrow $500 ID. I had called FUBU and she said no I would leave her after that. Of course. I left her after that. Well, he'll place where I left her after that and I remember maybe about 15 years ago something she's still my friend, but she came to my office.

1 (12m 10s):
Office and she she heard my secretary talked about my houses and all this type of stuff that we have to take care of from a financial standpoint in the wire the money. She was like, he's the one that $500 for

2 (12m 21s):
fuba.

1 (12m 24s):
God bless her. She's a great person.

2 (12m 26s):
Okay. So how did you come up with the idea for FUBU?

1 (12m 31s):
So, you know, we will I was spending so much money going out and buying clothes that that that the hip-hop Community love to buy. They could be ski jackets Timberland boots or whatever the case is and we start to hear rumors that you know clothing coming to power companies just didn't want rappers African-Americans inner-city kids. Whoever they don't want people wearing their clothes, but I started to get fed up to hear about all these type of Brands and I wanted to create a brand that loved and respected the people who loved and respected hip-hop and I called it fool for us by

2 (13m 5s):
us for us by us and end and you so what it was the The first article of clothing you

1 (13m 12s):
made well, I didn't make anything at first be very honest when I first did is I got a bunch of labels and I just went and bought Champion sure. So I just put my food will on top of the

2 (13m 22s):
champion got labels printed that's a FUBU on it.

1 (13m 25s):
And I just wore them on top of my Champion sure. It's just because I wanted somebody to I didn't want anybody to even know what mine because there's just one shirt. It couldn't it's not like I could resell it to somebody because let's say a sweatshirts $30. Well, I bought the championship for shirt for $30. So Going to talk to you from 40, right, you know, so I just tagged all the clothes I have and then I saw to see this hat that was on a lot of these rappers and it didn't look like it was made by a major clothing company and it look like a ski cap not with a ball in the top with a little tied like a shoe string on the top. Yeah, and I knew how to make those. My mother showed me how to make those because the first one I bought was about $20.

1 (14m 5s):
I went all uptown Manhattan. I couldn't find it anywhere when I finally found it if you had Of the gas and tolls I pay 30 dollars for this thing and I showed my mother that had and she said, you know, you can't afford to just pay that kind of money for something you can make for two dollars and and she's told me to go to the store and get some fabric. I went to the so I got $40 worth of fabric. I came back. I showed a bunch of hats and now all of a sudden I wasn't thinking from a commercial standpoint. Yeah, but I bought the same roll of fabric. So I have now this big roll of striped Fabric and I made a t Hat's so I decide to go stand on the corner and

2 (14m 38s):
sell them so you brought this roll of fabric. And and what you like cut out patterns and sew them together,

1 (14m 45s):
they will really easy, you know the pad it wasn't even a pan. It was just a straight Square. Okay, take the square. You fold it over you so one side and then you flip it in and out. So and then you sold on the top and you tie the string on top you're done you just had those so a straight line. It

2 (14m 59s):
was one square with one straight line and then you just tied it on top and there you go. You had the same exact

1 (15m 5s):
look it was like making like taking a sleeve right and folding it in half and using the part, you know, and then putting on your head and the top this open you just tie it with string. Wow,

2 (15m 17s):
and those just like those are really popular like lots of like lots of hip-hop artists kids were wearing those kinds of hats.

1 (15m 25s):
Yes, and nobody and no major corporations making them so there's no place to find them. So, where'd you find them with guys like me so I'm on the street corner. So I made 80 of them it took me probably about three hours. I'm a 80 of them and I hit that eye hit that street corner. I sold all them, you know a lot of people go. What are you talking about selling the corner? Because I know a lot of people may be listening to this and they may not live in a condensed area, but trust me it's not that I saw the quote outside my house. I went to the shopping area and his place called Coliseum all where people were actually going into shop. So I quote people are they walking in that mall and out of that mall by standing on the

2 (16m 1s):
corner and did you do the hats have FUBU the FUBU label on them at that point or I did

1 (16m 7s):
I put the FUBU logo on the front of the Hat.

2 (16m 9s):
Yeah and And people buy them and how much do you remember how much you sold us out for

1 (16m 14s):
ice all over 20, but if you didn't have 20, it would be 17. You have 17 and 15. You didn't have to clean it were 10. Yeah, it feels my last two hats they with $3

2 (16m 23s):
and they were costing you like to $3 right to

1 (16m 26s):
$3. I don't think so because I bought I bought for y'all were the fabric creati has so that means they were 50 cents. Wow, so you

2 (16m 33s):
come home that night and you must be thinking wait a minute. I've got something here.

1 (16m 39s):
Well, I was on my way home. I remember County I'm running I was so excited down the money. I just couldn't believe that I actually came up with a concept and I sold it and I was it was depending on whether I I can sell it or not. And then I just looked up and bang I hit a car. And I remember that guy getting out and it was a nice car and I remember him going getting out and I said man, I don't have any insurance and sorry he said all right. You know he how much cash you got on you. I said, I don't know $800. He said, all right, give me and I'll take it and he took the money and left.

2 (17m 19s):
In just a moment at Damon earned that $800 back and then some and then some more they with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to one of our sponsors who helps make this podcast possible E-Trade investing your money shouldn't require Moving Mountains. No matter how much or how little experience you have E-Trade makes investing simpler.

2 (18m 2s):
And for a limited time get $100 when you open a new account with just 5,000 dollars. It's all about helping your money work hard for you for more information. Visit each Ray.com. Learn more E-Trade Securities LLC. Amber s IPC a global shortage of helium. It's not just a big deal for balloons and birthday parties helium is used in Rockets MRI machines and quantum computers and we actually have to extract it like from the ground what happens if it runs out this week on shortwave the daily science podcast from NPR.

2 (18m 46s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's 1992 and Daymond John has made and lost his first eight hundred dollars selling FUBU hats but the word about his brand is spreading around town. So he keeps making more hats and then he decides to Branch out to t-shirts as well.

1 (19m 8s):
I studied really, you know refine the way I made the hats get better quality. I hats, you know, get better food with logos on them. Then start to put t-shirts there and then start to say, okay. Well, I can't just hang out here in the mall. And so these t-shirts so where can I get a booth at or where can I go to so I started to look at other places and Outlets then I started walking over to stores that were outside that mall saying hey, I'm usually outside this one on the weekends, but if I can't be here, can I put some shirts in your place or hats and your place on consignment? So I just started trying to figure any and every way out that I can increase my sales and my exposure of the

2 (19m 44s):
product. How did you find that the stuff that you were just going to like shops and buy a bunch of

1 (19m 49s):
t-shirts? Yeah, I was going to physical shops down on the Delancey Street area where people knew they can go and buy shirts and then I was starting to order as many catalogs. I could of people that were selling sweatshirts show like CCM. The Jersey company would sell CCM Jersey though blank or I would go to Boulder the boulder company in Boulder Colorado. They would sell sweatshirt. So I would just start to source as many places. I couldn't find something of high quality. That was that had no name on it and they were using it for that purpose. They were premium companies. They're the same company that would sell it to You know large large companies that you can put your company name or logo on it

2 (20m 26s):
and you were literally sewing the labels on

1 (20m 29s):
I was ripping the old labels out. I was sewing these labels in I would then start going to screen printers and start putting screen printing on the shirts. Then the next step up after that was to go to embroidery places to start embroidering the sure to get a high quality. I was out I kept improving the product improving the quality and to basically see the resistance or the acceptance of customers. What level would they buy it at? How much would they pay 30 with a be 60 92 they like extra large large red. I wanted to just really start to understand the customer. So I had to keep going back and improving whatever I was doing

2 (21m 3s):
and I mean this is like pre-internet. So it's like today you can just type up, you know in Google screen printing silk screen printers or whatever it how did you find isn't that nice? How did you locate all these places that were willing to do this for you?

1 (21m 20s):
Yellow Pages Calling if you drive into New York City. You'll see some sign on a bridge to say New Jersey the embroidery capital of the of the embroidery capital of the world. So what do I do? I take a train in New Jersey. That's the walking around. Wow. I saw walking around saying, you know embroidery places, you know, embroidery places. I mean just not stop and getting up at 6 o'clock in the morning and just hitting the

2 (21m 42s):
subway all the while working at Red Lobster night, right

1 (21m 45s):
all the while working Red Lobster and night and sewing the hats and delivering the hats at the same time and trying to source Since the the goods yeah, I mean just but enjoying it loving when I was doing it was kind of like this this new discovery this path that I was going down. I was just so excited about and to say that I also have to say that through 89 and 92. I closed the business three times because I ran out of money because all these development costs all the gas all this going on those trains and cars to going these places. I would run out of money, but I would only run out of like a $500 $1000 and before you know it, you know, I'm walking down the block someone who say hey aren't you?

1 (22m 26s):
The little kid that sells food? Well, I say yeah, they were like, I need some more been looking for you. What do you mean you've been looking for me? Huh? I need some more and I would keep opening the business back up because the business started to call me instead of me calling the

2 (22m 38s):
business. Did you ever get like were you ever in a situation where you were selling stuff on a street corner? And like I don't know City officials came up and asked for a permit or anything like that.

1 (22m 48s):
Yeah, I mean that had happened once or twice. Yes, but the best permit ever when you're selling stuff on the streets is being able to run faster than them. That was a great

2 (22m 57s):
permit showcase. Okay, there's clearly a demand on the street for your clothes at this point. But when did you decide it was it was time to take it to the next level?

1 (23m 8s):
So when I finally got to the level of 1992 and my friend J Alexander came back from fighting Desert Storm, and he had had a couple of dollars. He said I want to put in some money and I want you to take this thing serious And my plan at that time in the neighborhood was the big black guys in the neighborhood. They had little options on what they can have to be very stylish. So they had to go to Rochester Big and Tall or and get a big white shirt or a black shirt or they had to pay a lot of money to get this stuff custom made for them because nobody was really making somebody was really

2 (23m 43s):
tall or heavy basically

1 (23m 45s):
right? You're right, right. So what we did was we just found a place that made 4 x 5 x 6 8 H 6X shirts and we made 20 of those shirts because we met 20 because we knew that if we gave These Guys these shirts these guys are normally bodyguards not all of them, of course, right? But the ones we did give where The Bodyguard they were in front of the club's they will bouncers or something like that and we knew that they would not just wear it once and do something where something else like the more stylish kids who don't want to be seen as something twice. We knew these guys who wear it forever. Wow. So that was our first plan of attack for the first six months get the same 20 shirts out. These guys and that's what we did and we just would do that and before you know it these guys were walking Billboards and the artists started to say what am I chopped liver?

1 (24m 31s):
Yeah. Why are you giving it to you know this guy over here and I can't get it like well, I don't know. We don't really make you decide you're not going to really wear. No I wear it. I don't know you sure. Yeah. I'm sure you know that was out. That was our strategy when we first start to really launch

2 (24m 44s):
it and did people I mean at that point where people like did they know what food was or more people still saying what what is this food? Ooh thing.

1 (24m 52s):
Well, they started to know a little bit about it in the tight Community. We're at and then this one thing they're just put me on the map was we would dress these two or three bodyguards that work for a guy in New York named Ralph McDaniels and Ralph McDaniels show video music box is probably it's probably been on longer than MTV Howard came out the same year and Ralph is really known for breaking most of the music artists from I would say 85 all the way to 98 they all To really really beg him to go on his show and we put on the body goes around Ralph and we found out that Ralph was going to to Teddy Riley's concert or Teddy Riley had a weekend that he used to throw in Virginia.

1 (25m 37s):
So he said, all right, we're going to take the train down there because we know he's not going to know as many people in Virginia. So we're be able to get to Ralph easier and we got to Ralph and he said I won't look any your stuff. I know who you are. I want to put you on my show. Wow. And he did this interview with us and I was so sweet was so scared to death, but he told everybody that you know, who was the next best thing? Well, I think we had I think we have 50 shirts and I old Ralph so much as being one of my mentors and somebody was a mentor the to the community that he really put us out there and after that all the rappers all of them were ready to wear our stuff because Ralph gave us the thumbs

2 (26m 16s):
up, so I guess I mean around this time 92 Fubu Is becoming bigger meet you you start to realize that this has potential to become something more than just a side project. Obviously. Yeah. So what was your next move? How did how are you able to get it more exposure?

1 (26m 35s):
Well now it was about time to put my game face on and it was about time to start looking at the numbers and being a real businessman even though I wasn't so I started to put this plan together on how many retail stores would take my product how many we can ship and start taking out ads such as In right on and black Beat magazine and how can we start shipping these shirts across the country. And also how many street corners can we sell them one with the in regards to flea markets the street corners and I started to do that. I start to reduce my hours at Red Lobster and I saw to put in more hours here and then I then I started to bring in two and three other partners to help with the man-hours that we needed except

2 (27m 14s):
all that would require a lot of

1 (27m 15s):
money. I would require a lot of money at first so of course, you know, like like many businesses I Average my credit cards, you know up until I think my partners and I all of us leverage our credit cards or to be about fifty thousand dollars with a very high interest rate, which is not the smartest thing to do and then it all culminated to when I decide to go out to the magic trade show in Las

2 (27m 37s):
Vegas. This is a famous like industry trade show where like apparel and stuff.

1 (27m 43s):
Yeah. So it's the magistrate show. The magic stands for men's apparel Guild in California is held in Nevada. I know I'm a little confused at It myself but that's where all the stores go twice a year and they basically say, you know, they'll go and see your Ralph Lorenz your Nikes your food was of the world and they'll say okay. This is what we want to come in for spring. This is what we're going to come in for fall and as I would go out to that show my friends and I would scrape of our money and we're all going buddy passes and stand by. My mother happened to work for American Airlines at that time. So we all flew into Las Vegas influent to California affluent to Nevada and took the buses over because it was too busy to go into Vegas. Is being on standby? Yeah, and we got a small hotel room a couple of miles away from the the trade show and we put our clothes on the corner of the hotel room stuff on the beds and on the on the floor and we would sneak into the magic trade show.

2 (28m 36s):
Wait, you didn't have a booth at the magic trade show?

1 (28m 39s):
No, we didn't have a pool. We didn't even have passes to go into those paths that we probably had. You know, we probably each one of us had on us maybe $30 a piece but time we got there. So we sneak into the trade

2 (28m 52s):
show what you would just go. So you snuck into the trade show. You didn't have a booth there, but you would just go around and talk to people about your shirt.

1 (29m 1s):
I would have the food one and I will see brands that I felt were like ours. So if I was see Timberland or whatever the case is, I stand outside their booth and say hey, how you doing? Hey, I got this new brand name FUBU and some people will be like would say fool the forest by yourself. You're here. Where are you? Where's your book? Come on, I'll walk with you both. While instead of walking on my balls you want to hop in a cab it or bust because my booth is over the Mirage Hotel all this showing it around until no no. No. No, not really. Yeah this up in the room. It's so it works it out. And you know, we would write $300,000 in orders and that's when I would realize how much capital I really

2 (29m 41s):
needed you walk away from that show without even a booth with $300,000 in orders. How are you going to finance that?

1 (29m 49s):
That's that was the big question right there. Didn't know what I didn't know and I wasn't part at that time. No one will all the things. I know now. I wasn't part of the Chamber of Commerce. I didn't have enough financial education. I didn't even have an accountant at the time. So I went to all the banks I could and I got turned down by 27 of

2 (30m 7s):
them you said hey, I've got this business and can I get a

1 (30m 10s):
loan? Yeah. I didn't know how to fill out a loan application. I didn't know how to you know much as I was reading PLS. How can I write a p&l on a business that I never have grown past, you know? 2200 shirts at a time or five thousand shirts at a time, right? I do know how to project what $300,000 would turn to and I kick in turn down my Banks

2 (30m 31s):
27 Banks. Yeah.

1 (30m 33s):
It was so bad Loan Sharks for turning me down

2 (30m 36s):
my God because doesn't happen. I mean you were I guess in your sort of mid 20s still living at home with your mom. Yeah, and and banks are looking at you you had no sort of history of having a business. So they're thinking you know, why are we going to take this

1 (30m 50s):
risk? Ask, why would they take the risk? I had no history in this business. I had you know, I had really I couldn't collateralize the home I could I didn't do it at the time because my mother wasn't allowing me to go and put that up at risk. So, you know, I don't blame them. I wouldn't give myself the money, you know, and then my mother I remember coming home and she came home. She said, you know, you've been working on this house as long as I have you put as much money as you could into this house and we have some equity in this. House, and we need to go out and I wouldn't do this if you didn't have $300,000 on orders because this is all we have let's go out and let's take out as much Equity as we can on this house.

1 (31m 31s):
Wow, and once you sell the clothes you put the money right back in and you know, hopefully you'll have a nice profit. So she goes out and she gets $100,000 loan on our house. So your

2 (31m 42s):
mom really I mean, that's the kind of a kind of a crazy risk that she took on him and she really believes it. She must really believe this is gonna work. Work

1 (31m 51s):
it was a really big risk. So I don't know anything about manufacturing. I mean know stuff about, you know, putting an embroidery on a t-shirt stuff like that. But as far as I know I've only heard about manufacturing is over in China, but I'm not going to risk my money over in China. So what happens is my mother moves out my friends all move in my house. So we start they start all paying $75 a week for the room that they would rent out of my house. So I have now six six friends all living in. Home and all the furniture I couldn't sell I took on the back yard and we all chopped it up and we burned it all in the backyard because we wanted to make room in the house for selling machines because we weren't going to trust a hundred thousand dollars of our money overseas with somebody we don't know because we knew that we just weren't sharp in that area.

1 (32m 43s):
Wow, so we get all these so machines we get a Cutting Room. We hire we hire a bunch of seamstresses and we hire somebody to come. At the fabrics and trim the fabrics and we create a factory in the middle of the middle Hollis Queens Mouse to the

2 (32m 56s):
house you decide that you are you are going to be the factory to fulfill these orders of

1 (33m 1s):
$300,000. My house is a big version of Airbnb meets the

2 (33m 5s):
factory. How is exactly how hard were you did you have to work to fulfill those orders?

1 (33m 11s):
It was hard. I think we filled about $75,000 worth of those orders until I turned around and I only had five. Hundred dollars left in the bank and I was about 4 months late on the mortgage. Wow, again, I didn't have Financial intelligence at the time. And what was happening was I was paying for the setup of the machines and bringing all the real Goods here. So I had to pay for all that in advance. Then I was paying for the salaries of the people that will working there for me and that money was going out the stores when they receive the goods. They want to pay you for 15 30 60 90 days and my A lack of financial intelligence was starting to just underline how this company was never going to go anywhere.

1 (33m 58s):
And now I made $70,000 worth of the goods that I have a $300,000 order on and the stores are starting to say you're not delivering this in time. We're going to start canceling the

2 (34m 7s):
orders. So this is like what like 95

1 (34m 11s):
96. Yeah. This is right around 95. Yep.

2 (34m 15s):
It sounds like you're you're you're close to like going bankrupt.

1 (34m 19s):
I'm goes going bankrupt and lose. House and losing all the orders that I had those stores are not going to trust me again because if they're waiting six months for something to come in the one they give you these orders. It's the orders that they're not giving somebody else that they could be turning other Goods. So now they're losing faith in me and it got to be a it was a really really dark time and I see this a lot now and entrepreneurs who don't realize what they don't know.

2 (34m 46s):
So were you were you panicking?

1 (34m 49s):
Yeah, I was panicking house panicking for sure. How big I didn't know what I didn't know how to get out of it. And then my mother comes over to me and says I have a I have an idea and I said what she said you need a strategic partner, huh? And I said what the hell is a strategic plan? And she said it's OPM Damon, you know, you know OPM doesn't have to be other people's money to be other people's manufacturing mind power Manpower marketing I said, all right. Well, what do you mean? She said I $2,000 so I didn't have $2,000 I go back to Red Lobster and I work for a month and I come back home. I give her mm. So what are you gonna do with the money? She's I'm gonna take an ad in the newspaper.

1 (35m 31s):
Huh? And I said, that's that could be the stupidest thing I've ever heard in my life,

2 (35m 37s):
like asking people if they want to fund your company like taking an ad out in the paper classified ad and what did the ad

1 (35m 44s):
say million dollars in orders need financing

2 (35m 48s):
and What happened at people started calling the number?

1 (35m 53s):
Yeah. So 33 people call that add 30 of them hundred twenty five percent interests had lived in there adequate collateral pictures of loved ones in case I got lost, you know offers. I can't refuse. He's our Loan Sharks. Yeah, but three of them were real and one is a one with Samsung

2 (36m 12s):
Samsung like the Korean

1 (36m 15s):
during the glomeruli breath 200 billion dollar privately held completely.

2 (36m 19s):
Conglomerate somebody at Samsung saw that classified ad and was interested

1 (36m 24s):
Samsung the head of Samsung's textile division because Samsung makes everything from nuclear reactors to cars the phones, right and the text Oliver's saw it and said, hey, why don't you come in and I like this opportunity here. We Finance textiles and the deal with us was that they would Finance the manufacturer and Manufacturing and distribution of our product, but we had to sell 5 million. Ian dollars worth of clothes in three years to keep the deal.

2 (36m 52s):
Wow, and and so you went there to meet with them and they was the person that you met with in New

1 (36m 57s):
York. Yeah, of course, I was nervous. I want to present it. You know, I brought my mother with me later on. You know, my partner's a Samsung would say, you know, first meeting we ever had for a potential investment or whatever structure of the somebody brings their mom like a well mom's pretty smart. So I'm gonna bring her with me and you know, I didn't think I was going to hit. Five million dollars worth of clothes in three years. I barely even sold the first three hundred thousand dollars worth of clothes, but I had known my customers so well because all those things that I was doing that as we started to put the brand out there we did about 30 million dollars in three months.

2 (37m 34s):
So Samsung of this huge textile manufacture, all of a sudden is is making your clothes and distributing It Go, you're going from like a tiny little mom Paw shop to working with the biggest textile maker one of the biggest in the world. World.

1 (37m 51s):
Yeah, but I mean the work was still up to us who they were just financing and we still had the market even though they had to manufacture. They manufacture in the source of funding the manufacturing. We would have to find the you know, we have to find the Factory The Factory have to be up to par and we did say okay, why are the money over here here? So we're working with that the I mean all of it still landed on us the only area where I felt that obviously it was giving us the ability to scale is number one the stores knew they were going to get their goods in time.

2 (38m 19s):
Yeah. How did you get you know entree into the big retailers to to carry your

1 (38m 25s):
products? Well, that really wasn't hard at that point because we had already had six or seven years full of you know, really servicing specialty stores really well and retailers it actually we'd have to we'd have to stop the Retailer's we'd have to not allow them to purchase because some of the kids would look at some of these big retailers and say well now food was not cool anymore because it's in these big retailers,

2 (38m 49s):
you know. This I guess like 10 years before FUBU starts to really take off Adidas struck a hissed like a really famous deal with Run DMC after after my Adidas, which was one of the first times a major company did a branding deal with with with any musical artists. And and I wonder if a lot of these big box stores like Macy's or the other companies that want to carry FUBU were they trying to jump on that on the hip-hop end bandwagon. Did they see this as a hugely Actually profitable Market that they wanted in on

1 (39m 23s):
they did so they first of all they were scared. I actually did hear many stories say we don't want, you know, a lot of those type of people in the store because it's going to have shootouts and or shoplift. I saw a large retailer did ask me to take the picture of myself and my my three other partners off the Hang tag because it said we look like a gang. Wow, so you gotta understand the ignorance of some of

2 (39m 47s):
them. Were you when you're running up. Against that kind of racism and and bias and people kind of judging you even before you walk through the door did that to that anger you?

1 (39m 59s):
No, not at all. I don't know where these people I don't know. It was somebody's bias or something like that. I don't know what they've been exposed to in their life, you know, maybe they weren't around certain other people and maybe they just need that one person or the other person their life to come into their life to hopefully show them the difference that people are people. I also felt that I wouldn't be here if I knew what I knew. So if they all were that smart then there would be no place for Daymond John. So I can't I can't spend my life being worried about what other people think or the ignorance or the challenges they may have had grown up. They may just had the wrong the wrong family members in their life who telling him the wrong things. But you know, I'm listening the glass is half full and I believe love doesn't come in a color or gender and we have a there's so many beautiful people in this world that the people who don't understand that are suffering.

2 (40m 50s):
So 1986 Damon you get this this deal you just deal with Samsung. Within two years FUBU is going 350 million dollars in Revenue. I mean that yeah, that's insane. I mean, how do you what what happened?

1 (41m 11s):
I don't know. It's all a fog sometimes, you know, is this rocket ship but it was having really great partners and mentors all around and being able to have these systems put in place where we could start scaling, but if you want to simplify It you know, if the men's division of what we were doing we were doing approximate. Let's say argument sake we were doing a hundred million dollars by that time by three years. What happens is after year one you get you get a license comes aboard Jordache was our first license and they came aboard and they started doing ladies glows. So now we're doing a hundred say a hundred fifty million in men's they're doing a hundred million alone and ladies and you start to put other licenses on so bags shoes boots.

1 (41m 56s):
Fragrance suits bedding and each one of those are doing 15 or 10 or 5 million apiece socks and things that nature and that's how the scalability got to 350 but, you know 350 million dollars in the fashion business is great, but it's it's not you know, listen Under Armour join 3 billion or so billion Pumas doing 12 billion, you know, there's real numbers that that are out there even though I'm extremely proud of what happened, but that's how we started to

2 (42m 25s):
scale. And who was buying who was buying food will who your

1 (42m 28s):
customers so many people so in America primarily, you know African-American and or people who love rap music of all colors. I remember, you know, we first put in sync in one of our ads the you know, we started getting so many calls from stores in Nebraska and Ohio like hey, you know, this is not just a black thing and then when you start to have Too many Goods or overruns a Goods you then you sell it to the places such as Burlington and TJ Maxx and those customers come in and they're price-conscious customers. They're just not looking for a brand. They're looking for some good old drawers the good old socks go jeans and they bra and a lot of us.

1 (43m 11s):
I see so many parents and grandparents with with my cell phone going. I know this is FUBU until till I looked at the label I had it for 10 years my son bought it for me. So so food would just has its own interpretation from various different people.

2 (43m 26s):
Okay, so you have this like several years of this incredible expansion and growth and at some point like at a certain point FUBU was everywhere then. I guess you did something interesting which is sort of euphemistic way to describe this use in 2003 use semi-retired the brand at least at least in the US was that I mean was that because FUBU was like Overexposed or or what?

1 (43m 51s):
Well, what we did was we reduce most of the ution of it. I mean we still obviously kept our categories, but we would really narrow down to just a couple of stores just test the product and see how it's going because we felt that it just need to cool down and more importantly we will reduce all the logos as we could. So because people you know, they already had ten years of FUBU in their closet. They already thought that you know, it may not have been for them at the moment because we you know, it goes through Cycles, you know and a hot brand last five or maybe six years, maybe seven years, so I just slowed the brand down

2 (44m 27s):
and and were you I mean was FUBU did it seemed at that point that it was kind of time to to wind it down a little bit because it wasn't and I wasn't making as much money.

1 (44m 37s):
Well, I think it was you didn't want to force it on the consumer again. That's how I felt and I think that you know, if the store is were in like, oh my God, I have to have it then, you know, we needed to find something else to give to them and just put, you know fool not on a back burner but kind. Just slow down. So it's just really adjusting the way the visibility of the product

2 (45m 0s):
you had a like a completely just like just a total change of career path in some ways in like late 2000s 2008. I guess when you became a TV star because I mean a lot of these other labels were run by by people who were kind of well-known in the hip-hop Community alike, like Russell Simmons and puffy and and Jay-Z and you were Kind of quiet. I mean people didn't necessarily know you as well and you the brand right all of a sudden you become a TV star by becoming a shark on Shark Tank. How did that happen?

1 (45m 36s):
Yeah, so I wanted to start paying it forward and educating people on what I went through and trying to again show them where the landmines were. So I started writing books and I wrote her first book called display a power and it talked about the fact that we all have the same engine underneath our hoods. But are you going to tap into what drives you and what can make you a rock? Star make you proficient and bring you success and I started going to stations like MSNBC Donny Deutsch CNBC talking about the book and Mark Burnett some, you know, Mark Burnett said, you know crew saw me and he had show called dragons. Then there was already popular in Europe and Japan coming over to America and he said he wanted me to be a shark and I said, yeah, whatever why not.

1 (46m 19s):
Let's try the so the sound like the show sucked. It doesn't matter, but I'll I'll go anyway. I went for an audition and they ended up using the the pilot as the first couple of episodes Shark Tank. And before I know it the show that I thought would never get anywhere and sucked with these, you know, five business people just talking business all the time who want to see that before I know, you know going into our 10th

2 (46m 44s):
year. Do you ever when you're in the shower when you're in the Shark Tank and those you know those like controllers come out do you ever go back to you trying to pitch? Our company to Samsung like divert think about how you felt.

1 (46m 60s):
No, I don't because I remember I was so I was so unprepared. I don't even I give those people that walk in front of us way more respect than I give myself when I was pitching because those people are night and day comparison to Daymond John. So I value what they're doing and I do though I care for them because you know, I love to see the people up there that they put all the work into they just need a little extra. Extra step and so I value their their guts and I value their their entrepreneurial spirit.

2 (47m 32s):
So last question for a Damon how much of your success do you think is because of just your hard work and your intelligence and your scale and how much because of luck

1 (47m 42s):
very hard. I always contradict myself because I don't believe that there is anything such as luck I would just believe it's determination and drive meets opportunity. But when I look back and I sit there and I say see who I am. You know on this National platform able to change lives father of three and a Pisces. I say to myself wait a minute, you know, something's goddess have to bless me in various different ways. And that's why I work so hard to try to pay it forward to other people because it's got to be some kind of luck. I don't know why I was chosen. I have no idea but a lot of it is determination drive, but I think there is a bit of luck on what's going on in my life

2 (48m 21s):
Daymond John founder of FUBU since those early days selling. A FUBU shirts on street corners and cleans he's grown as net worth to an estimated 300 million dollars as for Shark Tank. He's put about eight and a half million of his own dollars into companies featured on

1 (48m 38s):
the show.

2 (48m 39s):
It word on how much money he's made or lost from those Investments. And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from one of our sponsors Squarespace design and build your own websites with features, including mobile editing go to squarespace.com NPR for a free trial then use offer code NPR to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

2 (49m 21s):
In 1987 dozens of federal agents surrounded a trailer park in Ozark, Missouri their target white supremacist threatening violent revolution. I have a team to Freedom Fighters prepare to start a race war wide agents fired tear gas arrested him and found a massive Arsenal C4 plastic explosives hand grenades thousands of rounds of ammunition. So years later, why did the FBI stop watching him that story on embedded from NPR? Hey, thanks so much for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and today we're updating a story that first ran about a year ago. It comes from Marin County California and it actually starts more than a hundred and twenty years ago.

2 (50m 7s):
Yeah, my great grandfather immigrated from Italy and 1897 and we have been farming or ranching here since then. That's Laura and Pancha from Tomales, California where he runs stemple Creek. Cattle ranch. Oh, yeah, you can see cows all over our Ranch. We have a few with white faces or speckled faces, but most of them are all black all Black Angus beef cattle the same kind his parents raised when Lauren was growing up and even though he loved the ranch. He eventually moved to Sacramento to work in pharmaceutical sales, but about 13 years ago Lauren realized he wanted to get back to those cows in Marin. I felt like it's either now or never I'm 30, you know, totally okay if we try and fail but if I don't even try I'm not going to be fulfilled as a person so Lauren talked about it with his wife Lisa.

2 (50m 59s):
I mean, I knew obviously since I met him how passionate Lauren was about agriculture and I was up for the adventure Solis acquit a good-paying job at a law firm and they moved back to Marin to join Lauren's parents on the ranch, but we were still ranching the way that my great-grandfather unrest at the And we need to change some things up and actually make it a profitable business. Otherwise, we weren't going to be able to survive and we essentially asked Lauren's parents if we could take over the running of the ranch. Thankfully they had the vision and they were brave enough to say. Okay, so Lisa and Lauren started to make some changes for starters, they no longer wanted to auction off their cattle to a feedlot.

2 (51m 44s):
They wanted to raise them until they were slaughtered and then sell the beef directly to Customers and because they saw that more people were demanding healthier food. They decided to raise the cows organically on grass instead of grain, but all of that took a lot of time and a lot of money, we invested a lot of our you know, personal Assets in the business. Like we didn't have an investor. We didn't have you know seed money we were the seed I remember having this conversation with Lisa multiple times and Lisa thing. When are we actually going to pay ourselves to do this? Both Lauren and Lisa kept day jobs at paid the bills while they certified the pasture and the cattle there was many people in our lives that just thought we were completely insane because he had two children during these years and we were running around, you know, seven days a week juggling all of these balls.

2 (52m 37s):
It took them three years to fully convert to being an organic Ranch and to build up a base of customers first farmers markets then at local stores and they kept working on different ways to go. Easier on the environment. In fact, they become one of the first farms in the u.s. To actually measure their carbon levels and now they're not only carbon neutral they are actually what's known as carbon positive managing the operations and the property the way that we do applying compost and rotational grazing or actually sequestering more carbon than we're

1 (53m 10s):
emitting. Its just incredible.

2 (53m 13s):
Anyway, a few years ago. Lauren was able to quit his day job in sales to work full time on the ranch. And this year they're projecting gross revenue of over 4 million dollars and that money doesn't just come from beef sales, but from tours and an air B&B on the site plus since we last checked in with them, they've renovated a 150 year old barn for weddings and conferences and all of that on the same Ranch started by Lauren's great-grandfather. I think my parents are like totally proud to see us back and our business thriving and they're always talking. Talking about us and they're always there are our biggest fans to hear more about stemple Creek Ranch or here previous episodes had to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org.

2 (54m 0s):
And of course if you want to tell us your story go to build dot npr.org and thanks so much for listening to our show this week. You can subscribe at Apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcasts. And while you're there, please do give us a review. You can also write to us HIV T at NPR Org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or add guy Roz our show is produced this week by rumty. Narrow Bluey also composed the music. Thanks. Also to Kansas limb. Julia car Nissan has Mexican porn Eva Grant and Jeff Rogers are in turn is Sequoia Carrillo. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this.

2 (54m 50s):
This is NPR.