0 (2s):
I would come home every day and he be like, oh, look at what I'm working on. It was really ugly in the beginning. And there were spelling errors and you sent out a activation email and it said, what is it let's read together at us? Was that what it said, joy?

1 (18s):
Oh, no, that was the friend connection email saying let's let's compare books or let's be friends or something like that, but I forgot the apostrophe and let's

0 (27s):
And he, he got just reams of emails that just said things like, I refuse to join a book site where you can't use it across to be correctly

2 (39s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Raz and on today's show how Otis and Elizabeth Chandler launched a social network out of their LA apartment, turned it into the hugely popular book, review website, good reads, and how they sold it to the biggest bookseller in the world. As I've said, many times on this show before some of the best business ideas aren't necessarily about inventing something new, but rather improving or sharpening an existing concept.

2 (1m 24s):
Tim Leatherman didn't invent the pocket knife or pliers. He simply combined them into a single tool and called it the Leatherman multi-tool before Missy park launched her apparel brand title nine women's athletic clothing was out there, but no one was focused solely on that type of apparel and Don Katz didn't invent books on tape. He just made it a much easier and more user-friendly experience by coming up with audible. It's the same principle for today's episode. Good reads. The idea Otis and Elizabeth Chandler came up with was inspired by the growth of social media networks back in the early two thousands, the success of Friendster and MySpace, and eventually Facebook led to hundreds of other social media startups, especially niche orie nted sites.

2 (2m 15s):
Many of which we've forgotten by now networks like eons, which was specifically for baby boomers or Kappa zoo for sharing music and photos or delicious where people shared website bookmarks Otis and Elizabeth Chandler were, and still are big readers. And their big idea was to build a social network for other book lovers. Initially in 2006, Otis started the site on his own with no strategy, no business plan, no office, and no employees. Elizabeth helped out in her spare time and they managed to attract a few hundred users basically by reaching out to everyone they knew, but eventually they reached over a hundred thousand users without hiring a single employee today.

2 (3m 4s):
Good reads is part of Amazon and now has more than 125 million users Otis. And Elizabeth sold it in 2013, but they stayed on running it until 2019. And as a review site alone, it has the same name recognition as Yelp or TripAdvisor, but good reads. Isn't just about reviews. It's also a place where books are celebrated. It's the world's biggest site dedicated to one of the world's oldest hobbies, both Otis and Elizabeth grew up in California, Otis in LA, where he was a descendant of the renowned Chandler family and Elizabeth in Palo Alto where her dad taught electrical engineering at Stanford.

2 (3m 46s):
And when she was growing up, she wanted to be a ballet dancer.

0 (3m 50s):
I got into it when I was about 12. I did gymnastics before that, which I was really, really terrible at. I think I broke several bones and my mom finally said, you've got to stop this. And so I decided to try ballet and immediately it was just a really good fit. And I, I fell pretty deep into it pretty quickly.

2 (4m 12s):
There's, there's a lot of kind of mythology around what that means, right? There've been films obviously. And, and that could mean an intense, just punishing kind of life. Did that in any way, reflect what your experience was like? Not at all.

0 (4m 29s):
I think it was a great passion. It was a great way to express myself. I learned a ton about discipline mastery, resilience. I mean, when you're learning to dance, you have to learn to fall down. You can't learn how to do a pair wet without falling. And for me, it was a fabulous experience that I think taught me a lot.

2 (4m 51s):
So were you so committed to it that you thought that that's what you would end up doing as an adult?

0 (4m 58s):
I didn't want to go to college. I just wanted to be a ballet dancer, but I was a really good student and a test taker. And I always, you know, did all my work and I got into Stanford and my parents were very insistent that I needed to go to college. So my plan was to go for a year and then drop out. So I, I did my freshman year at Stanford and then I went to the Boston ballet school. I was dancing in the highest level in the school. And the plan was to audition for companies and I, I injured my hip socket really badly. It was so bad. I couldn't cross my legs for like a year. And it made me hate dance being in that much pain.

0 (5m 38s):
So I went back to college and decided that I probably should stop.

2 (5m 43s):
Wow. All right. So you, you go on to college and I think, I think you are an English major, is that right?

0 (5m 50s):
Well, after I injured myself, I decided I should become a doctor and I actually was pre-med and an English major. And I loved reading books and analyzing stories. I just loved it.

2 (6m 6s):
I want to, I want to turn to you Otis for a minute because I, I want to ask you about your upbringing. I know you grew up in LA and I know this because I grew up in LA and you are part of a, a really well-known important LA family. Your family ran the Los Angeles times, your grandfather Otis Chandler was a publisher, the famous Dorothy Chandler pavilion named after your grandmother. Tell me about what, what was your childhood like?

1 (6m 34s):
I would say I had a lovely, wonderful childhood, and I really had no idea that my family was well known in some circles. I knew my dad worked at the Los Angeles times and would take me to work sometimes. And I'd go run around the printing presses and try not to get in trouble. But you know, later in life, I think I started to realize I had a famous name. I would go to the dentist and they would go, are you related to the UTIs Chandler? And I would be like, yes, yes, that's my grandfather.

2 (7m 3s):
But when you were a kid, you were not, you'd no conception of that. There was not part of your consciousness.

1 (7m 8s):
I mean, abstractly, I kind of knew that he was a big, important guy because he had, you know, he hobnob with presidents. You'd go to his house and he'd have pictures of him with all the precedents and tell stories about hanging out with Lyndon, B Johnson naked in the pool. I don't know why they did that, but they did. And, and he was like an Ernest Hemingway type guy. You know, he like, he went hunting, he drove exotic cars and had had a huge collection of them. Were you close with him? I don't think anybody was terribly close with him and my dad when I was growing up, told me all the time, like, I'm not going to be like my dad, I'm going to be a good dad and be around for you.

1 (7m 48s):
And big O we call them big O I was, I was, I guess that made me a little out of the loop. The family called him big. Oh, he was a very competitive guy. One day when I was about 15, we were at a family gathering and we were staying, I don't know, 20 miles from where a party was that everyone was going to, and he said he was going to bike. And I said, well, I'd like to bike too. And he said, well, why don't you bike with me? And I was on an old mountain bike and he was on a top of the line, fast road bike. And so we set off and I'm 15, you know, I have no phone. This was before phones and Google maps. I didn't even have a map. I don't know where I am and he's going pretty fast. And I'm having trouble keeping up. And I'm like, well, surely he's not going to drop me.

1 (8m 30s):
And he dropped me. And then I thought it was surely, he'll be up ahead waiting at some point. Nope. You just took off, left me in the dust and left me to find my own way to this party, which like three hours later, I finally did almost crying. Cause I was like, I don't know where I am. And, but that was big. Oh, if you got on the bike with him, it was a

2 (8m 52s):
Wow. I could never imagine doing that to my child.

1 (8m 56s):
I have one,

2 (8m 58s):
I know that when you were a little kid, your dad was diagnosed with cancer and in terminal cancer, how did that begin to change? Presumably everything about, about home life.

1 (9m 10s):
There's a huge change. So I think I was 10 and my mother came to me and told me that he had cancer and was going to have to move out for a week for some treatment. And he basically never moved back in and they told him he had two years to live and he ended up doing chemotherapy that put it into remission and ended up living, I think another 15 years, which was great. But he went from, you know, a present father who lived with me to a sick guy in a wheelchair who lived to two hours away in Ohio, California. And it was a very different relationship. And I think what it caused me to do is just grow up a little faster.

1 (9m 52s):
I think it just kind of causes you to take a little more responsibility a little more earlier. So

2 (9m 57s):
It was mainly you and your mom and any siblings,

1 (10m 2s):
Three younger siblings that my mom had to raise all four of us now by herself, which she did an amazing job of.

2 (10m 9s):
Tell me about what kind of student you are, where you committed to school, where are you? Pretty good, good school from, from a young age.

1 (10m 16s):
I was, I was one of those straight a kids, I guess though. I didn't get the journalism gene. I got the engineer gene from my other side of my other grandfather, who was the civil engineer. And so that's what I ended up focusing on. But you know, some inch entrepreneurs, they have that story. It's in a lot of books and interviews where, you know, they had some sort of business selling candy in elementary school and learned that they could buy it from here and sell it for more over there and make it their first business. I never did that. Instead, what I did is I took apart every single thing I could get my hands on and sometimes I would put stuff back together, but mostly I just disassembled stuff. Cause I was, I just want to know how stuff worked.

1 (10m 57s):
I was very curious. So

2 (10m 59s):
You never felt like you had to just out a family tradition follow in along that path and, and join the newspaper.

1 (11m 8s):
I never felt the pressure to join the newspaper. I think that, that I actually remember a specific moment. I think I was in high school and I went and asked my grandfather, you know, do you think I should go into the family business? Because you know, it's, it had been a business handed down generation to generation four times and, and he said, Nope, stay away. Wow. I recommend you go follow your passion. You know, maybe go work in that internet thing. That, that thing is up and coming, you know, probably in 1998 ish, but I did feel pressure to go to Stanford. I was a fifth generation Stanford graduate.

2 (11m 44s):
All right. So you, you go on to Stanford and, and your objective, like your, when, when you got there, were you thinking I'm going to become an engineer after this is done?

1 (11m 53s):
Yeah. I put down that, I thought I would major in mechanical engineering and I did major in mechanical engineering and I loved building things. I actually thought that I would maybe work on cars someday. I, but when I graduated with a mechanical engineering degree in the year 2000 Silicon valley was just a buzz with fire. You know, it's the height of the tech boom and being at Stanford, you were full of these stories of people who got a job at a tech company that was bought for a lot of money, six months later, and suddenly they're millionaires six months out of school. So somehow I, I got a job as a software engineer, even though I'd only taken two courses in software engineering at a startup in San Francisco that had 20 employees,

2 (12m 37s):
What was called that was

1 (12m 38s):
Tickled.com. When I started it was called III mode.com and later rebranded to tickle.com. And what'd it do it built personality tests. So the founder was inspired by the Myers-Briggs test, but that's copyrighted. So we couldn't call it that. So he built the ultimate personality test, what he had to basically observed at Harvard business school. Of course, his, that when people took a test together, it was a social event. People were talking about it for like 10, 15 minutes after taking it. And that it's, it's rare to actually find something that that's powerful. You know, ironically, I think books are like that, but you kind of have to have spent a lot of time with something that taps into your emotions to have that powerful of an experience.

1 (13m 23s):
And so he launched this company with the intent to do serious tests. And then of course, what we found out was that serious tests weren't that popular and what was popular, were fun tests. So our first viral test was what breed or dog are you? We built this test and it went instantly viral all over the internet. What you would ask, oh,

2 (13m 42s):
You would answer questions. And that would tell you what kind of dog you

1 (13m 45s):
Are. Yeah, I'm a St. Bernice mountain dog because I'm hardworking and loyal. So we had a PhD psychologist on staff who would write these 20 questions and then break it down into like eight or 10 result types that would tell you something about your personality, right? What color are you? What kind of car are you? You know, hundreds of them

2 (14m 5s):
And I'm not, and this is no judgment at all. But like, wow, that Harvard business school, the Stanford engineers, they were all taking their brainpower in and making that product.

1 (14m 17s):
Well, what ended up happening was the fun tests got us a lot of traffic, right? Because they were inherently viral. I think we maybe had 400 fun tests and 80 serious tests by the end of when I left tickle. So it was kind of a traffic acquisition funnel where, where you take the fun ones. And then, and then we try to see if you're interested in any of the serious ones.

2 (14m 37s):
Was it like startup craziness? Like, were you working from morning till night and sleeping at your desk and eating pizza out of a box? Was it, was it like that?

1 (14m 47s):
Yeah, it was a fun startup. It was a big floor. There's a whole bunch of us in our twenties programmers working there. And the other cool thing about tickle was they didn't just build the personality tests. There was a couple of other products too, including a dating site and an early social network. So as soon as we saw Friendster taking off, we built a social network as part of tickle. So it went from, you could take those tests and see what kind of dog you were to. You could take the tests and compare what kind of dog you were with all your friends. We built a social network, a photo sharing, social network called ringo.com, which was kind of like a early Instagram, but it was not on mobile because there was no mobile in 2004 or five.

1 (15m 32s):
And it was really a fun time to kind of learn from the inside. Like how do you build a social network? How do you make it viral? How do you do all that really fun engineering challenges?

2 (15m 44s):
All right. I want to come back to you, Elizabeth. Cause when we left off, you were at Stanford and thinking about pre-med and then went to English. And, but, but after you graduated, I read that you kind of went through the post-college exploratory phase, which is not uncommon, right? Like most people don't know what they want to do and they just kind of try different things and yeah. And I guess you try to sort of took some science classes at a community college in Palo Alto, but, but also started to gravitate towards journalism.

0 (16m 12s):
Oh yeah. I quite liked science, but I, I wasn't sure exactly what I wanted to do. And I also got an internship at the Palo Alto weekly while I was living at home again,

2 (16m 22s):
Like a free weekly alternative newspaper.

0 (16m 25s):
Yeah. It's a, it's a, it was my, it was actually, well, I was kind of placating my parents saying I was going to apply to medical school. And it was really the first time I had found a job besides dancing that I liked and it suited me. The, you go out in the world, you interact with people and then you come back and you write, cause I really do enjoy writing. And I think because I had done dance for the love of it, I had a really hard time compromising in a job. Like you don't become a dancer to become rich or famous. You really? Most of the girls, I know that I danced with women. I danced with did it because they loved it. And journalism felt like, like a fit.

0 (17m 5s):
I liked the other people I worked with. I loved the diversity of it. You know, you throw your yourself into something new and you try and learn everything about it. It felt, it felt right.

2 (17m 15s):
All right. So you are back in Palo Alto and Otis. You are working at the start-up in San Francisco. The two of you did not know each other in college who had been at Stanford together, but you didn't know each other, you actually met after he graduated a party. I think in Palo Alto, right?

1 (17m 34s):
Yeah. We, I think Elizabeth was a year and a half out of school and I was six months out and we both met at my good friend's house party and she walked in the door and sat down right next to me. And I couldn't tell you anything else about what happened at that party because I was immediately captivated by this beautiful girl who sat next to me. And then she told me she's a journalist and also taking physics classes at night. And I was like, well, that's just the coolest thing I've ever heard.

2 (18m 5s):
And apparently you told a friend that evening that I think she's the one, like, I think I'm a merrier.

1 (18m 12s):
Yeah. I, I was in the habit of, at that time in my life, we're all through college of sleeping out for Stanford basketball games. We were super fans and, and always first in line. And so after that party, I went to the sleep out and we were, you know, having a beer in our sleeping bags. And I told the friend, I met this really amazing girl. He would state

2 (18m 33s):
Sleep outside the box office to get tickets. Was it

1 (18m 37s):
That's okay. Get tickets? No, we had the tickets. We would sleep out to be first in line for the

2 (18m 41s):
Game. Cause it was just open seating.

1 (18m 44s):
The student section is open seating. Yeah.

2 (18m 47s):
And Elizabeth, when Otis said, yeah, I come here and I camp out at the gates to go to the basketball game. You're like, oh, this is the guy. He's the one.

0 (18m 58s):
He was pretty nerdy. I

1 (18m 60s):
Mean, where was our first kiss? So this is

0 (19m 2s):
No, we're not putting that in this. I do remember. I think we all went out to a club afterwards, was that at the first time or the second time I noticed that was the first time and he was dancing. And I remember thinking I could marry that guy. I just liked how steady he was. And sweet. What I also really liked was he was very direct. I mean, he called me up and was like, I want to take you out. I'm going to take you out this time. It was definitely very clear that he liked me. And I really liked that because I think probably even more so now people are so wishy-washy and I found that really attractive.

2 (19m 43s):
All right. So the two of you started today. This is in 2001 Otis, you're working@thestartuptickle.com. Elizabeth. You are applying to graduate school to study journalism. And from what I read Elizabeth, you get in to USC to study journalism and you moved down there in the fall of 2001. So presumably you guys start a long distance relationship. We did.

0 (20m 8s):
Yeah. So we hadn't been together very long. When we, when we started long distance relationship,

1 (20m 13s):
We are best friend was southwest.com and we, we just booked every weekend and probably flew three out of four weekends a month. And I think we did that for like four years.

2 (20m 25s):
And then eventually I guess it just the strain of that cracked and, and you guys split up around around 2005. Yeah. What Elizabeth, what happened?

0 (20m 36s):
Well, it just wasn't really going anywhere. So I broke up with him

2 (20m 43s):
And what'd you do Otis?

1 (20m 46s):
My response was to tear hair out for a couple months cause she wouldn't take my calls. And then I went to coffee with my boss. Who's now my good friend. His name is Stan <em></em> and I kind of told them what was going on. And, and I said, I don't know what to do. I think I maybe need to go down to LA because I can't get her on the phone. And he said, well, leave tomorrow morning and let me know next week, how it went. So I just drove to LA and she kind of opened the door and gave me a hug. And basically the end result was we, I said, I'm gonna quit my job and move to LA because you know, I'm still, I would like to be in this relationship still.

1 (21m 27s):
I remember the boss actually, Stan told me another thing that was smart, which was like, who you marry is the most important decision of your life. And the number of times you run across another soul that is in the camp where, where you think they could be, that don't let that go.

0 (21m 43s):
I never heard that before. That's it's a nice story.

1 (21m 47s):
Yeah. So then I told them, I think I need to move to LA. And he said, great, I'll process your resignation next week. And I said, actually I had a thought I'd like to work half time from LA. And he accepted that. And so then I think around Christmas, I moved to LA and got an apartment across the street from Elizabeth

2 (22m 8s):
And meantime Elizabeth, in that period, you actually got a job in LA at the LA times. Is that right? Yeah. And, and at that point, this is, I think 2005 Otis. Was your family even involved with the LA times anymore at that point?

1 (22m 23s):
No, they were there. The Tribune company had bought it or we'd so my family had sold it to Tribune, I think around 2000. Right.

2 (22m 31s):
And what, what were you doing, Elizabeth? What was your job there?

0 (22m 34s):
I got hired as an assistant editor and the Sunday magazine. So it was me and one other editor who were running the whole kind of feature section of the, of the magazine and I planned and was the editorial person on photo shoots. And then I also wrote features and I planned for fashion magazines a year to men's and two women's. Wow.

2 (22m 57s):
I guess Otis, not too long after you moved to LA tickle.com got acquired by monster.com.

1 (23m 5s):
The joke was we became tickle monsters, tickle

2 (23m 8s):
Monsters became tickle monsters. They bought it for like a hundred million dollars. You were not obviously a founder, but presumably you've got some cash out of that.

1 (23m 17s):
I did. And it was a seminal moment. I remember my boss coming around and, or the CFO coming around and handing me a check. And well, I mean, before that, when the CEO announced, you know, we're being acquired for a hundred million dollars, we thought this was the best, you know, we thought we'd won the super bowl. Yeah. And so then a couple of weeks later, when the CFO gave me the check, it was, I remember it was $80,000 post tax. So tax had already been taken out. And so it was kind of like doubling my engineering salary at the time. And I was like, I had two reactions. I was like, wow, this is great. And then the other reaction was like, this doesn't change my life at all. I realized that, yeah, you have to be a founder to make life-changing money.

1 (23m 58s):
So what,

2 (23m 59s):
When, when did you start to think that you were ready to start your own business after you got that $80,000 check?

1 (24m 6s):
Yeah. I mean, what I knew, I always wanted to start my own business. I had no idea if I could actually do that or if you know what it would be, but what it was. I mean, I, I grew up with two grandfathers who are CEOs of their own companies. Yeah. You know, I think the positive side is you look at your grandfather and you can read about them in the press and read books about him. And on the other hand, then you go to Christmas with them and you realize he's a real, just normal person. And it gives you a sense of belief that if he can do that, that I could do all that. And I think that was honestly one of the core things that led me to think I could be an entrepreneur, was he did it so I can do it.

2 (24m 52s):
And at that point, did you have an idea for, for what you were going to start? Like what you were, you were going to work on?

1 (24m 59s):
Well, I think at some point in 2005, I had maybe what you could call an inspirational moment, which was I was in a friend's apartment in San Francisco. And when I walked in and he had his bookshelf in the living room and, and if you're like me and, and Elizabeth, you know, whenever someone's got that bookshelf on display and you see it, you kind of gravitate right towards it. And so I had the opportunity to just kind of grill my friend about every book in his bookshelf, you know, did you like this one? And what about that one? And, Ooh, this sounds interesting. What, what was this one? Like, and I walked out of there with like five or six books that I was excited to read. And, you know, because in my day job I was building these social networks that have profile pages and in our case, and tickle the profile pages full of personality test results.

1 (25m 46s):
But I was kind of like, that would be kind of amazing if I could just like break down the door of all my friends' houses and grill them about every book that they've read in their bookshelves. I'd probably have like, you know, more book recommendations than I could ever read. And that would be awesome. Well, maybe I could just build a website where that's the profile page. The profile page is your bookshelf, the same one you've got at home and people would just put it there and we could browse each other's bookshelves. And like, we'd never lack for a good book recommendation. Again,

2 (26m 15s):
You were thinking about some kind of social network idea that you wanted to build in case.

1 (26m 22s):
Yeah, because I knew how to build one because we were building two of them. Right. Tickle was one, Rinko was one. And I think Lee much, much later on, I landed on thick really geeky terms, social objects, objects that people like to talk about that therefore can be the basis for sharing on a social network. Photos are super strong for that articles, cooking anything that people could kind of experience together or separately, but like have the same experience and, and then want to talk about afterwards. And, you know, I think maybe subconsciously I was looking for books because I was a huge reader when I was a kid, I was the kind of Raider. Like my 10 year old daughter is now who's reads under the covers at night.

1 (27m 4s):
And then when I got to Stanford, I kind of had to stop because you can't go to Stanford and read for pleasure. And then I went to tickle and I also kind of didn't get back into it cause I was working so hard and I was kind of, I kind of didn't like that about myself. I kind of wanted to get back to reading more books. And so I think maybe subconsciously it was, there was the idea that, Hey, if I do it around books, I'll have, I'll probably be able to read a lot more books and that would be cool.

2 (27m 31s):
But you knew that social networks, I mean, they were popping up left and right. And they were becoming more and more niche, right? Like a social network for dating and then a social network for specific types of dating. And then

1 (27m 44s):
Exactly. And so I could kind of see that social networks, we're going to probably start to do the same. And I remember I took out the CEO of tickle for lunch and I told him, I think I might do Ringo, but for books. And he was like, that's a good idea. It's probably a really small idea. You know, there's probably not a very big market there, but it'll probably work. And I was like, Hey, I was like very encouraged by this and B. I was a little bit like small. No, that's okay. I'm okay with small and maybe I'll prove him wrong.

2 (28m 15s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment, how old is launched his new website with no investment, no employees and no business model and why he decided to add an S to the end of the word, good read, stay with us guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this Support for this podcast and the following message come from. Klayvio the email and text marketing platform that puts creators in control. If you're the creator of an e-commerce brand, you need a platform that hustles as hard as you do, Klayvio unlocks the power of your e-commerce data.

2 (29m 0s):
So you can personalize and automate messages that keep customers coming back. Creators communicate with Klayvio get started for free@klaviyo.com slash NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor. nuMe nuMe is an award-winning weight loss program that uses psychology and personalization to help you lose weight and keep it off. nuMe gives you knowledge designed to help you make informed choices that fit you and help you reach your goals. Sign up for your trial and get psychology-based weight loss support@noom.com slash built.

4 (29m 40s):
What happens when you're pushed to the limit and what does it take to go further? I'm Jay Williams and those questions define my journey to the NBA and beyond, but overcoming limits is something we all have to do. So come with me as I explore how with some of the biggest names in sports business and culture, listen to my new show, the limits from NPR.

2 (30m 7s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's around 2006 and Otis Chandler has decided to take some of his savings and launch a website for people like him, book lovers.

1 (30m 21s):
And then I just started coding and spending all day like sketching out what the feature set could be. And I think for most of 2006, that's what I did is I went to the cafe every morning. Elizabeth went to her job at the LA times. She'd come home at, I don't know, 6, 7, 8, we'd have a quick dinner. And then we'd both crank a little bit more.

2 (30m 42s):
Where were you guys living in LA

1 (30m 44s):
In Santa Monica? Kind of two tiny little apartments. We each had roommates

2 (30m 50s):
And initially it wasn't called good reads, right?

1 (30m 53s):
Yeah. So initially I had a working name, never used called bookstore.com, which, you know, stirs were hot back then the person who owned bookstore wouldn't want to sell it to me. So we did a, you know, a bunch of brainstorms around names and, and one of my coworkers at tickle said, you know, I think I said like good books. And she was like, how about good read? And I was like, that sounds good. Yeah. And then I tried to go by good read singular. And it was like $50,000. And I was like, okay, forget that. And then I tried the plural good reads and it was not available. So I just bought good reads with z.com for, you know, just to use while I built it.

1 (31m 36s):
Yeah. But then I went negotiated for good reads with the NS and, and I think the negotiation over email went like this it's $5,000. And I said, oh, that's a lot of money working out of my savings here. So how about 2,500? Like a few days later, 5,000? And I said, how about 3500, 3 days later? 5,000? I was definitely like, not rich enough for w wanting to spend my savings, that, that I would, that I thought $5,000 was a small amount of money. I thought that was a, quite a large amount of money. And I remember calling my mom and being like, I can buy this thing for 5k. Like, do you think I should do it? And she was like, I don't know, honey, you got to decide, but it sounds like a nice name.

1 (32m 16s):
Yeah. But I'm super glad we did it because we ended up having a, I think the best name. So

2 (32m 22s):
You finally get it, get a sort of a beta version by the end of that year. And just to kind of understand the idea was this was going to be a social network site where people could upload their favorite books and write reviews of them, essentially. That was the idea.

1 (32m 36s):
Yeah. That was the idea that you could search for any book in the world, add it to your profile and kind of say, I read this, give it a rating and say something about it. And then you'd have your, your collection and you could browse other people's collections on their profile. And then we'd build, you know, didn't call it that at the time because Facebook hadn't coined the term, but a newsfeed on your homepage where you could see like all the recent updates.

2 (33m 1s):
And did you have in your mind, any business model around this, did you, did you not at all?

1 (33m 8s):
No. I mean, I suppose I had watched tickle, I have a business model of advertising plus lead gen and paying for premium tests. And I thought maybe I could put ads on it, or I really wasn't thinking about that, to be honest, like I, I had no, no business model documents or spreadsheets or any, any real thought about it at all.

2 (33m 27s):
So when you, when you finally had a beta site up in December of 2006, what did it look like? Was it, it was a website with a bunch of different images of, of book covers?

1 (33m 39s):
Well, it was about the ugliest website you've ever seen, but it worked. And then I remember I went to one of my taco designer friends and said, Hey, do you think you can do a side project and design this thing I made? And he said, sure. And so we iterated a little bit. And he, he came up with the logo and the design, and then like a week later, it transformed from the ugliest thing I've ever seen into something that looked quite.

0 (34m 8s):
I remember it was green when he showed it to me the first time it was this horrible green. And I remember that we had to tell the designer, you know, what should it look like? And I think we just found some sight on plants. Do you remember this Otis? It was like grow or something. And it had all these pretty kind of soft greens and soft Browns. And we thought, ah, can you just make it a little bit, look a little bit like that,

2 (34m 35s):
I guess like, just a couple months before you launched, you discovered that there were competitors doing, looking to do the same thing. Some of them were well-funded. I think one, one had like a million dollars in funding, right?

1 (34m 49s):
Yeah. We had two moments building it, or we kind of had, like, we discovered a competitor. So the first was library thing and I discovered it maybe four months into coding. And I was like, oh, man had already built something like this, but they're really much more focused on cataloging and problems that people with really large bookshelves have. Right. And I realized this isn't really the problem I want to solve. You know, I, I, I really believe that the best way to find good books was through your friends. And, and I think that's still true today. And then literally two weeks before we were going to launch, we discovered Shelfari, which had two co-founders, three employees and a million dollars in seed from Amazon.

1 (35m 29s):
And I was like, oh man, it's over. We're about to launch. And these guys I've already launched in, Amazon's just going to king, make them, they're going to put them on the book page on the Amazon book page and link to them and they're going to win. Yeah. But you know, it kind of, again, I kind of tore into their product and realized, well, it doesn't really quite do things the way that I think they should be done. So I'm just going to carry on trying to solve the problems that I think we should solve. And, but it was definitely a scary moment

2 (35m 58s):
When you were about to launch, did you have any employees? Was it still just you?

1 (36m 2s):
It was just me and, and then I secretly coerced the partner

2 (36m 7s):
And your partner was Elizabeth.

1 (36m 9s):
My partner was Elizabeth, but she had a full-time job. So what did you say,

2 (36m 13s):
Elizabeth? How are you, how did you start to get involved?

0 (36m 16s):
Well, I would come home every day and he'd be like, oh, look at what I'm working on. And I'd look at the stuff. And you know, it was really ugly in the beginning and there were spelling errors. And the, I remember we used to joke because everything said after you had any actions successfully updated, it wasn't friendly. It was very functional. And I was like, Otis, you've got to fix this. Like this language needs help. And I think you turned to me and you said, well, I kinda need a co-founder. And I was like, oh, well, I'll be your co-founder. And I mean, one of our favorite examples is you sent out a activation em ail and it said, what is it let's read together at us?

0 (37m 3s):
Was that what it said?

1 (37m 5s):
Oh, no, that was the friend connection email. So if I clicked on, I want to be your friend, it sent an email saying let's let's compare books or let's be friends or something like that, but I forgot the apostrophe and let's,

0 (37m 17s):
And he, he got, you know, just reams of emails that just said things like, I refuse to join a book site where you can't use an apostrophe correctly. So I got kind of roped in

2 (37m 29s):
And you get to make the site successful. You need users on there, uploading their books and talking about them and talking to other people and getting other people to do it. And so how did you get the initial group of people on?

1 (37m 43s):
Well, we wrote an email to everyone. We knew every email address we could find and we BCC them and said, Hey, we built this thing, come check it out. And I think people started to sign up and I would sit there and watching the logs and, oh, someone's on. And I think it got up to about 800 people that way. And then I said, let's, you know, kind of in January, 2007, I was like, Elizabeth, do you think we can like get some press? And so she wrote a press release and pushed it out to a couple places. And Mashable road wrote a story saying that we had just launched. And our growth went from 10 users a day to a hundred users a day. But actually that the first growth wave really didn't come from, from that it came from discovering that there is a huge community of book reviewers who were existing on kind of the blogging platforms of 2006 seven.

1 (38m 36s):
And what they were looking to do was just connect to other people who were reading the same stuff as them. And when they found good reads, they started adopting us intros because we, we were better at that than the blogging platforms. We, you know, you could just go to the book page for the book they were reading and they could find everybody else. Who'd read that book. And they loved that.

2 (38m 55s):
I mean, early on, you know, after that Mashable article came out and you're getting a hundred users a day, presumably you had costs like server costs and other attendant costs. So how were you paying for that?

1 (39m 9s):
We're never super huge, but I did put on advertising some ads, just Google ad sense tags right in the beginning, because I got the advice from one of my advisors that get your users used to the fact that there are ads. And I think in the beginning, maybe for the first year or two, the ads covered the cost of the server.

0 (39m 30s):
And well, and also I think we had affiliate links if you wanted to buy the book, but we realized pretty quickly, those were not very significant and would not be funding the business.

1 (39m 40s):
But, you know, we got it up to a hundred thousand users, I think registered users by the end of 2007 with no other employees, no other help. It just, just the two of us.

2 (39m 52s):
So what did that mean? Having a hundred thousand users here doing tech support and also improving the site. And also, I mean, I can't even imagine, and you had a full-time job at the LA times. She were going into work every day. Right? Elizabeth.

0 (40m 6s):
I was, and I was planning a wedding and it was for the two of you. Yeah. I was planning our wedding. It was also a really complicated time at the LA times. It was during the Sam Zell being sold to him. So it was kind of crazy at the office. I mean, I was working really hard, but I also was able to squeeze out a little bit of time to be working on our project as well.

2 (40m 31s):
So Otis, tell me about your date day day-to-day schedule. I mean, you're, you're, you've got a hundred thousand users by the end of 2007 and it's just you full-time on this job,

1 (40m 42s):
Correct? Yeah, it was insane. It was fun. I mean, I would just wake up, go get a big cup of coffee and put my headphones on and code. And I, I was kind of happy doing that, that I didn't mind that I quite liked it. Actually. I actually really loved doing the customer service. When you do your own customer service, you, you learn so much about what's working and not working for your product.

0 (41m 5s):
I feel like, I feel like we started to get to know a lot of our users and they were very, very passionate. We had this whole librarians group to have people help us manage the metadata on all the books. And I think one of our first employees Rivka was the super librarian who was just incredibly passionate about making sure that the data was correct. And eventually we hired her to be like the chief customer service librarian.

1 (41m 31s):
Sorry, we should clarify that super librarian was, was a status on the site. So we had librarians who were people we approved to edit the catalog. They could actually go edit the title of the book and add a cover if it was missing. And they had full power just like Wikipedia. And I think by the end of Goodreads, we had maybe 40,000 of them were making tens of thousands of edits a day, which is why Goodrich has one of the best catalogs out there in the world. And they were all volunteers and they were all volunteers and riff go breath goes like their leader. And so we eventually hired her.

2 (42m 6s):
So by the time you hit a hundred thousand users, right. And what point did you, were you able to hire your first employee?

1 (42m 14s):
So I think there was a moment where I went back up to San Francisco where I used to live in, and I met with James currier that the tickle CEO who had w who was not, who I now had agreed to be an advisor to good reads. Right. And I showed him my traction and he was like, this is pretty impressive. I think you can raise some money on this traction. And I said, cool, how do I do that? And he said, well, I'll lead an angel round. I'll put you in touch with four or five other people. I know. And, and we'll, we'll raise you a couple hundred thousand dollars. And I said, great. And so he made a couple email intros. I went talk to those people and showed them the product. I had no deck. And they all liked it and said, yes.

1 (42m 56s):
And so then after that, we were able to finally go and hire some employees.

2 (43m 1s):
Did you move? I mean, at that point, cause I'm assuming in 2007, you're still doing this out of your apartment. When did you first get like office space?

1 (43m 10s):
Everybody worked from home and we were, you know, like super early to the 2020 trend of working remotely. We used Skype and we used IRC chat boards, which are kind of like an early version of slack. And Michael was up in San Francisco, our first engineer. And, but then I found a couple of people in LA to do sales and to do a, another engineer

0 (43m 34s):
When, when we first started. So Otis was working from our, especially, you had a couple employees after we were married and in our apartment, you would work on Skype every day. And the people who live below us thought that we were illegally operating a business from our apartment because they kept hearing Michael's voice over Skype. Yeah. Over Skype. We had some pretty nasty, so a guy from the city came to inspect and he's like, I looked up your site. It looks pretty cool. Notice. It's like, yeah, no one's working in here. I don't have a bunch of other

1 (44m 8s):
Once I had two people in LA, I think I was like, let's get an office. And so I looked around for the cheapest place I could find that was within skateboarding, distance of my apartment. That was important because I didn't want to drive a car. And we found a dingy little office above a liquor store on like 10th and Wilsher in Santa Monica. And I remember the guy at the liquor store was like, just wanted to shake my hand. And I was like, no, I need a document saying I have a lease. And so he tore off a piece of cardboard from a beer container and wrote something on it and gave it to me.

2 (44m 39s):
All right. So meanwhile, the, the site is getting noticed. I'm starting to get thousands of users, but w when did you start to realize that, that this actually couldn't make some money?

1 (44m 48s):
So I think at 2008, I went to this entrepreneur gathering and I met a guy named Neil Neil Patel, who was like one of the top SEOs in the world. And I was telling him about the site. And he was like, how many page views do you have? And I forget the number, but I was like 2 million a month or something. And he was like, dang, you got an SEO site. And I was like, what does that mean? Cause I kept looking at my Google analytics and it kept saying we have a lot of traffic, but I didn't really understand where it was coming from. And we had this unique content that was really good. And I think that's why, why Google's algorithms kind of recognize that and started throwing us more and more traffic. You know, it wasn't overnight. It was like over years.

1 (45m 28s):
And so, you know, completely unwittingly we'd made a site that started ranking really well for every book title. And so then what we did is every time the advertising revenue got big enough where I could afford another developer, we added another developer. And I think it took us several years until we had like six or seven developers.

2 (45m 48s):
Clearly it was going to be ad supported. Right. Because the site wasn't, there was no way for people to subscribe or pay more, to be a super user or anything like that. Right?

1 (45m 56s):
No, no. So we, I think we kind of stumbled onto a business model early on someone at random house, the very nice woman named Julie sales pink desk and say, Hey, I love your site. And you know, I'm, I'm at random house. I in charge of marketing books, is there any way we can work with you? And so she set me up with the guide random house who, who does that. And he said, I'd like to do a $10,000 campaign. And I was like, whoa, you know, that'll pay for months of servers, but I kinda just call. And they said, great. And then I hung up the phone and I was like, man, now I gotta figure out how do you serve an ad campaign? And so I Googled it and I found that there was this new thing called Google ad platform.

1 (46m 37s):
Something like that was about to launch, but it was in private beta. And I pinged an old roommate who worked at Google and was like, can you get me into this? And he got me into that and it took me a whole day to set it up. And that was kind of the beginning of realizing that we had an audience that book publishers love

0 (46m 55s):
And we got better and better at amplifying a good book through, you know, a whole array of techniques as the company progressed. But also I think the audience was very attractive to all kinds of advertisers because they knew it was a highly educated audience. I think we had a lot of statistics on, on our users in terms of just education, gender of the site, 75% women. So advertisers who wanted to attract educated women knew that this was a good place to get eyeballs. So I think our, our audience was always very attractive,

1 (47m 30s):
But I mean also that the deeply targeted nature of what we're able to do. So we don't, we're not able to just tell you that you're getting book lovers, we're able to tell you, do you want to advertise the fantasy book lovers? Do you want to advertise to world war II history buffs? We knew who these people were and what they read. And we could design ways to put books that we think they would like directly in front of them. And it quite works well

0 (47m 54s):
Also because I think we were respectful to the users as well. So, you know, the advertising was always clear that it was advertising and it was tailored in a way that I think that users found it useful.

2 (48m 8s):
From what I understand over the course of the several years before you were acquired, we're going to talk about in a sec, you didn't raise that much money. Right. I think you've total about $3 million. Is that right?

1 (48m 20s):
Yeah. We didn't raise that much. No, it was two or $300,000 seed and a $2 million series a from true ventures and li like most startups, we give our employees a good amount of equity and that incentivized everybody to be an owner in the company and, and believe in it.

0 (48m 38s):
I also just, all of our employees were real book people. We had people who were all just former bookstore employees, engineers that reached out to us, wanting to work for us, like our second engineer, Louise, right out, as she found us because she was a user and she wanted to work for us. I think we were incredibly, incredibly fortunate. So it was a really happy work environment too. I

1 (49m 4s):
Think we talked about books at every lunch

2 (49m 7s):
And you guys actually reached profitability within, I think what three or four years.

1 (49m 12s):
Right. I actually don't remember the moment, but I remember that I kept a spreadsheet. The instant revenues went up enough. We could afford another engineer. I'd be like, let's go get another engineer. Right. You know, we weren't like Twitter, which kind of exploded over two years into a huge company. You know, we were growing slowly but steadily over a period of four or five years, but the growth was very consistent. And so we kind of just kept it right at that profit level. And I remember when we were looking at the series B, we still had most of the series a in the bank.

2 (49m 44s):
So when you, when you guys by 2012, let's say you've got a, you know, at this point it's not a 20 million monthly web visits. You've got 10 million registered users by the middle of that year. You're based in San Francisco. Now you've got 30, 35 employees. Do you remember what your annual revenue was at that point?

1 (50m 6s):
I don't remember. It was enough to cover the salary of 30 engineers or 30 people. So

2 (50m 14s):
Like, just cause I'm just curious, like, because some people, you know, they think, oh, tech company, you're doing billions of dollars, but probably you were probably doing like what 10, 15 million in revenue a year. Not even that much, not even that much. And all this was coming from advertising,

1 (50m 29s):
Advertising and affiliate. So affiliate was, we get, you know, an 8% cut of a book when we refer a customer to Amazon and Barnes and noble or somewhere where they buy a book.

2 (50m 38s):
Presumably the two of you are not the highest paid employees.

1 (50m 41s):
Oh no. I think for the first year of Goodreads, I had no salary. Then I had like maybe 30,000 a year. And then I just, once we had enough money where we were hiring some people, I, I just kept my salary at the top person's level. I never paid myself more than the top person we had.

2 (50m 59s):
But at this 200 12, you had to make some decisions because you're profitable, but not, you don't have enough cash in the bank to, to do the kinds of things that you'd need to do to get bigger, like huge marketing campaigns or maybe to introduce expensive features or, you know, I don't know, video or whatever. So I'm assuming that at this point, you're thinking about what, maybe raising more money.

1 (51m 24s):
Yeah. We were looking at raising more money because the growth was accelerating and that was pretty exciting. And then we moved to San Francisco and I started talking to lots of venture capitalists

2 (51m 37s):
When we come back in just a moment why Otis and Elizabeth wound up not needing that VC money and why they decided to sell a good reads to an 800 pound gorilla, stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Squarespace Squarespace has the tools you need to get your business off the ground, including e-commerce templates, inventory management, a simple checkout process and secure payments. Whatever you sell. Squarespace has merchandising features to make your products look their best online.

2 (52m 21s):
Check out squarespace.com/npr for a free trial. And when you're ready to launch, use the offer code NPR to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. This message comes from NPR, sponsor burrow, a new kind of furniture company. When it's two founders pondered, why there wasn't an easy way to get an affordable high quality sofa without long trips to warehouses, inconvenient installation or expensive shipping fees. They started borough with a borough purchase. You can put together an entire sofa by yourself without using a single tool and every single item ships for free to learn how listeners can get $75 off their first order.

2 (53m 5s):
Visit burrow.com/built. Hey, welcome back to how I built this guy Roz. So it's 2013, about six years after launch and good reads now has all the, it did not have in the beginning, an office in San Francisco, millions of users and hundreds of millions of book titles, but what it needs now is money in the form of a sizeable investment. And what, how much money were you looking to raise? I don't think,

1 (53m 42s):
I think that was ever disclosed. So guy rose has the exclusive, I think it was 10 or 15 million. I actually don't remember, but one of those,

2 (53m 49s):
Right? So you weren't going to really be able to scale. Yeah, but at this point, I think 2013, I mean, you guys were, you were getting more views on your book pages than Amazon. There's a New York times article around that time came out and said you arrivaling Amazon as a platform for promoting new books. So they must have been an Amazon had acquired similar companies like yours previously. Right?

1 (54m 13s):
They had acquired our show, Fari, who we talked to that earlier, that they had seated for a million dollars. They ended up acquiring, but you know, it's funny. And that New York times article you just referenced, I remember going to New York and going into their building for that interview because I was there for a book conference and I told them, how many, how many page views or monthly unique visitors we had? I forget what it was at the time, maybe 30 or 40 million monthly uniques. And they were like, that's more than the New York times has. And I was like, oh, that's crazy. You know, like I kinda knew that we had a lot, but to hear it compared that way, you're kind of like, that's one of those moments where I was like, oh, we have, we have something interesting here.

2 (54m 52s):
So had Amazon, did they just come out of the blue? Had they been kind of ping you in previous years? Cause I remember when I interviewed the late Tony Shea, you know, he had been approached by Amazon a few times. Cause Amazon tried, when he originally rebuffed him, they tried to build their own version of Zappos and they couldn't have they come to you before

1 (55m 15s):
We had talked to them like once a year for the past four or five years, I think, you know, we, when Kendall launched, which was also late 2007, it changed the book industry, you know, not overnight, but it started, it started the path where a lot of book discovery moved online. That was pretty exciting to us because one of the problems we had at good rates was sometimes people wouldn't remember to come back to us after they finished a book. And what I really wanted to do was pop something up at the end of a book saying, Hey, what'd you think, give it a rating, write a review, share, share your thoughts. And you could do that in a Kindle. And so we had this strong vision and we met with Amazon, like I said, four or five times over the years kind of talking about would we do this?

1 (55m 58s):
And they were always into it. The issue was it required deep integration to pull off and they weren't comfortable with doing that unless they owned a piece of us or all of us. Right. And every time we talked about that, the numbers just weren't there. And we weren't interested in selling a piece of us for the wrong number.

2 (56m 18s):
Oh yeah. So meantime you're, you're trying to raise $15 million and you're going to raise it. You're getting all these term sheets cause you've got incredible traffic and what, what happens? I mean, again, just a routine call with Amazon and

1 (56m 30s):
Somehow they're corporate goes new to ping us. And so they, they said, Hey, we want to have you, we've talked about this exciting idea in the past. We'd like you to come up to Seattle and meet some of the, the team and, and chat about it again. And so I flew up there and I met with the Kendall leadership team and you know, there's, there's a saying in business that companies are bought not sold. And I think that's really true to any entrepreneur who's ever like, how do I sell my company? Like that's the wrong mental model. So we weren't trying to sell. We kind of sketched out these ideas and I think they liked them. And I think more to the point, they got to the place in their roadmap where they wanted to invest in social. And they therefore kind of said, Hey, we're either going to build something in social or we're going to buy something and social.

1 (57m 15s):
And this time, you know, it turned out that we were able to get to an agreement on the numbers. And more to the point I was super excited about the vision we had. We had sketched on the other hand, I was not sure at all what to do. This was the hardest decision. I think hands down I've made in my life.

2 (57m 34s):
And the one hand I'm thinking, why was it a hard decision? I mean, Amazon, the biggest bookseller in the world and you guys have this great platform and I mean, working with Amazon, you would reach exponentially more people and you could do things that you could not possibly do with a $15 million raise. On the other hand, you were an independent, trusted brand and, and, you know, fair, unfair. Amazon is seen as the 800 pound gorilla, right. Even more so today than in 2013. And that might have made people angry. I think

0 (58m 5s):
Either way, raising a series B or selling the company was a lot about the kind of giving away our baby. Yeah. And I think that was painful for us. Both paths felt painful because it was our, was our first child in many ways. And we'd spent so many years tending it and taking care of it. And that was really a source of tension.

2 (58m 25s):
And I mean the source of tension, but I think somebody listening to this would say, but you cash, you're going to get a payout here. We're going to finally get some money from this thing you've been working on.

1 (58m 33s):
Yeah. But we, we own most of a website. There was one of the top a hundred websites in the U S by traffic. Like we kind of knew we'd we'd do well off it somehow. It was more just like, what's the right thing to do for the product, for the, for the customers. Yeah. I mean, but I think Elizabeth's right. I think it was, do we want to be captains of our ship or do we want to give up that control so we can go after a bigger vision faster, but I will say Amazon made it a little easy in that they told us they would want to run this as an independent subsidiary and an independent brand, just like they run audible and EMTB and Zappos and now Twitch.

1 (59m 13s):
And they have a long list of yeah. Track record of doing this. That felt right.

2 (59m 20s):
What kind of things were you thinking about at the time or what kind of advice did you get about making this decision?

1 (59m 26s):
Well, have you ever heard of the regret minimization framework? I haven't

2 (59m 31s):
Don't tell me about that.

1 (59m 32s):
It's a really geeky phrase coined by actually Jeff Bezos, which is basically a framework that says, imagine yourself is 80 years old, looking back on your life, would you regret doing or not doing the thing you're contemplating right now? Like what would you regret more? And that turns out to be a great way to make decisions.

0 (59m 52s):
It was interesting to me too, just growing up in Silicon valley because my dad, he definitely said to me, you know, I know so many CEOs who have an offer and they say, no, no, no, I'm going to, in 10 years, I'll do it. And you know, the company will keep growing and he was just very, very measured about, you know, you should really consider offers when they come, because it's not like they happen at every moment because he had just seen it over the past, you know, several decades in Silicon. Yeah.

1 (1h 0m 26s):
Silicon, Valley's funny because for every, everybody's got a story. So I remember somebody told us the story of a cliff bar when, and how he walked into the meeting to sell his company for a life-changing amount of money. Didn't sign it, walked out and kept it independent. And another person told me the story of Foursquare, who once upon a time had a huge offer to sell for a lot of money. And, and then the deal blew up and, and then, and then they would look at the time, like it was going to go to zero. Now, now, now they've turned it around into, into something again, I think. But you know, there's always the story of like the company who should have done this, but, but the opposite thing happened. And I think in the end you have to do what you think is right for yourself and for your, your company,

2 (1h 1m 12s):
Amazon announced that it would acquire good reads in March of 2013. But presumably I mean, those conversations started maybe in early 2013. And I have to assume you had to be totally silent about it. Like you do. You had to still run the company, but you couldn't talk to anybody.

1 (1h 1m 29s):
Yeah. I think it was late 2012. I flew up to Seattle and I think it was, there was definitely a month, which was probably the most stressful month of our lives, where we couldn't talk to anybody. We had to stop talking to all the VCs. We had to stop talking to anybody else. And all we did probably 18 hours a day was due diligence.

2 (1h 1m 49s):
And you were just ghosting the VCs. Like, they'd be like, Hey man, what's going on with a term sheet and you would just, what? You wouldn't respond,

1 (1h 1m 55s):
Couldn't respond. That's common. But it was tough.

2 (1h 1m 59s):
I feel like, cause Amazon with all of its resources and all of its creative talent has the ability to do something like this was part of the equation in your mind. Cause I think it would have been on my mind, we have to do this because if we don't, Amazon can just make it on their own and could basically unravel this thing we've worked on for so many years. Wow.

1 (1h 2m 22s):
Most people would think that. And I thought that right, but no, I mean, it turns out Amazon could not have built a successful social product because they are wired for commerce. This is my impression, you know, they, they shared with us a bunch of thinking they had in the social space and it was just clear that they, what they were thinking wouldn't have worked because they were so geared to think about commerce and not social metrics as success. Right. Success to them. The bottom of the funnel always had to be a purchase, not like a user engagement or a recommendation or a like, right. And I don't think that they were geared to like understand that or act on it to be more fair.

2 (1h 3m 6s):
When you sold to Amazon, the sale price has never been disclosed, but there's been all kinds of reporting on it. And I think some good reporting on it. So usually when that happens, they want to bring on the executive team and the, and the team to keep it going. And usually the commitment is two to three years. So you guys now become Amazon employees and did a whole lot change. I mean, were you able to, did good reads feel different after that?

1 (1h 3m 38s):
Yeah, I think that was the big change is Amazon wanting to invest in social. And I finally had permission to go unprofitable. So we, we grew from 35 employees to over a hundred, I think in two or three years.

2 (1h 3m 53s):
Wow. So once you, once you were an Amazon company, did it kind of take the pressure off in a sense? I mean, did, did you feel like a weight was lifted because you didn't have to hit certain benchmarks and be on calls with investors or, or were there other pressures that actually increased?

1 (1h 4m 9s):
Yeah. I don't know how I did this to myself, but I started working harder than I'd ever worked after the acquisition. Amazon was not a place where you go to cruise. I actually remember I had coffee with another friend who'd sold his company to, and he'd sold it to another big, slow moving company, but I was like, how's your day going? And he was like, well, I play golf every morning. And then I go into the office for four hours and then I go for yoga and I'm bored out of my mind. And it's only been a year since we sold. And I was like, wow, I'm working 12 hour days as hard as I've ever worked, it's stressful, but it's super fun. And you know, I think the learning curve of learning Amazon, the learning curve of learning, how to be, not just a manager, but a manager of managers and then a manager of managers of managers was immense.

1 (1h 5m 1s):
Yeah.

2 (1h 5m 1s):
You guys stayed on for both of you stayed on full-time for six years. I think with Amazon a little over six years. Is that right?

1 (1h 5m 8s):
That's correct. It was funny. I kept having friends go like, why are you still there? You know, when's your not over, oh, you're past it. Why are you still there? And I was like having fun. I like it. And they were like, I don't get it, but that was just the nature of Goodreads.

2 (1h 5m 23s):
So I, I know that you, you both stepped away in 2019. I'm speaking to you are in France right now. You've moved to France with your kids for, I guess, for a year to just move to France. I mean, I do that in a sec and to kind of just maybe be a family for, for a year and focus on your kids and, and, but you are both young. I mean, you're in your forties, first of all, do you, do you miss either of you do miss the grinded, maybe a grinds are the right word, but do you miss that adrenaline rush of going to an office and being around people and working on a project every day?

1 (1h 5m 60s):
Of course you do. I think that was actually a lot of my fear of stepping away, but I was kind of like, you know what? I kind of want to be creative again. Like I, I value and miss that part when I had time to think, you know, you, you, you don't want to see my calendar from when I was at the end of running Goodreads. And I had every square inch of the calendar was full with a 30 minutes of something. And it was fast paced and crazy, but it was busy and you didn't get time to tinker on something. Yeah, Elizabeth,

0 (1h 6m 34s):
I probably should have left maybe a year earlier than I did. I ended up having three kids in five years and I ended up developing pretty serious health problems in which I would go in and out of the hospital and they would write papers on me. And it was pretty, yeah, it was pretty unpleasant. So how are you doing now? I'm fine. I'm actually great. But I really needed to stop. Like I had just not listened to my body for, for years. And for me, I was also as a, as a parent, I was at a place where I was really unhappy with the balance I had between my work life and my life with my, with our three kids.

0 (1h 7m 21s):
And I, I knew that it was absolutely essential that for me to be happy and to just give them the attention they deserve, that I had to stop. So no regrets,

2 (1h 7m 34s):
You guys are now, you still have the rest of your lives ahead of you and you probably have enough money to fund a, a new business venture. If you wanted to. Is that something you're thinking about? Is that something you might do starting a new business?

1 (1h 7m 49s):
It turns out it is. So I'm actually starting to tinker worked for the last six months. I've been starting to tinker on, on a new project, which has been exciting. I don't have anything to announce, but it's in the space of trying to address the problem that I think that the new, how people get their news and information today is, is broken. Perhaps is, is the word. I don't think people are reading the right content. I think the right content is often not the content put in front of us by the various algorithms and feeds. And I think that can be improved. So I'm kind of grateful and having fun, just going on a learning journey and reading a lot of books.

2 (1h 8m 27s):
How much of, what your success, what happened with good reach to tribute, to how hard you worked in your intelligence and the decisions you made and how much do you think has to do with just being lucky?

0 (1h 8m 38s):
The one thing that I always was really humbled by with good reads is it feels like we got so much of the glory, I guess, cause we were the founders, but the people that we worked with, they were all really, really incredible people that worked just as hard as we did and, and are really a big part of the success story too, of of good reads. So I don't know if it's just luck hard work. It's also, you know, the people

1 (1h 9m 6s):
I was once at a tech gathering and this exact question came up and I think the consensus in the room was we were about 50% lucky and 50% because we worked hard and were smart or earned it because I think luck matters. And we did work super hard and we did get lucky in that. I worked at TIBCO and was connected to it, an amazing set of advisors that all helped me in different ways. And I attribute a lot of our success to having those people to go ask what do I do? But if Kindle hadn't launched in 2007 and moved, you know, started the digital reading revolution, I don't think Goodreads would have flourished.

1 (1h 9m 51s):
Industry trends have to align. And if that hadn't happened, you know, my old CEO would have been right. It would have been a small site. I wouldn't have grown like it did

2 (1h 10m 1s):
That's Otis and Elizabeth Chandler co-founders of good reads. And by the way, even though they both obviously love books, they often disagree about what a good read actually is. And they realize that early in their relationship, when one day they were browsing the books and

1 (1h 10m 19s):
I saw dune and I was like, oh, there's my favorite book.

0 (1h 10m 23s):
I said, I've never heard of this book. What is this book? And he got very agitated and said, what do you mean? You've never read dune? And I said, okay, how about this? I'll read that if you read pride and prejudice. Fair enough. So we bought the books, he read pride and prejudice in one night, he stayed up all night, reading it. Meanwhile, I suffered third dude for like three weeks and he wrote a review on good reads about pride and prejudice. And then I wrote this review and good reads about how dune was not my kind of book. And I gave it one.

2 (1h 10m 55s):
You can tune one star that is just that's trolling serious trawling

0 (1h 11m 2s):
At first good reason stroller.

2 (1h 11m 8s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week, please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded. If you want to contact us. Our email address is H ibt@npr.org. And if you want to follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this. And mine is at guy Ross. Our Instagram is at how I built this NPR and mine is at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by Casey Herman with music composed by rum, Tina or bluey. It was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Claremore Ashima. Our production staff also includes Ferris Fari, Liz Metzker, JC Howard, Juliet Carney, Carrie Thompson, and the lane coats. Our intern is Margaret Serino.

2 (1h 11m 50s):
Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Ross, and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.