0 (0s):
It's Sky Ross. Here on the Wisdom from the Top podcast. I talk to leadership experts and some of the world's greatest business leaders about how they lead, innovate, and transform the people around them. If you're trying to make it in business, or just wanna think more like a leader, this show probably for you. Listen now to the Wisdom from the Top podcast, From, Luminary, and npr.

Airbnb (21s):
Maybe you've stayed in an Airbnb before and thought to yourself, this actually seems pretty doable. Maybe my place could be an Airbnb. It could be as simple as starting with a spare room, or your whole place when you're away. You could be sitting on an Airbnb and not even know it. Maybe your kid is heading off to college in the fall and you'll have an empty bedroom. You could Airbnb it and make some extra cash while they're away. Or, if you have a vacation plan for this summer, that could be a good time to Airbnb your entire place. Whether you could use a little extra money to cover some bills or for something a little more fun, your home or spare room might be worth more than you think. Find out how much at Airbnb dot ca slash Host

Zensurance (1m 5s):
are you an entrepreneur or a startup owner? Starting a new business is an exciting journey, but it also comes with its fair share of risks and uncertainties. As a new business owner, you invest significant time, effort, and capital into building your venture business. Insurance safeguards your hard work by protecting your personal assets. Without it, a substantial liability claim could put your personal finances like your savings or your home at risk. Liability insurance also gives you a competitive edge in the market. Many clients and partners require proof of insurance before engaging in business relationships. So visit zen insurance.com/save 35 to get a free quote for the low cost insurance protection you need so you can focus on growing your business. Worry free.

1 (1m 60s):
We can't see tomorrow, but we can hear it. And it sounds like a wind farm Powering homes across the country, we are bridging to a sustainable energy future. Working today to ensure tomorrow is on Enbridge life takes energy. Hey, before we start the show, a question for you. Do you ever get nervous when performing or speaking in front of an audience? Because I definitely do, and I have to stand in front of a lot of big audiences. Well, I recently interviewed Ellie Golding about being shy on stage. And even though she's a music superstar who's performed at Coachella and a royal wedding, she told me that she finds ways to break through the anxiety and be present in the moment.

1 (2m 40s):
You can hear my conversation with Ellie Golding on my other podcast. It's called The Great Creators. Just search for The Great Creators with Guy Raz wherever you listen to podcasts. Or go to the great Creators dot com and now onto today's show.

4 (3m 3s):
I remember people always telling me, you know, Hey Joel, nobody pays for apps. Apps are all free. Yeah. And no one's gonna ever pay for an app. And I said, I'm actually not an app. I'm a essentially a dating business and people have been paying for dating for centuries.

0 (3m 19s):
You're a matchmaker.

4 (3m 20s):
I'm I'm a matchmaker. And so I expect people will be willing to pay for it, cuz we're providing a lot of value. Unfortunately, I was right.

5 (3m 31s):
Welcome

0 (3m 32s):
To How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs idealist, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz and on the show today how Joel Simkhai wanted an easy way to meet other gay men. So he built Grindr and helped it grow into one of the most popular dating apps in the world. Grindr changed the way people meet If. you don't know it. It was started as a dating app, mainly for gay men. And today it's used by around 12 million people a month.

0 (4m 16s):
In 2009 when it launched, there was no Tinder. There was no Bumble, yes, there was internet dating, but Grindr was different. First of all, its founder Joel. Simkhai was unapologetic. He called it a hookup app, plain and simple. But secondly, and most importantly, Grindr was the first dating app to use geolocation. It meant you could see how close another Grindr user was in real time on the app. But what's probably most remarkable about the rise of Grindr is that Joel didn't really know what he was doing, at least at first. He wasn't a programmer or a software engineer, he wasn't an expert in marketing, but he was a gay man who knew how hard it could be to meet other gay men.

0 (5m 3s):
And he wanted to fix that problem. The answer came to him in 2008, that year, Steve Jobs made the iPhone open to third party apps, and in the iPhone and the app store, Joel saw an opportunity Grindr would go on to become one of the most successful, but also one of the most polarizing dating apps ever created. Sometimes it even put its users in danger, but we'll get there. Joel Simkhai was born in the mid 1970s in Israel, but his family moved to New York when he was three. And as long as he could remember, he struggled to fit in at school.

4 (5m 43s):
Yeah. So I was mostly friends with girls and I wasn't very athletic. I was a small kid. I played tennis and I, I, you know, my parents, you know, were very good in giving me opportunities and, you know, encouraging me to do things and, but I was not very good at sports. I was not, my hand-eye coordination remains to this day, not very good. And so it wasn't something that I excelled at, at all.

0 (6m 8s):
When did you start to feel like, you know, like maybe when did you start to feel different from other boys? I mean, you mentioned the sports thing, but did you get teased as a kid?

4 (6m 18s):
I did get bullied. You know, luckily I had a, you know, great family and my cousins and, and so that was really who I connected with as a child. I didn't quite connect as much with people at school. I, I knew I had these feelings, but I didn't quite understand them. And I, I vividly remember once I was part of the swim team in, in high school and I was teased and someone called me a faggot and then I said, no, I'm not. I'm, I'm not gay. I'm not gay. And for the first time I, I said to myself, wait a minute, what if I am? Maybe I am. And so, you know, it took me several years to realize that, that I was gay. Hmm. One of the things that was very helpful for me was online.

4 (7m 1s):
So these were the days of CompuServe and AOL chat rooms, and so I was able to connect with people online.

0 (7m 11s):
Hmm. So, alright. So you are kind of exploring your, your own identity. You go off to college, you went to a Tufts in Boston, and while you were there, did you start to feel more comfortable coming out? Or were you still quiet about it?

4 (7m 30s):
So I was pretty quiet about it. Still in, in college, I had a girlfriend, or I had several girlfriends, but I also was started to kind of date guys. And all of this was kind of secret. This was kind of my, you know, I would go on AOL and, you know, meet guys in Boston and then I would over the summer and I was back home. That allowed me a little bit more freedom where I was going to bars and going to clubs and leading, you know, more of a gay life when I was back home in New York.

0 (8m 1s):
When you finished college, I read that you worked very briefly in investment banking and then, and I guess you worked@a.com startup or like right before the, the.com crash in, in early two thousands. That's right.

4 (8m 12s):
That's

0 (8m 13s):
Right. And I know that like after nine 11, you, you ended up working in media at NBC for a couple years doing some translation work. So, okay, so at the time you were living in New York, and I guess it, it seems like you didn't quite know like what you wanted to do next, but, but I guess you, you'd figured out that you didn't wanna work in a, in like a corporate environment like that, that wasn't gonna work for you, right?

4 (8m 37s):
No, not at

0 (8m 38s):
All. Yeah. And, and by the way, in terms of your personal life, you know, this is still early internet era, but you know, internet dating is starting to gain traction and I mean, how was your sort of social life in New York? Were you dating? Was it, were you having fun? Was it exciting? Was it easy to meet people?

4 (8m 57s):
Yeah. In New York, you know, right after college I remember just a great time, you know, this is, I just come out and now, you know, everyone essentially knew I was gay, maybe not at work, you know, not something I advertised at work. And so I just, you know, would go out. I would go to clubs, bars, restaurants, and would still use online. You know, Craigslist became very popular, personal ads on, on Craigslist. There was another website called Connection, which was more, more dating based for gay people. And I met a, one of my first boyfriends on, on that, but I kind of had a healthy mix of online and meeting people offline and, you know, being quite social.

0 (9m 37s):
Yeah. Did you always, in your mind, think that you would start a business? I mean, your dad had a business, he sold diamonds. Yeah. And so, you know, maybe it's in your d but did you see yourself as like somebody who could hang up a shingle and start something?

4 (9m 53s):
Yeah, I mean, I always thought that I would want to do something on my own. I remember my dad would always say to me, people out there have become very, very successful in selling shirt buttons,

0 (10m 6s):
Selling shirt buttons.

4 (10m 8s):
Yeah. So he'd point to the buttons on my shirt. Yeah. And say that there's millionaires who made their wealth by selling buttons. And it might not be glamorous, but it's a great business for a bunch of people. And so that ethos was always very much part of my upbringing. You know, we were not the be a lawyer or a doctor kind of family. We were go find your own success. But I had started selling magazine subscriptions online. And so I started, you know, a website that sold subscriptions. And, wait, just,

0 (10m 43s):
Just let me, let me, so so how did you even find out about, was this like a, like a multi-level marketing thing?

4 (10m 51s):
I remember I was, I went to go buy a subscription to something. Yeah. And I went online on eBay and I saw that it was like really cheap, cheaper than you would get it. If you went bought the magazine directly. Yeah. And so I said, huh, how do these people sell these magazines so cheap? And then I found out that you could buy these subscriptions through these clearinghouses. The mechanics of the business is these, these magazines are eager for subscribers because that's how they get their advertising base. And so they often would sell at the subscription at a discount just to get the subscriber. And so I set up a website, contacted some clearinghouses, and started selling magazines.

0 (11m 34s):
And you would sell subscriptions to which magazines?

4 (11m 38s):
All kinds of magazines, almost all of them.

0 (11m 40s):
Time, Newsweek. Yeah, whatever the New Yorker.

4 (11m 44s):
Yep. Hmm. And so the business grew. I mean, it was, you know, I don't remember how big it it grew to, but this was my main business for a number of years. And, you know, it grew to a point where I, I actually couldn't handle it anymore because

0 (11m 59s):
It was just you. Right.

4 (12m 1s):
I, no, I actually had other people there were, you know, there's a marketing component into it. So we, we had people helping with the marketing and then people, some people helping with the customer service and the operations. So it wasn't a very complex business, but, you know, I was able to work from home and run my own business. Hmm.

0 (12m 21s):
All right. So you're doing this magazine subscription website, but I guess I, I, from what I understand it, it, the business kind of plateaued around 2008 and, and you decided to close it down and, and make a major move to, to Los Angeles. Why, why LA What, what were you gonna do when you got there?

4 (12m 42s):
I had no idea, but I remember at this point, you know, I had, I had for a number of years been kind of trying to think about how, how can I meet guys in a more efficient manner and how can I use technology? And I remember the founders of Foursquare before they started Foursquare, they, they started a company called Dodgeball, I think. And it allowed you to connect with people using sms. And so I remember I reached out to them and I said, Hey, can I use your platform? And they thought this would be a great way to meet guys.

0 (13m 16s):
This was something that you'd been thinking about, like while you were doing the magazine subscription business. Yeah. You were thinking, I have a hard time meeting other guys. Cuz presumably like, you know, you might meet somebody or see somebody and you wouldn't know if they were gay, they might be gay. You wouldn't necessarily know, you wouldn't know If, you could approach them or talk to, right. I mean, they're probably things like that too.

4 (13m 40s):
Absolutely. I mean, that, that's, I think every queer person walks into a room and, you know, wonders who else is just like them in the room. And so yeah, that's our big challenge. I mean, I think for straight people you

0 (13m 52s):
Just assume that, right, exactly.

4 (13m 53s):
Yeah. You just, you just assume. And, and so this nagging problem was always there and, and then, right. You know, a few months after I'd moved to la Steve Jobs announces the second generation iPhone.

0 (14m 6s):
And remind me what, what, what made the second generation of iPhone special?

4 (14m 11s):
Yeah, so this iPhone now would have three things. One was the App store, and so now developers could develop third party apps. Secondly, they could distribute those apps in the app store. And third was that they would add GPS to the iPhone. In some ways I felt like Jobs had built this phone for me because it was exactly, you know, what I needed. There was no hesitation in my mind. This was the moment I was waiting for

0 (14m 39s):
Almost immediately. You think this is a platform that I can build something, some kind of dating or, or Meetup app on.

4 (14m 47s):
It wasn't almost immediately, it was immediately, you know, the, the second he said this, I said, I need to build an app that lets me meet guys on it. Yeah. So I had this idea. The big problem is I had no, no skills to, to make this happen.

0 (15m 0s):
You were not a coder. This is, you did not study computer science,

4 (15m 4s):
Not a coder. And you know, I don't have any design skills. I don't know how to build, you know, I don't know, I don't know. Technology. And back then there was no ecosystem for iPhone developers. Yeah. Not clued into the tech community. I wast clued into development and anything like that. So what I did was I went to, you know, the first generation iPhone had a Jailbroken app store where third parties would develop software for the iPhone. And this wast sanctioned by Apple.

0 (15m 37s):
And just to clarify, these were apps that people developed for the first generation of iPhones, but I guess the phones had to be, as you say, jailbroken, they had to be like internally hacked in order to run these applications. That's right. Okay. And you knew that there was a website where you could like Download these, these apps?

4 (15m 56s):
Yeah. So there was a, an app store, the Jailbroken app store, I think it's called, or was called Cdia. And they had, you know, a number of different apps that you could Download.

0 (16m 8s):
What do they have? What do you remember?

4 (16m 11s):
Well, the ones I remembered were some mapping apps. This was again, before any Apple Maps or Google Maps. Right. And so I reached out to each of those developers and I said, Hey, I'd like to develop an app myself. And I was wondering, you know, would like to hire you to build this app for me? Hmm. I think I said it was an app for, you know, dating. I think I probably had said it's a dating app, but I was a little bit cagey about what it was because I didn't want them to steal my idea.

0 (16m 38s):
And, and how long did it take before you got a response?

4 (16m 43s):
I don't remember how long, but I didn't get many responses. So a gentleman out of Denmark, Wharton got back to me and I think we had gone on the phone and I kind of pitched to my idea and he was all very excited. And, you know, he,

0 (17m 1s):
What, what did you tell him on the phone?

4 (17m 2s):
Well, at first I was kind of, I didn't mention the gay part right away, but eventually when I told him, you know, I wanna build an app where I can meet people using location, I wanna see, you know, who's nearby by the way, you know, I'm gay and I think this would work really well for the gay community. And so I, I'd like this to at least initially focus on helping me find other gay people.

0 (17m 28s):
Hmm. And what'd he say?

4 (17m 30s):
Great. That sounds perfect. And he was, you know, very excited by it. And he thought that that made a lot of sense. And he thought I would be a great market to launch us at.

0 (17m 40s):
Alright, so let's just for some perspective here, we're 2008, you get in touch with this Danish guy, Morton, who knows how to build an app. First of all, how are you gonna pay him? Did you have any money to pay him?

4 (17m 55s):
No. And so that was the other part I said to him, and by the way, I don't have a lot of money. And he said, okay, well we'll figure it out. This sounds like a very good idea to me. I think it's gonna do well. We'll figure it out.

0 (18m 8s):
Did you design what you wanted it to look like? Or did you, like what kind of direction did you give this coder in Denmark?

4 (18m 16s):
So the other thing I did at this point was ask a lot of my friends for help. I said, you know, I needed a name, I needed, you know, I needed a logo, I needed to design this app. I needed, there's a lot that needed to happen. And I reached out to my friend Scott Lue, and he was a graphic designer and he, you know, we were friends. He had a full-time job. I asked him to help me and he, he was excited by the opportunity. And, and the three of us worked on this app. And I remember, you know, one day looking at my photo album on my phone and I said, Hey, wouldn't it be great if these were the guys around me? And so that was really the inspiration for the user interface of Grindr.

4 (18m 58s):
And it still remains today is it's a grid of people. The first person would be me, and then the next profile to the right would be the closest person in nearby and then the next person to their right would be a little bit further away. And that's how we would display all these profiles of the people nearby.

0 (19m 19s):
Alright. So you're in LA and the plan is to launch this app. And like, did you think of this as a fun project or did you think of this as a potential like significant business opportunity?

4 (19m 33s):
I thought of it this as something that I needed in my life and that put me at the center. And I remember many times talking to people online and they would say, yeah, I'm gonna, you know, you hit off and say, okay, great, when can you meet? And they'd say, oh yeah, I'll be in town in a few weeks. And with the power of GPS, I wanted to meet the guys who were nearby.

0 (19m 57s):
All right. So you're working on this idea and the name, you come up with this name Grindr. So tell me about, about that name.

4 (20m 5s):
So we came up with the name, you know, kind of brainstorming various names and we didn't want it to be something that was all about being gay or queer, but we wanted it to be something distinctive. We wanted it to be something that was unique. And Grindr was one that we liked. We also looked at, you know, mixer and Blender and we really liked this idea of kinda, you know, mixing people together. We chose Grindr because one, I was, I liked that it was edgier and I also liked kind of these, it wasn't quite sex, but it was sexual and I thought it was unique and, and, you know, and masculine also.

0 (20m 49s):
So was this all you were doing? Was it like your entire focus or were there other things you were doing? Were you like doing a day job for example?

4 (20m 59s):
I didn't have a day job. We were just working on this, this, there was a lot to be done. To me, this was a race, a race to launch first. Cuz I, you know, thought to myself, you know, if I have this idea, I'm sure there's lots of other people who have this idea. I, I don't remember quite cuz you know, the iPhone was announced in June. I don't, I don't quite know when the app store and, you know, the, the distribution started, but it was starting already and people were starting to, to get these new iPhones. And so I realized it was just a matter of time before, you know, someone else would do this. And so, but the challenge was, you know, Morton and Scott were both and had full-time jobs and that made things to, you know, go very slowly.

4 (21m 39s):
Yeah. At least in my mind. And

0 (21m 41s):
How, I mean, even things like, even though Morton was working for very little money, but even things like filing for, you know, a trademark and, and looking for a lawyer to help you do that. And that still costs money. Not that much, but it still costs money. How were you financing that? I mean, did you have savings?

4 (22m 1s):
Yeah, I had a little bit of money. I see. Okay. I think we had only spent a few thousand dollars and

0 (22m 8s):
You, and we say we, it's me and you and Scott.

4 (22m 10s):
Yeah.

0 (22m 11s):
And do you remember feeling stressed out at that time? At at the pace of things? Yeah, I was,

4 (22m 15s):
I was very frustrated with the pace, you know, because Morton was working part-time and I, you know, or actually, you know, he had a full-time job and understandably not his first priority and I wasn't really paying him that much. So I wasn't in the position to be very demanding. But fortunately there were no other apps. And I remember I would check off and to see, you know, I would type in gay into the app store to see what would come up. And I remember at the time also before we launched, I reached out to some of our competitors. Cause I said to myself, how am I gonna get this? And how am I gonna distribute this? How am I gonna get people to know about this?

0 (22m 48s):
Yeah. I

4 (22m 49s):
Don't have the money to do a marketing campaign. I, I just don't know how to do that. And so my idea was, you know, why don't you go work with the incumbents and private label what Grindr was like,

0 (23m 2s):
White label it for match.com or one of these other who, who was out there? Do you remember?

4 (23m 6s):
So Manhunt was the big incumbent. They were the dominant player in the United States and multi-million dollar business. Hmm. You know, that's the website that gay man would use. And I remember I went to them and they called me actually the day we launched and said, we're not interested in doing a partnerships, but we'll, we're interested in buying you.

0 (23m 27s):
Hmm. So this was March 20, I think you launched March 25th, 2009. That's right. The day you launched, you got an acquisition offer. Was it a significant offer?

4 (23m 36s):
$25,000.

0 (23m 37s):
And so that wasn't gonna happen. And, and just to, well,

4 (23m 41s):
It, it was a lot more than I had. Yeah. It was a lot more than I had spent. I'd spent probably a few thousand dollars, so it would've been a decent return. And I remember him calling and saying, Manheim calling and saying, you know, we just commissioned a study, you know, we spent a few hundred thousand dollars on this study and we asked our users and location was not at the top of their list of importance, but we're still interested in, you know, buying you, we think it's interesting. Let me call you back tomorrow. I wanna talk to the boss and call me the next day and say, you know, we'll pay you. I actually, they said 25 to $35,000. And I said, you know, listen, I think that's, you know, very nice of you, but I'm gonna turn you down.

4 (24m 23s):
And I, many years later I told him, you know, Hey, had you offered me the $200,000 that you had paid for this study of yours, I would've taken your offer.

Allbirds (24m 34s):
When we come back in just a moment, my Grindr began to blow up, even though it was prone to crash and kept getting one star reviews. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This. This is the summer to explore, but before you set foot out the door, set foot in the ultimate travel shoes from Allbirds. Allbirds are versatile enough to go with any outfit, durable enough to wear on any terrain, and lightweight enough to make packing a breeze. I actually have a pair of the Plant Pacers, which are made with 100% plastic free vegan plant leather. And I absolutely love them. They're super stylish, they're comfortable, they're durable. They're basically everything you want in a shoe. I would also recommend checking out the collection of Allbirds Tree shoes. They're all made from insanely comfortable breezy eucalyptus fiber. There's the Tree dasher, which is a running shoe with extra grip and responsive foam. The tree lounger, it's a super packable slip-on with a minimalist design and maximum comfort. And the tree skipper. It's a silky smooth boat shoe that fits naturally into any situation. Get in vacation mode before you even leave the house with Allbirds tree shoes. Find your perfect pair@allbirds.com today and use code built for free socks with a purchase of $48 or more. That's a L l b i r d s.com code built

LinkedIn (26m 6s):
as a business to business marketer. Your needs are unique. B2B buying cycles are long, and your customers face incredibly complex decisions. Isn't it? Time you had a marketing platform built specifically for you. LinkedIn ads empowers marketers with solutions for you and your customers. You'll have direct access to 930 million members, 180 million C level executives and 10 million C-level executives. You'll be able to drive results with targeting and measurement tools built specifically for B2B in technology. LinkedIn generated two to five times higher return on ad spend than other social media platforms. Our team uses LinkedIn all the time to research potential guests for this show. It is an invaluable resource. Make B2B marketing everything it can be and get a $100 credit on your next campaign. Go to linkedin.com/built this to claim your credit. That's linkedin.com/built this Terms and conditions apply.

0 (27m 14s):
One more thing before we get back to the show. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And it's totally free. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's March of 2009. Joel has just launched Grindr, he's turned down a bargain basement offer to sell it. And he's now anxiously watching the app store to see how it's doing.

4 (27m 46s):
I remember I was alone in my house at the point. I had no marketing plan, I had no budget. I had, there was no launch party, there was no celebration, there was no champagne. It was almost just like any other day, except for this phone call I got.

0 (28m 1s):
So before you hit the launch button or you know, whatever the proverbial launch button and it went live, what was the plan on how it would make money? Was there a plan?

4 (28m 11s):
So we added ads, there was the provider ad mob, which would serve ads

0 (28m 17s):
And then it would just suck in whatever ad you know, the algorithm pulled in and you would get pennies or on that ad or something like that.

4 (28m 24s):
Yeah, that's

0 (28m 25s):
Right. So initially when you opened the app on March 25th, 2009, tell me what you would see. What, what, what could you do? Let, I opened it up and then what's the first step?

4 (28m 35s):
Yeah, so I would, I wanted to make it as easy as possible for people to sign up and to get onto the app. So we didn't even require an email address, no phone number, nothing. It was just, we had used the device id, you could log on and you didn't have to even create an account, which later became a problem. But initially you could just log on and photos were not required. They were optional. Yeah. And so the idea here was two things. One is that, you know, not all gay people are gonna be comfortable, so let's not make a lot of requirements. Number two, let's make this as frictionless as possible and very, very simple and straightforward.

0 (29m 15s):
And it was just gonna be free. There was no paid model initially. That's right. Right.

4 (29m 18s):
Yeah. So it was just like, you know, grid, just like your photo album. The first photo essentially was the closest person. Hmm. You would look at their profile and it would say, you know, so and so is, you know, you know, 500 feet away, you know, wow. Five miles away, whatever the distance was. And then you could chat with them and so you would hit the chat button, send them a message. I think at the time you might have been able to exchange photos. I can't quite remember if we launched with that or not, but eventually you'd be able to exchange photos and chat.

0 (29m 48s):
So when you launched the app, I mean, this is a time where there were probably only like 10,000 apps in the app store in total. So discovery was just much easier. And was it just discovered, I mean was it pretty soon after you launched it? Did people start to find it because there weren't many, first of all, gay hookup apps, if any. And probably even not even that many dating apps yet.

4 (30m 9s):
There was a few other apps, but certainly If, you would type in gay into the app store, you wouldn't come up with much. You know, what we decided to do was to have parties and we would go to local gay bars in LA and, you know, throw grinder parties. June was, you know, pride month. I remember we went to different prides and I remember going to San Francisco Pride and what we would do is we would hand out little business cards, you know, Download Grindr. And the reaction was very, very positive when anytime someone at that time heard that there was an app for gay people, they were really excited. It was a free app. And so we got probably about a thousand downloads a day.

0 (30m 46s):
At what point though, did you have to figure out a way to get money? I mean, every a thousand downloads a day, even in the first month, like a certain point, you've gotta build out a team to support that. So did you get a loan, did you go to a bank? Did you ask family friends? Like what did you do? Yeah,

4 (31m 4s):
I got a loan about a hundred thousand dollars from my parents. You know, fortunately I wasn't paying Scott, he was working for Equity Morton. Yeah. Was was getting eventually what would, the deal I had with Mor was a rev share on the ads that would come in. So he would get paid as, as ads would come through. And it was just the three of us really. So the costs weren't that high other than, and the serving costs were, were not that much at first. Yeah. But quickly the complexity kicks in and we needed to, to find ways to monetize.

0 (31m 37s):
So how did you, I mean, so I hear this idea of Grindr, okay. And my instant reaction to this is, what a brilliant idea. You know, gay men have a hard time meeting other gay men and you're gonna come up with a solution to it. But I have to imagine that a lot, even me in 2009, If, you would've told me this, I might have said, ah, I don't see how this is gonna work. You know, from the vantage point of 2023, it looks like a brilliant idea. But did you have other people say to you, you know, I just don't think people are really gonna use this. I don't see this working.

4 (32m 9s):
Yeah, I mean, I, I was met with a lot of doubt and I asked a lot of people to help me. I mean, I asked some friends, Hey, would you come work with me on this? A lot of people turned me down, you know, when we were launching this and I was looking for beta testers, I had reached out to my friends and I said, Hey, can you help me? Beta test? A lot of people didn't respond to me. What

0 (32m 26s):
Was the pushback? Do you remember that people gave you, what was a reason for why this wouldn't work?

4 (32m 32s):
Yeah, I mean, I think it was, you know, some of the, the responses that I got from the competitors that the iPhone wouldn't take off. That, you know, now we understand how important location is, but back then, that was not the assumption. There was no Uber, there was no Foursquare, there was nothing like that. And so our minds at the time were not oriented around location. Yeah. My mind was oriented around location because I was the guy who would go online and would have to talk to people who were nearby. Yeah. And so for me, my, my struggle was all about location, largely. Now you realize, hey, I wanna order some food. Of course I wanna order food to exactly where I am. I wanna order a car. But none of that existed at the time and none of that was done through your phone.

0 (33m 15s):
The other question I have for you, Joel, and, and I'm one of the things that is so hard about starting a business, right? Or, or having an idea is hearing no, you tell somebody your idea and they poke holes in it or they tell you, this is why it won't work. And just started our interaction. Like, you don't come across as like a hustler, like a wheeler dealer type. But are you, would you consider yourself to be confident and good at kind of presenting and selling?

4 (33m 45s):
You know, what I do know is that I have one skill really. I don't know how to program, I don't know how to design. I don't really have any hard skills. The only skill I have is to figure it out and to know that everything has, every problem has a solution, especially with technology. And so surprisingly to me, that's always been my greatest skill. And the way I'm able to do that is being able to work with people and leverage people and to get people to, to execute kind of my vision. All

0 (34m 18s):
Right. So it's clear after you launched this app, right? That, that you're getting some traction, people are downloading it, right? That's right. And and like you said before, I mean, they weren't a lot of people out there at the time who, who even knew how to make iPhone apps. So, so, so this guy you were working with this guy, Morton, I mean, he just kind of figured out on his own how to create this and, and, and make it all work.

4 (34m 41s):
Yeah, he's, you know, the, the beautiful thing, he's, he's a hacker and so he essentially figured this out. But Morton was a developer, an iPhone developer on the front end. What he wasn't was a developer on the backend. Those skill sets of front end and backend are very, very different. And so that was, you know, soon after launch became our big challenge was how do we scale and how do we deal with all this traffic, him and me. And none of us expected the scale we would get. You know, I remember when I had this server before I would, I would, I would go on once a day and I'd have to restart the server to kind of flesh out. I don't remember exactly why, but it was not built for scale at all.

0 (35m 24s):
And I mean, I have to imagine that the, I mean, at a certain point, like early on, did the ads start to generate some revenue to keep you afloat?

4 (35m 34s):
Yeah, that's how we, we funded the business was through ads maybe a few thousand dollars the first month. And imagine the few, the first year we probably made a few hundred thousand dollars in, in ads.

0 (35m 46s):
And you weren't, you didn't have like an ad sales team, it was just like whatever would come in through this server ad server.

4 (35m 52s):
Yeah. That there was no cost to us. It's just a check at, you know, wire deposit into your account once a month,

0 (35m 57s):
Couple pennies every time there was a little ad. And it could be an ad for whatever. I mean, this is probably still early days when it came to like targeted ads. Like, so not necessarily like ads that would be targeting gay men.

4 (36m 9s):
Yeah, I mean I think that, you know, this was in the early days, so these were very general ads and most of them, I don't think even were location based ads at the time. Right. These were just very, you know, ads for other apps too. Right, right. You know, Uber at one point was a big advertiser, so other apps would advertise and

0 (36m 25s):
Joel you were very clear this was not a dating app. If people met somebody and they dated, great. But this was really, you described it as a hookup app.

4 (36m 34s):
Yeah, I mean I think, you know, various times I thought of it in different ways, but yeah, essentially I see it as a hookup app and I, I, but even, you know, If, you peel it a little bit more, I just thought this is a way to meet someone, right? This is just a way for you to meet someone nearby and whether you go have sex or you go whatever you wanna go do, the whole point is to go meet. And that was something that was not really happening on an iPhone at the time,

0 (36m 58s):
So it was probably super viral right away. Right. Because once you're on it, you're telling your friends about it and then that's how it spread.

4 (37m 6s):
Yeah. So our strategy was twofold. One was these grinder parties and the other was press and, and to reaching out to the press. And so, you know, I didn't have a PR firm, I would just pitch them and I just sent them a short email. You

0 (37m 19s):
Would just write to the reporter yourself?

4 (37m 22s):
Yeah, I would just look up who was covering the space or who was I know. And find any reporter I could email them. Yeah. Said, Hey, I'm just launched this app. And that's how, you know, we got the word out.

0 (37m 33s):
So at a certain point, apple, they enable you to sell the app. Right? And that's, that essentially allowed you to create two tiers, a free tier and a paid version. And what did that, what was the difference between those two options?

4 (37m 48s):
Yeah, so the, the paid version, you could see more people, you could block more people because remember every time we would show you a new profile that was a call to our server and you know, we were, our architecture was not very good. And so there was an added expense for each new profile you saw. So we essentially started charging for that.

0 (38m 6s):
And did, did you find a lot of people paying for it?

4 (38m 8s):
We got a good amount and I remember people always telling me, you know, Hey Joel, nobody pays for apps. Apps are all free. Yeah. And no one's gonna ever pay for an app. And I said, I'm actually not an app. I'm a essentially a dating business and people have been paying for dating for centuries.

0 (38m 25s):
You're a matchmaker.

4 (38m 27s):
I'm a matchmaker. I'm not an app. And so I expect people will be willing to pay for it cuz we're providing a lot of value. Unfortunately I was Right.

0 (38m 36s):
Okay. What about l Let's go back to the sort of the, the technology side. I mean, getting a thousand downloads a day and then just the virality of it. Well that's putting more and more pressure on the backend. So from what I've read, the user experience in the first couple years sucked. Like it would crash all the time. Horrible. Right? Like what was going on. Yeah.

4 (38m 58s):
Our, our app store ratings were, you know, one star. We had horribles reviews and, but

0 (39m 3s):
Doesn't seem like it affected the downloads.

4 (39m 5s):
No. And user time, I mean people were using the app for hours,

0 (39m 10s):
But giving you one star reviews.

4 (39m 12s):
That's

0 (39m 12s):
Right. And why were they giving you one star reviews? What would happen?

4 (39m 16s):
The app would crash. You would have to wait to, for the profiles to load. You know, it just wasn't a very good, wasn't a very good software.

0 (39m 23s):
Right.

4 (39m 24s):
But my real problem was I didn't have a technical co-founder, so I didn't have anyone who had a deep understanding of what was going on technically. Yeah. Morton probably at this point had left and I had hired someone else and so I had another friend, childhood friend, Yvette Pasqua, who worked at a consulting firm down in Costa Rica. And so eventually I turned to her, I don't know exactly what, I can't remember exactly what year that was, but it was fairly early on. And through her consulting shop, they developed the app. They had developers for the, you know, iOS, eventually Android and Blackberry and also the backend,

0 (40m 2s):
You outsourced the maintenance of the app to this group of code developers in Costa Rica.

4 (40m 9s):
That's right. Wow. That's right.

0 (40m 10s):
So that was, I mean, very efficient. But did you ever think, you know, I just gotta get an office, I gotta get everyone in this office, I gotta have all these people here. Staff, employees? Or was it just, did it make more sense to you to just kind of do patchwork, like we'll outsource this, we, we'll, you know, just patch these holes like that?

4 (40m 29s):
Yeah. For, you know, I was very reluctant to get an office. I was working from home. I was very happy. I would, you know, I remember I had maybe eight people. They would come to my house. I had a very small house. The neighbors would complain with all the people parking on our small street.

0 (40m 45s):
And how were you as a, even with a small team, I mean, how were you finding yourself as a boss? I mean, did managing people and projects come easily to you?

4 (40m 54s):
No, I, I was not very excited about managing, but at some point it became a business. Yeah. And I was kind of reluctant for it to become a business in some ways. I really kind of loved it as a, a small project, something that was, that I could kind of do from home. And I remember at this point we were getting people interested in investing cuz we had been getting quite a bit of attention and they wanted to see my financials. And so we didn't, I several financials, I don't have financials, I don't have projections. I don't know what, who knows?

0 (41m 25s):
You had no, you had investors coming in wanting to like look at your data room.

4 (41m 29s):
Yeah. And I said, data, what you talking about? I, I don't have a business plan. I don't have a business plan, I don't have a marketing plan, I don't have a data, nothing. You know? Yeah. You see what you see is what you get. Yeah. And you know, my, my college head friend, her husband was, wasn't working at the time. And so Carter Junction, who ended up being our COO later on, he came in and he helped me put my projections together. And so he would consult and I said, how much do you want? He said, a hundred dollars an hour. And I said, I almost fell off my chair because

0 (41m 58s):
You thought that's crazy expensive.

4 (41m 60s):
That's a lot of money. Yeah. And then, so a few months into the, the project with Carter, I think he understood that this was gonna take off. And he called me and said, listen, I need to move from, he was out in Maryland at the time. I need to move in Los Angeles, I need to work on this full time and we need to build a business here. Hmm. You could tell that this was on a good, very good trajectory. I remember in, in, I, I went to San Francisco Pride in June, three months after we launched, I was out in handing out cards and someone said to me, Joel Stephen Fry mentioned to you on Top Gear,

0 (42m 33s):
Stephen Fry, the great obviously British comedian. Yeah.

4 (42m 38s):
And I went back to my hotel room and we got 10,000 downloads.

0 (42m 42s):
Stephen Fry was on top gear at obviously the racing show on bbc. And he talked about how he had Grindr on his phone.

4 (42m 49s):
Yeah. So Stephen Fry went on top gear, which at the time was the number one show on the bbc. Right. And you know, Stephen Fry is a bit of a tech geek or tech, you know, tech lover. Yeah. And so Jeremy says to him, oh, you know, do you have any favorite apps? And he says, yeah, I have two apps. One is this app where you can play music on it. And the other app is this app called Grindr. It's a gay cruising app. And they pan to the audience and you can see their reaction. It was going

0 (43m 19s):
Like clutching their pearls going forward. Exactly,

4 (43m 21s):
Yeah. And he then goes out and takes out the app and he basically gives a demo. Wow. And, and so that was a huge moment for us where everyone in the UK at this point knew about Grindr.

0 (43m 32s):
And this was, and it was possible to Download it in the UK too. Like the location service would work just the same. Absolutely.

4 (43m 38s):
So we launched, we launched around the world and it was available everywhere.

0 (43m 43s):
One of the things about one of the early criticisms that you got was critics writing. Oh this is so superficial. It's just like torso shots of guys with six packs and, you know, bulging muscles and it really is all about looks and and your response that was Yeah, that's right. That's exactly what it is.

4 (44m 8s):
Yeah. I mean I think that that Yeah, that's right. I mean, I think the way I, I had always thought of it was, you know, you walk into a bar and what is it that you foresee is you foresee that person, you walk into any situation. And so that is actually mimics real life in some ways

0 (44m 23s):
That humans are superficial. Initially we do just look for looks.

4 (44m 28s):
Well that's what you see when

0 (44m 30s):
You see that's,

4 (44m 30s):
You see, yeah. you don't know anything about the person before you meet them. Right. All you know is what you see. And so for me, this was not very inconsistent with how we meet people normally.

0 (44m 42s):
Now, one of the things that the app did not have was like any kind of sexually explicit photos. Like the photos were if they were real, but there were no, they could not put any, NOA could put like a sexually explicit photo up there.

4 (44m 59s):
Well, so the way I viewed this was what I try to do with Grindr was I try to mimic real life as much as possible. And so what we thought about is that, that there is a public space and there's a private space. And so with Grindr there's the public profile. And in your public profile you have to keep it PG 13 in your chat, which is a private chat. You can discuss whatever you'd like and you can exchange whatever photos you'd like as long as it's legal because those are private. And so that's how If, you wanted to exchange explicit photos. You could. And that was a very, very popular feature. And to, you know, that was in our private space and that was in compliance with Apple and Google's guidelines.

4 (45m 40s):
And, and that's the what people did.

0 (45m 43s):
So, I mean, sounds like you guys started to bring in revenue, maybe even profit even if it was small from ads pretty soon after you launched in 2009.

4 (45m 54s):
We didn't bring in profit. I don't think we were profitable maybe till year, maybe three year four. Right. But we know revenue did come in maybe 2010. We probably maybe did a few million dollars in revenue. So, but it was, you know, break even and trying to grow the team and pay for the servers and, you know, those were our two big costs. And you know, we ended up using Google App Engine and at one point, this is later on, they increased their pricing and they, and I know it's almost killed the business because what's

0 (46m 23s):
A Google app Engine? Sorry?

4 (46m 24s):
Google App Engine was the, our hosting provider was the Google Web cloud services essentially.

0 (46m 31s):
Oh. And they raised the prices and you did not And that almost killed the business.

4 (46m 34s):
Well because, you know, the, our cost went up dramatically and we simply couldn't afford what they were gonna charge us. Eventually we went on, we moved to Amazon because they became so expensive. Hmm. But largely because we had implemented them in a, not a very efficient way. So we weren't, you know, we weren't profitable for a number of years, but we were fortunately making revenue so that could

0 (46m 56s):
Float the business enough for a while. Yeah.

4 (46m 58s):
Our ability, you know, we were able to achieve everything we were able to achieve because our marketing costs were virtually zero. We, you know, we had a number of people who helped with these grinder parties, but you know, our marketing spend was essentially zero. So our cost to acquire new users was essentially zero. I mean, that's what allowed us to grow. You know, if I had to spend money acquiring users, we would not have been able to achieve what we achieved.

0 (47m 23s):
You were spending no money on user acquisition. That's right. I mean it's like a, it's like a dream business.

4 (47m 28s):
Absolutely. And you know, initially I think, you know, ads were 80% of our revenue and you know, the subscriptions were 20 and eventually it would flip to the opposite where, you know, most of the money came from subscriptions. And, you know, we had a lot of users and for me, you know, this is a network product. And so from my perspective, we wanted to have a lot of free users because we wanted the network. And that's the power of the app. You go on and you see someone nearby. And so if we had to charge everyone, it simply wouldn't have worked.

0 (47m 60s):
I have to imagine that not that long after you launched it, there were competing apps that would pop up.

4 (48m 6s):
Oh yes, absolutely.

0 (48m 8s):
How did you kind of create the moat around Grindr given that the user experience was so bad in the first year or so, if other competitors were coming on board, I have to assume that some of them might even have had a better app. How did you guys, they

4 (48m 23s):
All had a better app.

0 (48m 24s):
So how did you manage to compete against him? What, what was the reason

4 (48m 28s):
It's the size of the network just cuz you were there early,

0 (48m 31s):
You were, you were there first.

4 (48m 33s):
Yes. You know, size matters. I think that even was our tagline for a while. And you know, for a location brief service, when you're meeting people, it's really, you know, all about you want people nearby and if someone's not nearby, that's not a great experience. Yeah. And so we had the, you know, first movers advantage. We had the network and we were growing very quickly. And so that was fortunate for us that we had the network and that was our mo.

0 (49m 0s):
And in that sort of year, first year, year and a half, I mean, you know, you come across as a very kind of quiet and, and even keeled guy. Do you get stressed? Did you get angry? Would you like, you know, with the team around you, would you, like we gotta, we gotta fix this. Would you ever panic? I mean yeah. Tell me a little bit about, just kind of walk step outside of yourself for a moment and who, who was, who was Joel at that time?

4 (49m 25s):
Well, I remember the first phase of the first year was actually quite a lonely time, you know, starting for the development until maybe after launch until I actually had invited people to come work. Yeah. You know, physically at my, my place, it, it was a very lonely time because a, I was so busy working on it. So my social life had become essentially nothing. Yeah. And this is gonna sound very cheesy, but I remember I was so, so lonely and I was so depressed. And I said to myself, you know what, Joel, I had a conversation with my future self and I had my future self tell me, Joel, keep on going. You need to persevere and you need to just keep on the hard work, keep on the perspective and keep on going.

4 (50m 10s):
And that was very helpful for me. And, and, you know, I still have conversations with my future self, you know, what is, what advice does, does he have for me? What is, what perspective does seven year old Joel have for current Joel? The other beautiful thing about it is that you can't really argue with your future self because it's yourself. And so it's hard to say, eh, he doesn't know what he's talking about, or that kind of thing. And so that's kind of a mechanism that I've, I've employed in my life.

0 (50m 34s):
So. Alright. So one of the things that I think was a really interesting break, or probably probably the first time that I I think I can remember hearing about Grindr was cuz I think by, by September of 2011 you had like two and a half million users all around the world, which is quite amazing. I think it was 2012, right? Summer of 2012 you had the Olympics in London and basically for some reason the app crashed Yeah. At around that time. Yeah. Somehow a rumor started that this was coincided with the arrival of athletes in London at the Olympic Village.

0 (51m 19s):
Tell me the story. Did you plant that story? Did somebody plant that story? What? Cuz it's a great story, but what, what do you remember about that?

4 (51m 28s):
Yeah, so this was right before the Olympics had started and the athletes had just arrived at the Olympic Village and we got a, an email from one of the tabloids in the uk. They said to us, Hey, you know, we noticed that Grindr went down right around the time the Olympians had arrived. Is there any correlation? And I remember I turned to the head of marketing and I said, don't respond. And they ran with the story without comment from us that Grindr had crashed because gay Olympians has essentially crashed the, the

0 (52m 5s):
Servers and said the company had no comment, no response,

4 (52m 8s):
No response. And it was ridiculous. Right. I mean, how, how many Olympians are there? A few, a few, a few thousand. How many of them are gay? Maybe a dozen. A few dozen. Or a few hundred for them to be able to crash our servers when we had, you know, hundreds of thousands of users and maybe, you know Yeah. Daily active users and, you know, millions on monthly was simply ridiculous. But that became part of the, you know, the urban legend I guess. Yeah. And one of the things I realized also is that, you know, our outages actually, we had a lot of outages and we would actually see that anytime we would have an outage our traffic would, would go up afterwards and anytime we would have a, a negative news article about out outages, our traffic would go up and we'd get more downloads.

4 (52m 49s):
And so one of the things I realized here was that even bad press, you know, quote unquote bad press might be good.

0 (52m 58s):
Why We come back in just a moment. Grindr starts to get even more attention for all the other problems it has from uncontrollable spam to critical concerns over Privacy. Stay with us. You're listening to How, I. Built. This.

1 (53m 17s):
We can't see tomorrow, but we can hear it tomorrow. Sounds like hydrogen being added to natural gas to make it more sustainable. It sounds like solar panels generating thousands of megawatts and it sounds like carbon being captured and stored, keeping it out of our atmosphere. We've been bridging to a sustainable energy future for more than 20 years because what we do today helps ensure tomorrow is on Enbridge. Life takes energy.

6 (53m 47s):
Imagine this, you just got to the hotel and the whole family is ready to jump in that pool, but your sunscreen vanished. No sweat. Use Instacart and add SPF to cart for delivery in as fast as an hour. Throw in some snacks in water for the crew. And vacation. Here you come. Travel well with Instacart. Shop from thousands of stores across the country to get what you need wherever you are. Visit instacart.ca to get free delivery on your first three orders. Offer valid for limited time, minimum $10 per order. Additional terms apply Instacart, add life to cart.

0 (54m 28s):
Hey, welcome back to How. I. Built. This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's around 2013, four years after launch and Grindr has about 5 million total users. And at this point, Joel starts getting calls from people who wanna invest in the app. But he says, no, he's not interested.

4 (54m 48s):
I don't like to answer other people. And I felt that if I would take venture backing, I would essentially become a monkey to them and that I would need to essentially work for them. And a lot of them were, you know, straight men who I felt like didn't understand my business and you know, I didn't want to answer to straight corporate America.

0 (55m 10s):
And also, I mean, your revenue started to become significant, I think by 2013 is 25 million. That was a combination of subscribers and ad revenue.

4 (55m 21s):
Yeah, we had the, the financial, you know, we could support ourselves. So there were certainly points where we could have used the money, but I was very stubborn about this that I didn't want. And I also didn't, the other things, I didn't want someone to push me to an exit. I just said to myself, Hey, I don't know when we're gonna exit. And what, that's not what it's about. Yeah. This is about building the business. And I think the other part of it is, you know, I'm a person who doesn't look for external validation. And I think one of the ways that founders get caught up in validation is with valuations, gain valuations, headcount. And to me those were vanity metrics. Those were not metrics that were important.

4 (56m 1s):
The only metric that was really important to me was my daily active users and how many, you know, messages people sent. Yeah. And what impact were we making? That's what mattered to me.

0 (56m 10s):
Has the app gotten more and more popular? You also get scammers. Yep. People who are trying to get credit card information or you know, and, and, and all kinds of scams. When you found out about that, how did you handle that?

4 (56m 27s):
I don't know that we had a lot of, in terms of credit card hacking and, you know, apple would process our payments, so we didn't have any right of those types of problems. But we had spam, you know, spam was, you know, visit my website, go Download this go Download that

0 (56m 40s):
You had spam profiles being set up.

4 (56m 43s):
Oh yes, absolutely. And, and so going back to the initial founding of the app, we didn't have accounts and essentially anyone could message anyone. And that was because I wanted to, you know, make it very easy for someone to be able to use our service. That made it a perfect opportunity for a spammer to be able to spam our users. And so you would go on and you would start talking to someone and they would send you a marketing message. And it was very hard for us to solve this because we didn't have accounts. And so this was one of our moments where I thought I could lose the business

0 (57m 20s):
Because Cuz you weren't clear how many accounts were, were, were fake.

4 (57m 24s):
Well, no, you, the customer experience was horrible. You would go on Yeah. And people would spam you imagine getting your inbox without the spam filter. It's just impossible to communicate. And so we had to to fight the spammers.

0 (57m 36s):
Yeah. So how did you do it?

4 (57m 38s):
Yeah, so it's, you know, it's, you know, creating accounts. So everyone has to have an account, you have to verify your email address. So at some point, If, you didn't sign into your email, you would lose access, which wasn't a problem because people would do essentially anything, you know, they had put up with so much, giving an email address was not gonna be a challenge. Yeah. But you know, you also go through messages and you do message detection where you look for keywords that people are, you know, the spammers and you shut down the spammers. So there, it's quite a, an effort to combat spa. How

0 (58m 9s):
Long did it take?

4 (58m 12s):
Years. I mean, it took us, you know, a few months to really, you know, solve, you know, the, the crisis. But y you know, it's an ongoing battle. It's a whack-a-mole with spammers Yeah. To, to fight them.

0 (58m 25s):
So there are obviously always unintended consequences to any technology. Right. This is normal. Yeah. And one of those unintended consequences was that the app did put some people in danger, right. Particularly gay men in countries where homosexuality is illegal, Afghanistan and, you know, Ghana and Iraq, Iran, I don't know if it is today still in also Saudi Arabia where it's, it's punished Egypt. Yeah. And allegedly in, in in Egypt, the state authorities used the app to track and even arrest gay men. I don't know. Exactly.

4 (59m 2s):
It's not, it's not alleged. It happens,

0 (59m 4s):
It happened. So, yeah. How did, I mean, on the one hand it was this probably this incredible opportunity for these very closeted, fearful men to meet other men, but on the other hand, to put them at risk, what could you do to fix that? Or to, or to mitigate that? Anything?

4 (59m 23s):
Yeah. Well, a couple of things we did. One was we, we had messaged our users and told them not to put their faces in their profile. Not to, not to publicly declare who they were. The other thing is, you know, you know, grinders all about location, so you see how far away you are from somewhere. Yeah. Well, using that data, the police are able to, to find where you are. Yeah. So in Egypt, we turned off that ability. So you couldn't see how far p you were from one another. You know, it's a tough call when you think about these places and you say to yourself, should we make the service not available? And from my perspective, what I realized is that this was the only kind of gay bar for a lot of people in a lot of places.

4 (1h 0m 5s):
And to take that away from them, I thought would be the wrong decision because for them, that that's their, that's largely their access to other queer people.

0 (1h 0m 15s):
And as this became more and more successful, I mean, your market was gay men, which is a big market, a lot of dollars. But did you think, I mean, I know that there were people coming at you saying, Hey, this is exclusionary, it's only for gay men. What about gay women? What about non-binary folks, trans folks, et cetera? I mean, just from a business perspective, and I hope this doesn't come across as cynical from a business perspective, it might have been a good opportunity to just expand the user base, right?

4 (1h 0m 43s):
Yeah. And I mean, beyond that, we had straight people. I mean, a lot of

0 (1h 0m 46s):
People asking, asking to get on it. Yeah.

4 (1h 0m 48s):
Yeah. Hey, this is, you know, before Tinder, Hey, why can't I meet someone on my phone? We need, we need a better way. And yeah. So after we got that feedback from all corners.

0 (1h 0m 58s):
And so one of the ways you addressed this was with another app called Blender that you created. That's right. And was, I mean, to kind of spoiler alert here, but Blender did not do quite as well as Grindr by any stretch. Was was it already too late when it came out? Was Tinder already kind of the dominant

4 (1h 1m 15s):
App? No, we, we predated Tinder quite some time. Okay. Did Wow. Our failure was, was in the architecture of what we did. And so, you know, if there was a woman, she would get hundreds and hundreds of messages. We also allowed people to exchange photos, and so women would get unsolicited nudes that, you know, that was a problem. We also would say, you know, how far you were on Blender and that made women uncomfortable. So overall, the, the failure of Blender was the failure of understanding what were the needs of women. And part of it was we didn't, you know, we didn't have women. We mostly were gay men on the team, and we didn't have enough straight women.

4 (1h 1m 57s):
And, and we thought we, we understood the market, but we didn't.

0 (1h 2m 2s):
How did you cope with the, the occasional criticism or more than occasional criticism you would get, you know, media stories about underage boys going on and signing up stories about men in, you know, coun, you know, endangering themselves in countries where it was illegal or, you know, like how did you personally deal with that? Did you just, was it just for you, it's just the price of doing business? Or did did it ever get to you?

4 (1h 2m 26s):
Well, I mean, each of those are different. Yeah. But I think on the bigger picture, I think the answer is that with every technology that there is negatives. You know, one of the good things we had was we had the location of these users. So if someone committed a crime, we would, you know, turn over to the, the law enforcement say, you know, here's where you can find them. But, you know, this was one of my, I think my challenges at Grindr was not taking maybe seriously enough some of the other issues that we could have dealt with, that we could have helped. You know, people spend an hour a day on Grindr, that's a long time. That's not very good for you. And so thinking through how could we have better, you know, help without all these negative things, without the racism, without the transphobia, without all these other negative aspects and aspects of the community.

0 (1h 3m 17s):
And I guess we should mention that there was quite a bit of that on the site too. There were, right? I mean, there were men who were saying, I don't date this kind of person. I don't date that kind of person. Or they were even, even in chats quite explicit in their racism. Yeah,

4 (1h 3m 32s):
Absolutely. That was, that was a problem. I think it remains to be a problem. And you know, after leaving, I think I now have a different perspective on that. I think we, we should have had been a lot more involved and guiding of our users and letting them know that certain behaviors was, was just unacceptable.

0 (1h 3m 52s):
In 2016, you announced that you had sold a 60% stake in the company. This is after many years of many suitors and investors coming at you and you turning them down. This was a Chinese video game developer called Kun, Kun Tech Company, and they took a 60% stake and that deal valued Grindr at 155 million. So you, yeah, you guys got 93 million at that point. What was the reason, what changed? Like why then did you say, you know what, let's bring it on now?

4 (1h 4m 28s):
I think there were two main things that were going on at this point. One was the technology. We were still struggling. We were still just dealing with our scaling issues. We were not shipping updates, we were not releasing new features. And so I just realized I was essentially a firefighter and our team was, were just firefighting. We were fighting fire after fire and we just didn't have the expertise that we needed. And so I thought, you know what, if I can find a partner who can help me scale this and grow this, and someone who really understands technology. So that was one, one part of it. The other part was it, I had no idea what my business was worth. So I said to myself, you know, why don't we go out there and find out what the business is worth?

4 (1h 5m 8s):
And then we got to the point where, hey, this is a lot of money and this is life-changing amount of money. So we found Kun, who they had a lot of experience with mobile gaming in, in China and also China at the time. We wanted to break into China. So they would be the perfect partner to help us with the China. And this partner is gonna help us where, where we're weak. And this will finally be kind of this technical co-founder that I've never had.

0 (1h 5m 37s):
All right. So they, they come in and they buy 60% steak. And the other side to it is, did part of you wanna just eventually get out? Because when they take a 60% steak, eventually they're gonna take a hundred percent stake.

4 (1h 5m 50s):
Yeah. I mean, and we had a mechanism for that. It was essentially a three year. We, we, you know, at that time we said ourselves, okay, likely be out in three years, but maybe not. I, I think I probably fooled myself in some ways and thought that I would, if I wanted to stay, I could stay. If I wanted to go, I would go. And from a external perspective, you're right. Hey, you, you know, you sell control, you lose control. But I don't, I know that I fully understood that.

0 (1h 6m 18s):
Alright, so now this, this Chinese company comes in and what did that mean? Did that, did everything seem to say the same, more or less? Or did things start to change quickly? I mean, 60%, they own a majority of the company now.

4 (1h 6m 30s):
I mean, I think, you know, things, you know, we, we didn't have the best relationship. The honeymoon was very short. We got hacked soon after the deal closed. Hmm. And I said, great, you know, you guys are not great that we got hacked, but like, you

0 (1h 6m 46s):
Can solve this,

4 (1h 6m 47s):
You can help me solve this. But you know, they weren't very helpful and they were very focused on us launching in China, and they wanted us to really become the number one app in China because there was another app that was gaining a very significant traction to China. Yeah. I try to look at it from their perspective. You know, they're sitting there in Asia, they're seeing that, that they're, you know, that someone else is becoming the dominant player in Asia, they're worrying about that. Right? But I'm sitting here in Los Angeles and I'm saying, you know, that's not the end of the world. Even if we don't get China, you know, we, that's fine. We, I'd rather, I'd rather lose China than lose, you know, have the business be hacked and lose all our data. And so that became very contentious. They

0 (1h 7m 24s):
Exercised their option to buy the rest of the company out about two years later. Exactly. Two years later, bought it, the rest of the company out for $150 million. And I guess at that point, Scott Chen from Klon comes to run, comes the head of Grindr, and they sort of politely asked you to step aside,

4 (1h 7m 47s):
I'm not quite sure the word polite is the right

0 (1h 7m 49s):
Word. Maybe Impolitely ask you to step aside.

4 (1h 7m 53s):
Yeah. Listen, it, it wasn't, it was very contentious and not the way I wanted to go. But, you know, we ended up settling it and, you know, we came to an agreement.

0 (1h 8m 4s):
Joel, let me ask you this question. I mean, and, and it may sound obvious to some people, it may sound just utterly stupid to others, but, you know, you've been grinding away at this just to, so to speak, since 2009. It's now 2018, and they've asked you to leave in a contentious way, and you are not happy about it, but you're gonna walk away with a hundred, $200 million of value. That's a pretty great outcome. And you know, you're walking away from the stress of that business too. So I guess my question is who cares? Right? Like, why, why would it matter to you? And I'm not, I'm not saying who cares, of course, but, but why, why, why did it matter to you that it was contentious and you, you had to leave

4 (1h 8m 50s):
This? You know, I think starting a business is a very emotional thing, and I think it is something that I dedicated myself to. And I had many lonely nights. I had many difficult days and nights. You know, it took all of me and I was helping my community and helping them meet, helping them, you know, find great sex, finding love. You know, there are people who have gotten married because they've found someone on Grindr. And so, such a tremendous impact. And, you know, something that I love more than anything is matchmaking. And so combination of all those things, I don't expect anyone to feel sorry for me because I made a lot of money.

4 (1h 9m 34s):
But kind of ironically, a few months before I, I finally left, I met a guy in New York and we started dating and Brendan and I are now, you know, married. And interestingly I've asked him and I said, you know, he said, you know, I don't think I would've taken you serious. Seriously If, you were still the CEO of Grindr. I don't know that this relationship would've worked. And I think for myself also, I, I think I was able to prioritize him and my, you know, relationships in general. And that created the space for me to fall in love and, and get married.

0 (1h 10m 15s):
I know that after you stepped away, Joel Grindr continued to grow for some time, but it, it, it did have some challenges. And I know that the, the Chinese company that had bought it from you eventually sold it and then the new owners took it public a few years later. That's right. That's right. And, and for time, the market cap was like, was over like 2 billion and it's, I think it's, it's dropped quite significantly now. But when you saw that, I mean, at the time, right, the thing that you built was valued at 2 billion. I mean, it must have been quite amazing to see that.

4 (1h 10m 49s):
Yeah. You know, I was very, that's certainly mixed feelings, right? Yeah. But the main feeling I had was kind of proud of myself for building something that got acceptance from Wall Street to a certain extent. I was very proud of that. And I was very proud of the queer community, that this was a successful business that, you know, served the queer community. And it was a success story of the queer community.

0 (1h 11m 13s):
The, the around the same time that Grindr went public, you launched a new company, a new app called Motto, a new dating app, which you now is out in the world. Tell me, tell me about it. What, what is it and how is it different from everything else out there?

4 (1h 11m 30s):
Yeah, so Motto is essentially a hookup app for queer people. You have to upload three face photos, and so you see exactly who you're meeting and we verify every single person. So it's a hundred percent real community. And it's essentially an experience, kind of more like Hinge. You get a batch of people every day at 5:00 PM and you get to react to their profile and you get to reach out to people. And it's meant to be a lot more straightforward. And a lot of it was built in reaction to, you know, the problems of the, the current hookup apps. Hmm. Not just Grindr, but the other ones as well.

4 (1h 12m 10s):
But at the end of the day, this is, you know, I think I had this benefit of, of sitting there and saying, Hey, now what does the hookup app look like? If, you build it from scratch, you know, 2009 and 2008 was, was Grindr and that was the app for then. And then Motto was I think the app for, for today.

0 (1h 12m 28s):
Yeah. Joel, when you think about this, your whole story, you know, you're a guy who is not a computer scientist, not I, you're obviously very smart, but like you studied international relations and you were not a coder developer, you had an idea. Lots of people do, they go nowhere, but you turned it into a really big business and you became very wealthy as a result of that and created something that has had a significant impact on, on culture, certainly on, on gay culture, queer culture. How much of of that do you think is, is how, how much time and and grind you put in and how much do you, do you attribute to luck?

4 (1h 13m 10s):
You know, this is a tough one because it's hard to tell, right? I'm not a huge believer in luck. I don't, I don't actually really know, understand what that means. Yeah. I'm also very fortunate and you know, I grew up to parents who were supportive financially and emotionally and in many, many different ways. You know, I don't know, is that, you know, luck in some ways. Sure. But I had a lot of people who come up to me and said, Hey, I had that idea too. And my response to all them is always the same thing. It's like, well, what did you do about it? And the answer always is nothing. Yeah. I go back to what I, I said earlier, and that's, I, I, you know, I believe in myself.

4 (1h 13m 51s):
I don't let other people tell me what to do or to validate me, and I figure it out. And just understanding that, you know, I may be right, I might be wrong, but at the end of the day, I'm a happy guy.

0 (1h 14m 6s):
That's Joel Simkhai, founder of Grindr. And Motto Motto, by the way, is still small right now. It only works in New York and Miami, but with plans to expand far beyond in the future. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And it's totally free. This episode was produced by Casey Herman, with music composed by Rum Arablouei. It was Edited by Neva Grant with research help from Katherine Sypher. Our audio engineer was Gilli Moon. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Sam Paulson, Liz Metzger, Alex Chung, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, and Carla Estevez.

0 (1h 14m 53s):
I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey Prime members You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon music. Download the Amazon music app today. Or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If, you wanna show your support for our show? Be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

7 (1h 15m 36s):
Do you spend sleepless nights worrying about being submerged in quicksand, being attacked by an unrelenting swarm of killer bees, or how you'd out swim an angry giant shark? I'm Anthony at Tamnick and I'm here to tell you to stop worrying and let me an anxious and overly informed comedian, be your guide to solving your most worrisome what ifs. Don't panic. A new comedy podcast from Wondery leans into, into our most absurd anxieties and diffuses them with humor and actual advice for how to deal. Should you find yourself facing your fears, you'll laugh, learn, and possibly sweat profusely. Enjoy. Don't panic on the Wondery app or wherever you get your podcasts.

7 (1h 16m 18s):
You can listen to. Don't panic early and ad free on Wondery. Plus, join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts.