0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and add free on Amazon Music. Download the app today. Reboot your credit card with Apple Card. Apple Card is the credit card created by Apple. It gives you unlimited cash back every day on every purchase up to 3% and you can use that cash right away. No waiting and waiting for rewards. Just daily cash you can use right away on anything. Apply now in the Wallet app on iPhone and start using it right away. Subject to credit approval, daily cash is available via an Apple Cash card or as a statement credit.

0 (40s):
See Apple Card customer agreement. For terms and conditions, apple Cash card is issued by green.bank member F D I C. You've

1 (48s):
Got back to back meetings, errands to run and chores to take care of. What's the secret to clearing your to-do list? A little help from DoorDash. You can get dinner household essentials and everything on your grocery list delivered along with the restaurants you love. You can now get groceries and other essential items delivered with DoorDash. Get drinks, snacks, and other household items in under an hour. For a limited time, our listeners can get 50% off up to a $20 value and $0 delivery fees. When you download the DoorDash app and enter code Wondery, that's 50% off up to a $20 value and zero delivery fees when you download the DoorDash app in the app store and enter code Wondery. Don't forget that's Code Wondery for 50% off up to a $20 value and $0 delivery fees with DoorDash subject to change terms apply.

0 (1m 38s):
You are on the road setting up demos at any natural food store and trying to get people to try it, right? That's a lot of

3 (1m 46s):
Work. You're right. It was a ton of work and most people would never do that. They wouldn't live in vehicles for all those years. They, they wouldn't get along their relationships. I mean all those things. But the Monte was always just so much about bringing us together and bigger than any one of us. And we actually had a lot of fun. I mean, it was a blast.

0 (2m 9s):
Welcome to how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Ross and on the show today how five surfers in California bonded over a drink most people didn't even know existed. And how they built a hundred million dollar company to share it with the world. Building a brand is really hard, especially when the product is virtually unknown to your potential consumer base. This is why you don't see Americans spreading Marmite on their butter toast in the morning.

0 (2m 52s):
Even though millions of British people eat it every day, it would take decades to convert Americans into Marmite consumers. Salty, bitter brown Yeasty sludge is an acquired taste. So is a bitter musty beverage called Ma. Now, if you're not familiar with it, Mata is the most popular non-alcoholic beverage in parts of South America. It's made by steeping. The dried leaves from a yba tree in water and it's usually served hot in a hollowed out Gord in Argentina and Brazil. People usually drink it through a metal straw. Monte has a few organic compounds that some people say make them more energetic or alert, a little like coffee, but without the edge.

0 (3m 37s):
Anyway, back in the mid 1990s, a group of friends in San Lu Obispo, California were introduced to ma by another friend from Argentina. And within a short period of time, they founded a MA company they called Guayaki. Now what they didn't account for was how difficult it would be to convince people to drink. Ma, let's just say it doesn't go down easy. It would take them almost 15 years of grinding away before the company turned a profit. And much of those 15 years was spent on the road in a camper van going from festival to festival, handing out free samples. In fact, the co-founders estimate they've given away more than 5 million samples of MA a few years ago.

0 (4m 21s):
They made a decision that would be both incredibly hard and incredibly smart and that decision was to build their own distribution network and how they did it, well, we'll get there today. Gu Aki year generates more than a hundred million in annual revenue and their canned and bottled drinks are available all across the United States. You're gonna hear from two of the five co-founders in this episode, Chris Mann and David Carr. David grew up in the hills between Santa Cruz and Silicon Valley. He spent a lot of time as a kid outside in the redwood forests. He ended up going to college at Cal Poly San Lu Obispo in 1989 where he took business classes.

0 (5m 3s):
But pretty quickly after he got there, he figured out that capitalism didn't really appeal to him. So instead he decided to switch to Cal Poly's foreign language department, which took him to study abroad in France.

3 (5m 15s):
I really liked the challenge of learning a language and I, I was always been like a people and a connector person and I lived with a French family, French grandparents really? And so they didn't speak any English.

0 (5m 26s):
Wow.

3 (5m 27s):
And after like three to three to four months it finally started clicking. Like I could understand what they were saying and I could speak a bit. And so I really liked that challenge. And then I also loved the area where I was living and I loved the cuisine and I loved the attention to like, there was just a different pace of life and I was really drawn to like sitting down and having a meal for two hours and talking and sharing a glass of wine. Not to get drunk but just to like socialize. And so it was, for me, it was a huge like awakening of like a whole, whole different way of like living. Yeah. Based on what I had kind of grown up and experienced just on the west coast.

0 (6m 3s):
All right. So you come back to California to finish up your degree. You graduated in 1996, but I guess that was sort of two or three years after, right? Cuz you got to school in 1990.

3 (6m 15s):
I started in 89 and graduated in 95. So I had two years abroad. And so from, because my experience in France was so good, I ended up going to another language school in Germany for a few months. But then I moved to Spain and then again lived with another Spanish family. Actually it was two families, two nine person families. So I was like in this pack of like 18 Spanish people. Wow. And they didn't speak English at all. And so my Spanish actually became the best even better than French. Yeah. And so I'm just sharing that. Cause when I got back and when I met Alex at, at the restaurant later on I did have a base of Spanish like enough to hang out and converse. And so I could basically, Alex could speak to me in his maternal tongue and be himself and express himself in his own humor.

3 (6m 58s):
And I got

0 (6m 59s):
It. All right. So you came back basically with two and a half languages under your belt. Yeah. You're back in San Lu Obispo and I guess you met this guy named Alex Pryor. Alejandro Pryor. Who is who? Who, who is Alex?

3 (7m 13s):
He was an exchange student in soil science

0 (7m 15s):
From Argentina. From

3 (7m 17s):
From Argentina? Yeah. And we met both after we finished like I graduated 95 and so did he, and he was working at a restaurant locally and that's where we met.

0 (7m 29s):
You guys just struck up a conversation in Spanish?

3 (7m 32s):
Sort of? Not really. He ended up spilling food on my girlfriend at the time and so we ended up chatting it up, you know, cuz it was like, oh my God. And then he liked us and he invited us out to have a meal, like a traditional barbecue, which they call a patia at his place. He was living in a, in a mobile home, like a little trailer on a fairly large property and he was doing organic farming studies for the landowner. So we came out there, had a meal. And then after the meal is when sort of the, the moment happened, you know, when he passed around the traditional ma go,

0 (8m 11s):
He finished the meal and he passes around this drink Yes. Called mata. Yeah. And, and tell me what, what was, what do you remember about, about how he sort of presented it to you?

3 (8m 22s):
Well I think it's just sort of a normal thing to do After you have a meal, you, if you want connect with someone and you want to have a moment, you pass around a Monte Gor,

0 (8m 30s):
A Gord, it's literally a Gord a dried Gord, right?

3 (8m 34s):
It's really like there's all different kinds of gords. There's hollowed out like kavas, like squash GOs, there's ceramic GOs, there's metal GOs, they're basically a, a container and you put a metal straw into it with little slits on it that create little filter at the bottom. So when you put this straw filter in there, you suck through it. The small leaves and particles don't come through the little slits and you just get the

0 (9m 0s):
Liquid. And were you thinking this is interesting? Like what? Yeah,

3 (9m 4s):
Well that was the moment, right? People ask you like, what's that moment and the aha moment? That was the moment cuz I had suffered in my life from hay fever straight up and I had taken Sudafed and Benadryl like drugs to just be able to like stop, have my nose running. I just suffered a lot, had humidifiers in my room growing up and I kind of cut all the drugs, cold Turkey because they just made me feel so bad. And the only thing that ever really made me feel great was like a lot of exercise. So I would, if I was surfing or mountain biking or doing like a two hour Ashtanga yoga, which is a bit more of a vigorous yoga, something like that, I could breathe pretty well.

3 (9m 48s):
And it took an investment of time to do that. Well that day when he passed around the go, within like 10 or 15 minutes I all of a sudden my nose cleared up. Not completely, but like I was breathing and I was like, what is this stuff? Like how come I'm,

0 (10m 3s):
You'd never heard of it

3 (10m 4s):
Before? Never heard of it. No.

0 (10m 6s):
I mean the description you see, you're like sort of saying I felt amazing, right? But it wasn't like a hi, right? It wasn't like taking mushrooms or something. It was a Describe how you like felt besides the fact that you felt like your nose cleared up. What else did you feel?

3 (10m 24s):
Well I felt the energy and the clarity of mind too. Like because Monte's a vaio and bronchodilator, so you gets your system flowing. So not only am I breathing now, then you have more energy and you have more clarity to mind. So those were sort of a byproduct or an effect of having a system that's flowing better.

0 (10m 45s):
All right. So you have this experience with it, and I wanna be clear about this. Not everybody is gonna have that reaction and there's, this is not a science show, we don't have the data, but you clearly, it was like you loved it, there was something about it. So did you say to Alex, Hey, can I get more of this stuff? Like, I wanted to keep drinking this tea.

3 (11m 7s):
I did and we, he started sharing more and more gords in me and we, we'd hang out, we liked each other. Right. We had a real chemistry. Yeah. Like, you know, we're passing around other green things at that time too. And this was like, okay, everyone who started drinking this was like getting the balancing effects from it. Like we were all surfers and spending a lot of time, you know, driving along the coastline, staring at the waves, trying to find the best one, parking, checking it, driving your car again looking for the, so you're, so we all started drinking it and you know, an hour into drinking the go and then we'd go paddle out and it was like we'd all, everyone started saying they had the best sessions. Like everything started clicking, you know, you'd have, you'd be doing yoga on the beach, drinking your latte, get in. And so it just really like landed so well and then people started quitting coffee and that's what kind of was like, huh, this is really interesting.

0 (11m 55s):
I guess this is a moment where we should pause and talk about mata for a minute because when I was doing research on this episode, I was amazed to learn that mata's, like it's not surprising it's been around for hundreds and hundreds of years. I, he's been around for longer. But it, it was sort of first consumed by, you know, indigenous tribes in what is now Paraguay and around Argentina. And in those areas it's been consumed for like 500 years but really never really made it beyond Argentina and Paraguay in parts of Brazil. Right. Like what, so when you first had it, did you ask him, you were like, how is it that this thing is like only in this tiny part of the world?

3 (12m 38s):
I did and the story that I've heard over and over is it was actually expanding like tea and coffee and it was kind of, it kind of went all the way up into Peru and different places and, and then there was a war that happened between Pua, Argentina and Brazil and the trade routes broke down. And so then Yaba Monte never kept trading and going further away it kind of stayed confined to that area, whereas tea and coffee continued to expand around the world with their trade routes.

0 (13m 9s):
And I guess you could describe ma as sort of having elements of coffee and tea, right? It's got, it's a leaf, it's a dried leaf, it's brewed like tea. It has some of the same chemical properties of tea but also has caffeine like coffee.

3 (13m 26s):
Yeah, I mean it was used more like our culture uses coffee than tea. People used my ma in the morning to wake up and they brewed it strong and even as we commercialized it, the first people to ever really get into ma were not so much tea drinkers because people would have like generally a cup of tea or a lighter cup of tea, whereas they would brew the Yuba in a French press or a coffee maker and make a strong cup of ma. So it was very much like you could quit coffee drinking ma. Yeah. However, if you look at the chemical structure, and this was always very fascinating, you know, coffee was really, had a lot of caffeine and so does ma tea had a lot of telene and then chocolate had theo roaming and Yaba has all three.

3 (14m 13s):
And that was very much what I attributed sort of the unique sensation that people feel from your like why is it so different than coffee or tea? Well, it's the unique combination of these alkaloids in the package of something that has pretty much the nutritional profile of like a wheat grass.

0 (14m 29s):
Got it. Okay. From what I understand, like most ma is commercially grown and like it's grown on areas that where there was rainforest, rain, foresters just like cut down to just plant these ma trees and they can produce a lot of ma faster. But ma traditionally was grown in shade and ma is not like teed, which has grown. It's like a low growing leaf, right? It grows close to ground. Monte grows on trees, right? It's a leaf from a tree.

3 (15m 0s):
I mean tea like Monte, they, they kind of look like bushes, right? So they're, they're both cultivated similarly for the ease of harvest, if you were to find a a Monte tree in the wild, it would grow up like 80 to a hundred feet tall and maybe be like 12 to 18 inches in diameter for bigger trees. But that is difficult to harvest generally. Like for the mass amounts of production, they prune the, the trees down and they make them in more like bon eye trees like the size of an orange tree and get on step ladders and trim them like a tbu. They're probably bigger than tea bushes, but similar in size or shape.

0 (15m 36s):
So at what point did the idea come into your head or into Alex's head to maybe turn mata into a business? What, I mean you're, you're like, what do you, what was the conversation you remember?

3 (15m 47s):
Well we were becoming bros, right? We were hanging out a lot and

0 (15m 51s):
You guys were bros.

3 (15m 52s):
We were bros we were surfing and doing TaeKwonDo and drinking latte and at one point he was asking me for advice and we were talking and he said to me, he's like, the door's always open. I'm like, what do you mean? He's like, we could do this together. And at that point he was putting half pounds of Monte together in his trailer with a tin tie bag and selling it at one store in San Lu Bipo. So he had it in one co-op store and he'd make like a couple cases and sell it. So I, I started doing that with him, just helping him. Actually I wasn't even joined with him yet, but I just would hang out and talk with him and pour mata into the bag. That's what we were doing. I was kind of just volunteering my time.

0 (16m 26s):
And would they call it, were they calling it like Alex's ma or was there a name or, it

3 (16m 30s):
Was called Guke Guayaki from the very, it's

0 (16m 33s):
Called Guayaki. Yeah. Wow. Tell me about that name.

3 (16m 35s):
Well the name came from our, where we all of our ma originally came from Paraguay from an area of rainforest that was part of like an experimental project to Refor ma in its natural habitat. And Alex, through his dad who knew the landowner, when he got this yba mate in his hand and started drinking it, he was also profoundly affected. He was like, man, this stuff tastes really good. It's nothing like the yba mate. He grew up drinking cuz all of them all just drank commercial, sun-grown ma with chemicals. That's all you can get. And the name of the reserve where the ma was coming from was about 25,000 acres, was called Gua Key. And so then Alex just used the same name and we just would throw Yba in the sack and that was it.

0 (17m 19s):
And this mate was different cuz it was essentially grown organically,

3 (17m 23s):
Organically in the shade, smooth tasting, better flavor, all of it. And so he was like psyched on it and he was, it was also I think if he shared it with people, they liked the taste better because if you drink the Argentine stuff that's sun-grown, it's really like almost offensive. Unless you grew up drinking it, it's pretty bad tasting. Hmm. And for me, that was when my business brain clicked back in, I was kind of like anti-corporate. Like I don't wanna be part of something that's not good, good for the world. And when I learned that this Yba Monte could be grown in its natural environment and produced by small farmers and indigenous people, all of it just sort of added up to me. I'm like, wow. And like the more we could scale this in return, like destroyed lands back to forest would be great for the world.

3 (18m 9s):
I saw like the power of this product to drive real change. And that's what, that's what got me in.

0 (18m 15s):
All right. I'm gonna, I'm gonna come back to you David, in, in just a moment, but I wanna turn to Chris for, for a little bit cuz Chris, I know that you grew up in Southern California and I think like David, you also loved the outdoors and yeah, I read you, you know, you were a high school athlete and a super smart kid. I know you studied economics at Harvard and then you went into finance after college, right? But from what I, I understand you had just were not happy with the path you were on and so you sort of quit your job, which is around the time you Yeah. You guys met. So tell me about that. Where, where were you when David and Alex met? What, like what were you up to?

4 (18m 50s):
So I, I at the time was living in the Bay area. My wife was getting a degree, a master's degree in holistic health. And I was trying to figure out my next, what I wanted to do. I was waiting tables basically just to make ends meet, pay rent. But I had a lot of free time and both my wife and I, we were just diving into like all kinds of reading and learning and you know, a lot of eastern thought and just really I think grappling with like, who are we as people and what do we want to do on this planet? And I think the more I, you know, moved away from conventional mentality, the more it allowed fertile soil for, for these other seeds to grow.

0 (19m 29s):
So, all right. So, alright. So you, you're going through this kind of personal transformation. How did you end up in San Lu Obispo, which is on the central coast of California?

4 (19m 38s):
So two of my high school friends were very passionate about Macrobiotics and were going to Cal Poly San Lu Obispo. And as part of their senior project, they were opening a vegan restaurant in San Louis. Hmm. And they were living in a house that they had converted the whole front yard into a living garden and into, into really like a food forest where you had mixed trees with different herbs and shrubs and vegetables. Wasn't just like planting things in a line. So it was, it was really kind of a early version of permaculture. And so I lived there and the way I, I felt eating the food changed my body. And then on top of that, we were connecting with all these local farmers.

4 (20m 20s):
And so seeing the connection between the food we eat, how it impacts the land, how it impacts the community, how it impacts the health of the body, and it was like, wow, we really need to focus on building something here.

0 (20m 32s):
All right. So you're working at the restaurant, helping your friends out. How did you meet David Carr and Alex?

4 (20m 38s):
Yeah, so I met both David and Alex through the restaurant. We officially opened, I think in mid 1995. And around that same time Alex was living on a farm. And that farm was where we were sourcing our subtropical fruits for what we called our forager bar. So we had basically a giant salad bar, but it was all kinds of different fruits and vegetables, many of which were locally foraged. Wow. So it, Alex came in, he, you know, knew about the restaurant and he thought it would be a great place to sell Yba. And shortly thereafter, David became a customer and we met and, and really hit it off. And you know, David is, is such a incredible person.

4 (21m 18s):
I mean, the moment you meet him you really, you know, kind of light up. And at one point, you know, he's like, oh, you should, you should come by my place and we can play some music or something. I was like, oh, that sounds good. When's a good time? And he was like, anytime. I was like, wow, really? Anytime? And he's like, yeah. And when I did go to his house, that's when we first shared Ma Outta the Gor and that's when it really got me, you know, and here is something where it's very intimate, you're sharing. And so, you know, you naturally start having these incredible conversations and dreaming about the future. And, and so, you know, so much of, of how I think about David is just so tied to that.

0 (21m 55s):
All right. So you guys start to form a friendship and David, I mean you and Alex start to really explore turning this into a business. And I guess at a certain point you wanted to formalize it. You, you were like, let's file an LLC and set up a company properly. Tell me about how you even started that process.

3 (22m 16s):
Well that's even a more funny time because the way we first sort of ceremoniously celebrated our relationship was he gave me a silver wampa, which is a bullhorn that's silver plated on top and a drinking vessel for Yara Ma. So he gave me one of those as like a symbol of our friendship and connection. Alex did. Alex did. And that's, that was what I had for a whole year. That was the only thing I, we went on. But when we actually had to go like, get some money, that wasn't enough I think for the bankers. So we, we did come up with agreements, but you know, that was something you gave to someone when you got married or a really special time in your life. And so for him that was the most important thing was symbolizing our connection.

0 (23m 1s):
All right. So David, how did you go about, I mean, presumably you needed money to import the ma you needed money to buy the bags that you would then put the ma in and then labels to label them. I can't imagine it was that much money that you needed to get this started, right? Cuz you were really selling to local shops and

3 (23m 22s):
Yeah, we, we got a $50,000 bank loan locally. How

0 (23m 26s):
Did you get, how did you get $50,000 bank loan?

3 (23m 29s):
Well that's also kind of the funny thing about a small town in relationships, right? Because Alex worked at this Italian restaurant and the owners were friends with like the local bank and they made an introduction and then Alex and I went in there and we told 'em about this whole project. I don't think they got it at all. Yeah. But they liked us enough and they loaned us the money.

0 (23m 49s):
Wow. What kind of collateral did you have? Must Nothing,

3 (23m 53s):
We had no co I mean we had some Lu Vermont, but you know, that's what they first bank San Lu Bipa, that's what they did. They wanted to support local business and I think a lot in a small town comes down to relationship and who you know and do you trust them?

4 (24m 6s):
We had to sign personal guarantees, but there was no nothing to guarantee.

0 (24m 10s):
Yeah. I mean that's kind of a crazy loan to give. I mean, you know, it's an unknown product. There's no market for it. You basically are going to them saying, look, we're gonna create a market in the United States. We're gonna educate people about this product. And if I'm a banker, I'd be like, mm, I'd be kind of skeptical back then. Well

4 (24m 28s):
Part of it too was it was an SBA loan and so the SBA guarantees, you know, I think 90% of the loan. And so it's really kind of like how it's designed to work. Yeah. But with all the banking consolidation that's changed so much now it's all about that's changed, right? The numbers and stats and everything

0 (24m 45s):
Else. Right. Because in the mid nineties there was still a lot more independent banks than there are now.

4 (24m 50s):
Yeah. If I, if I recall the president of the bank was named Reese Davies and he said, you guys remind me of the San Louis Sourdough boys. And that was, and San Louis sourdough had been a big success locally. And so that was it.

0 (25m 4s):
That's amazing. That's amazing.

3 (25m 6s):
And there was another really big element to it. I mean I think we had nine personal credit cards. Maxed Chris and my brother Steven and myself. We got, you remember that time there was that time in the mid nineties they just started sending everyone credit card offers. Yeah. So we just like said yes to the mall and we probably, you know, probably had another couple hundred k just in credit cards on top of the bank loans that we did to like fund the business at that time.

0 (25m 32s):
But initially when you guys got together to start this, David, what do you remember about the ambition? Were you like, we're gonna make this the next coffee, this is gonna be the next massive beverage in the United States? Or was it more like, yeah, let's just see if we can get people to buy it in San Lu Obispo?

3 (25m 51s):
Yeah, no, it was always a really big vision and it's a little humbling to even talk, talk about it now. I mean, I remember convincing my brother to drop out a university in Chico, which is

0 (26m 1s):
Your brother Steven. Yeah.

3 (26m 1s):
To do, which he did. He

0 (26m 3s):
Dropped out of university.

3 (26m 4s):
He was almost done, he had like a half a year left. But he was studying graphic design. I was like, bro, we need you. And he was living in Europe, kind of following my footsteps for six months. And I went out and told him everything that was going on with Alex and shared ma with him and left him with a Gord. And, and then when he got back, he was in,

0 (26m 21s):
You needed a graphic designer for your logo and for your looks.

3 (26m 24s):
Everything cuz we were like a packaging and products and we were doing all that and we couldn't really afford anyone and none of us were taking a salary. So we just needed sweat equity in there. And you know, I remember telling him, I was like, we're gonna be a billion dollar business in five years. You know, like I, I was so, so jacked on this product. Yeah. Like I didn't know anything. I was naive. I just thought it would, would spread it a lot faster. I didn't know anything about distribution or sales or lead time, nothing. I was just like, human nature loves this stuff and it's just gonna be big

0 (26m 54s):
When we come back in just a moment to the Guayaki team spreads the word about Yaba to people who have never heard of it before and why their first big piece of media attention almost kills the company. Stay with us. I'm Guy Roz and you're listening to How I Built This. If you care about things like human rights or the environment or safe working conditions for workers, viable jobs, living wages, you can actually show it with the things you buy. American Giant is a company that really lives its values, its clothing that you can trust. They produce it all in the United States and their products support sustainable jobs and hardworking communities.

0 (27m 37s):
More importantly, their stuff is really great. I've got tons of American giant products. I love their jeans in particular, which I can dress up or dress down or wear them with white sneakers. I can wear them with leather boots. They're super versatile. They last a long, long time and they are super comfortable. Unlike how most clothes are made today, quickly, cheaply, and this profitably is possible for the companies. American Giant clothing is made to last not wear out particularly their classic full zip hoodie. You can shop gifts that last@americangiant.com slash built and get 20% off when you use code built at checkout.

0 (28m 17s):
That's american giant.com/built promo code built. When it comes to audio entertainment, it makes sense to choose Audible. It's a place where you can really let your imagination sort the home for stories told by all sorts of voices. Like Ethan Hawk, Carrie Washington, Kevin Hart, even me, I narrate my own book. How I Built This on Audible. Audible has an incredible selection of audio books across every genre. Plus, as an audible member you can choose one title a month to keep from their entire catalog, including the latest bestsellers and new releases. Members also get full access to a growing selection of included audiobooks, audible originals and podcasts you can download and stream included titles all you want.

0 (29m 5s):
Let Audible help you discover new ways to laugh, be inspired, or be entertained. New members can try it for free for 30 days. Visit audible.com/built or text built to 500 500. That's audible.com/built or text built to 500 500 to try audible free for 30 days. audible.com/built. Hey, welcome back to How I Built this. I'm Guy Raz. So it's the mid 1990s and Gu aqui is starting to take shape as a company.

0 (29m 46s):
Chris has now joined David and Alex and so is David's brother Steven. That accounts for four of the five founding Samia or Seeds of Gu Aqui. The fifth founder goes by Dawn Miguel, although his real name is Michael Newton.

3 (30m 1s):
Michael Newton and I were like, became college buddies. He, he was, he was also studying business but we were just like hanging out surfing and playing music together. Just, just bros. But like he was actually the very first one who started helping out Alex and I even before Stephen and Chris because he actually, he ended up kind of joining as a quote intern and, and helping drive up like the first eight tons a year of a mate from al Los Angeles to slow town in the, in the U-Haul that was rented. And like, you know, having to like move all eight tons himself twice. Cuz this, I mean the classic story do Miguel, he's a workhorse stallion, always positive, you know? And so, you know, he was working with us early on.

0 (30m 41s):
And how did you guys decide who would do what did you say, okay, you're gonna be the ceo, you're gonna be the cmo, you're gonna be this, what do you remember about, about those decisions?

4 (30m 52s):
Well it might be a moment to talk about Alex's transition, David.

3 (30m 56s):
Yeah. Cuz essentially, like I said, we had a partnership there and when he was on a sourcing trip pretty early on might have been like in what, 97

0 (31m 7s):
Back to Argentina. Yeah.

3 (31m 9s):
Cause he's living in, you know, central coast. Right. But he goes back on a sourcing trip and he meets his future wife Florencia and things change for him too. And so now he's kind of like, hey, we're sharing a Gord. It's a very emotional charge moment. So he basically says, give me 10 or 20% of the business and I'll send you the yba. And I'm like, ugh.

0 (31m 31s):
And just to be clear, he was telling you, Alex was saying, I'm moving back to Argentina. Yeah. I can't run this business from here, but I can send you the the mata.

3 (31m 40s):
Yep. And he did.

0 (31m 41s):
Yep. But he was the guy. Yeah, he was the connection to ma he was the Argentine

3 (31m 48s):
And continues to be my soul brother. I mean later introduces me to my wife. I mean he's my, he's like my soul bro. And so of course, what do you do? You love your, your friends and yeah, for me, I never wanted to be just the guy, you know, I, I liked doing things with people and partnerships and friends. And so that was when we shifted up the equity structure and then we distributed the rest of the equity to the four of us based on sort of responsibility that we had.

0 (32m 11s):
So Alex moved to back charge and that's it. He was sort of out of the picture on day-to-day operations

3 (32m 17s):
For the next, you know, three to four years. It was more, he took another job as well. It didn't require that much of his time until we started growing. Right.

4 (32m 26s):
It was one of those things that like it wasn't the right time for it, but ultimately it never would've worked had he not moved down

0 (32m 32s):
There. Yeah. This is a challenging business that you started in 1997. Really? 1996 because you had to introduce a product to a market that 99.9% of people had never heard of. You had to convince them to try it and then you had to hope that they would experience the benefits of it enough to turn this into a sustainable business. But it's one of those products that you can't just like sell to a a natural food store and hope that they're gonna sell it off the shelves. It's the kind of product that you have to demo in a store, give it to people, let them try it.

0 (33m 12s):
So presumably you're doing that in San Lu Obispo at this time.

3 (33m 16s):
Yeah. So that kind of goes back to your original question of sort of how the roles and responsibilities broke out because now there's five of us and Alex is now in South America se and Chris is running the business holding it all together. Do Miguel and Steven and I, the three of us get on the road as like full-time Salo

0 (33m 35s):
And Sabados. Just to clarify, these are, it's like a barista of ma

3 (33m 39s):
Yeah, it's a, it's a traditional term for someone who shares, who prepares and shares the Juba. So we, we are okay. And we, we started doing that in Slow Town in San Lu Bipo at the farmer's market.

0 (33m 51s):
And you were just brewing it tradition, just normally no sugar, no

3 (33m 55s):
Nothing else. Exactly. That was the thing, right? We had a very small percentage of people who could actually drink it cuz we were so hyped on our own Kool-aid. Right. We brewed it so strong in those percolators, those coffee percolators that would drip for like half an hour and then serve it to people at the market. And they would drink like this cowboy latte, like straight and dark and strong.

0 (34m 15s):
The espresso is

3 (34m 17s):
Super strong. Right. And so people felt it and some people were like, not for me. And they'd walk away like 80% of the people, like they'd smell it, I can't do this or too strong or too bitter or too much. But those who did were just like, hell yeah. That was amazing. And so we kind of got that, that whole feeling of it. And we got, we took that show on the road, Stephen and I, my bro went into the north do Miguel went south where he was from Long Beach and did SoCal, Steven and I would go together. We were living in my VW bus. Okay. And Dogo had his truck and he was more on his own. But then the three of us would come together for certain events like, like some of the first festivals that were being started on the West coast. This is back when festival culture really hadn't started yet.

0 (34m 57s):
What kinds of festivals? Like

3 (34m 58s):
Back in the day, like Health and Harmony was like the first one on the west coast. And then there was Coachella and Bonnaroo and then there was all Trinity

4 (35m 8s):
Tribal stop reggae on the river.

0 (35m 11s):
So music was your, that was the tribe that you were going for the people go into the festivals.

3 (35m 15s):
It was kind of what we were into. Yeah. And if you're gonna go to a festival, it was where younger people were and people wanted to stay up late to catch the music and they needed the energy cuz they were dancing. It just fit right in. Yeah. And then Steven and I, after going all the way north and going all the way south, ended up in LA and we're like, oh my God, this is great down here. Everyone was like so into, into health and wellness and so we just like planted ourself into Penga for like a year. But there was something that happened when we were down in LA that's when soy milk started getting popular. Yeah. So we started putting honey and soy milk in the latte and making ma lattes and then like the percentage of like maybe 15, 20% of the people actually trying it and liking it went up to like 50 or more people were like, oh this is great.

3 (36m 1s):
I can drink it instead of my coffee now I can drink a latte latte.

0 (36m 4s):
This is before Whole Foods really blew up. So you were going into mainly independent health food stores, co-op type places?

3 (36m 12s):
Yeah, like the Santa Monica co-op and then the Whole Foods. But also we were at that era when you could actually just still go in and talk to a Whole Foods buyer and get them jazzed on it and they would take it in. So that was how we did it right

4 (36m 23s):
In a store.

0 (36m 24s):
Yeah. You'd walk in with a bag of latte and say what we'd say, can I talk to the

3 (36m 28s):
Buyer? We had the same strategy the whole way along. We said, look, if you let us come in and demo our product, we'll sell you the product on consignment and you can just basically sell whatever you you want. We'll take the rest with us. Well what inevitably happened was it was like a top selling product in their store and they would take us in and then we would basically, while we were on the road, we'd call back to Chris and be like, Hey, send out a few cases to this store. And then we'd ship it via UPS for like the first four years we shipped product out direct to stores via ups.

0 (36m 59s):
I got you. So you would get these big, big sacks of ma you guys would hand package it yourselves?

4 (37m 5s):
You know, at that point we weren't hand packaging, it was being hand packaged. But we were working with this group called The Achievement House out at Questa College and it was a group adults with disabilities. They did all the loose packaging for us. And then we also had a teabag co-packer we worked with who put it in tea bags.

0 (37m 22s):
Right. Cause I imagine that selling loose MA was not gonna go very far because most people are not ma baristas. Right. They don't have the Gord. And so Teabag probably made more sense practically, right?

4 (37m 34s):
For Yeah, for most people. I mean that was definitely, we sold more bags than loose. I think in the natural foods industry. At one point our bags were the number two selling tea and the loose was like number six. So I mean they both did really well relative to that, that market.

0 (37m 51s):
All right, so David, you and your brother and your VW bus and Don Miguel is going down to SoCal. Chris, you're manning the, the headquarters in San Lu Obispo. This would be like 5, 6, 7 years of driving up and down the west coast of the United States setting up demos at any natural food store and trying to get people to try it, right?

3 (38m 15s):
Correct. That was like till 2003. Then we started doing cross country tours. You know, that was when we had to get the bigger vehicles like the, the RVs.

0 (38m 25s):
I can't imagine how, I mean that's a lot of work cuz you're, there's a business to run based in San Lu Obispo and you are on the road. What,

3 (38m 34s):
I mean, we did did some tours that were just eight months long or six months long. We would just go and I think Steven Dol, Miguel and I personally served over 5 million cups of Ma. Wow. Like we spent a lot of time architecting how to get as much yate in people's hands and then that was way easier to scale with cans and bottles as we grew. But in the beginning with loose, it was very challenging and required a lot of preparation and a lot of breakdown. But the advantage was when you serve someone a really strong hot cup of latte or a hot latte latte, it was definitely even a little bit more impactful than just drinking a can. Yep.

0 (39m 11s):
But to do that person by person, by person by person is very hard. It wasn't like you had a 40 million marketing budget to take out billboards in Times Square and every bus in Los Angeles, you couldn't scale this thing. It was like, you know, one at a time. That's a lot of work.

3 (39m 28s):
You're right. It was a ton of work. And most people would never do that. They wouldn't live in vehicles for all those years. They wouldn't get along the relationships. I mean all those things. But the Monte was always just so much about bringing us together and bigger than any one of us. We actually had a lot of fun. I mean it was a blast.

0 (39m 45s):
I mean you never, but this is my question David. I, you know, I think anyone at the beginning of their career, it's a grind. But you are doing this for a long time. You never got down, you never felt like, God, this isn't taking off as much as I had expected or as quickly as I expected it to.

3 (39m 60s):
Well I definitely felt that. I definitely was like, thought I would take off a lot

0 (40m 4s):
Quicker. And that wasn't demoralizing. It didn't get you down.

3 (40m 7s):
It was never a grind.

0 (40m 8s):
That's amazing. How, how

3 (40m 10s):
I loved everyone I worked with and we loved getting together. And when we got together and shared a Gord, you know, it kind of got to the point where it didn't matter how big or how fast, what mattered was like survive until you thrive.

0 (40m 26s):
Chris, you are in San Lu Obispo, you see the numbers, you know, we're talking 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 for five that it's, it's not profitable. Or you as optimistic as David and and those guys? Or were you like, yeah, this is awesome or were you ever stressed you had a kid?

4 (40m 42s):
Yeah, well I think a big part of my role is balance as well. And the way that I looked at it was like, this is gonna happen but we don't know how long it's gonna take. Wow. So let's try and build structure that can last a long time. And so, you know, if you go back to, as David mentioned, we, we got an SBA loan, we got a second SBA loan in 98 maybe, and then like a 200 K SBA loan in like 2000. So maybe that was a total of like, you know, three 50. So we didn't have any equity that we had sold or anything. And so we really were like, we really want to be super frugal and like do this in the right way so we don't have this outside pressure trying to drive us.

4 (41m 22s):
And if it takes 25 years or if it takes 50

3 (41m 25s):
Years

4 (41m 26s):
Or it takes a hundred years,

0 (41m 28s):
I love that out. No, I, I love that. I love that you had that patience and that and that optimism. I love that. But not everybody would stick with it and the business would not become profitable I think until 2011. So you're talking about 13 years of unprofitability for a consumer brand for a drink. I can't imagine that's not scary at certain times.

4 (41m 53s):
So we, you know, we were profitable early on because we weren't paying ourselves. We were, you know, basically just covering expenses and and whatnot. And we were shipping via ups, you know, we weren't making much, but we were sustaining ourselves when it started to change was then all of a sudden it's like, okay, now we've got a national footprint. We need to bring in the national sales manager and now we need a broker network and now we need a distributor. And you start seeing, you know, all those costs add up. And so you're right from like probably 2004 to 2011, we weren't profitable but we were always close, you know. And so what we did was we started bringing in equity capital, but always from friends and families or angel investors. And so I, I ended up spending a lot of my time over that period of time raising money because we never went out and said we're gonna raise 5 million.

4 (42m 38s):
It was like, okay, let's raise 250 K, let's raise another 500. And that way we were able to, you know, minimize the dilution, bring in the right, you know, those smaller numbers. You can really find people that are really believe in the mission and vision and we'll stay with you long term. And many of them are still investors to this day.

0 (42m 55s):
What about media attention? I mean how, you know, part of this is you can explain to people what MA is just word of mouth, but that's not enough. This is a very specialized product, especially in 2001, 2, 3, 4, 5 when you're starting out where you trying to reach out to press to get them to write about it.

4 (43m 16s):
We did have a big media success in 2003 that actually led to our first near death experience.

0 (43m 21s):
What

4 (43m 22s):
Happened? So we, we were on the cover of this magazine called Women's World that was on, you know, at the check stand of every grocery store across America. And it said South America's secret weight loss tea. Oh wow. Because Yuba Monte's known to suppress appetite. And so it's used in a lot of weight loss pills in Europe. And so it, that headline came, we didn't know about it. All of a sudden we just started getting calls and we started getting orders and I remember it was like September and you know, our sales doubled from the previous month in October they tripled from the month before that. Wow. November they tripled again and then all of a sudden December they stopped and then January we got nothing.

4 (44m 2s):
February we got nothing and we had this like, oh shit moment. Like what is going on? Yeah. And what we found out was it was like a weekly, so it was out for a week or two weeks and then the next thing came on. So everyone wanted it, but for a very short period of time. And the whole infrastructure, the retailers were ordering it, so distributors were ordering it and then we were making it. But by the time the retailers didn't need it anymore, there's such a lag that we didn't know. And so there was a glut of inventory and that's why we weren't getting sales for those next few months.

3 (44m 33s):
But the other thing was they bought it all on consignment. I took the calls like from Vitamin Shop and GNC I think it was. And I was like, oh my God, this is amazing, exciting. You know, you say yes and you're like cool sign the document. But it was consignment.

4 (44m 45s):
I think only GNC was. Yeah.

3 (44m 47s):
But a lot of it came back.

4 (44m 49s):
And the second irony to that was we had a major cash crunch, but we had a second piece of PR as well. And David ended up being on the cover of Money Magazine at this point. Wow. Talking about how successful we were and how great everything was going.

0 (45m 2s):
You were on the cover of Money Magazine? Yeah. When was this?

3 (45m 6s):
It was like right after it. And that was kind of embarrassing too because Money Magazine was not a big deal to me. I, in fact, I was kind of against like a lot of like just traditional corporate behavior. But it was an article on Social impact. Okay. It was me and a few other people. Anyway that led to our first significant investment that actually came in at the right time.

4 (45m 27s):
One thing I just want to reference is we actually did not lay anyone off through that experience. And I bring it up only because it was, it was a big decision and it was kind of formative to how we grew. We decided that everyone would take a pay cut rather than lay people off. And so the Sams, we took the biggest pay cut, but everyone took a pay cut.

0 (45m 46s):
How many people were working for the company at that point?

4 (45m 48s):
I think we had about 15 or 20 at that point.

0 (45m 51s):
And when you were on the cover of, of Money Magazine, David, I mean you guys were maybe three, 4 million company, you were pretty small.

3 (45m 58s):
I think that was about right.

4 (45m 59s):
Yeah, yeah,

0 (46m 1s):
Yeah. All right. 2005, a couple things happened that year. You move your operations to Sebastopol California, which is where I think your main headquarters, one of your headquarters is still located.

4 (46m 13s):
And by this point, David was in British Columbia cuz he fell in love as well.

0 (46m 17s):
So you moved up to British Columbia? Yeah. Wow. Okay. And that year you start to sell bottled Ma and you brought on a new head of sales who had worked for Coca-Cola, a guy named Pierre Ferrari. So a lot going on that year.

4 (46m 34s):
Well, to rewind a little bit at a Pioneer's conference before that I had met Ben Cohen from Ben and Jerry's.

0 (46m 41s):
Oh

4 (46m 41s):
Yeah. And gave him a sample and apparently he tried it on the plane and hated it. But he was impressed enough with our business model that he had one of his people reach out to us. And it turned out when they sold to Unilever, they created two small venture funds, two 5 million funds, one run by Pierre Ferrari called Hot Fudge and One Run by Chuck Lacey called Bar Rock. And so they were both our first bigger investor, bigger meaning they have each invested like $150,000. Yeah. And they were both on our board. And so that's how we got to know Pierre. And so he had previously been the head of marketing for Coca-Cola, but he was also very much into, you know, social justice and was invested in a lot of different interesting companies doing fair trade clothing and and whatnot.

4 (47m 24s):
So it was a real natural fit for us.

0 (47m 26s):
Yeah. Cuz you were a fair trade company from the get go.

4 (47m 29s):
So when we started Fair Trade wasn't really a

0 (47m 32s):
A thing. Yeah.

4 (47m 33s):
A thing. Yeah. But in spirit, the whole idea was that because Monte natively grows in the rainforest, we can use it as an economic driver to steward and restore Rainforest and be able to partner with the communities that live and rely on that forest. But from the beginning, that was the way that we operated. And so as Fair Trade became, you know, a more legal entity, we, that's something that we've got very involved with and very committed to,

0 (47m 56s):
I guess important to mention that like something like 90% of the ma grown is controlled by like three or four big companies in our in Argentina. Right.

4 (48m 3s):
So I think the growing is a little more complex than that, but it's a very consolidated

0 (48m 8s):
And as a result most of it is, is not grown in a sustainable way. Is that fair to say?

4 (48m 14s):
Yeah. It's, it's, it's like, you know, virtually all sun grown ma and any shade grown ma that exists tends to get blended in with the sun grown Ma. So it's all essentially sun grown Ma

0 (48m 25s):
And you wanted to just sell Shade grown mate.

4 (48m 29s):
Yeah. Our belief not only because we felt like the highest quality latte came from the rainforest, but just intuitively because that's where it natively grows. And it also is the, you know, what makes the whole business model work, we call our business model market driven regeneration. And the idea is that through the market, ie customers, people believing in our product, they will purchase a product that then drives the growers to be able to regenerate forest, be able to store it and store the forest they have. So is this whole market driven regeneration concept, so it relies on rainforest latte,

0 (49m 1s):
Right? 2005 that year you also start to bottle ma and sell it in glass bottles presumably because, I mean this is kind of the beginning I think of like the natural tea boom right? There had been Snapple in the eighties and nineties and Arizona ice tea. But this is like, you're starting to see tea on the shelves at this time. You're starting to see like unsweetened teas and so was the, was the thinking like this is the only way to grow?

4 (49m 31s):
Yeah, for sure. I mean there's a combination of things. One is with the loose and bag market, we realize just in the United States, it's just a pretty small market. You know, statistically in the United States it's like 75 or 85% of tea is consumed cold plus David and Steven and do, Miguel had spent so much time making ma lattes and making latte tastes so good. People loved it, but they would always say, we can't make it the way you make it. And so we felt with a ready to drink, it gave us the opportunity to make it the way we wanted to make it and then be able to share it much more broadly. Yeah.

3 (50m 2s):
The one other thing to add, after we had that really crazy cash crunch situation of having our sales really decline through our classically our strong months, like the fall, winter in spring when it was cooler out and people would drink hot beverage and now we're entering like the desert, the dry season, right. Hot weather. So Chris and I and Alex and crew at that point where it's like we gotta come out with something cold. We need to be a four season business. And because we had the relationships and natural foods and because it wasn't that big of a stretch to find like a bottle or produce a hundred thousand bottles and put 'em in the stores where we thought they would do well, where we had a customer base is kind of how we started that business.

0 (50m 48s):
And at the time it was glass bottles and you were insistent on, cuz glass bottles are clearly recyclable and no matter what anybody says, plastic is not recycled. Like 90% of plastic in the US is not recycled. Glass is very recyclable, but it's heavy and it breaks and it's riskier. It costs more to ship, which is why so many beverages are in plastic bottles. Did you at all consider plastic?

4 (51m 14s):
I think in the beginning we didn't consider plastic at all. Partly for the environmental reason and partly just because we felt like from a health standpoint, you know, the plastic, you kind of get the leaching effect and whatever. Yeah. And the cleanest way to drink something would be out of glass. Flash forward a couple years when we were, you know, looking at how do we expand our reach And we did consider plastic at that point, but ultimately decided plastic didn't make sense for us and we opted to go with aluminum cans because we felt like it's the best out of those three containers because it's so energy efficient to recycle. Flash forward five, 10 years and everything's in cans now.

0 (51m 49s):
Yeah. Okay. Here's the thing, making a drink, it's gr a great idea, but then getting it into the hands of consumers is another thing. From what I understand, if you're not in convenience stores, it's really hard to scale it like you've gotta be in, in the corner shops, right? You can't just be in Whole Foods. You can maybe be a eight, 9 million business if you're in every Whole Foods, but beyond that it's really hard.

3 (52m 14s):
Yeah. That that was our experience.

4 (52m 16s):
Yeah. So, so for the first really year and a half, two years, it was just natural foods. Yeah. And so I think to your question, guy about convenience, that was kind of the next area and we knew to do that we were gonna need a direct store distribution of dsd and at our size it was gonna need to probably be a, a mom and pop type of operation. And so we reached out to people in our network that we knew, and in particular Blaine and Seth from honesty were really helpful and they introduced us to a couple of their early distributors. One was literally one, a one person show based out of Berkeley. And so that was our very first distributor and we just started going up and down the street and selling in to stores right around uc, Berkeley.

4 (52m 56s):
And then we got a second distributor that was up in this area and then we added one in Pacific Northwest and kind just went like that.

0 (53m 3s):
Yeah, I mean I'm curious, were you surprised at how challenging that whole thing was? Because you can get a distributor, but some of them are very small and then you don't necessarily have control over where they're placed in the shelves. Is that what you discovered?

4 (53m 19s):
Yeah, I think you're such a small fish in that pond. Yeah. Just getting space on the truck is hard. Getting a, from the root sales peoples really hard because every month you have companies coming in and just laying huge stacks of cash on the table and saying, you know, every account you get we're gonna pay you a hundred bucks. And that was never the way we operated. And you know, kind of a funny related story. One time our LA distributor, I wasn't doing the presentation, but the person on our team that did it, they had to follow Body Armor and Body Armor brought in their new investor Kobe Bryant. Yeah. And so that was just the constant challenge because there was so much money in the industry and people were paying to get the placement and we wanted to really make sure we earned it.

4 (53m 59s):
Yeah. But one other thing is, you know, we also had this insight that, and I think Pierre actually came up with this, was that we could either be a gentle reign, meaning that we can spend a little bit of money in market nationally, or we can create thunderstorms. And the idea was like, let's focus really tightly geography so that we can really make an impact. And so that's what we decided to do. We put all of our money into sampling and everything in the west coast so that we could really have an impact there and, and people felt us.

0 (54m 29s):
I'm curious about a moment in the company's history, 2009, from what I understand, the brand is available, the bottles still, you're not quite yet in cans, but you're in 6,000 stores, so it sounds like a lot, you're reporting about $10 million in annual sales. So you've been, you've been around since 1996, so what, 13 years later? Yeah. You're still a very, at this point, a tiny company or small business, you were still losing money. Was this a kind of a, an inflection point? Was there any moment where you are thinking maybe we won't be sustainable, Chris?

4 (55m 2s):
So there were always worries. I, for years, I mean was managing cash so tightly. I mean we would certainly, David, Steven and I missed payroll, you know, more times than we would like to admit. And at the same point, you know, we saw friends companies that were, you know, just hockey sticking and it was like, wait, we're getting left behind. But there was never a long-term concern. It was always just short-term like, okay, how are we gonna get through this valley? How are we gonna get, you know, to the next peak? How are we gonna make this work? We joked every year, this is gonna be the year of the yba, this is the year, next year's, the year of the Yurba.

0 (55m 39s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Chris, David and the team finally make it work and why they decide to start a second massive venture building their own distribution company. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This

5 (55m 59s):
Is this thing on Check 1, 2, 1 2. Hey y'all, I'm Kiki Palmer. I'm an actress, a singer, an entrepreneur, and a Virgo, just the name of you. Now I've held so many occupations over the years that my fans lovely nickname me, Kiki, keep a bag Palmer. And trust me, I keep a bag love, but if you ask me, I'm just getting started and there's so much I still want to do. So I decided I wanna be a podcast host. I'm proud to introduce you to the baby. This is Kiki Palmer podcast exclusively on Amazon music. I'm putting my friends, family and some of the dopest experts in the hot seat to ask them the questions that have been burning in my mind. What would former child stars be if they weren't actors? What happened to sitcoms? It's only fans only that I wanna know, so I asked my mom about it.

5 (56m 42s):
These are the questions that keep me up at night, but I'm taking these questions outta my head and I'm bringing them to you because on Baby, this is Kiki Palmer. No topic is off limits. Listen to baby, this is Kiki Palmer, exclusively on Amazon Music with your prime membership. Download the Amazon Music app today.

6 (56m 59s):
Thank your job stinks. Just wait until you hear what it was like to be a funeral clown. Long before all of human knowledge was in your pocket. People had some pretty bizarre professions. Luckily you don't have to see a sin eater or a barber surgeon now, but you'll find out what it's like to get surgery with a shave

7 (57m 17s):
Wonder. He's new podcast. This job is history is hosted by Chris Parnell from Saturday Night Live and Rick and Mory steeped in factual history. This brilliantly funny podcast delves into quirky and absurd jobs from the past with hilarious interviews that are infused with fascinatingly true Easter eggs.

6 (57m 34s):
Come get weird with us each week as improv comedians from Groundlings and UCB act out their old fashioned gig from another time. You'll be glad your guidance counselor didn't recommend any of these jobs.

7 (57m 45s):
Clock in and follow this job is history. Wherever you get your podcasts, you can listen ad free on the Amazon Music or Wondery app.

0 (58m 3s):
Hey, welcome back to how I Built This. I'm Guy Rise, so it's 2009. And Chris, David and the rest of the crew have been grinding for over a decade. Goki has yet to really take off, but they aren't even thinking about giving up. Although it's clear some of their competitors in the beverage space seem to expect that they will.

4 (58m 25s):
You know, I was getting a lot of calls in like oh 4, 0 5, 0 6 from people that wanted to buy GU a key. And some of them what they said was, you know, we just know that about seven years people get tired and we're looking for a deal. Like we're hoping that you guys are kind of burned out and, and we can grab it. But then in very end of 2005, it's almost like 2006 we launched the beverage and it was almost like we were a startup now. And so it was really much like a second wind. So if you think about being in 2009, in a way we're only like two or three years in on the beverage business at that point, but we knew that we needed to reach more people. So our thought was we wanted to come up with a product that had a more simple flavor profile that would really resonate with a wider audience and that we could then go more into convenience and really be able to grow.

4 (59m 12s):
And so we did raise a little bit of capital again and at the end of 2009 is when we formulated the ation in the can, did a test launch in San Diego and then later in 10 we came up with the other two. The the rebel berry and the Enlightenment.

3 (59m 27s):
Think about everything was, it's been such a long journey, everything was relative. Like it took so much energy and time to like make ma lattes on the road and there's honey stuck on the floor and on your clothes and like plants and like, yeah. And then all of a sudden we have bottles and they're like, great, they're, they're awesome. They can't quite scale, but now people can actually drink it just by cracking it open. It was this whole like, oh my gosh. And that was exciting. But when the cans hit, it was a whole nother thing, right? It was like another generation of consumers, all of a sudden young people could use this product in place of all the other canned drinks and now are starting to build like around 2011.

3 (1h 0m 8s):
So it was a whole renewed sense of like optimism and like, wow, okay, this product can do it.

0 (1h 0m 14s):
Did, did you Chris, at any point in the the period where you weren't profitable and you had outside companies coming to you, and I'm sure they were saying guys, I mean Coca-Cola about honesty, right? There's all this consolidation happening. I'm sure you were getting the same pitches, like you're just not gonna make it as an independent company, you've gotta be with a bigger player, but we'll respect your values and you guys can run it just as you wanna run it and we'll put a, an infusion of cash in that never ever sounded tempting at all.

4 (1h 0m 42s):
No, and and I think, you know, something maybe I didn't highlight before in talking about, you know, what also motivated us is for us it was never about the money, it was about the mission. And at the same point we very much felt a responsibility to the growers. Yeah. Because, you know, they were relying on us and, and especially as we did grow and were buying more and more latte from them, you know, if we partnered with another company, they weren't gonna get it. The press releases are always so positive and then a year or two later at most the founders are out and, and the company's doing different things. And in fact I was on a number of panels at different like investment conferences and stuff where I always represented because when we raised money, we raised it with no exit strategy.

4 (1h 1m 23s):
And typically that's the first question an investor has is, well how am I gonna get my money back? And we would say, we're not sure, we're not ruling out selling, but it's not something we're focused on. We really want to grow this for the long haul. But we just felt like that was a much more sustainable business for us and it allowed us to grow slower and kind of figure things out. Had we grown fast outta the gate, we wouldn't have figured out the bottle or the can, we wouldn't have had those products. We probably would be owned by someone already. Because it seems like the faster you grow, the faster you kind of hit that plateau. Whereas if you can grow slower, you can really find your market and not buy your market.

3 (1h 1m 57s):
And we wanted to create a legacy business that was alive and thriving beyond us. That doesn't preclude us from going public. It doesn't preclude us from partnerships, it doesn't cruise from anything, but it does mean that we need to partner with the right people at the right times and make the right moves. And it's interesting that like you, you referenced honesty, which has just been announced by Coca-Cola, that it's gonna be discontinued by the end of 2022. So that brand is no longer a legacy business. It'll be a tombstone and it's like, okay, it was a good run and that's great. But we see beyond that, all of us have come together for reasons that we felt like the, the current paradigm of business and capitalism isn't serving people the way it needs to be served.

3 (1h 2m 39s):
It could be done better with more interest than just the stakeholders or just the people that own the stock. And so that's really the driving force behind a lot of our decision making.

0 (1h 2m 49s):
Hmm. All right. So in 2010 right, you've got the cans out into the world and by 2011 you actually have your first, I think your first profitable year 15 million in revenue. Yeah. And then a few years later you do something that I think is really interesting cuz I almost never heard of this. You essentially decide to create your own distribution company and before we get to how you did it and what you did right, help me understand why you even started to think about doing something like that.

4 (1h 3m 18s):
And around 2014, we weren't national and we were at the stage of growth where, you know, we were approached by the big beverage companies and could have been on those beverage trucks. And had we done that, we probably would be two or three times bigger than we are now. But we also might be that size and getting canceled, you know, or we might be not involved. It might be a product that we didn't, don't feel good about. And so at the time we thought, what are other options? You know, we could build out this third party network with a whole range of independents, but we knew a lot of people that had done that and it's, you know, you have like 200 distributors and you know, hundreds of employees and it's just so much to manage and no one cares about your product as much as you do. Yeah. And so we thought, why don't we try it ourselves and see how it goes.

3 (1h 4m 1s):
And the other big appeal beyond what Chris just shared, you know, sort of the lack of control of destiny was more the potential control of destiny with our own vehicles. In other words, we wanted to have the energy of our brand translate through our drivers and the, in the relationships that would occur at the store level and have way more visibility into that relationship. Like okay, you have a great relationship, maybe you can get a cooler in there. You have much more reporting over what's happening at the flow through and a much closer connection to the retailer and then ultimately the customer. Cuz we kind of, we always had that vision of like seed to shelf, like all the way from the Iba Monte tree to the shelf ultimately would be a great way to steward the product all the way through.

0 (1h 4m 48s):
Well let me ask you quick question before we get there. I mean, let's say you did partner with a large, a distributor basically is a company that has the trucks that you load your product on and then they drive it to the store and then they put it on the shelves of the store. If a big company came to you and said, Hey, we wanna distribute your product, what, how would that affect your values? I mean you say now that you might have been even bigger than you are now, had you done that deal, but how would that have been a compromise?

4 (1h 5m 14s):
More so a compromise from a business standpoint, I feel, because you know, if you go with one of the three big companies, you're with that company, they make their money off of carbonated soft drinks. Yeah. And that's, that's what dominates the shelf. That's what dominates the truck. If you're Coca-Cola and you own Coke and you own Diet Coke, your margin on that is through the roof. And so there's a limited room for other products on those trucks and they have to really perform. But a lot of times when you're building something, it doesn't perform out of the gate. It takes time to build it. You know, I think we have seen that with other companies when they've been acquired by one of those companies and they get on those trucks and they just can't meet the volume thresholds because it takes time to build and, and so then you start trying to discount and move quickly.

4 (1h 5m 58s):
And that's where it really changes the way the business is run.

0 (1h 6m 2s):
All right, so 2017 you guys decide we're gonna build our own distribution network. What literally does that mean? Does that mean you have to buy your own trucks, hire your own drivers? Because that's a different company, that's a logistics company. Did you essentially have to start a brand new company?

3 (1h 6m 20s):
Yeah, it was a new company that

4 (1h 6m 21s):
Was started. And to be fair, it's not David and I that built that network. We started a separate company in LLC out of Jacksonville, Florida with a separate team that ran it and built it. And from the beginning the idea wasn't for to necessarily be a national distributor, it was to fill in all the gaps where we weren't. Because there's a lot of places in the, in the country where there aren't good third party options. It's either gonna be, you know, one of the big three or like an Anheuser bush.

0 (1h 6m 47s):
So, alright, over the next, I think two years you started to buy Chevy Bolts, this was gonna be your fleet. Great. Electric cars, very small.

4 (1h 6m 56s):
Yeah.

0 (1h 6m 56s):
Eventually you buy 300 of these Chevy, I think you're the biggest customer of Chevy Bolts in America. First of all, how do you fit enough product in a Chevy Bolt to get it to enough stores?

4 (1h 7m 9s):
Well, Cooley, after a year they developed one based on our feedback. And so they took the backseats out, put additional suspension in, had a cage. But our model was very modular and because we started out going after markets where, you know, that were new markets for us, where we were in natural food stores, but we didn't have any convenience distribution. It was very small, small scale to start with. And so it was just starting from scratch, basically knocking on doors, opening accounts, making it happen. And so, you know, a small vehicle that could hold 60 cases was sufficient in those areas. You know, in Wyoming we might only have one vehicle, for instance, one person, one vehicle. But as the model shifted and we started taking over more distribution ship, and as the sales grew, then that obviously became a huge limit.

4 (1h 7m 55s):
Our belief was that, you know, within two years there would be electric vans and trucks and there

0 (1h 7m 60s):
Aren't. Right. With this distribution system, now that you start in 2017, first of all, how did you finance it? I mean, 300 vehicles and 300 drivers and a team to manage that and you know, know, how did you finance that?

4 (1h 8m 17s):
When we started it, we were able to sell finance because we just started, you know, I think our first market might have been Jacksonville and that was, you know, maybe three or four cars. We leased three or four people. And then, you know, as we started adding markets at a certain point it outgrew our ability to fund that cash flow. And so we needed to raise some capital. So 2019 and end of 18 into 19, I think we raised about 30 million. And most all of that went to all of that went to distribution. That was purely a hundred percent distribution.

0 (1h 8m 48s):
All right. Here's a question and, and I think it's a fair question to ask because you are focused on restoring parts of the rainforest. I know you're very committed to trying to finance the restoration of like 2 million acres of the rainforest. But you know, how do you guarantee, given that you're not in Argentina or Paraguay or you know, or Brazil, how do you make sure that's the case? How do you make sure that the farm workers are treated well? I mean, because your values are so aligned and so tied to to that idea, how do you make sure that you're not getting the, the wool pulled over in your own eyes?

3 (1h 9m 22s):
Yeah, well, I mean that is what our South American team focuses on. We have, you know, dozens of people down there on the ground in each country park. Why Argentina and Brazil working with the communities that we source from, like, there's no broker. And that's probably one of the biggest distinguishing factors between Guke and other businesses. Like these are relationships that people have cultivated over more than two decades now.

4 (1h 9m 45s):
And to your point, guy, I mean we have, we have uncovered a lot over these years because we've always invested in having a team down there. And I mean, we had an example where we were paying a cooperative who had a number of growers and it turned out that the cooperative wasn't paying the actual growers, but the growers thought that we weren't paying them. So then our team had to go grower by grower and connect with them, explain what happened, carry cash through the countryside and actually pay cash to ensure that this was happening. And so building that team down there is critical. We have offices in Parky, Brazil, and Argentina, and we have a full processing facility as well in Brazil.

0 (1h 10m 25s):
I'm curious about the five founders who are still actively engaged in the business. You're all distributed, you all live in different places, right?

4 (1h 10m 31s):
Stephen and I are both in Sevastopol, but yeah, everyone else is somewhere in a different place.

0 (1h 10m 37s):
And how, how do you guys make that work? Do you get together regularly, quarterly?

3 (1h 10m 41s):
Yeah, we always have. That's been part of the beauty.

0 (1h 10m 44s):
How, how often?

3 (1h 10m 46s):
Oh, we're together several times a year, somehow usually around surf trips or, or work gatherings.

4 (1h 10m 51s):
I mean, I think for, you know, a lot of it, it would, it would probably be, you know, 10 times a year. Obviously during c that's changed a bit, but we all travel and we meet where we are. But the other factor is that some of us have always been apart throughout the whole journey just because the nature of being on the road. And so we've, we've gotten really good at just communicating and just because we're so connected to the, the mission and vision, you know, even when there's times when we haven't spoken, when we get back together about something that we haven't talked about, like 99% of the time we're completely aligned on it.

0 (1h 11m 21s):
How many employees do you have now?

4 (1h 11m 23s):
I think somewhere around four 50.

0 (1h 11m 25s):
And that includes the, the distributors?

4 (1h 11m 27s):
Yeah, the, the majority of that would be the distribution business.

0 (1h 11m 30s):
David, you mentioned earlier that you know, this can be a billion dollar business one day. Mata as a whole, from what I understand, is closer to a 300 million global business and that includes all mata around the world sold. And you guys now are about a third of that. How big can this grow?

3 (1h 11m 49s):
Well, I think it can, it can grow to be any size that a beverage company could grow to be, and it really comes down more to execution than anything. And you know, if anything, I have more faith in that than I ever had before, especially because we're, we're part of really driving forward this regenerative movement. We want all kinds of businesses that are stewarding, you know, the planet and taking care of people. We want those kind of businesses to be successful to do just that.

4 (1h 12m 19s):
And I think for us, you know, we had a big reset in 2020. You know, covid hit us hard and it was a moment for us to reflect and say, you know, what do we really want? Do we sell the company at this point? Do we want to bring in other partners? What do we want to do? And I think David, Alex and I were like, we do feel like we need to bring in the expertise to be able to take this to the next level because we, you know, we got to a hundred million without Costco, Walmart, Amazon, any of those big retailers that are usually a big part of it and think we're just engaging with them now, you know, as we hit like one 50 or so. Wow.

0 (1h 12m 50s):
So you're not in Costco or Walmart or any of those places yet?

4 (1h 12m 53s):
We, we just, I think we just started in Costco this year.

0 (1h 12m 57s):
I'm wondering, I mean as you now approach 150 million in revenue and start to get to the bigger stores like Costco and Walmart, you're obviously likely to grow more and more. You're not ruling out selling your company one day, but it's not something that you can imagine anytime soon.

4 (1h 13m 15s):
Yeah, and, and two, I think going back to the scale conversation, you know, one of our competitors is owned by Pepsi and they're on the Pepsi trucks and they have unlimited distribution, but it's not really working. And I think it's because it's, it's just premature, you know, the market's not ready, there's not enough customers that know about it. So I, I think for us, we can make the decision that feels like it's right for the brand over the long haul. And so if that means going public, then, then that's a path. If it means partnering with a bigger company, then that's a path as well. But there's nothing on, on our agenda currently.

0 (1h 13m 46s):
Hmm. When you think about the journey you took, I mean this is basically a company that started in 19 96, 97, took a long, long time to reach 10, 15 million in revenue, you know, 13, 14 years and now you are where you are easily the biggest miba ma brand in the United States, one of the biggest in the world. This has not been easy path and I, I understand that you've enjoyed pretty much every minute of it. I think that's amazing, but it doesn't take away the fact that it was hard. How much of that do you think has to just do with the hard work you put in the years of driving door to door, the setups of making millions of cups of latte, what you did and how much do you think has to do with just getting lucky, you know, the natural foods business and industry kind of coming up and Whole Foods expanding and people becoming more aware of natural foods.

0 (1h 14m 36s):
What do you, what do you think?

4 (1h 14m 38s):
So I'm a incredibly grateful person and so I could easily say it's all luck. I think luck is more of the accelerant and it's the, the work that I think links those lucky moments. And in some cases the luck maybe saves your life as well. In one way. It's lucky that I, that I met David, Alex, and Miguel and Steven, but I, I'm humbled by what we've been able to create and what we have yet to create. And I know that luck definitely plays a big part of it.

0 (1h 15m 8s):
David.

3 (1h 15m 9s):
Well I think you make your own luck. Okay? Like you can't really look back and say how it would've been different. But I feel like we made our own luck by really investing in connection and relationships. We tried to do right by people we worked with. Whether it was the achievement house, you know, the adults with disabilities at first packaged our loose mata and tea teabag or like showing up at a store and like connecting with the store buyers or the front ends and like really making someone an incredible ma latte like the relationships that Chris and Steven and do, Miguel and Alex and I will have with each other. Like all of that is very meaningful and profound is their luck. Well sure we've survived until we thrive.

3 (1h 15m 50s):
We're still doing it. We were like on the bleeding edge for most of my career and now I just say we're on the right side of history.

0 (1h 15m 59s):
That's David Carr and Chris man, two of the five co-founders of Gu Yaki Ibama. By the way, that VW bus that David and his brother Steven drove up and down the west coast way back when they first started serving Ma. It actually has a name, it's called Danny Stephen painted the side of the bus with images of the rainforest. And mate, go above the message honk if you pack 'em. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you enjoy our show and wanna show your support, please help us spread the word, tell a friend about how I built this or send out a message on social media. If you wanna contact the team, our email address is h I t id.wondery.com.

0 (1h 16m 40s):
If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built This and mine is at Guy Roz and on Instagram. We're at How I Built This and I'm at Guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by Alex Chung with music composed by Era Louie. It was edited by Casey Herman with research help from Josh Lash and Catherine Seifer. Our production staff also includes NIFA Grant, JC Howard, Sam Paulson, Liz Metzker, Carrie Thompson, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, and Carla Ez. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey Prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music.

0 (1h 17m 24s):
Download the Amazon Music app today, or you can listen early and add free with Wondery plus an Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey. The world's greatest sporting event only rolls around every four years. And every four years everyone becomes a soccer fan. That's right. Billions of eyes are about to fall upon 32 nations battling it out for soccer supremacy and the Men in Blazers podcast will once again be your guide to every incredible goal, every heartbreaking defeat in every moment of human triumph.

0 (1h 18m 10s):
This is America's number one soccer podcast, bringing you expert analysis of every US men's national team game, and exclusive interviews from a slew of athletes and celebrity guests all month long. This is what the world will be talking about. Follow men and blazers wherever you get your podcasts. You can listen ad free on the Amazon Music or Wondery app.