0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this Early and Ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

‎Embedded Podcast (9s):
What if the greatest tragedy of your life was just covered up? I have never seen any, anything like that before or after. This is the story of the worst Marine on Marine friendly fire in modern history. A story kept from the public. It's like, what did y'all have to hide? Listen to NPRs Embedded podcast and its latest series taking cover.

0 (29s):
Hey, it's guy here. You know, we hear a lot of stories on how I built this about facing hurdles, overcoming obstacles, and being told no again and again and again. I recently talked with Country Music superstar, Shania Twain, and she shared some pretty candid and surprising insights on how she is a female performer from Canada had to make some pretty bold moves to break into the male dominated world of country music in Nashville. You should definitely check out my interview with Shania Twain on my other podcast, the Great Creators just search for the great creators with Guy Raz, wherever you listen to podcasts. And now onto today's show.

4 (1m 16s):
I literally would call and be like, hi, I have an ice cream idea. I was wondering if I could pay you to use your equipment.

0 (1m 23s):
Did you tell him what kind of ice cream it was?

4 (1m 25s):
No. No. And so I show up like a couple days later with my little recipe and my ingredients that I bought from Smart and Final. And he's like, so what are you making? And I'm like, proudly. Like I'm making the first all natural healthy ice cream. And he just looks at me and is like, oh, so it's not weed.

0 (1m 44s):
He thought you were gonna make weed ice cream. Yes. Which of course it's California, so Southern California. That's

4 (1m 51s):
Right. He was just so sad about that. He was really hoping I was making weed ice cream. I broke his heart.

0 (2m 5s):
Welcome to How I Built this, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz, and on the show today how Justin Wolverton blended Egg Yolk Stevia and Fruit in his Cuisinart and grew that into Halo Top, A frozen dessert that raised the bar for low calorie ice cream. In 2017, an obscure brand of ice cream seemed to come out of nowhere to become the best selling pint in America that year.

0 (2m 45s):
Halo Tops sold more pints of ice cream than giants like Ben and Jerry's and Haas's. Just five years earlier, Justin Wolverton debuted his ice cream in one grocery store in Los Angeles. At the time, Justin was a frustrated lawyer in LA who was trying his hand at standup comedy and screenwriting on the side. Anything to get his mind off the tedium of document review. What made Halo Top go viral, as you will hear, was a combination of things, timing, branding, and a lot of luck. But the most important reason was that Halo Top, at least at the time, was different.

0 (3m 26s):
It had higher protein, less sugar, and fewer calories, about a third as many calories as the other premium brands. And all of a sudden, celebrities fitness freaks and aspiring dieters were posting videos of themselves eating it by the pint load. But of course, as it's often the case, what goes up must come down. And Halo Top did eventually lose its place as the top seller. But Justin turned the brand into a significant player and in 2019 he sold Halo Top for an undisclosed amount of cash. Now, the idea for making ice cream didn't actually start out as a business proposition.

0 (4m 6s):
Justin was trying to cut down on his sugar intake. So for dessert, he started blending up Greek yogurt and fruit and stevia and then sticking it in the freezer. In fact, there is nothing in Justin's pre ice cream making days that would've suggested a future as an entrepreneur. He grew up in the 1980s and nineties. His dad was in the Navy. So when Justin was young, the family moved around quite a bit. When his dad retired, they settled near Salt Lake City and from a pretty early age, Justin knew exactly what he wanted to be.

4 (4m 40s):
I actually, at the age of 12, basically was dead set on being a lawyer of constantly everybody, you know, it, especially around 20, would be like, what am I doing with my life? And I was always just confident like, I'm gonna be a lawyer. I clearly had a different conception of what a lawyer actually was or a

0 (4m 59s):
Child. What? What did you think a lawyer was?

4 (5m 1s):
Oh my goodness. You remember those John Grisham novels, those movies? Yeah, Pelican Brief I think is one of 'em. And it just seems so glamorous and you're involved in like crimes and mysteries and, and honestly, I was, I bought into that stuff and I thought, you know, I think I'm a good arguer this, that and the other. And I thought lawyers made a ton of money, for example, even though I didn't realize the ramifications of going into $300,000 of student debt, but I was just fully focused on, I'm gonna be a lawyer, I'm gonna be a lawyer. And that didn't change until I was like, from 12 to 30 years old, I was just dead set. I'm gonna be a lawyer.

0 (5m 38s):
Hmm. So you did of course wind up going to law school. I mean, first you went to UCLA for college. I think you, you studied political science there and then you got into a really good law school. You went to Columbia, New York, so, so how'd you like it?

4 (5m 55s):
Oh my goodness. I did not like it. I just, I, that's when I was like, oh boy, you know, I don't know if this is actually for me, didn't quite gel with the other students. I had a core group that I liked. We all just seemed to, I don't know, didn't click for whatever reason, backgrounds, who knows. But it wasn't a, it wasn't a great time. I, I actually at one point thought about transferring back to UCLA law, but I really like New York City, so ultimately I didn't,

0 (6m 26s):
So you graduate 2009, I think you're about 30, so maybe like two, three years older or maybe the same age as most of the graduates. I don't know, but probably on the older side.

4 (6m 38s):
Yeah, on

0 (6m 38s):
The older side at that time. Yeah. And you got a job at Latham and Watkins a major law firm in New York, right? Yeah. I mean you were probably getting paid, I don't know, almost $200,000 your first year, maybe even more. That's

4 (6m 54s):
Right. That's pretty much exactly what it was. And then if you hit your hours, they give you, you know, a small bonus.

0 (6m 59s):
So you're there at Latham and Watkins as a first year associate, you're paid a lot, but you are, you are doing the grunt

4 (7m 6s):
Work for partner the grunt work.

0 (7m 7s):
You're doing all the, going through the discovery, right? You're reading document after document. Was that what your life

4 (7m 13s):
Was like? That's exactly what it was like in the light at the end of the tunnel is that it's gonna get better. It's gonna get better. You know, your first and second years, you're the grunt and it's supposed to suck. Right? It's kind of like true for any job. Yeah. And it gets better and it gets better. And I eventually got in with a good partner kind of in my second or third year who gave me an awesome case. I basically flew to Hong Kong to appear before a tribunal. They had like the English judges with the powdered wigs, you know? Yeah. Stayed at a really nice hotel. It was as good as it gets for a lawyer. And I realized that I was in my hotel room in Hong Kong the entire time.

0 (7m 53s):
You never even saw the city.

4 (7m 54s):
Never even saw the city. I got like, every day I would get some dumplings, but other than that, really didn't get to see the city. Yeah. So that's like 2011. And that's when I realized I could not keep doing this because the dream of it getting better from being a junior associate, it, I just got the best assignment that I would probably ever get. And I did. I hated it. So, damn, there goes, you know, since I was 12 years old, I wanted to be a lawyer. And this is the moment when it all came crashing down and I realized I cannot be a lawyer, at least at a firm of this size doing well, actually, I just realized I couldn't be a lawyer.

0 (8m 30s):
There's a certain type of person who can, who can do that work and who can tolerate it. But the reality is you're, you're, you're fighting and fighting and fighting to make partner, and then you make partner and you realize it doesn't get better. You just get more piety.

4 (8m 44s):
Yeah. It's amazing. You know that saying, because they say it's a cake eating contest where the prize is more cake. That's exactly what lawyers say. Maybe it is pie. You might have it more correctly than I do, but Yeah, you're exactly right.

0 (8m 57s):
So what, what did you start to think about doing? This is 2011, you've got this promising career. You're making over 200 grand a year as a lawyer. Obviously you've got student debt, but still, I mean, it's a very stable lifestyle if you can hack it.

4 (9m 11s):
Well, that's actually the issue was my student debt was so high at 300,000 that even though I was making, you know, clearing 200,000 a year, I was still living like a law student. And so I kind of did the math and realized that I would have to crush, just keep grinding away at this job for like eight years just to finally get rid of my student loan debt. And then I have no guarantee of what would come after. So in a weird way, that student loan debt actually propelled me into taking risks as, as odd as that sounds, because I realized I couldn't do that job to tread water.

0 (9m 45s):
Right, right. So I guess, I guess around 2010, you, you moved back to la you continue working at Letham m Watkins office as a, in LA as a lawyer. And I guess while you're in LA you start like dabbling in, in things that have nothing to do with being a lawyer. Like, like stand up comedy and, and writing screenplays now. And it's not to say that you can't do those things. There are probably lots of people who are lawyers who went into screenwriting, but maybe not lots, but some, but you are thinking this is a practical pivot for me. Like this is what I think I I can

4 (10m 23s):
Do. I I love how you put it. It's, yeah, it's a practical pivot. No, you're absolutely right. So the, the plan was to go into comedy and give that a shot for a year or two while I was practicing law, kind of, you know, ostensibly practicing law.

0 (10m 39s):
Yeah.

4 (10m 40s):
And so I was doing open mic nights, I was doing improv classes and I was doing what they call spec scripts to send into different comedy shows where you basically write an episode and see if they like it. I never, actually, I did about 10 standup gigs and I never actually completed a spec script because ultimately Halo top got in the way, fell in my lap and I ran with that.

0 (11m 4s):
How was your stuff

4 (11m 6s):
Bad? I, I, I, like, I always tell people that they should try to do a standup act just once, just because number one, you'll appreciate how much of an art it is for the really good guys. And number two, any cringe moment you have in your life will just wash away compared to the first standup show you

0 (11m 29s):
Do. So you are not, you are not gonna be the next Dane Cook.

4 (11m 34s):
I mean, I will say in my humble defense that every great comedian says that their first times on stage they were horrible. But I think if we're being realistic, I probably just wasn't very talented.

0 (11m 47s):
Okay. So you're at the law firm and you are being a lawyer, kind of doing the, going through the motions of doing what you had to do. And then this idea comes to your mind about ice cream. Right? But this didn't just happen overnight. Like, before we get to how that happened, tell me about your lifestyle. Were you, at the time, I mean, you're working a lot, so were you exercising, were you taking care of yourself or were you just sleeping and eating and waking up and working? Yeah,

4 (12m 20s):
That was the one thing that was keeping me sane is I was trying to go to the gym for mental wellbeing and I was trying to eat healthy. The key in terms of lifestyle too is this is very common now that we've hit the Covid era. But even back then for lawyers, you could do almost all of your work remotely. And the grunt work that I was doing as a junior associate, this document review, you could do that anywhere.

0 (12m 47s):
Alright, so you are, you know, you're working out exercising and do you have any, any like health issues or like gluten allergies or any celiac, do you have anything like that at, at all or,

4 (13m 2s):
Nope. Can you eat

0 (13m 3s):
Everything?

4 (13m 4s):
No gluten allergies, but in the past I had tried one of those carb elimination diets like Atkins. Yeah. And it didn't work for me, but I realized that I didn't do well on a lot of carbs, so I began consciously lowering my carbon intake and my sugar intake and naturally increasing protein and fat. But it just, it gave me a lot of mental clarity and it just, it really feels like the right, it felt like the right fuel for my body.

0 (13m 29s):
So. Alright. So you're, you're doing, you're kind of, you know, trying to be a little health conscious, but what I'm trying to figure out, cuz this is a big leap we're about to take here. And so I'm trying to figure out how you, you know, how you start to think about food in a food business or a business at all. I mean, were you in your mind thinking while you were at the law firm, I should start a business?

4 (13m 55s):
Not

0 (13m 56s):
At all make something?

4 (13m 57s):
Not at all. I don't think I had an entrepreneurial bone in my body until I realized I did of course, when I founded a company.

0 (14m 4s):
But, but how did you come across the idea of making ice cream? Like how, how did that happen? I mean, cuz initially, from what I gather, you didn't make this to sell. You were just like, let me try to make some ice cream for myself.

4 (14m 17s):
Yep, exactly. And it comes down to Greek yogurt. I was, I don't think there would be a halo top without Greek yogurt. I was eating Greek yogurt once, twice a day. I like to limit my sugar intake. So I wasn't getting the Greek yogurt that had like the sugary fruit on the side that comes with it. I would get the plain stuff and I would add my own fruit and I would, you know, add stevia to it, like a zero calorie sweetener. I think everybody at this point knows what Stevia is. And I was eating that so much that eventually I began to freeze it in a very bachelor style way. Like seriously just put it in my Ikea bowl and put Saran wrap over it and put it in the freezer for a couple hours. Yeah. And then I basically got sick of the tang of Greek yogurt and made a, like an analog, just kind of like just looking at the nutritional facts and using some cream here and some egg whites here and some sweetener here to try to mimic ice cream.

0 (15m 11s):
And then, but when you take that outta the freezers, it a rock solid

4 (15m 15s):
Rock. It's like, it's, it had kind of like shaved ice type. Yeah,

0 (15m 20s):
Yeah. Like shaved, you can take a spoon and start to hack away at it,

4 (15m 24s):
But Well, you're exactly right. You can't let it freeze overnight. You have to let it freeze for like an hour or two or else. You're right, it freezes into an ice cube.

0 (15m 31s):
All right, so you're making this for yourself, but I'm trying to figure out how you, I mean, cuz it doesn't sound that good to me. You know, I'm, I make ice cream. I do, I make ice cream all the time. I, I I, and I love making, I've got an ice cream maker and I, you know, I used egg yolks and cream and sugar and mint leaves or whatever, vanilla, whatever I have. And, and it's good. It's pretty good. But I'm thinking like what you are doing doesn't sound that good. So I'm trying to figure out at what point were you like, Hey, this is really good. I think other people are gonna want this. Well,

4 (16m 5s):
Believe it or not, it wasn't very good. I mean, this is kind of obvious, it wasn't good coming straight out of my freezer, but I, when I bought a cheap ice cream maker off Amazon, I ran the concoction through that. It actually did taste really good, believe it or not. And it, it that, from that point on, I started Halo Top. I mean, that became my life. That, that night I ordered again from Amazon, a book called Sell Your Specialty Food, which is basically food Business for Dummies. And I was just full go on that stuff. Hmm. What happened is when I made it in the ice cream machine, I, it tasted so good that I immediately ran down to my local stores and like a crazy man was running up and down the aisles, the freezer aisles being like, has anybody done this?

4 (16m 51s):
It seems like a slam dunk. Has anybody done this? And they hadn't.

0 (16m 54s):
There was sugar-free ice cream in 2011, but there wasn't Greek yogurt ice cream that was sugar-free that as far as you know

4 (17m 3s):
Yeah. Frozen Greek yogurt hadn't come out. I'm not too aware of any sugar-free ice creams, but it was actually a big decision at the beginning as to whether to make frozen Greek yogurt or to make that concoction I made, which would become Halo top, which was light ice cream. And on one hand, frozen Greek yogurt would be such an easy sell to stores into the public. But on the other hand, all of these Greek yogurt companies, whether it's Chobani or whether it's just Ben and Jerry's or something, they could make a frozen Greek yogurt at the snap of their fingers. Whereas my little light ice cream concoction was much more unique and had a different value proposition in that it, it didn't have tang basically.

4 (17m 45s):
So I had to make that decision as to what I wanted to start my company around.

0 (17m 48s):
But, but I'm trying to figure out how you go from making, being a lawyer, having No, never. Because, you know, there'd been people in the show, like I was always dreaming of the business that I wanted. I always thought, you know, and I had this job, but I knew that I was gonna start something in my mind. And you're going from a guy who never even thought about a business at all to like a few days later saying, you know what? I'm gonna make a business. I'm gonna sell this.

4 (18m 11s):
Yeah. Immediately to to, to me the ice cream was so good. This thing I had been tinkering with and the concept was such a slam dunk in my naive head that yeah, between the time I bought an ice cream maker, I founded a company within three days. I was just that convinced on the concept.

0 (18m 31s):
And, and so when you say you found a company, you're a lawyer, so you filed like an LLC and, and just kind of set up a, what you call, I think you called it Eden Creamery initially, right?

4 (18m 41s):
Right.

0 (18m 42s):
So then what do you do? What's the first thing you do to, I mean, cuz it's kind of delusional, let's be honest. It

4 (18m 49s):
Is delusional and the story of what I did is exactly what anybody who doesn't have a clue would do. Like everything I'm about to do is like, yeah, I guess that's what I would do too if I have no experience. And I was naive. Yeah. Literally what I did the next day was Google ice cream factories near me to figure out where I could go make it on professional equipment In my head, this ice cream was gonna be ready to go. I was gonna have packaging in maybe three to four weeks and I would have it on store shelves, you know, within two months. Very naive. Yeah. I had no idea what I was doing in food and beverage, but that was my thought process. Literally. It did not go that way. It did not go that way.

0 (19m 28s):
When we come back in just a moment, we will indeed find out how it actually went. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

Squarespace (19m 44s):
I talk with so many business leaders who use Squarespace as they're all in one platform for building their brand and engaging customers online. Squarespace lets you easily create a dynamic website and sell anything your products and services and even the content you create. Squarespace makes it really easy to get started with best-in-class website templates for all types of businesses that can be customized to fit your specific needs. Squarespace also provides the tools you need to run your business smoothly, including inventory management, a simple checkout process, and secure payments. Whatever you sell. Squarespace has merchandising features to make your products look their best online. And with Squarespace email campaigns, you can build a community of email subscribers and customers. Start with an email template and customize it by applying your own brand ingredients like colors and logo. And once you send built-in analytics, measure your emails impact, check out squarespace.com/built for a free trial. And when you're ready to launch, use offer code built B u I l t to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

ZipRecruiter (20m 54s):
Did you know that on average it can now take up to 11 weeks to hire for an open position that's nearly two and a half months. So if you're hiring for a growing business, do you really have that kind of time to wait? Well, I've got some advice for you. Stop waiting and start using ZipRecruiter. ZipRecruiter can help you find qualified candidates for all your roles fast. And right now you can try it for free at ziprecruiter.com/built. ZipRecruiter uses powerful matching technology to quickly find and send you the most qualified people for your roles. And you can personally invite them to apply with one click, which may make them apply even sooner. Four outta five employers who post on ZipRecruiter get a quality candidate within the first day. So speed up your hiring process with ZipRecruiter. See why 3.8 million businesses have come to ZipRecruiter for their hiring needs. Just go to this exclusive web address to try ZipRecruiter for free. ziprecruiter.com/built. Again, that's ziprecruiter.com/b U I L t. ZipRecruiter, the smartest way to hire.

4 (22m 6s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this. I'm Guy Raz, so it's 2011 and Justin has just founded a company called Eden Creamery and he then does what any of us would do. He googles ice cream factories near me to find places that could make his new product. I literally would call and be like, hi, I have an ice cream idea. I was wondering if I could pay you to use your equipment, if it needs to be on nights or weekends, I'm willing to do that. And I called all 10 of them. I called all 10 of these companies and nine said no. And some of them said no angrily like, what are you even doing? And this is actually, this is not exaggeration. Literally I had nine scratched off my list and the 10th one was a guy in Van Nuys

0 (22m 49s):
And the San Fernando Valley. Yep,

4 (22m 52s):
Yep, yep. And he was oddly interested in it. He was like, yeah, sure, you can come in. We've got a lot of extra capacity.

0 (22m 58s):
Did you tell him what kind of ice cream it was?

4 (23m 0s):
No. No. And this is what I'm getting at. I, he said, what are you making? And I was of course paranoid about like, every entrepreneur is a little too paranoid. I'm about, someone's gonna steal my idea. And I was a lawyer so I had a bunch of NDAs at my disposal. So I had him sign an NDA and he was really curious, you know, what, what the hell am I making? And this guy was, he was really cool. He was old school LA and wore like big aviators at all times. He must have been 70. Just a cool guy. So I show up like a couple days later with my little recipe and my ingredients that I bought from Smart and Final and he's like, so what are you making? And I'm like, proudly. Like I'm making the first all natural healthy ice cream.

4 (23m 41s):
And he just looks at me and is like, oh. So it's not weed it, he was just, he was just so sad about that. He was really hoping I was making weed ice cream. I broke his heart,

0 (23m 53s):
Which of course it's California. That's right. Southern California. Of course you would make weed ice cream probably exist today.

4 (24m 0s):
And that's why he thought, oh I, I'm pretty sure it does. And I'm, he thought that was why I was being all cagey. And it was like, man, you're making a healthy ice cream. Give me a break.

0 (24m 11s):
Doesn't, doesn't sound very appetizing to be Okay. So you're, so he, he, he, you have these ingredients and he agrees to what make a batch for you and the ingredients are what at, in, in, in that first run? It is.

4 (24m 24s):
I,

0 (24m 24s):
I'm egg

4 (24m 25s):
Whites. I'm so naive. It's my own recipe that I made on my whole ice cream maker and it's got all of like five ingredients and I'm actually sitting there doing the blending and putting it in the machine and learning how to use the equipment with another

0 (24m 36s):
Guy and And it's milk or cream?

4 (24m 40s):
Milk and cream. Yeah.

0 (24m 41s):
Yeah. Milk and cream. Stevia.

4 (24m 44s):
Stevia. Yep. I can't give away the recipe too much. There is a little Coca-Cola to this stuff,

0 (24m 48s):
So, okay. I got obviously egg, egg whites. These

4 (24m 51s):
Are the basics.

0 (24m 51s):
Yes. There's egg whites in there.

4 (24m 53s):
That's right.

0 (24m 54s):
By the way, egg whites is weird because that gives you use egg yolks in ice cream to give it that creamy richness.

4 (25m 1s):
That's right. So the whites, they add a little protein and if you want nerd out about ice cream, they have emulsification properties. Right. So it actually is a good thing to put into ice cream in terms of

0 (25m 11s):
Performance. Okay.

4 (25m 13s):
So I run my little batch all right on the machines and it could not have gone more horribly. The, the machine basically spit out something that looked like a, a liquid burnt marshmallow. I mean it was just like a white river. It was so demoralizing. It was foreseeable of course that my little home recipe wasn't gonna work on professional equipment, but it, it just absolutely didn't work. I mean, I'm demoralizing almost to the point of tears cause I was so gung-ho on this thing. But,

0 (25m 42s):
But, but why didn't no work? I mean, I mean it's the same principle. It's, it's spinning and freezing the ingredients. So, and when ice cream is ready, it comes outta soft serve and then you freeze it. So I don't understand why it didn't work.

4 (25m 56s):
Well, ice cream needs a lot of salt. I couldn't actually pinpoint exactly why it didn't work, even though it was just me sticking a bunch of ingredients in an ice cream machine and expecting it to spit out ice cream. But to be more precise, ice cream needs a certain level of solids like sugar and fat in that Yeah. To give it body. And I didn't have enough of that. It worked on my little Cuisinart ice cream maker at home. But on this professional equipment, it didn't work at all. So it was like back to the drawing board e either give up the dream or it's back to the drawing board.

0 (26m 25s):
So you're not a food scientist of course. Nope. Right. This is not your background, but you're kind of dabbling and there's clearly a reason why up until that point there was nothing like that on the market because probably when, if anyone had attempted it, the same thing happened. Happened that it just didn't come out. Didn't come out good.

4 (26m 46s):
Yeah. I talked to some ice cream experts and there were some movie moments where they were like, you know, give it up kid and a food scientist who was like, this just can't be done and things like that. So one of the virtues that I had at the time was just utter sheer overwhelming naivety to where I didn't realize how hard it would be to eventually make this stuff.

0 (27m 8s):
How did you start to figure out what to do next? Did you go to the, I mean presumably you went to the internet?

4 (27m 14s):
Yeah. So, you know, on the, the internet you can figure out how to make everything now. Hmm. And I basically took my little recipe and just that night started researching, became like a little miniature food scientist and started researching what did I need to have in there. And then I started to realize proportions of solids and all these things I won't bore you with, but greatly revise the recipe overnight.

0 (27m 37s):
Well this is a thing, right? Like then you've gotta find out things that will replicate that, that mouth feel.

4 (27m 45s):
That's right. That's right. But the biggest, the biggest issue is when you take out a lot of the sugar or almost all of the sugar out of ice cream, it loses all of the solids and the salt. What I mean by solids is everything that's in ice cream that isn't water. I mean that's even fat particles, but sugar is the easiest one to understand. And if you remove that, it will freeze hard as a rock unless it has enough solids.

0 (28m 9s):
So, right, right. Cuz the, cuz sugar keeps it creamy.

4 (28m 12s):
Right, right, right. Yeah. And it and it keeps it soft and scoopable Yeah. Because it depresses the freezing point.

0 (28m 18s):
Alcohol does the same thing too, I think. Right. Little

4 (28m 20s):
Bourbon something. I, I actually at one point experimented putting a little bit of vodka into Halo top. Right. I'm not kidding. I'm not kidding.

0 (28m 26s):
Yeah. Because vodka's a low calorie beverage am not surprised.

4 (28m 30s):
Yeah. Yep. And I spent like five days researching if I could do that without Yeah. You know, can I put alcohol and ice cream without declaring it? All of that stuff.

0 (28m 40s):
How, how long did it take you in experimenting with different ingredients before you were satisfied that you had something ready to sell?

4 (28m 49s):
Yeah, it took about two months, I would say. Before I was like, okay, there's a little bit of tweaking to do, but I'm almost, once packaging is done and everything like that, I'm ready to start selling in stores.

0 (29m 2s):
So about two months in And you were financing this, right? I mean, so, so you had to pay this guy and, and presumably this, this co-packer and Van Ice could handle everything. They could, they could make the ice cream and package it up for you and you would just come and pick up the pallets of frozen ice cream.

4 (29m 20s):
Yep. And I wasn't in stores until early 2012. So during 2011 I didn't even need to deliver ice cream. I was just going up there with my ingredients, taste, testing the batch, making notes, going the next day with ingredients, making the new updated recipe. Yeah. The issue was with this equipment, I had to make like 80 to a hundred pints at a time and I really only needed one pint to test test. So it was a total waste, but the machine was too big.

0 (29m 45s):
All right. So you, now at a certain point, did you start to add a little bit of sugar of cane sugar or was it only stevia?

4 (29m 51s):
I did, I did dur just during this whole process of going back and forth and seeing how well it froze and all of that. But I realized, I realized that Stevia alone kind of has this weird black licorice taste and so I would add, I, I always added a little bit of sugar both for taste and for performance, but also to cut that stevia taste.

0 (30m 10s):
Yeah. Alright, so you've got these pints ready to go and, and you're financing this all from your paycheck as a lawyer? Yeah. Yeah.

4 (30m 20s):
And, and deep, deep credit card debt.

0 (30m 23s):
Yep. And at this point, you know, you're thinking, I'm thinking, okay, take it to a farmer's market, put in a cooler, open up a farmer's market stall and start to sell it there.

4 (30m 35s):
Yep. I thought that that would be too slow. So I just called stores directly. Not really very, very nervously. I remember my first sales call, it was in right at the start of 2012 and I called it's

0 (30m 46s):
Store called, and who is it to

4 (30m 48s):
Ewan? It's, it's like an LA

0 (30m 49s):
Institution famous store in la Yes. LA Natural food

4 (30m 52s):
Store. Yeah. Natural food store, bougie, $25 salads, all that. And I called and I'm so nervous for this call because number one, I don't know what the hell to say on the phone. Just like, how do you even, how do you even broach this subject? And number two in the back of my mind, I'm like, I just devoted six months to making this stuff. What if nobody wants it? What if nobody will carry it? Because, you know, I couldn't go to a store ahead of time and say, Hey, I've got this concept, would you carry it if I made it? It doesn't work like that. And I didn't know any store

0 (31m 24s):
By he sold. You could bring it and say, here, try it.

4 (31m 26s):
Yeah. Well I, that's not the way that it went. So I'm making this, this nervous phone call and I remember her name was Vicky at AK and she was just fantastic. She's like, oh honey, just come in every two, any Tuesday from two to 4:00 PM and we'll try it. And, and that was how

0 (31m 42s):
It worked. And what the, what were the flavors you had

4 (31m 45s):
To offer? I, I started with vanilla bean, chocolate, strawberry and lemon cake. Got it. Because it was kind of received wisdom back then that of course you do vanilla and chocolate, then you do a fruit and then you, for your fourth you do an experimental flavor. Mine was lemon cake and it was actually the most popular flavor for a long time.

0 (32m 5s):
So you bring it into Aeron. Yep.

4 (32m 7s):
But, and Vicky's there and I, that was my first sales meeting, I realized how, how long they can be. I was probably sitting there for like an hour and a half, two hours while everybody in the store kind of came around and tried it. But they were absolutely awesome. She, and it was a small chain, it's not like a big chain where it's like, we're gonna take you and you hit shelves in four months, so get prepared. She was like, yeah, we'll take it. We'll give you all four flavors. You could put it on the shelf next week. And so literally in like the span of a week I had was now selling ice cream on the shelf. Wow. And like two days later I had a little folding table and an apron on and I'm scooping ice cream for people saying, Hey, try healthy ice cream that doesn't taste healthy.

4 (32m 52s):
Or some cornball thing like that.

0 (32m 54s):
You called it healthy ice cream. You didn't call it low calorie or anything? I,

4 (32m 57s):
I buried between the two, you know? Yeah,

0 (32m 59s):
Yeah.

4 (33m 0s):
Because low calories more accurate, but, you know, healthy, the words were always awkward to say like, you know, how do you actually term this

0 (33m 8s):
Stuff? And, and by the way, how many calories was like a pint of vanilla ice cream?

4 (33m 13s):
I was right around 300 I think.

0 (33m 15s):
Okay. For the whole pint. Yeah. Yeah. Whereas a traditional like Ben and Jerry's or Hagan nas, vanilla would be like twice or three times that amount. Four times. So it was a

4 (33m 25s):
Quarter. A quarter. That's exactly right.

0 (33m 28s):
Yeah. And, and, and you personally would go there with your cooler and you would stock the shelves.

4 (33m 34s):
That's right. For the fir until I got a distributor, which came a few months later, which was crucial, obviously I was literally hand delivering ice cream all the way up in some cases to a store called Lassens in Ventura. So I would seriously just have, I had so many coolers in my house at this point. I never thought I'd own so many coolers, but I would have a big cooler of ice cream loaded into the back of my trunk, put a bunch of dry ice in the cooler cuz it had to stay perfectly frozen and go make deliveries around LA Yeah. And so I'm just basically cold calling everybody. And I reached a point, I think I got into about just like 20, 25 stores on my own.

4 (34m 14s):
And then I got into a certain chain that was big enough that they then forced their distributor to take me on.

0 (34m 22s):
Who, what was that chain?

4 (34m 23s):
Bristol Farms.

0 (34m 25s):
Bristol Farms, okay. Yeah. And they have a distributor that this, that handles ice cream or frozen goods. That's right. And they agree to carrier to to distribute your stuff.

4 (34m 33s):
That's right. And that's the big catch 22 of starting up food beverage company is in order to get a store, typically a store chain, you need a distributor and in order to get a distributor, you need a store chain. So what you really need to do is convince some store chain that they really want your stuff so much that they force the distributor to basically take it on. And that's what happened.

0 (34m 56s):
So. Alright, so you've got now this label, this Eden Ice cream, and I guess around this time, this is around 2013, you bring on a partner a new, cuz you were doing this by yourself more or less up to this point. That's right. And, and you bring on a partner named Doug. Doug Bowen or Boton Putin.

4 (35m 17s):
Bouton.

0 (35m 18s):
Doug Bowen. And, and who is Doug? Tell me about Doug, how'd you meet

4 (35m 21s):
Doug? So I met Doug in late 2012 in a lawyer basketball league actually. And he

0 (35m 28s):
Emailed, he was also not, not happy about being a lawyer.

4 (35m 31s):
Yeah, no. He kind of worked at a firm similar to mine. And he actually emailed me for two reasons. Number one was he was leaving his firm to start his own law practice. And he was pitching me as a client, which was actually very, very intriguing because I was gonna need investment pretty soon. And the second thing was he was involved with a startup that was at the spot that I was in like a year, year and a half prior and was looking for advice on like, Hey, how do you, you know, get into a store? Kind of the basic questions. Yeah. So in, in late 2012 through 2012, I had basically gotten into about 80 stores, like I said, and I still thought I could do it myself, but at the end of 2012, I had a little miniature boom.

4 (36m 15s):
In the natural foods world, there are kind of two major store chains. It's Whole Foods and it's Sprouts. And at the end of 2012, I basically somehow convinced Sprouts not only to carry me, but to that I could make enough ice cream for them. They were like, can you make enough to handle 300 more stores? And I'm like, of course I could do it tomorrow. And then I was told by Whole Foods in NorCal in your region actually, that they were gonna bring me in. And I, I just realized at that point I physically couldn't do it alone. So I started kind of looking to bring on somebody, somebody out there, and Doug was obviously from riding me in from already being in LA and with his legal background was definitely on my radar for the, the first person I would bring on.

0 (37m 1s):
Alright. So, so Doug joins and, and, but the challenge at this point is to, I mean, the many challenges, right? It was to obviously scale and figure out how to sell more ice cream. And, you know, and by the way, just being in Sprouts and Whole Foods in California, it's, you're not gonna become a big business. You know, it's, that's not possible. And just being in Whole Foods nationally, maybe you can grow to like seven, maybe 10, maybe $12 million in annual revenue, but like, you're gonna max out. Yeah.

4 (37m 37s):
It's really hard to, to make money, but the, the real money is made in the Krogers and the Walmarts, you know? Yeah. But it's very cool to be able to say that you're in Whole Foods and it definitely helps the brand image,

0 (37m 49s):
The, the, I guess, I mean, Eden Ice Cream is now in these stores, not many, but still quite a few. And I guess pretty, pretty soon you get a cease and desist letter from a company that makes even soy, soy milk.

4 (38m 3s):
Yeah. You know what, this is actually back in 2012, right after I got that first distributor. Right. So it was an absolute nightmare. I mean, thank God it came earlier rather than later. But they basically said, look, you can't use the name Eden. We make Eden Chili and Eden Pasta and Eden Soy and all of this stuff.

0 (38m 23s):
How did you, by the way, how did you not know that as a lawyer? Wouldn't you have done, I'm not trying to, to like, you know, pound a man when he is down, but I'm just curious, you know, didn't you do like a, a name check or

4 (38m 34s):
No, I deserve it. It was very, very stupid of me. It was a very stupid thing to do. And then when it happened I was like, you know, maybe I can fight this because Eden Creamery, you know, they, they don't make any perishable or frozen products. And I was like, eh, this is gonna cost a hundred thousand dollars at minimum just to fight. And again, this thing is bootstrapped no chance. But yeah, I had to cave and yes, it was very stupid to pick that name.

0 (38m 60s):
So, so how did you come up with a new name?

4 (39m 3s):
When they sent me to Cease and Desist, my marketer said, okay, let's stay with the heavenly angelic concept. Eden is for letters, why don't we just go with Halo h a l o creamery? And I said, well, okay, first Halo to me is a video game. Yep. You know, second, maybe there's some trademark issues with that. Cause it's a very basic name. And I, I thought Halo Top rolled off the tip of the tongue and the gold lids were kind of like, you know, the top was a halo. So I was like, let's do Halo top. We fought back and forth because that would've taken a lot more packaging changes just to go from Halo top to Halo.

4 (39m 43s):
And I'm like, no, let's do Halo top end of story. And the funny thing is, in retrospect, like even my close friends when I'm like, you know, the, the top is a lid, so it's like the top or the top is a gold lid. So it's like the top is a halo. They're like, I had no idea that was even the case. I had no idea. And 50% of the population still calls it Halo anyway, like Halo ice cream. So this whole fight over Halo Top was pretty much for nothing.

0 (40m 7s):
Yeah. So, so from what I understand, like this is also a pivotal moment because, you know, you're, I think the, in in, from what I understand, in 2013 you did about a little over $200,000 in revenue. So still very small brand, but you know, it's, that's not discouraging. But I guess you, you were, you were having, and you alluded to this a little earlier, quality issues like with, you know, the ice cream not being to consistent, sometimes people would get, it would be chalky, it would, it wouldn't, you know, it had to thaw for a long time. Tell me what the problem was.

4 (40m 46s):
Yeah, so it, it was kind of like starting to be a come to Jesus moment where it's like, I do not understand why this stuff is not selling the way it should sell. And especially with how good it tastes off the line. And really it just came down to this supply chain issue to where you never knew what you were gonna get. Like half the pints were rock hard, another 20% were chalky and just kind of ruined. So that was the big, that's why 2013 and 2014 was by no means of runaway success. There was some financial difficulties, especially with cash flow, but it really, I think came down to the fact that we didn't have much of a marketing budget and the product just needed to be more resilient through the supply chain.

4 (41m 29s):
And it was at that point I realized I need to get serious with a food scientist here.

0 (41m 34s):
So what did you do? Did you, did you have to change the recipe?

4 (41m 37s):
I did, yeah. I went up to good old Cal Poly San Luis Obispo. It's really cool. They have a dairy science department. We signed an nda. I went up there with my recipe and doing the testing at this place was just so seamless. And it was a pretty funny experience. Like when I went and parked by the dairy science building, I almost hit a cow. Like I pulled in and pulled into the spot and this cow snout was hanging over the curb and I almost ran into the poor guy. Very agricultural, you know.

0 (42m 8s):
And what were they doing? They were test, they were trying to figure out why you were having this quality issues.

4 (42m 13s):
Yeah, we were trying to use different ingredients and adjusting some ingredients just to make it more resilient through the supply chain. And the big challenge too was we had to use all natural ingredients, which is again, a problematic term. But what I mean by that is Whole Foods approved ingredients, they kind of set the bar for what all natural is. And there were some ingredients that would've been simple additions to make Halo top more resilient. But that I wouldn't be able to stay in Whole Foods if I had used that ingredient.

0 (42m 43s):
Well, like, like what? Like what kind of ingredient?

4 (42m 45s):
Oh man. I can't even like monoglycerides words that would Yeah. Words that are really boring. Yeah, right. A lot of these things.

0 (42m 55s):
And and how long did it take to get the, to get it down, to get it done right.

4 (42m 58s):
Took about six weeks, you know, all of these things in the food business, it moves like an aircraft carrier, not like a little boat. Yeah. And by the time we were able to make it and by the ingredients for it, put it into packaging and get it into stores, you know, it took nine months. So even though that was done in 2014, the new recipe didn't hit until 2015.

0 (43m 20s):
So given that the cash flow situation was challenging and you were certainly not profitable, what was your cash situation like? In 2014?

4 (43m 30s):
The entire company was funded by my legal salary and my credit card debt. And the good thing about being a lawyer is that you have high income and you get huge credit limits. I guarantee you my credit card companies really regretted that. But I was funding it through my legal salary and through about 300,000 in credit card lines, credit card debt. And as could be expected, that eventually ran out. You know, we were kind of hanging by a thread in, in, in a number of stores, like, you know, your cells are just on the cusp to where we could almost discontinue you or lower your skew count. So yeah, we, it was not a runaway success by any stretch.

4 (44m 11s):
Yeah. And so we actually raised our first round and we raised two rounds of money totaling a million, which is really not a lot. And it was a combination of that was kind of all we could get. So for example, we, we raised a little bit of money in 2013 and we raised money in 2015.

0 (44m 30s):
And you raised in 2013, you raised it from,

4 (44m 32s):
From mostly friends and family.

0 (44m 34s):
Yeah,

4 (44m 35s):
And I didn't want to give up control of the company at, at whatsoever. So we did not want to get in bed with venture capital firms unless we absolutely had to gun to our heads, you know.

0 (44m 45s):
So I mean, how, how close were you to, you know, you've got the debt, but I mean, were you ever close to a place where you thought, I don't know if this is gonna make it, or were you always confident you were gonna

4 (44m 57s):
Be fine? No, it's kind of a mixture of the two. I, I still really believed in the stuff that I was, I, I don't know if I ever would've been able to give up on it. I just thought it was such a slam dunk. It, it wouldn't be so much that the company would go under, but we would've had to get in bed with the wrong people. An example is, I don't wanna sell them out, but the founders of a major, major company that everybody's heard of met them for lunch and they were going to invest a million in the company, which would've saved the company. But of course they wanted control. I'm a control freak guy, a hundred percent control. I didn't wanna give up any control, but you know, these guys are sharks. That's their business.

4 (45m 37s):
Yeah. You can't hate on 'em. This is just what they do. And so every negative stereotype and every fear I had about working with a BC firm came true indeed when we got their offer sheets. And worse, they want, they thought the product should be marketed toward the senior citizen market, just like those ensure protein shakes. So that certainly wasn't my vision for Halo Top. And you know, so it it, the fun thing is to say, yeah, the company would've sunk, that's so dramatic, but really we would've just taken money from an entity that would've steered us in a very weird direction.

0 (46m 15s):
Yeah. Alright. So you're, you're trying to figure out how to deal with this cash crunch, right? Meantime? Yes. In 2014 Sprouts, from what I understand, they dramatically reduce how much halo top they're buying. Cuz I guess it's not selling. Yeah.

4 (46m 35s):
Sprouts was my crown jewel before when it was just me and we got kicked out, we just didn't sell enough for 'em. Yeah. It was very demoralizing.

0 (46m 43s):
That has to be the majority, it has to be more than 50% of the stores you were in by that point.

4 (46m 47s):
I think that it was somewhere pretty close. I don't remember it being quite that dramatic because we did have a steady climb in store growth. I couldn't tell you what percentage

0 (46m 58s):
Of stores, independent stores and

4 (46m 59s):
Independent stores and other chains. Cuz we had UNFI as the distributor. So they were putting us in a lot of stores that we didn't even know about to be honest.

0 (47m 7s):
But you weren't selling at Sprouts

4 (47m 9s):
That That's right. Look, there's no way to minimize it. Whether that was 50% of our stores are 20% of our stores. It was crushing financially and mentally it was a big deal. And I, I'm trying to remember if that happened before or after we were actually raising money because it came at a really awkward time. We might have just closed our second and final round for about 750 grand and then got kicked outta Sprouts and it was like, oh, sorry guys are bad. So just embarrassing too. It's just embarrassing.

0 (47m 44s):
So, so in like 2015, you, you're definitely still, you know, you're still a relatively small ice cream brand right. In a, in a sea of ice cream brands. But, but one of the things that, that you, because you didn't have a whole lot of advertising dollars, right. And you really start to lean into like, like Facebook and, and Instagram ads, which is like 20 15, 20 14. And this is sort of like the peak of really hopping, hopping on that, on that train, right? Because you, you could target people based on their backgrounds and their interests and, and their zip codes and, and things like that, right?

4 (48m 20s):
Yeah. You know how everybody is mortified by figuring out just how much data. Yeah. Facebook knew about us. The only people who liked that were us marketers. And it was so, I was like, man, this is so invasive, but so useful. Yeah. They could track, if you liked a pa a page on Facebook, they could track that, link it to your wallet and find out what type of products you were buying at the store. But it was also very useful in making sure that our ads got in front of the right people.

0 (48m 51s):
So who was, who was the kind of like, who was the kind of person you were targeting?

4 (48m 55s):
Our main target was, I always just basically said soccer moms, the type of people who liked Greek yogurt, you know, more or less it wasn't, yeah, it wasn't ice cream gourmet people who tended to be the people who hated on you top the most, you know, we, we tended to really do well with millennials, but I didn't quite foresee that coming. I didn't quite realize that they were so health conscious and stuff

0 (49m 20s):
And, and so to like a soccer mom, what would the message be?

4 (49m 24s):
That was just kind of the general one, which was like ice cream that you can feel good about eating.

0 (49m 29s):
So you're like a perfect angel halo, right. This idea like you can eat this and not, it's not sinful.

4 (49m 35s):
That's exactly right. I think we even put in some of our ads a halo over the pint.

0 (49m 41s):
Okay. That brings us to 2016, which was unprecedented. One of the unprecedented moments in the history of food. I think in, let's start with what happened, which started with an article. So what did you know about, about the making of this article?

4 (49m 58s):
I knew nothing. Nothing. That's what made it so funny is I got a Google alert for Halo Top, realized GQ had written about it, and I opened the article with my hand covering my eyes, like with a little crack between my fingers, like, oh

0 (50m 12s):
God, what did they like thinking they were about to, they were about to just trash

4 (50m 15s):
It. Yeah. I had no idea what they were gonna say.

0 (50m 19s):
When we come back in just a moment, how the content of that article completely changes the trajectory of Halo Top. Stay with us. I'm Guy Ross and you're listening to How I Built This.

Allbirds (50m 41s):
Okay, hear me out for a sec. I have some pretty good ideas for how you can make shoes from things in your own backyard. Like if you dip your foot in mud and you let it dry, let's basically instant footwear. But you know, if mud shoes are a little too rough and ready for you, you might be interested in today's sponsor Allbirds, which has actually perfected the process of making shoes out of natural materials. In the Allbirds Innovation Lab, they research how to make the most out of sustainable materials like leather from plants, sugar cane, and tree fibers like the plant paster. It's made with 100% plastic free and vegan plant leather. The tree dasher has eucalyptus tree fiber for a light and more responsive shoe. And then there's super light, which are shoes made from sugar cane. I have a pair of plant pasters and I absolutely love them. I wear them all the time. They're casual, but you can also wear them for going out and they're super comfortable. Basically everything that you'd want in a shoe. Allbirds is making shoes better than natural. They're supernatural. Find your perfect pair@allbirds.com today and use code built for free socks with a purchase of $48 or more. That's a L l B i r d s.com code built

NetSuite (51m 52s):
. If your business earns millions or tens of millions of dollars in revenue, stop what you're doing and take a listen because NetSuite by Oracle has just rolled out the best offer we've ever seen. NetSuite gives you the visibility and control you need to make better decisions faster. And for the first time in NetSuite's 22 years as the number one cloud financial system, you can defer payments of a full NetSuite implementation for six months. That's no payment and no interest for six months. And you can take advantage of this special financing offer today. NetSuite is number one because they give your business everything you need in real time, all in one place to reduce manual processes, boost efficiency, build forecasts, and increase productivity across every department. 33,000 companies have already upgraded to NetSuite, gaining visibility and control over their financials, inventory, hr, e-commerce, and more. If you've been sizing NetSuite up to make the switch, then you know this deal is unprecedented, no interest, no payments. Take advantage of this special financing offer at netsuite.com/built netsuite.com/built. To get the visibility and control you need to weather any storm netsuite.com/built.

4 (53m 11s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. So it's early 2016 and Halo Top Ice Cream has a new formula, new packaging, and a small amount of investment.

0 (53m 21s):
And then GQ Magazine prints an article about it. And Justin, he can barely summon up the courage to read it,

4 (53m 30s):
But it was actually a fantastic article. A guy named Shane Snow, who I absolutely, I don't know, but I still love him. Even if I wasn't, you know, the founder of Halo Top, I would still wanna read this because all that he did was eat Halo Top for 10 straight days.

0 (53m 46s):
He ate Halo Top for 10 days. He wanted to show what it was like to eat,

4 (53m 53s):
Eat,

0 (53m 53s):
Eat only Halo top for 10

4 (53m 55s):
Days. Yeah. Not just eat it for 10 days, eat nothing but Halo top for 10 days and talk about his experiences every day. So it was a really unique article.

0 (54m 3s):
And this was not, it was not an article you pitched at all. No. You had no idea he was working

4 (54m 9s):
On this. No idea. He must have pitched the editor and the editor was like, all right, you're crazy. Go

0 (54m 14s):
For it. I mean, I'm, I'm just thinking that's not a good thing to do because, you know, we need fiber and roughage. I'm just thinking about, you know, things that I can't talk about here on the air, but just what would happen to you after 10 days of just eating pints of Halo Top?

4 (54m 31s):
Well, if I remember correctly, Shane was very good at actually putting in the advice of a nutritionist who indeed told him, you are being stupid. Don't eat, don't do this. But he was very honest about everything. He obviously, he was like, by day five, I'm sick of this stuff, but he's talking about how he hit new records in the gym and after day 10, he is like, I don't even wanna see Halo Top. But you know what? I found myself a week later getting more of it. So it was just like a fantastic viral

0 (55m 0s):
Article. And, and when did you start to see the ripple effects from that GQ article? How long after?

4 (55m 7s):
So, yeah, I can give you an example. In 2015 is when the new product, both on the inside and the outside hit the shelves, the

0 (55m 15s):
New formula, reformulated and new packaging.

4 (55m 17s):
That's exactly right. In 2015. Yeah. And we started to see a little bit better turnover rate in stores. And so it was all primed, all the good stuff was on the shelves from, like, Shane was in New York City and LA and everywhere, pretty much on the shelves at 2016 in March, 2016. And that month alone in March isn't a great month for ice cream. March 26 alone, 16 alone. We did more revenue than the entirety of 2015. And then 2016, just from March just got went up and up and up and staggering levels. It was just unbelievable.

0 (55m 53s):
I, I've seen one figure that said your growth in 2016, you had 2500% growth year over year from 2015 to 2016. 2500% growth in one year.

4 (56m 9s):
Right. I mean, we set sales records, obviously I think we might have set all time sales records. A company isn't supposed to grow that fast, you know, it it, it became a phenomenon.

0 (56m 20s):
No, that's in insane you. So just help me understand the demand, because you're going from, oh, selling, I don't know, maybe a hundred thousand pints a year to like 25 million pints a year.

4 (56m 39s):
Yeah, it, it was just insane. And the issue with it is, it's not just like any company that hits it big. There were unique challenges because it was ice cream, for example. Nobody knew how to handle this. So the stores, let's take a Whole Foods, they couldn't keep

0 (56m 56s):
It on. It's like, tickle me Elmo in 1985. Yeah.

4 (57m 1s):
They like for the supply chain had problems like Whole Foods couldn't keep it on the shelves, but these stores only have so much room allocated in the back for extra overflow ice cream. Yeah. And so they couldn't order enough of the stuff and they had to change their entire design, how they store foods to hold more ice cream. Because what you do with ice cream is, you know, you buy a pint of Ben and Jerry's, you go Sunday and you watch Game of Thrones and you eat the pint of Ben and Jerry's. It's like a once a week thing or once a month. Yeah. People for the first time were buying an ice cream for every single day of the week and buying 14 pints at a time in some cases.

0 (57m 38s):
So, because they could just do it. Yeah.

4 (57m 40s):
And to be honest, I think what fueled a little bit was when you go to a store to buy something and it's always sold out, that just drives the fervor even more. So when you do see it, you're like, screw this. I'm getting every single pint here. You know? So it's, yeah, it's a plus. It's a pro and a it a con, I mean it's mostly a con. You wanna sell it if people want it, but there are some upsides to not having availability.

0 (58m 4s):
How are you dealing with that demand? I mean, you had one co-packer as far as I understand.

4 (58m 10s):
Yeah, we, I, I can't quite remember if we had one or two co-pack. I think we had a, I think we had more than one, but it was just immediate all hands on deck. This is where Doug really shined cuz he was run, he was coo. There are only so many ice cream factories in the nation and they're all taken up. So we had to beg and cajole to like get space. And our fact, our co-packers were like, what is happening with this brand? There's no way you're possibly ordering this much product. And so we were working out ways to build onto their factory, might not buy our own factory, but to do a kind of build and lease thing where we put a new line in their factory dedicated to Halo top.

0 (58m 54s):
You would pay for all the equipment?

4 (58m 56s):
Yeah, we would, we would pay for it and then they would pay us back. It was a really complicated arrangement.

0 (59m 1s):
And, and, and you would say just, we'll, we'll, we'll build you a line dedicated just to our product in your factory so you can do all the other ice creams there, but we need you to focus this line on just ours.

4 (59m 11s):
That's right. And I, I don't, I'm not too sure if there was a single ice cream, a serious ice cream co-packer in the nation that wasn't working with Halo Top at that point. We needed everybody

0 (59m 21s):
Wanna get back to this in a moment, but let's talk about 2017 because that year you, I can't believe, I mean, it's, it's one of the craziest stories in food, I think in, in the last 50 years, this, this brand Halo top that was like two years earlier, a tiny brand like a a, a minnow in an ocean of ice cream brands becomes the best selling ice cream pint in the US beating Ben and Jerry's and Hodis 300, almost 3 50, 3 $50 million in sales that year.

4 (59m 56s):
You you wanna know what a crazy part of that is? Our brand awareness at that point, when we became the best selling ice cream, our brand awareness was just over 50%. That means half the population didn't even know what Halo Top was. I mean, compare that to like Ben and Jerry's, where a hundred percent of people know. Yeah. So the people who liked Halo top freaking liked it, you know what I mean? And it was a daily ice cream that other ice creams just simply weren't. You can't eat a pint of Hogan dolls every day. Lord knows, we all wish we could, but you can't.

0 (1h 0m 28s):
I mean, you didn't have an office. You, you had no physical office space. You had no physical factory. You, you, you outsourced the factory. The, the production you had, everybody was working remotely and the distribution was handled by a, a distributor. And what I mean, it was, it was a lot of your Yes, exactly. The things you were doing were outsourced

4 (1h 0m 51s):
In the co-packing thing. There are quite a few really successful ice cream companies that don't own their own own factories. So the co-packing thing is a little bit normal. But yeah, there was a lot of, yeah, a lot of outsourcing.

0 (1h 1m 3s):
I mean, just incredibly efficient. I mean a business with no, with very little overhead doing 350 million a year in sales.

4 (1h 1m 11s):
Yeah. And that was my focus was efficiency. I think so many of the kind of corporate habits are just such time wasters and just inefficient. And so that was always something to get away from.

0 (1h 1m 25s):
I should, I should add that the ice cream was very polarizing. Still is, it was definitely polarizing. Some people were like, oh, this isn't ice cream. This is, this is just, you know, it's stevia. It's not like if you want ice cream, get real ice cream, just have a couple spoonfuls of it, you know, or Right. You had haters out there.

4 (1h 1m 42s):
Absolutely. We never got defensive over that. I mean, think about how bad of a look that would be if we came on and said, oh, well you're not real ice cream. I mean, who, if we just kind of, there's just nothing you can say to that. Some people are purists. I can tell you that in 2017 there was a period where I could tell that we had peaked and it's kind of like a band had gotten too popular and the, the sentiment of us kind of being like a cool brand was starting to shift. It started to become cool to hate on Halo top a little bit more. Does that make

0 (1h 2m 15s):
Sense? Right. Once you, once you saw like everyone, it's like Von Dutch, right? You ever see that those hats,

4 (1h 2m 23s):
Especially here

0 (1h 2m 23s):
In South, right? Like they were cool and then all of a sudden like everyone's wearing them and like everyone, people wearing 'em to church and like, this isn't cool anymore. Would that kind of ha start to happen to Halo top?

4 (1h 2m 33s):
Yes. And to me, I always think of bands like Nickelback. Everybody loves 'em at first and they're just top of the charts. And then it,

0 (1h 2m 41s):
Everybody, poor Nickelback, poor Nickelback, poor Nickelback, everybody hates on Nickelback.

4 (1h 2m 45s):
And, and actually that's why I made a very, very weird ad that they talk about polarizing. I mean, it is a very weird ad, a very avantgarde ad where it's like this sci-fi dystopian future and there's a robot trying to feed this woman saying there is only ice cream.

0 (1h 3m 3s):
It's an old lady. Right? It's like an elderly lady. They're feeding her ice cream. Yeah, yeah, it was. And everyone around her is dead. Yes,

4 (1h 3m 9s):
Yes. It was dark, it was weird. It was a very love it or hate it. The marketing world loved it. And that was partly the reason I did it was partly because I could kind of sense that we were becoming very uncool and it was honestly kind of like a band trying to stop making pop music and release something arty, something artsy like their, they're jazz record. That really was kind of the impetus Yeah. For that I could sense that we were becoming uncool.

0 (1h 3m 39s):
Yeah. From what I understand, part of you probably was nervous about growing so fast, so quickly,

4 (1h 3m 47s):
Right? The real worry was exactly what happened, which is we somehow managed to fly under the radar of the big guys. They like, they let us exist. They didn't squash us like the bug that we were for, you know, four or five years. And then suddenly in 2016, and then in 2017, especially when we became the best selling ice cream, the cat was out of the bag. And so every single ice cream maker, even from startups to Unilever, were just straight up making coffee cats and the one that hurt the most. And yes, I use the d the the derogatory word copycat instead of competitor. Yeah. Because it makes me mad. I, I, it's, it's like a song.

4 (1h 4m 28s):
It's hard for me to understand why you can't patent a food that people can just write your same song. Yeah. I mean, it makes sense and nobody will empathize with me because everybody likes competition and I get it, but it's still, I I'm still raw

0 (1h 4m 44s):
About it. You can't patent a recipe. You can't,

4 (1h 4m 46s):
You cannot. No. And what really, what really started to, to cut into our bottom line was that stores would make Halo top knockoffs. And like

0 (1h 4m 57s):
Kroger had their own brand, I think.

4 (1h 4m 59s):
Exactly, exactly. And I think Target

0 (1h 5m 1s):
Did, and they were

4 (1h 5m 2s):
Cheaper and of course they were cheaper and they got the better shelf space.

0 (1h 5m 6s):
Yeah.

4 (1h 5m 7s):
We had a copy cap brand come out and they copied our design so much that we actually sent them a cease and desist, but they copied it so much and in their calorie counts on the front front they put the lower number, the per serving number. And to be clear, there's four servings in a pint of ice cream. Yeah. So if there's 280, we would've 280 in the pint, we'd put two 80 on there, they would put 70. And so it was like kind of an underhanded Yeah. Clever trick.

0 (1h 5m 35s):
They're four servings in a pint of ice cream. That's not true. I thought there was one serving in a pint of ice cream. Isn't

4 (1h 5m 39s):
That crazy? Isn't that crazy?

0 (1h 5m 42s):
That's just my pin of ice cream. Yeah.

4 (1h 5m 44s):
Yeah. It's like a candy bar is like two servings or something. You're like, what?

0 (1h 5m 48s):
Whoever, that's crazy. Who, who's ever gonna cut a candy bar in half?

4 (1h 5m 52s):
I and I I four servings who eats a quarter of a pint?

0 (1h 5m 58s):
Nobody. I, from what I understand you, when you started this business, right, already at the beginning, you know, and we've had entrepreneurs on the show who are like, I'm never gonna sell my business. I'm gonna do this forever. Or some who who say, well, you know, we'll see, but this is a, you know, this is my career forever. I wanna do this. Your, that was not your intention. You, your intention was to build a brand and eventually sell it from the beginning. You were clear about that,

4 (1h 6m 21s):
Right? Well, 1000%. Yeah. I mean, I had unlimited passion for the stuff when I made it. I mean, it was like my life. I had such a fire to get it done, but it was never, I want to have an ice cream business that I can hand down to my son one day or anything like that. Yeah. I wanted to get it big and to sell it to a, a company.

0 (1h 6m 41s):
So at this point, 20 17, 3 50 in sales, you, you would think, okay, here's your golden opportunity to sell this business. And I have to imagine you had suitors coming to you.

4 (1h 6m 54s):
We did. We constantly had suitors in 2017 is when we got real buy real offers to sell the full company. But even, you know, before then, I mean, every venture capital firm in America was in some cases sending people to my house to knock on the

0 (1h 7m 12s):
Door because they wanted it in unsolicited.

4 (1h 7m 14s):
Yeah. They want it in to be like, Hey, we wanna buy 20% and we'll give you this valuation

0 (1h 7m 18s):
Probably for amazing terms. Well,

4 (1h 7m 20s):
Oh, I, yeah, right. I mean better than what it would've been in 2015. Yeah.

0 (1h 7m 24s):
Yeah.

4 (1h 7m 24s):
What's funny is when I first founded a Halo top, it was in my cheap little apartment in this place in West Hollywood on Genesee Avenue. And I'm talking about, it's in an area where it's like next to a liquor store in tu pawn shops. And I would have my neighbors take pictures of this kind of very low rent place of like a one venture capital guy showed up with a gigantic human sized golden spoon and basically sat outside my door for an hour and my neighbor was filming him and sent it to me. And I was like, that's

0 (1h 7m 54s):
Crazy. I didn't know that they were that, that like, shameless me neither.

4 (1h 7m 58s):
Isn't that crazy?

0 (1h 7m 60s):
And, and, and why didn't you take any of their money at the time? Were you just holding out to sell, sell the whole thing? They

4 (1h 8m 6s):
Wanted to give us money when we already had boomed. You know, it's like a

0 (1h 8m 11s):
Little bit like Yeah. And now you're profitable. Now you're really, you've got a lot

4 (1h 8m 14s):
Of cash. Yeah. And what was was unique about that sales growth for Halo Top is we grew so fast that actually we were flushed with cash to where we didn't have really cash flow issues.

0 (1h 8m 25s):
Wow. Wow. So you just ignored these people.

4 (1h 8m 29s):
Yes. 1000%.

0 (1h 8m 32s):
So in, in the year 2017 when you were just, it was gangbusters, were you and Doug at that point like, all right, we gotta find a buyer now. Is it time to do it or or did you decide to wait?

4 (1h 8m 43s):
Yeah, we, we were already in talks with the, the people that you would think we were in talks with

0 (1h 8m 48s):
The Unilevers and the Nestle's and the big, maybe not those exactly, but, but big that's basically

4 (1h 8m 54s):
Multinationals. That's basically Right. And they were approaching us. We weren't actively looking to sell at that time, but it was like, if an offer came along that we couldn't refuse, well we wouldn't refuse it. Yeah. It was in 2018 that we decided to actually go on an offensive like sales pitch rather than just being defensive.

0 (1h 9m 14s):
How much, I'm just curious about that because I think you, you made a very smart decision and, and I'm not giving away the story. We'll get to it. You did sell it of course, but, but you probably saw that you were gonna start to lose market share as competitors came in and that you really, like the clock was ticking down on the value in every, the longer you waited, the value would decline and that it was probably in your best interest to try and sell sooner rather than later. Am I right about

4 (1h 9m 45s):
That? Yeah, you are right. But that's actually not the full story. I had been, I was burnout. I had been doing this thing since 2011, you know, the first two years doing it alone had taken gears off my life and probably given me mental issues I'm still dealing with. And by the time,

0 (1h 10m 3s):
Yeah, I can tell. I'm just kidding.

4 (1h 10m 6s):
And the time 2018 rolled around, I was either gonna look for a new CEO or I just needed to sell the company. So I'm telling you, if I were refreshed, I probably would've just held onto the company and kind of relished the challenge of getting through all these competitors and having a competitive market. But I was just burnt out to be perfectly honest. And I was like, I cannot deal with this anymore.

0 (1h 10m 33s):
Yeah. And you really had no, no, no major outside investors. You just had friends and family, some angel investors and, and I guess you're probably some of the folks inside the company had some equity.

4 (1h 10m 43s):
Yeah, of course, of course, of course. Yeah. And everything was drawn up to where it was a, a very easy process. I I, I did have a hundred percent control. So when it came time to the sell there, it was extremely easy. I mean, if we like to,

0 (1h 10m 56s):
It was your call to make Yeah.

4 (1h 10m 58s):
But just with a signature, you know, you could kind of, there was no board to run it past or anything like that.

0 (1h 11m 4s):
So you guys shopped, or the bank shops this round and you eventually start to negotiate with this, this ice cream brand called Wells Enterprises. These guys were based in Iowa and they made Blue Bunny not to be confused with Blue Bell, that

4 (1h 11m 20s):
Is from Texas. A very good point. That is a very good point. A lot common

0 (1h 11m 23s):
Mistake. Yeah. Blue Bunny, not Blue Bell. Right. Because people in Texas are going to boycott this show. If I say Blue Bunny is from Texas and, and I, and they, I guess they had ambitions to like be bigger than Unilever in the ice cream space. That was their

4 (1h 11m 38s):
Goal. That's right. I think at that point the, they were the second biggest.

0 (1h 11m 43s):
So you had this negotiation with Wells and they in, in Kim to agreement they, they were going to acquire you for a hundred percent cash deal? No, no, no stock. Nothing like that.

4 (1h 11m 53s):
Oh, 100%. That was one of my conditions. Cause like I said, one of the reasons I wanted to sell was that I was just flat out burnt out. And so one of the conditions was I'm not doing a thing. I mean, I, I was willing to stay on for three to six months to transition to the next CEO or whatever. Yeah. But I was like, there's not gonna be some two year standard earnout where I've got a boss and I'm sitting there obsessing over our earnings in order to hit a certain earnout. It that wasn't gonna happen. So we were clear about that upfront during the sale

0 (1h 12m 24s):
Process. Yeah.

4 (1h 12m 26s):
Did,

0 (1h 12m 26s):
Did the, cuz you were, you know, the sales were declining from 2017. That was to this day by far, your peak year. Oh

4 (1h 12m 33s):
Yeah, for sure.

0 (1h 12m 35s):
And and they were declining 10, 15, 20% year over year. Now did that have an impact on the negotiations?

4 (1h 12m 43s):
I'm 100% dead because it was, it wasn't 2017 anymore. You know what I mean? There was no place to go but down, to be honest, revenue and earnings is like the end all be all during a sales process, right?

0 (1h 12m 57s):
Yeah. They, they, they bought you out undisclosed amount of money. But I think fair to say that you did better than you would've done had you stayed on as a partner at Latham and Watkins.

4 (1h 13m 7s):
I was able to buy my parents a house and I was able to pay off my student loans. And seriously, those were the two things that I don't have a lot of. I don't have expensive tastes. Those were the two things that made me very, very happy.

0 (1h 13m 18s):
So you signed the contract the next day you're done. You're not Halo

4 (1h 13m 21s):
Top anymore. I'm done. I woke up and I'm thinking like, oh my goodness, you know, it's over. What the hell am I gonna do with my life? And for, for two, three years, I seriously just vegged it. It had taken so much outta me that I did. It's like, remember that movie office space when he is like, what would you do with a million bucks? And he said nothing. And they were like, nothing. Yeah. I said, I, that was me. I was like, I am doing nothing.

0 (1h 13m 50s):
You just like ate pints of Ben and Jerry's and watch Netflix. Yeah. I

4 (1h 13m 52s):
Was like, thank God I don't have to eat Halo top anymore. I was just scarfing Bena Jerry's

0 (1h 14m 1s):
Doug stayed on your cfo, he stayed on, he, he, he, he did a deal with Wells and he took over international distribution of Halo Top. And was that sort of the last time you guys worked together?

4 (1h 14m 14s):
Yeah, more or less. And they actually just released a product line called Gatsby, which is like a chocolate version of Halo Top. Yep.

0 (1h 14m 24s):
It's like low Keller chocolate.

4 (1h 14m 26s):
Yeah. It's

0 (1h 14m 27s):
It's, are you an investor in that? Yeah,

4 (1h 14m 28s):
I am. But it's absolutely fantastic and you've got all the halo top rock stars. You've got like, I mean exactly what I should have done. You've got 20 people at the start. You're not trying to do it solo. You've got all this expertise in terms of grocery stores and everything. Yeah. I think it's gonna be a big success and it's a great product.

0 (1h 14m 46s):
And so in the meantime, what are you, how are you keeping busy? What are you, are you investing? Are you, I don't know, do you go out? Do you And I'm just, I'm just curious. Yeah.

4 (1h 14m 58s):
Well yeah, I have a lot of passive investments out there and give, I'm happy to give some advice to people who need it. I got a wonderful girlfriend finally. I gave up on girlfriends for 10 years while I was doing Halo Top. Not a chance. Yeah. So have a wonderful relationship.

0 (1h 15m 16s):
Yeah, yeah.

4 (1h 15m 16s):
Let's just say I'm looking for something else because it's, it's, you know, I've got hobbies and I play basketball, but there's nothing I'm doing that's impressive right now that people would care about. Let's put it that way.

0 (1h 15m 29s):
Here. Here's, here's a sort of a weird question, but I I I ask people from time to time about this because it's, it is awkward a little bit, right? When you know when your life changes the way it does, things can get awkward. Like you did not grow up with money. You, you graduated college with hundreds of thousands of dollars in debt or law school and then you had this huge success with this brand, which, you know, you sold and enabled you to become wealthy. How does that change interpersonal relationships? Like everybody you meet now is going to look you up and know you started Halo Top and they'll know that like you did well, does it, does it change how you interact with people or how you make friends or you nervous that people are just kind of want some of your money or want, I don't know, or something from you?

4 (1h 16m 16s):
Yeah, it's a really personal question, but I'm happy to answer it. And you, you, you touched on it, people come out of the woodwork and there is all, people are much nicer to you, but when you do meet new people, you, it's, I've met a lot of people who are like, oh man, this guy's genuinely nice and you know, three days later he sent me an investment deck. You know what I mean? It's like, do people like me for me or do they like my money? So yeah, that's definitely your hackles go up a little bit on that point. Like, I've friends with startups, I've had a couple awkward experiences. Yeah. So it does affect things a little bit.

0 (1h 16m 53s):
When you think about this journey that you've taken, I mean, how much of this do you, do you attribute to, to the grind and the work you put in and how much of the success do you think had to do with luck?

4 (1h 17m 5s):
Yeah, that's a good question. I guess I would have to say it was about, I, I would have to say 50 50 I guess. I mean that what a cop out that is, huh? But it took,

0 (1h 17m 16s):
It's okay.

4 (1h 17m 17s):
It's alright. But I founded the company in 2011 and it took until 20, like 15, 20 16 to see signs of life. And so, I mean, it's hard to attribute anything of that to luck that was pure grind. Probably a level of psychosis of not giving up and still believing in the stuff. And then I knew it could be successful. But the fact that it was that successful, that it was like a phenomenon like that, that was, there was a lot of luck involved in that, you know what I mean? I I I I was fully competent that it could be a pretty good ice cream that could, you know, get into the top 10 or something like that and, and provide a good living, but becoming a phenomenon.

4 (1h 17m 58s):
There was a lot of luck, a lot of right place at the right time involved in that. So I'm going to give you the cliched cop out answer and say 50 50.

0 (1h 18m 7s):
That's Justin Wilberton founder of Halo Top Ice Cream. By the way, last year, Wells, the parent company of Halo Top was bought by Ferrero, the Italian group that owns brands like Tic-Tacs, Keebler Cookies and Nutella. And whenever Justin thinks back to 2019 when he sold to Wells,

4 (1h 18m 29s):
The one thing I regret is that when I sold the company, I did not get free ice cream for life or something like that. So when I get Halo top, I still have to go to the store and buy it, which I think is kind of unfair.

0 (1h 18m 40s):
I you can afford it. I'm not, I'm not. I'm playing the world's smallest violin for you. You can afford it, it's come

4 (1h 18m 46s):
On. It's the principle.

0 (1h 18m 47s):
I'm playing the world's smallest violin for you. You can buy the Halo top, you can buy me the halo top. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you wanna contact the team, our email address is ibt id.wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter or account is at how I built this and mine is at Guy Roz on Instagram or at How I built this. And I'm at Guy Roz. This episode was produced by Carrie Thompson with music composed by Ram Era Bluey. It was edited by neba Grant with research help from Alex Chung. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, Sam Paulson, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, Carla Estevez, and Kiki.

0 (1h 19m 30s):
I'm Guy Roz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey Prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and add free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon Music app today or you can listen early in ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.

Capital One (1h 20m 6s):
With the Capital One Spark Cash Plus card, you earn unlimited 2% cash back on every purchase and it has no preset spending limit so your purchasing power can adapt to meet your business needs. The Antonelli's Who own Antonelli's Cheese Shop in Austin, Texas use their 2% cash back from their Spark Cash Plus card to help cover their employees' healthcare costs. Imagine what the Spark Cash plus card from Capital One could do for your business. Capital One, what's in your wallet. Find out more@capitalone.com slash spark Cash plus terms and conditions apply.