3 (3s):
We launched with I mean must be at least like a thousand demos.

1 (7s):
You would go and Mo Kio, what would you

3 (9s):
do? So you have like a table and you put down as much as you can to make it look nice and warm and fuzzy and I'm standing there with a happy baby t-shirt on and you're trying to get people to sample these like yummy foods that I'm thinking. I'm so proud of this. This is taken years to make this, you know, and you're standing there waiting for someone to come. And then barely anybody comes and on the third time that I did a demo. I realized that this wasn't going to work.

1 (47s):
From NPR it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm Gyros and on the show today have shazi vishram decided to take on the big baby food companies and build happy family. One of the best selling organic baby food brands in

3 (1m 9s):
America.

1 (1m 16s):
One of the trickiest things about building a business around software or a product that you have to engineer and machine is that the barrier to entry is pretty high. You usually need lots of money just to come up with a minimally viable product. It's why I Toby lipka had to raise money just to build an early version of Shopify and why John Foley needed to find hundreds of thousands of dollars just to make a prototype of what would become. The Peloton bike but when it comes to food much of that prototyping can be done without ever raising a dime. For example lar American just chopped up dates and nuts and shaped him into bars, which eventually became Larabars Kathleen king of Tate's bake shop baked her crispy chocolate chip cookies at home long before she launched a bakery and a brand that would go on to sell to Mondelez for half a billion dollars.

1 (2m 13s):
It's a similar story with baby food. Food, it's not that hard to make you puree some veggies or mash up some fruit. And there you have it babies dinner and this is essentially what shazi this room did back in 2004 in her apartment in New York, except shazi was experimenting with a potential business idea and idea that started with pureed peas and mint and eventually a bunch of Home recipes that she turned into Happy Family Organics a brand that now sells around 200 million dollars. Baby food a year, but getting that brand off the ground took a long time and many moments when it could have collapsed for starters.

1 (2m 54s):
Her original idea was to make frozen cubes of baby food except that

3 (2m 59s):
idea never gained traction and

1 (3m 2s):
then later she had a hard time competing with the big Legacy brands that were half the price that is until she made a pivotal change a change that would turn her brand into a Powerhouse, but of course Long before any of that happened when shazi was a kid. She literally grew up in a motel in Alabama. Her parents were Indian immigrants who first settled in Canada where they ran a convenience store, but after saving up some money they were able to move to the US

3 (3m 33s):
and I remember I was three years old and my dad had this friend and he was in the motel business and in the south in the Southeast and there are a lot of Indians in motels in the south. East and this guy sold my parents a motel outside of Birmingham, Alabama, we packed up all of our stuff and then we moved down to Fulton Dale, Alabama and lived in the

1 (3m 56s):
motel. Wow. Wait, so how did I mean? How did that idea even have I mean your parents they have a convenience store and I mean it's fine, but they have this opportunity in their thinking. Yeah, let's do this. Let's go,

3 (4m 9s):
you know, they're inherently already risk-takers. I mean it both of them grew up completely. Lately with dirt floors under their feet they had grit, you know what I mean? And you know, it it's not like it's rocket science. It's a business like any other and you wrap your head around it. And you figure out what do we need to make this successful? Yeah, they didn't have experience but I think like so many other things you figure figure it out as you

1 (4m 35s):
go. Alright, so they have this opportunity to buy a motel and was it expensive to buy Motel.

3 (4m 40s):
I want to remember the exact number. I think it was $300,000. I think they had saved up $100,000 after working in Canada over 7 years, and I think they put that down and I think they bought it for 300 K.

1 (4m 55s):
So you're three years old is you your brother your mom and your dad and they just relocate to this town right outside of Birmingham, Alabama to Basically take over a Days Inn motel and that's it. That's that's where you end up growing up. Tell me about about that mean. So did you guys live in a like was it like an apartment behind the reception area where you guys live? And then the motel was like in front like how that

3 (5m 25s):
work. Yeah, so we lived it sounds so terrible, but it was actually really nice, but we lived in room 123 and 125. Yeah, and they were you know, it's like imagine stopping at a Days in somewhere as a motel and imagine getting two adjoining rooms. That was where we lived. You're my brother and I kind of had fun. It was like, you know, someone might say, oh, wow, you must be so poor. This must be so hard. I'm thinking we have a hundred and four-room

1 (5m 56s):
house and he was swimming

3 (5m 58s):
pool huge swimming pool. I mean at the time it was one of the biggest in Alabama outdoor. Wow, so and if you Think about it if if I ever wanted something to eat. There was the chef. His name is Randy Crowder and he would make me a burger and fries and a bar or restaurant and

1 (6m 14s):
bars in the restaurant. Oh,

3 (6m 16s):
okay. Yeah, and there was and there was a bar and the woman's name was Sandy and she made me my first Shirley Temple. Wow,

1 (6m 23s):
and was the hotel business. I mean, I imagine it was it was tough, right? Because there's like, you know, you got it's hard work for one thing. And another thing like it depends on guests staying at the hotel. Like, you know, it's It's a Grind right to to make that work.

3 (6m 45s):
They figured it out. They made it work. I got some bull Billboards off of the highway and you know it just like anything in life you figure out the right price point to attract your customer like you say, we have a great swimming pool an HBO. I mean, these are you know, early marketing lessons I suppose and and they made it work.

1 (7m 5s):
Chelsea I'm curious like as it as a kid when you go to school. Were you the only South Asian kid in your classes and in your school?

3 (7m 15s):
Yep, totally accept. Well my brother if you were in the same school at the same time the other one

1 (7m 20s):
and as a kid, did you feel different? Did you feel like you guys were different or

3 (7m 24s):
or well, I have a lot of heart for all of them. I have to say and my experience was really unique. So my parents You know despite us living in a motel. They knew that the most important thing for us was to get the very best education that was part of why they came to America, right? And so for them that meant private school. And so I first through third grade went to a private Catholic school and I was the only Indian girl in the class. And then after that we found another school and it was it was a Baptist school and so for fourth and fifth grade and sixth grade, I went to a Baptist school and I definitely felt more different there because there that's when I felt like in a I was told this all the time that because I was who I was and my family was who they were we were clearly going to hell and and you know that our Salvation would be if we were saved.

3 (8m 32s):
Yeah, and and I really Leave that for a while and I would come home and question my parents saying, you know, we're really good people and you guys are so nice. Why would we go to hell and I think I think and in that environment I felt definitely different but I had friends. I was like a regular kid, you know, I could invite people over to swim in the pool. We could have really good slumber parties. Yeah,

1 (9m 1s):
you know, I'm wondering when you were when you were a kid when you were at school did your Parents, like, you know have these sort of Ambitions for you to get like a stable safe job like to become a lawyer or doctor to go into Finance. Was that like was that what they wanted for you?

3 (9m 18s):
Yeah. I mean, I think the Indian parents doctors usually number one and then you know, you have to go to Harvard. So when I went to Columbia, it was sort of like for my mom it was like well why not Harvard, but the funny thing about them is that of course, they wanted me to have Every opportunity and they wanted me to do what in their mind was the traditional version of success, but the way that they lived and the ethos that they had showed me something very different. They always talked about how meaningful and how proud they were to be owners and to be the ones who are their own boss.

3 (10m 0s):
I mean granted they're working all the time, but they're working for themselves. They're working for us not for someone else. Else and I'd never let that go

1 (10m 9s):
so you go off to college and what did you what did you think you want to do

3 (10m 13s):
there? I wanted to be an artist I went to I went to Columbia. I was excited because I wanted to be in New York City and so in while I was in high school I painted. Yeah, and my my undergrad degree was in Visual Arts and I and I did a double major in history. But yeah, I want I just wanted to paint

1 (10m 34s):
pictures and was business even like part of your thought process at all when you were when you were in

3 (10m 41s):
college never, you know, if you think about Like what I had witnessed and kind of lived through. I had not a disdain for it, but I was just like I don't want to be a slave to the way that they were just always on and I saw them with the grind and it was it's like never-ending and I didn't want

1 (10m 60s):
that. Yeah you because you saw your parents and you were like, this is not the life I want to do. So when you graduated, what did you what did you do? Where'd you go

3 (11m 8s):
work? So I got a job as the first Active media buyer at what was then and it might still be the largest independently owned Agency for media buying

1 (11m 25s):
and a company that like buys ads on behalf of clients or brands on like shows like ours or TV or whatever

3 (11m 35s):
exactly and it was fun. I mean I learned a lot it was cool. I mean it was literally I think the agency that I worked in was the one that Mad Men is kind of based off of Loosely and I think one of the things I learned is that I was good at it and I didn't you know, like I didn't want to be so good at business, but I'm kind of good at it, you know, I was on a good track for Success there but I just didn't feel good about working so hard for someone else whose values I didn't truly identify with and when I say that thing about Mad Men think about what that means like why am I killing myself to make someone else so much money? That they then gift their their admin who's about to become their wife a Porsche.

3 (12m 19s):
It just it didn't feel

1 (12m 20s):
right. I mean, this is the story of so many Junior people at like consulting firms or law firms or Finance firms, which is like their the cogs grinding away making all this money for the partners and stakeholders

3 (12m 34s):
and using your like your god-given incredible talent to create abundance. But then for the wrong reasons, yeah, it's Not up to you where the money goes right and I kind of grew up seeing that when you work for yourself, you're in control and your values are the ones that you bring to the table because you're the one doing the directing and I felt yeah, it's just I felt like I had to do something else.

1 (13m 2s):
So I read that after you laughed you kind of ran your own like marketing business for a while, and then I guess I'm certain point you decided to enroll in Business School.

3 (13m 15s):
You know I decided to go to business school because I realized that I needed more Tools in my toolbox so that if I had the idea to do something big like I could do it big and I was totally terrified of going to business school. I mean, I didn't think and I didn't you know, I didn't fit in but I went with that mission I went with okay. I'm going to do something big one day and I'm going to need the credentials and I'm going to need the I'm going to need the skill set. To be able to like really go big with it. So

1 (13m 47s):
you so you decide I've got to just stay in New York to do a business degree Columbia. And was it everything you thought it was going to be

3 (13m 56s):
I was the black sheep of the business school. I mean I did not fit in I did not feel like I belonged and it's not like I was alone and everyone hated me or anything. I just didn't I felt like I felt kind of sad because I felt like a lot of the And this is totally different now what brought them there was different than what brought me to business school and I expected and wanted to meet more people that were similar minded to me and that at that time in that era pre that's sort of 2008 humbling of the economy. There was a lot of hubris in that

1 (14m 36s):
environment and then why you were there at Columbia you kind of just kind of stumbled on the side. Yeah for what would eventually become happy family. How did that happen?

3 (14m 49s):
What happened actually was it was like the time that people started talking about the new green economy. And there was I think it was fortune or Forbes, but there was a story about like, you know, how this could be the business of the future that makes change. Is that going green and that sounds so cliche right now, but remember this is like 20 years ago and right I remember I was like within a day or two of reading that article I ran into a friend of mine. And I hadn't seen her in a while and she had twin babies, which I still think it's a superhuman feat for anyone to have more than one baby at any given moment.

3 (15m 32s):
And she was telling me she's a bad mom because you know, she didn't have the time to make all of their food fresh from ingredients. You got at the local farmers market and I never like to see my friends. Upset and berate themselves, and this is someone I really cared for and I'm like I haven't seen you in a really long time. You just had twins. It's amazing and you're not a bad mom from feeding them baby food out of a jar. And then it was like all of a sudden I was like, oh, well, there's got to be something better. There's not. Oh, well, then I'm going to make something better because if I can make something better it all came together for me. It wasn't just like selling a product.

3 (16m 14s):
It was contributing to what looked like it was. Going to be the movement of the future towards creating abundance in a way that felt right and it just kind of came together where it was like, you know, I have to do this. Wait. I'm

1 (16m 26s):
just this is like this is the summer of 2003 and in that moment at that lunch you thought hey I could maybe Tinker around with this idea or or was it just a seed that was planted in your head that kind of just sat there and germinated over time.

3 (16m 46s):
I asked her. You know, what's the best like why are you feeling guilty about buying something? Like isn't it? Good? And she's like, no, it's gross comes in a jar and smells and it just doesn't like it's not fresh and I thought wow, you know, this shouldn't be one thing that you stress out about. There should be something that makes you feel good about how you feed your children and then that then I started looking

1 (17m 11s):
into it. So you thought all right. So you leave that lunch and you the sort of the gears in your head are turning and you're like Okay, let me let me look into it. And what did you find was? What was on the market in 2003?

3 (17m 23s):
Yeah. So what I found was so interesting that baby food as a category was created in round the 1930s. Okay, and the category was created to be. This new market for convenient and cheap product that was consistent and that, you know started in the 30s with kind of the two Mega Giants Beechnut and and Gerber and

1 (17m 53s):
the Gerber baby became like an iconic baby. Yeah, right,

3 (17m 57s):
you know, but that didn't meet the needs of my friend. She wants something fresh and premium and alive and and she wanted something that was going to contribute to their health and that Tasted

1 (18m 9s):
good, but in 2003 like presumably Gerber and Beechnut were like the Coke and Pepsi a baby food, but there weren't a whole lot of you know, if you think about Coke and Pepsi you also have like, you know, a thousand other great beverages out there that you can sort of check out and organic and kombuchas and whatever whatever is out there like you go to Whole Foods and there's just like endless shelves of cool interesting drinks. Was it mainly Gerber and Beechnut in 2003 when it came to baby

3 (18m 36s):
food. There was a small organic player. Been called Earth's Best, right and there were something a little players. There was another one. I remember looking at and then there were Innovations from around the world. It started seeing like there were some fresh and frozen options in the UK. I mean, I went and visited I try to learn as much as I could but we're going to do the UK. Oh, yeah. Absolutely.

1 (18m 58s):
Yeah, they're like wait while you were business school student you flew out to the UK to just buy baby

3 (19m 4s):
food and and met these two women who started a frozen baby food. Company and I was the more I looked into it. See this is what really drove me. It was like I actually saw this whole company is an opportunity to change Children's Health for the better. I really did. I thought I thought well if we're starting ourselves off on processed foods, and then we're hooked on processed foods and then we eat the standard American diet then we get sick and we get sick because we don't have this like Health blueprint that could Based on a more natural way of

1 (19m 41s):
living. So so you really start to research this in Earnest you go to the UK you check out the baby foods and you start your second year Columbia with this idea to pursue this

3 (19m 53s):
thing. That was all I lived for Wow. After that point. I just became the baby food girl and I did a little pulling, you know, and this isn't think 230 parents More than 70% of them didn't like the taste. Of Jarred baby food of the of that seventy percent 12 percent had made their own homemade or tried to of that 12% I think it was only like four percent continue to do. So, this is a lot of work takes time. Yeah, and I'm thinking let's come up with something that answers this need putting some chart chart lamb and some kale and white beans in a puree feel so special.

3 (20m 39s):
Like let's make these special. I mean who's putting quinoa and baby food?

1 (20m 42s):
Yeah, just out of curiosity shazi. I mean, you're obviously super smart and like very resourceful and you've kind of learned a lot about this industry, but food is especially when you're talking about babies who like that is that's just crazy scary because you know, you like you need food scientists who understand pH levels and and shelf life and spoilage and all this stuff like, I'm assuming that you weren't quite there just yet. You're still making it your Cuisinart and just testing it with for you and some friends and just write or did you start to talk to food scientists already at that

3 (21m 21s):
point? I was doing both. I was trying to make something that I could be proud of and then I was trying to think we'll how do you scale this and make it commercial and you can't here's the thing which you're totally right about. I mean most of the people I mean 99.85% of people were just like you are absolutely crazy eye. Not touch that business with a 10-foot pole. No one is ever going to manufacture that for you. This is a hazard just from the get-go and you know, don't touch don't try to touch this industry and don't try to wake a sleeping giant and I was like, you know, I just started talking to people. I called the organic trade Association. I started calling trade Association started going to trade shows.

3 (22m 4s):
I met like like all so many special people that some that you've even interviewed that I'm just so like humbled by like I called them like I cold called Seth Goldman, you

1 (22m 15s):
know have honesty founder of honesty and 2004 by the way. He was not crushing it yet. Right like this. His company was still you still building it, but but he was already a known entity because honesty was as kind of cool story and and you'd called him for advice I guess,

3 (22m 32s):
right? Yeah. I kept putting myself in these positions to like meet people and learn because I didn't know anything about the food industry, right?

1 (22m 40s):
So your prototypes, where were you making

3 (22m 41s):
them? Oh those were like in my kitchen. I used to have these little containers and I would make I would make you know, all the flavors that I thought. We would one day

1 (22m 52s):
launch and you're turning them into ice cubes,

3 (22m 54s):
right? Yep. It fill it. It's a little like think of like a yeah, like little ice cube tray and you pop out what you need and and you know freezing is sort of Nature's Best preservative and I'm just curious about recipes.

1 (23m 8s):
How did you know? Recipes to make

3 (23m 10s):
and I did a lot of research. I talked to so many nutritionists. I have a lot of friends, you know, and I found myself excited to just always be kind of trying new things and coming up with cute names. We had one with beets and carrots called it beta carotene and the peas were a nice one and it was so bright green, but I felt like they needed something and so it makes us like really nice mint tea and steam the peas with the mint and that You know, I don't know you play with it and you

1 (23m 42s):
learn this one so you it was like it was like a couple of you do like two three four thing ingredients in there. Not too many vegetables and

3 (23m 49s):
fruits. Well, there was one inspired by my mom called baby doll. And that was that had some more spice and some flavor in it.

1 (23m 58s):
What somebody told her yellow peas

3 (23m 60s):
or yeah, it was lentils French lentils and potatoes carrots and we use coriander and a touch of cumin and just a hint of cinnamon. Women and all of those things had you know, like everything had a reason it wasn't just yeah. I mean it was like if you only had good stuff under the kitchen sink and you throw everything in the kitchen sink, which it would be good because you started with good stuff. It was kind of like that just you know, so many different fun combinations that felt right and sounded good and tasted good.

1 (24m 29s):
I mean at this point it was still just you right at me because you keep saying we but I think you're you are in your kitchen doing this by

3 (24m 37s):
yourself. Yeah. No at that point it was Me and then I had a lot of friends who knew what I was doing. I'd like almost like a support group,

1 (24m 46s):
but that you would just and you were talking about this all the time. And at what point did you did you come up with a name? Happy baby?

3 (24m 53s):
Well, it was called Fresh Start Organics. That was the name. I wanted was Fresh Start Organics. Yeah and actually turned out when I went to finally get to the trademarking that Fresh Start was taken by a woman in California who was going to do fresh frozen organic baby food, which never ended up launching but even still Till we had to come up with options. And so I remember having these little boards and we there was a naming shop where they from Minnesota and they came up with a number of options and there were like twinkle and googoo gaga. And I mean funny funny names and one of the names they came up with was happy baby.

3 (25m 35s):
And I was like At first I didn't actually see it. I was Pro. What I wanted to go with was nurture me and our incorporation name was nurture ink and then finally I started seeing happy baby and happy and like like pairing the emotion. Yeah with health and I was just like who in the world doesn't want to happy baby. That's everything.

1 (25m 59s):
All right. So you've got a name you've got this concept of like Frozen baby food. Now you need money or do you go I mean, I

3 (26m 7s):
I tried everything I I was so I wanted to raise like half a million dollars which to me was like that current equivalent of maybe a trillion dollars. Yeah, and that would be

1 (26m 18s):
enough to to get the first like production up and running and to maybe get some distribution like that would be enough to give you like a year or two of Runway,

3 (26m 26s):
maybe. Yep. The original plan was to launch in a few stores in New York, you know find a manufacturing facility to make it partner, you know, put together a best-in-class Advisory Board For biologists nutritionist pediatricians like the whole like to make it feel that I was I'm not an expert. I need to bring those people together and to you know, build out a team and have have people to help because you just nobody does any of this stuff by themselves and I almost made the worst mistake of my life. I almost took half a million dollars from a VC group.

3 (27m 7s):
Because I was I felt so alone, you know and I felt so broke and I felt like a disappointment to my family that I hear. I was went to Columbia business school. I never recruited for anything, you know, everybody else is like, you know talking about their job at Morgan or whatever and you know, like some of them, you know, some of my friends would be like we're going out for sushi. I mean, I could never go

1 (27m 32s):
and Meanwhile your mom and dad are like so what are you gonna do? And how's this baby food going? You know,

3 (27m 37s):
whatever and it and I didn't want to ask them for money. Yeah, you know, yeah sure because I just didn't feel feel comfortable and it was kind of like when I wanted to be an artist. I didn't want to ask them to support me so I could paint pictures in New York City. It just didn't feel honorable and right and and so I got a job and then this time I know I found someone and I thought okay. This is it. I'm going to I'm going to raise this money it took my money for the VC firm. Yeah, and I'm thinking the terms were so bad when they finally gave me the term sheet that I shared it with a few different advisors and everyone was like shazi.

3 (28m 19s):
You can't take that deal. You lose control the second you start you won't really own this thing and you know all the things that you want to do. You're jeopardizing them by bringing on a partner who you don't really know

1 (28m 31s):
just to clarify when you when you because you need money to start and Came, are you impressed them and they're like sure we'll give you half a million bucks, which can be really attractive because it's a shortcut then you'd have to go to a bunch of people and start asking for all this money. If one one VC firm is going to give you all of your sunshade money that's going to save you a lot of time than I saw and that's attractive and a lot of people we've had them on the show. They take that deal but the terms were what do you remember what the terms were like, they would own more than half of it or

3 (29m 3s):
what it was. It was 70% they would on. Don't have every blocking right every every every right to you know, and I was ready to sign on and then one day one day one of them was just like yeah, we love the name Fair fa re and I'm like, I don't I don't know. It doesn't like feel good and just kind of gross and like I just I was just as funny that was like the day that I met my husband for our first internet date you had online can we met on the internet and I we were Walking into this like little place in SoHo and I meet Joe and he's just like cute puppy dog of a guy and I'm just like to kind of tell this guy my whole and he's like not a business guy and I remember part of the story is just the advice you gave me which was like, don't do something doesn't feel right.

3 (29m 57s):
Like I don't have an MBA from Columbia or a degree from an Ivy League school to tell you that he's like a snowboarder yoga guy, I mean and but he The right and I didn't take the

1 (30m 9s):
deal. Wow, sweetly. And the first date with this guy who is now your husband and partner and life. He's like this just doesn't sound right to me and but and you're like, yep, I think this is not right. I don't think I'm gonna do this deal.

3 (30m 25s):
Yeah. I mean, it's it might be obvious to you or to someone else. But you know when you're in the thick of it and you're stressed out I'm here using your Amex to charge peanut butter. I would eat peanut butter in my And in Brooklyn with a chopstick to make it last longer like who does that? Yeah.

1 (30m 43s):
So you tell this VC firm. I'm not gonna take your money and but that means you now have to find the $500,000 because this is the number in your head. So, where do you go? Who do you see? How do you start to get that money?

3 (30m 58s):
It was hearing now a million times. I could probably still remember the original investor roster. I think it was 36 people for $550,000 and Seth Goldman of honesty was $2,500

1 (31m 9s):
seven golden of us to give you $2,500

3 (31m 12s):
$2,500 done. Originally. He was going to give us five thousand dollars, but then he told me that his wife really needed a new oven that year and it was going to end up he was going to have to cut it down to

1 (31m 22s):
$2,500 my kids. I would cost $2,500. By the way. I wanted to take you to Cobble together the

3 (31m 31s):
$500,000 it took like at least six months and then as soon as I raise that money. Started raising the next million like because we were like on the verge of spending it'll you know, it's just it's like a it was a

1 (31m 43s):
churn. The thing is that the in some ways the seed round is the most stressful because you're raising money from people, you know, right like family and friends and like it's their money, but at the same time like they're also the people who want to help right? So I mean did you find that it was challenging getting that initial 500,000 were most people like, you know, sha zhi I believe in you. I've known you for a while. And here you go. Here's Pierce 5,000 bucks or here's you know, 2,500 bucks or here's 10,000

3 (32m 14s):
bucks. Oh my God, it was super challenging the ones who like you who don't really want to invest have a hard time being straightforward some time. And so then you're like circling back and circling back and following up and you know, it's it was really hard and yeah, some people believed in me, but like I didn't have a track record. You know and I've never done this before I didn't know anything about the food industry and I think the people who invested first of all, there's so much extra pressure when it's people, you know, yeah and my mom actually to go back to the beginning. She was the first person who put the money in like I knew the value of my mom's money and you know, I knew she was like making a margin selling Snickers bars to give me that money.

3 (33m 4s):
Yeah, and that had such a tremendous. endless amount of pressure and then there were people who invested because they really believed in the vision and the mission and felt like it was right and felt like, you know, I was gonna do my very best or die trying

1 (33m 29s):
When we come back in just a moment how shazi took that startup cash and created her first products. And what happened when those products totally bombed stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from and ER. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a JW s dot o-- r-- g--

3 (34m 11s):
NPR's codes, which is a podcast about race in America. That's about all of us our history's how were represented the ways. We work together and

1 (34m 21s):
worked against each

3 (34m 22s):
other. You'll learn you might get mad. You'll definitely laugh

1 (34m 26s):
but don't take my word for it. Just listen to NPR's code switch. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's the mid-2000s and shows Eva's from is working on a fresh frozen type of baby food and alternative to the jars of beech nut and Gerber that dominate the baby food aisle, but her idea it's hard to pitch to investors because the beech nuts and the Gerber's they're super inexpensive often less than a dollar a jar.

3 (35m 1s):
My whole pitch was look I'm not To make something cheap. I'm trying to make something premium that is truly like an alternative to homemade and you know, we might look at the baby food market but then look at all the other stuff for baby. You can drop a thousand dollars on a crib right now. If you want you could drop a thousand dollars on a on a stroller and yet at the time parents didn't have a better option when it came from for food, which does actually impact your health and so my whole thing was look people will Spend more and we will be able to have a healthy margin and to a retailer. This is an opportunity to make a healthy margin on something.

3 (35m 43s):
That was otherwise a lost

1 (35m 44s):
leader. All right. See you. So you raise this money and you need to start to make the product right? But in the meantime, you met somebody who who becomes your sort of your co-founder Jessica Rolfe. Who's Jessica had you meet

3 (35m 59s):
her so yeah, Jessica was my founding partner and she was our CEO. Oh, and she Working in Texas at Whole Foods like on-site at Whole Foods basically doing research for them and we reconnected through a mutual friend. And you know, I said look if you want to be a part of this come join me help me but having lunch it that that's

1 (36m 25s):
kind of a big risk, right? I mean there are many stories like that that end really badly. How did you know that this was the right decision?

3 (36m 34s):
And I think I have pretty good gut for good people. You know, I talked to her in met her a number of times before I offered her a role, but she is just authentic and smart and really organized. She was a perfect person to be a CO o to like a, you know, crazy kind of loudmouth Visionary type person who had big ideas and Big Dreams. She's an Executor and that's what a lot of us Founders need some time. As you know the right person to actually make it

1 (37m 6s):
happen. Alright, so you've raised this seed money. You've got a partner in Jessica. And how did you find the place to make the baby food? It was it in New York. I mean it would I guess would have to be right because it you were living in New York.

3 (37m 21s):
Yeah, actually the there was a man I'd met who had a little manufacturing facility outside of Boston and he was making kids Foods. I remember calling him and I said Steve Eve can you just do think it would be okay we could just do a pilot run because I really just and I want to launch from a professional facility and he said yes and Jessica was there and we were jumping up and down, you know, and we would drive up and because my parents had a Days Inn, we had these days in employee employee discount coupons. They were like literal physical yellow coupons and you could get a Days Inn room for $25 a night.

3 (38m 2s):
So like Jessica and I would share A room at the Days Inn Danvers, which was near the facility and we literally go and like make the baby food in the plant and their plant and we initially used like a pastry baster pastry bag type of thing to

1 (38m 20s):
Phil Phil what cars? Oh

3 (38m 22s):
cute like this little we made a mold. We made a tray of that look like an ice cube. Can I try and we would feel you know, it was kind of like Laverne and Shirley like I would do the peas and She would do the carrots.

1 (38m 35s):
Oh, so you guys were making you guys were doing the labor? You didn't just Outsource it to them and have them do it. Like you had to

3 (38m 40s):
do it. There were people around to help but like we were doing

1 (38m 43s):
it but this is like by hand a giant like pastry bag that you were just squeezing into the things and and then the other question is, where did you get all like the vegetables in the you know the peas and all that stuff. We're did you source that

3 (38m 54s):
from? Yeah, I mean, so it'd be like local organic produce that we would, you know, peel and chop up and steam and you know, just literally just like if you were making it homemade, that's the way Doing

1 (39m 5s):
it and this is a marshal kitchen and you just use like they're giant whatever pots and Steamers and whatever to just to make the first run the first

3 (39m 14s):
bag. Exactly. Yeah that is massive. You know, it's like it looks like a like a giant had a Cuisinart they had one of those and they had this blast freezer. I remember being in that blast freezer and being like so cold. Yeah.

1 (39m 28s):
And the ice trays of the baby food. Did you put that in like a cardboard box or was it like a like a plastic sealed plastic thing around it with your name on it, like happy baby on it. What did you had you package

3 (39m 42s):
it? Yeah, so there's an ice cube tray and I'm like a thin sort of plastic film over it that was like kind of heat sealed on and then the other came in a little cardboard outer shipper and it said happy baby and there's pictures of the All of the fruits and vegetables which I would take so I had this little like white box and I would take all the fruits and vegetables and photograph them. And then we had a contest for all of the different babies to be on the front of the happy baby box. And that was it was really fun to name the winners because they all of course became like huge fans of happy baby. So at least we had like seven consumers in the beginning because we had one of them was my nephew.

3 (40m 21s):
But yeah, and and it's just it looks like this fun this fun beautiful different thing in the the freezer with a bunch of babies on the front of the Box smiling at you as you walk past the

1 (40m 33s):
freezer, but once you pack this first run, how did you wear it? Well, where did you sell them? I mean you had to sell them at a store. So what store who sold it.

3 (40m 45s):
So we launched with in New York City and five Gourmet Garage Doors. Gourmet Garage is my first of I mean must be at least like a thousand demos

1 (40m 56s):
and assuming you you're doing these in the And like the frozen food aisle, right? I mean is is that as it Howard?

3 (41m 3s):
Yeah, so you have like a table and and you put down as much as you can to make it look nice and warm and fuzzy and I'm standing there with a happy baby t-shirt on and and my gloves, you know, and you and you're trying to get people to sample what looks like warm fresh really really high like beautiful colors of these like yummy foods that I'm thinking I'm so Proud of this. This is taken years to make this, you know and you're just standing there by the freezer waiting for someone to come and then it's like barely anybody comes and then we you're waiting for you waiting for a

1 (41m 44s):
mom with a baby you like to walk in yours. You're like, oh Mom baby come in and and they might just pass you by like, I'm sorry. I'm just really busy.

3 (41m 51s):
Yeah, I mean imagine like I don't want to try that or a little baby food. A lot of people were like, oh, I don't want it.

1 (41m 58s):
Sample, baby food,

3 (42m 0s):
and I'm like, well, why don't you want to sample it? It's amazing. It's so look at this. It's incredible. It's delicious. I live for literally I live for this but that's not that's not how you convince a consumer to buy something, you know, and I'm thinking like I have this big dream to change the way children are fed in this country and it is not going to happen if I keep standing where I am standing right now, and we got to change we need to get into that

1 (42m 27s):
aisle. But understand why were people but by no, I mean, it's a great idea. You're demoing it. You've got this cool concept why weren't people buying the Frozen baby

3 (42m 39s):
food? Because it wasn't that some people weren't buying it. There are just a few people who were buying it. Right but they were buying it as an alternative to homemade. They were not what I needed was the alternative to the jar. And that's how you move markets and it wasn't

1 (42m 58s):
convenient. And also I guess our habit is to go to that one aisle over all the jars are like we don't it's hard to change human habits, right and people who are not used to going to the freezer aisle for baby

3 (43m 11s):
food. I mean, one of the hardest things to do is to change human behavior. And what I realized is you have to work with the existing human behavior and make small steps to change. I That like my whole dream of creating, you know, the sort of like enlightened alternative to that jar that alternative was not frozen baby food. And so it also meant like we're running out of money. We need to Pivot and we need to think of something else because the dream was pure and real in the vision was real but I didn't have the product right despite how much I loved

1 (43m 46s):
it. Just just because like in the first year of the company, do you remember how what your Revenue was

3 (43m 54s):
hundred and sixteen? ten thousand dollars Which was far from what I thought we would be on track for

1 (44m 2s):
so $116,000 is revenue, but obviously you've got all the costs of all the produce you gotta buy the packaging and the distribution like you probably were losing money, right you were you you're eating into your 500,000 seed money pretty

3 (44m 18s):
quickly. Oh, yeah. Our Revenue was certainly not covering. Our costs are operating

1 (44m 24s):
costs. Yeah. I mean this sounds like you realize pretty quickly like within within the first year of launching the company. Did you continue to make the ice cubes? And you know, you're to your three kids is like 2006-2007. Is that is that what happy baby was still in those years?

3 (44m 45s):
Yeah. So in 2006 when we launched we had five skews 10 flavors of frozen organic baby meals and I Probably guy within and here I'm talking about something that took me almost two years and change to get on shelf get produced professionally have the right, you know quality control scientists microbiologists everybody working together to make this product probably on the third time that I did a demo did I realize that this wasn't going to work

1 (45m 22s):
but you still have to make it you saw the

3 (45m 23s):
sell it. Yeah and what I realized hey - Ozzie, you're being a dummy Frozen. This is a beautiful product. But it's the alternative to homemade baby food. Yeah, this is not how you're going to change the way children are fed in our country. You got to do that in the baby aisle, where moms are shopping and dads are

1 (45m 40s):
shopping. So did you start to think? Okay. I better just make shelf-stable baby food in jars, like Beechnut and

3 (45m 47s):
Gerber. No. No, what I thought was let's look at the set and let's and lighten it and the first Innovation actually was let's look, let's see what's there and how can we bring something meaningful to the table? And it was funny. I was having we had a trade show or you know, sampling the Frozen baby food because to the external world, you don't tell them you're giving up on something you're still selling it in and trying to build a brand, you know, but in your heart you just know like it's just like, you know, this is not going to be the thing but you got to keep it going.

1 (46m 20s):
I'm really interested in this because there's a lot of times when you see somebody a politician or a Business Leaders very optimistic. Okay, you know politician is a good example there pull number suck but they're like we're going to win the White House your sales sucked and you still had to sell this product and be optimistic and represent it

3 (46m 37s):
always and it was this is you know, this is part of the solution. We're playing a long game here. We're changing consumer behavior that doesn't happen overnight, you know believe in me buy us some time. We're going to support this we're going to promote it and we're on a mission don't give up on my

1 (46m 54s):
mission, but it was hard.

3 (46m 56s):
Yeah. I'm in the sales were terrible and every time we made a batch we would lose money on it, you know, and we had to keep selling it in to keep staying alive because you can't just like launch and then go away and then come back two years. Later

1 (47m 9s):
meantime. Were you still we still raising money?

3 (47m 13s):
I was never not raising money. So what did you I mean what was

1 (47m 17s):
going on in your head? I mean, you've got the Frozen cubes, you know, it's not working. How you know how you gonna fix that? Where are you even looking for ideas?

3 (47m 27s):
I mean, we looked everywhere and the first the first space to innovate where I really saw something was with cereal. So we launched the first-ever baby food in the world that had probiotics and I believe very strongly in gut health and establishing strong gut health, you know from the very beginning of Life and why can't we Reduce them into a first food that's a winning food typically off of breast milk or formula. So we still have so the baby still has probiotics and that was just a moment and that became Happy Bellies and that cereal was like a huge success.

3 (48m 10s):
I mean to quantify huge and it was it took us from you know, we did a hundred and fifteen hundred sixteen thousand the first year 520,000 the second year still on Frozen baby food. The next year we launched the cereal and were able to get so much more distribution because we weren't struggling for space in the freezer. Right and we went to two point 1 million.

1 (48m 33s):
So this is this is like rice cereal like that you mix with water and fed to babies.

3 (48m 38s):
Well, so we had three so we had a multigrain with amaranth and quinoa. We had a rice brown rice and we had an oatmeal and we could also you know show people how you could mix them with the cubes of Rosen to make a yummy breakfast or a meal and it started beginning a platform. I've been absolutely saved our hides. Wow,

1 (49m 2s):
but you're still not able to kind of crack that market with the Frozen baby food. So are you still obsessing about how to solve that problem at this

3 (49m 11s):
point? I was I was never not thinking about what what is what is the actual alternative to the jar? And then one day I saw

1 (49m 20s):
it one day you saw it? What?

3 (49m 22s):
But I saw a pouch of a sauce at a trade show and Melbourne Australia and then I started thinking sauce. Yeah, and then I started seeing kids applesauce in this pouch and Wheezy sauce like it was yeah and it was from it was from Europe and it was like the very you know first there were these pouches that had this tear tear strip and we looked into that and we launched initially with both kinds of pouches that are strip for Chunky meals and a pouch that had a spout where the the beauty of it. This is this product this package enabled to change consumer behavior in a way that gave them a more premium product with fruits and vegetables a lot of vegetables actually, but made it easier rather than harder.

3 (50m 16s):
I mean it was like, you know, it's like the epitome of the lightbulb moment where we've been in this game for a few years now. Now and you see something you're like, that's what I've been looking for all along. And that is it that is the alternative to the jar

1 (50m 29s):
because you wouldn't need to refrigerate it. You could put it on the Shelf next to Gerber and whatever right and it's convenient. It's a pouch

3 (50m 38s):
and it tasted better and it it felt better. You could take feel the fiber in the food like the technology allowed for such a different

1 (50m 46s):
process. All right, so you've got this idea for pouches. But so where did you Source them from work? And what factors? Trees were going to be able to because you are using like pastry bags to fill ice cube trays and I guess I got a little more sophisticated. But what What factories are companies are poor, you know plants in the u.s. Could fill pouches with your baby

3 (51m 8s):
food. There were two options in the United States and one in Canada. And when you notice something that's disruptive and groundbreaking in the market your competitors notice it

1 (51m 20s):
to yeah sure

3 (51m 21s):
and if you don't have cash to compete with someone else asking for that line time in these facilities that have this very precious and very highly sought-after commodity of a technology then you know, that's when it gets like really challenging and so we lived through that too because if you're Scrappy and bootstrap The Way We Were that was like actually the big thing was like was so crazy because I'm sitting here thinking I finally found found the solution. It will make this business the business in my dreams and then you're like, oh my God, I have this huge challenge as a result of that solution. That makes me feel like this is nearly impossible right now.

3 (52m 2s):
And there's I mean that the world of baby food sounds sweet, but it's actually like a dog-eat-dog. It was I bet it was like a dog-eat-dog world of of competition and back then when you're fighting for shelf space. Do you think about it like go to going to a retailer and showing them this whole full lineup of B20 skews to have that platform. I mean this was like it was like the stuff of dreams, but you had to be the first one to get there.

1 (52m 30s):
And what are you the first one to get there or were there others who snuck in before you?

3 (52m 35s):
Okay, so we were the first brand of baby food in pouches and Whole Foods and Target. Wow, and and those those two accounts were really meaningful for our whole our whole business moving

1 (52m 47s):
forward. How did you get into Target?

3 (52m 52s):
Into Target with Frozen baby food, Jessica and I would walk around a store. I was twelve Target stores that we were in for the test. We will walk around the store with a free trial coupon and a box of Frozen baby food and regardless of how terrible our turns were they kept us in and I'm like very proud to tell you that happy is the biggest work biggest brand and Target in baby. Wow, and it started in 12 stores literally walking around and giving it away for

1 (53m 19s):
free. But how did you I mean, how did how were you able to to fund that was it hard to find that that growth because I mean I've heard that you basically were like, I'm just not going to go to private Equity or Venture Capital. I'm going to raise this money pretty much from Individual investors or you know, I'm going to borrow it that's harder to do in some ways. Were you able to raise the money fast enough to fund the production

3 (53m 46s):
I never so I never took a penny from any institutional shareholders that time in our life. That was really hard for me because I up until that moment. We didn't have this like Breakthrough hit and I was ready to do whatever it took to make sure we had the financing we needed to grow the business and I started talking to private Equity Funds and I had a few options and I was scared but I you know like you it's one thing to Cobble together $550,000 from 36 people. It's another thing to raise eight million dollars in one shot and that's where I was that's what I was looking. Being at and actually what happened is, you know, my son was just born I got I got an inbound email that said we're doing an online.

3 (54m 37s):
It was going to be an online documentary actually for American Express and we want to we want to tell the story of happy baby. We've heard about your company.

1 (54m 46s):
How did it was just a just random solicit. I like an email from somewhere at a Max of

3 (54m 51s):
just well it And totally random it wasn't totally random. So the real story is in 2009. There was a competition called shine a light and shine a light was competition between American Express and NBC to shine a light on inspiring new businesses that were actually making it in America and you had to submit this very long form and you know talk about why your business should could be could be one of these. Yeah, we didn't win. We were actually the second we were the runner-up to the most inspiring business in the country. And then what happened was about a year later American Express was doing another campaign and I had no idea when they called.

3 (55m 31s):
It was an inbound email. I didn't even know it was related. They finally said well we heard about you through shine a light but we're just doing an online documentary. Can we follow you around for four days? Of course, so they filmed this this for four days and this is it's all kind of culminating, you know, so I I just had my baby and he's in the video and it's very sweet is the happiest baby honestly, so it was just beautiful to see that Journey kind of documented and you know, we've been like working hard and we're sort of seeing some success. It's not big but like the like it's coming and the pouches are coming and we know that something is about to happen and then Amex emails and they say we need you to come in for voice over work for the commercial and I'm like, what do you mean commercial?

3 (56m 20s):
I thought it was an online documentary own. No, it's a commercial. It's the centerpiece of a campaign. We're putting 50 million dollars of media behind your

1 (56m 27s):
commercial. Wow. So for I mean this was going to be a massive ad campaign that you didn't even have to pay for it after having there's no marketing dollars yet to put behind it. You were also all of a sudden going to your name and your brand we're going to reach millions of people.

3 (56m 45s):
It's a guy they played it before, you know, like on the Golden Globes when they show you what like save it for the end. What's the best V our commercial played before that they played it on the Super Bowl pregame. Wow, and all I had to do was take that email from Amex and email it around and I raise eight million dollars in three

1 (57m 6s):
weeks. What did did I mean what happened to sales? I mean of all of a sudden millions of people are exposed to your brand and products

3 (57m 16s):
that Gyros 39

1 (57m 17s):
million. How did you make enough products to fulfill all that demand?

3 (57m 23s):
God knows it was hard 39 million went from 13 million to 39 million like practically overnight when we had a hundred and some skews. So we had you know at this point we're building a real platform for nutrition for you know, the first three years of

1 (57m 39s):
life hundred different product. So like the pouches and the cereals and the you know,

3 (57m 44s):
Puffs and the Yogi's and yeah.

1 (57m 48s):
All right. So here's now here's the crazy thing you hit 63 million. I'm rev dollars in revenue in 2012 a company that did a hundred and fifteen thousand dollars just a few years earlier selling Frozen ice cubes of baby food that you were co-packing. You're making a CO banking facility. You're doing 63 million dollars you far out presumably out, you know, exceeding your even your own business plans and projections. and 2013 you sell 92% of the company to den own which makes yogurts and it's a huge French conglomerate owns a lot of food companies. Why what was the thinking behind it?

1 (58m 28s):
What was the advantage? I mean, obviously you're going to get paid a lot of money, but but you will already doing so well, what why did you sell it at that

3 (58m 36s):
point? I was really really nervous. I was nervous about the future of the business because I saw the potential of it being the biggest baby food brand in the world and I really felt like we are a in unchartered territory be it's not like you don't know what your competitors doing. I knew both of both of our bigger competitors had hired bankers and we're selling their

1 (59m 3s):
companies. This was like Plum Organics

3 (59m 5s):
and there was another one called Ella.

1 (59m 8s):
You knew if they had the backing of those big companies, they could potentially crush you like with with all those add marketing dollars and R&D in the distribution. They had like if they wanted to if you stayed independent you might have gotten crushed.

3 (59m 24s):
We might have gotten crushed in everything. We work so hard to build around that initial mission of actually changing the way children are fed. All of that could have been jeopardized and then personally I was just I was in so much turmoil at home and I just felt like I needed I needed another strategic

1 (59m 46s):
partner what was going on at home?

3 (59m 49s):
Well in April of 2012 my son who's you know, so beautifully featured in the American Express commercials was diagnosed with autism and it was a state of it was it's the call it regressive autism. So he hit every Milestone as first two years of life and all of a sudden he was losing his milestones and losing his ability to communicate and point and talk and label things and and make eye contact and it it was terrifying and as a mom leading a business that was what the fastest growing Food business for almost three years in a row it was you know, I just I felt like I needed to take a step back and say what But I need to focus on number one the health of my child in my family.

3 (1h 0m 42s):
Yeah,

1 (1h 0m 43s):
so so this entire I mean this is really important because right we we talked to Founders about their businesses and their and growing it and and and usually we do talk about personal life and that's much more important in the business, right? And in this case you now know that you need to focus on Primarily on your son and working with him and with people who could help him and and you you were not able to do that in sort of the life you were you were little living I guess is that is it right?

3 (1h 1m 25s):
I mean, it's right, you know, not just financially but focus and attention wise, you know, it's like there's so many special moments. Not that I was just missing as a mom, but that I needed to be a part of In order to help his healing and the thing was what my parents would have done for me is drop everything and focus on how to figure out the solution for for me to have the best chance of Life.

1 (1h 1m 51s):
The other thing is that in addition to of course getting more time with your son. You know, I'm assuming the choosing to sell also gave you, you know Financial Security because I think a lot of people don't realize that even though the company was making, you know, Three million dollars in Revenue at this point. I'm assuming you were not you were making millions and millions of dollars and by selling to Danone it was going to make you financially secure which which I imagine was attractive that security was attractive.

3 (1h 2m 24s):
We sure are especially when you feel like you need to find you need something for your family and your children. I will you know, I will kill for it. Yeah and master the walls. Yeah. I will do everything in my power. And and I'm a fighter and I don't I don't quit. And in that in that case, I felt like that was the right choice to give me some Financial Security to partner with summons that I could continue to build and have ownership but not not the majority of the burden. Yeah, and you know, not for nothing Danone has been selling baby food for a hundred years. They were the second largest in for nutrition company in the world and there were a lot of synergies that I could have imagined working with them to build this brand for the future and which we Have we have actually accomplished?

3 (1h 3m 9s):
Yeah, I mean, it's

1 (1h 3m 11s):
interesting. We didn't an episode with Tristan Walker who started bevel personal grooming products for for men of color and then expanded it and he sold it to Procter and Gamble and now he works for Procter & Gamble and one of the arguments you made was like look to get this out to the world. We needed the marketing dollars the R&D dollars the distribution dollars that that a company like Procter & Gamble has was it the same with Danone like with the know? Known and their marketing budget and there, you know huge Rd and and their other brands was that in your mind the way that you could you could really scale happy baby and and family happy family and turn it into a the big huge brand you want it to

3 (1h 3m 55s):
be and that was part of that was part of what I had hoped. And if anything I wasn't so naive to think they were going to do very much because you know, they went when a big Corporation buys us. Our brand part of it is they want to retain your DNA and What Makes You uniquely, you know, like the mission of our brand and the beauty of our business is very attractive to a large organization because we helped Inspire them to make the changes that they inherently want to make but have inherited so much else in their history, you know, and it's funny how it works out but it's been it's been a really Pleasant two-way street and we've stayed very true to who we are for instance.

3 (1h 4m 36s):
I I've really believe strongly in the you know, the movement around be corpse and happy has been a b Corp for many many years and Danone recently became you know, the largest publicly traded B Corp in the world and I feel like happy has been an inspiration in that process and that's a way to make systemic change. I'm not saying everything is sunshine and rainbows when you sell your company as a Founder, it's hard. It's bittersweet. It's my baby, but it's not mine

1 (1h 5m 6s):
anymore. You step down as CEO in early 2018. I may still obviously involved with the brand and I think you still own a little bit of of the brand chassis when you think about all that you achieved and I mean, you know, just those the pivots and the crazy moments and Amex and seeing the pouches and then you know, how much you think this is this all happened because of luck and how much because you were just smart and you worked really hard.

3 (1h 5m 38s):
I don't see how you can answer that without saying both. You know, I think number one. I think I am the luckiest person I've ever met but you know, I think you make your own luck by showing up and fighting for what you believe in and being there. So when those opportunities do show up, it feels lucky, you know feels lucky that we were in Amex but like I said, you can't win the lottery unless you buy a ticket. So I think it's both

1 (1h 6m 5s):
if you I mean if you think about I know your dad he passed away in 2013 and your mom still around and she's still in Alabama still involved the motel business. They wanted you to be a doctor a lawyer or maybe financing like that. I mean I have to assume that even your daddy got to see he got to see really succeed. He got to see that. That must have been a big deal for them, you know moving to the US with no money and like knowing no one and grinding away at a motel and raising their kids and rooms a hundred and 103 and to whatever was and to see you achieve that I mean not just a message just they must have been so proud.

1 (1h 6m 51s):
I mean he must have been so

3 (1h 6m 52s):
proud of you. He was he was. I'm sorry, you know nothing makes me prouder than thinking about every you know month. We well we would talk almost every other day, but every month I would call him and tell him what our sales were and I used to call him and say like Daddy we did four thousand dollars in sales, you know, they and then I run the last one was like May of 12. I think we had a ten million dollar a month and my dad would always remind me he would say Sha zhi you are a lion and there are sheep.

3 (1h 7m 33s):
But you are a lion and he was so proud of me and the irony at the end when we sold the company and he grew up again dirt floors motel room. He was comfortable there. He died a millionaire because of their investment in happy baby and the most happiness I've ever gotten from a With him was telling him we sold the company and getting him to guess for how much he couldn't believe it. He actually told me he had to sit down his head was spinning and he had to lie down. And so yeah, but he was proud of me.

3 (1h 8m 16s):
Because I think I became the daughter that that he he had he had hoped for as a human. You know, you want your you want your kids to grow up and be someone that you love and you're proud of and you want to be around them and you you know. You respect them. And I think that's what we had.

1 (1h 8m 39s):
That's shows Eva's room founder of happy family Organics By the way, when she left the company in 2018, it was doing more than 200 million dollars in revenue and last year the company pledged that by 2025 all of its packaging will be reusable recyclable or compostable as for shazi. She's launching a new company this spring it's called healthy nest and its goal is to promote healthy brain development. in babies and please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from our sponsor Comcast business, no matter what business you're in you rely on having fast reliable and secure connectivity Comcast business can help visit Comcast business.com to learn more Comcast business Beyond fast.

1 (1h 9m 41s):
Hey, thanks so much for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and this week story starts back in 2016 during a six-year drought in California restaurants were actually not even serving drinking water unless asked in an effort to save water. This is Dylan wolf and Dylan grew up in Los Angeles and during the drought. He just assumed that everyone was trying as hard as possible to conserve water. But then one day he heard from a friend who worked at a restaurant he Me one day after work, and he's like you would not believe this but we're not serving drinking water. But in the kitchen, we're just running water for 7 hours a day defrosting frozen food.

1 (1h 10m 21s):
And when Dylan heard this he was totally

3 (1h 10m 23s):
shocked in that time about a thousand gallons of water is going down the drain.

1 (1h 10m 28s):
So Dylan started Googling around and he found out that in the restaurant world. There are strict Health codes about how you're supposed to defrost your food and yeah running cold water is one of the recommended ways to do it, but For Dylan this became kind of an obsession whenever he went out to a restaurant. He would ask if they were using gallons of cold water to defrost their meat and

3 (1h 10m 50s):
fish they would kind of not admit to it and then later in the conversation come around and be like, yeah, it's like kind of a dirty little secret but that's how we do it.

1 (1h 10m 58s):
So Dillon started to wonder if there was a better way to defrost frozen food that didn't waste so much water now he isn't an engineer but he is the kind of guy who likes to Tinker and solve problems. So we To work on this kind of Big Tub that could recirculate cold water. We needed a pump and we needed some sort of thermostatically controlled function that would automatically shut off when the water reaches 68 degrees because in order to prevent bacterial the water has to stay below 70 degrees. So Dylan started to sketch out a design and so I found a prop house in North Hollywood that helped me build out our first prototype of how it would work to be clear a movie prop house that Sized in things made of acrylic so we created this dual container system where one container sits within the other and the water basically flows from one to the other in this continuous recirculation.

1 (1h 11m 52s):
So just to recap a self-contained system where no water is going to go down the drain. Anyway, Dylan brought the Prototype home from the prop house. You put some frozen fish into the acrylic tub, and then he turned it on it created a sound of like a relaxing Fountain. I

3 (1h 12m 9s):
had salmon that Just kind of floating around in there and being

1 (1h 12m 13s):
agitated by the pump, which is by

3 (1h 12m 14s):
Design our path our patent attorney at the beginning called it a meat

1 (1h 12m 18s):
jacuzzi a meat jacuzzi. He did float that out there as a potential official name meet you kuzey anyway now came the hard part actually finding someone to manufacture the product. A lot of people were very supportive of

3 (1h 12m 32s):
our mission and our

1 (1h 12m 33s):
products. But if we weren't going to do seven figures for them the first six months and it wasn't worth their time it took Dylan a full Year to make a product. He could actually sell and buy the middle of last year. He started to pitch

3 (1h 12m 46s):
it a lot of it was essentially

1 (1h 12m 48s):
door-to-door. We would go to restaurants. We would ask to talk to their executive chef and actually one of his first customers was a very high-end sushi restaurant that uses a lot of flash frozen fish in the first month of use. They saved almost $2,000 on their water bill Dylan now has a partner on the marketing side and they're piloting their defrosters in a few major restaurants and even in some supermarkets. And now that we have these really incredible established restaurants and grocery store chains using something that I created. It is a bit surreal and it's really exciting Dylan and his partner Brett call the device conserve water or food defroster. And if you're trying to spell conserve water just leave out all the vowels.

1 (1h 13m 31s):
If you want to find out more about conserve water or here previous episodes head to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org and of course if you want to tell us your story. I go to build npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe at Apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcasts. And while you're there. Please do give us a review. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to set a tweet It's ADS how I built this or add Kyra's our show was produced this week. But Rachel Falkner with music composed by R Mt. Narrow Bluey. Thanks also to Canada slim Julia Carney leave a grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Sequoia.

1 (1h 14m 11s):
Carrillo I'm Gyros and you've been listening to how I built this This is NPR.