4 (1s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor Adian the future-proof payments platform. Welcome all payments be on The Cutting Edge of customer experiences and grow your business with Adian. Visit a dyn.com NPR to learn more. Hey everyone. So I have a request if you value this show if you value the stories the lessons the wisdom and inspiration we bring to you if you think of me as your friend, which I am because even though millions of you. Are listening. I'm actually talking just to you right now. I need you to be there for me as well. And you can do that by supporting what I do and buying my book how I built this it is just out now and available everywhere and it doesn't cost more than a few cups of coffee and it's filled with wisdom and stories and ideas that will have you feeling inspired and fired up to Take On The World.

4 (56s):
So please if you love this show and what we do for you do us one back. And pick up how I built this wherever books are sold. There were days in the summer that we were making 1,500 bucks and a market. Wow, it surprised us and it surprised the farmers market people. But first of all, you couldn't walk through the market and not taste our kombucha. We would make sure that everybody who walked by our booth got a sample. How'd you do that? Hey, yeah, you want to try some probiotic tea? From NPR is how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements.

4 (1m 43s):
They go I'm guy rocinante show how an unlikely idea for a product to fight hair loss led to today's fastest-growing brand of Kombucha called health aide. What are the questions we get? All the time from aspiring? Entrepreneurs is how do I turn my promising side hustle into my main gig because for everyone out there who's making something in their garage or kitchen and maybe selling it on eBay or at a local flea market or really anyone who's working on a business idea part-time that moment where you decide to make the side hustle your full-time job can be daunting and scary.

4 (2m 36s):
Especially if you're walking away from a stable career with a salary and benefits now, of course, there's no one simple answer to the question of when to do this it often comes down to an overwhelming feeling that what you've started to build is actually the thing you want to do with the rest of your life the feeling Nancy twine had when after three years of working on her side hustle, she quit her job on Wall Street to go full time. With her hair care products company brioche EO and the feelings Sal Khan had when after years of making YouTube tutorials, he realized Khan Academy was what he wanted to pursue full-time and today story follows a similar pattern in 2012.

4 (3m 23s):
Dialect route her husband Justin and her best friend Vanessa launched a side hustle selling homemade kombucha at a farmers market in Los Angeles. They had very little experience and Most no money but less than a year after that as you'll hear they were facing that transition moment and Dinah decided to go all in on kombucha. Now over the past 25 years. Kombucha has become a huge category in the beverage sector. In fact in 2020 the market for kombucha in the u.s. Is expected to be close to two billion dollars, but at the beginning Diana trout really had no idea.

4 (4m 6s):
Aware a kombucha was headed. She started making it for fun as a graduate student at the time Dinah was living in Boston and working toward a PhD in Biochemistry. And she says that if you ask any of her roommates and graduate school what they remember about living with her, they would probably all agree. It was the food. Oh, man. I made the best dinners. I mean I got into some serious credit card debt in grad school. I would he tell you cause I would invite everybody over. Neighbors friends friends of friends would come over and I would make something spectacular paella like 24-hour paella and you know every kind of fish and of the sun we would find and you know build salt rocks and then put that in the smoker for I mean, I was just really beautiful real whole food cooking and and lots of wine.

4 (4m 57s):
Yeah. Yeah. It was a lot of fun and and I got into you know, I wasn't really afraid to get advance. So that's how I started getting into like Routing things and fermenting things. So yeah, kombucha kimchi sauerkraut kefir. These were all things I played with so you you end up earning a master's degree in nutritional biochemistry and also a master's in public health. But but I guess like you eventually decided not to pursue a PhD. Yeah. So you're so you've got these degrees is 2007 and you're living in Boston with the Boston area and I guess at the time you were Um, you were dating somebody who's not your husband just as that, right?

4 (5m 40s):
Yeah and and tell me about what you guys do is decide to relocate to the West Coast. Yeah, why'd you want to leave the east coast and go check? I mean I can understand that. I live in California. But why would you why did you decide to do that? Yeah, I mean three reasons the whether the produce and the music so Justin was a musician. So the decision for us as a couple was a re going to go to New York or La it was Was a tough call but we just I think it had been a particularly brutal winter to it was like we just wanted to move to California and I didn't know what I was going to do yet, but I figured I could figure it out when I got there. So you're in La he moved to LA and I'm assuming you start to look for a job or you start to look for a job before you move.

4 (6m 26s):
Well, I was looking I was very open-minded and also practical in the sense that I understood. I had, you know an undergraduate degree to pay for and to graduate series. Before so I was really looking for what would pay me and what could use my skill sets and I got recruited actually by a pharmaceutical company, which is pretty funny because if you knew me back then you know, you couldn't even convince me to take an Advil then so it was pretty funny that I ended up taking a job with the second larger pharmaceutical company in the world, which is GlaxoSmithKline and and based in La based in LA. And that's where I found myself for 5 years. That really was my only job. I mean that was my only real job besides the stuff.

4 (7m 8s):
I did extra just you know by my beers in college. Yeah, so you are you become like an employee's GlaxoSmithKline and and I guess I'm like the first day on the first week you get paired up with somebody who would factor into your life later. This is Vanessa do and that's a do and both of you were like young sales agents at that point sales reps. That's right. Yeah, and and how were they how are you guys paired up? So first day First week first day she so they make you do a ride-along your first day so they paired us together and we became fast friends and funny thing happened. I just have to share with you that day because she had broken up with her boyfriend the night before and so it wasn't a great day for her.

4 (7m 52s):
And so would she pick me up I could see she had like mascara under her eyes from tears and I'm particularly good with people, you know that have just been through something and so we had to just a really good day. And I think it wouldn't have been such a great day had that not happened. And so a little bit serendipitous on many fronts. So when you when you start working there was it did you enjoy it? Was it? I mean, what did you like about sales? I don't know if I really enjoyed it. I love being with people and connecting with people. So yeah, I did really well. I think the first year I was like probably one of the top I think me and Vanessa. We won the team won the top award for the year and it was like that the whole time we were there.

4 (8m 36s):
What was your ambition at that point? Did you think you know, I'm kind of kicking but here at GlaxoSmithKline, maybe maybe I'll be an executive here one day. Yeah for sure. I always Had that grandiose fantasy. I guess you could call it and it was it's only a fantasy because you know, there were a hundred thousand employees at GSK, but that's absolutely where I was focused at that point on being a manager next and then moving from management up to you no more executive leadership and so on and so forth. So it's like I had my vision to get to the top. I guess a few years in you are exceeding expectations on sales calls and they give you this this chance I guess for a year to sort of step away from the sales side and be what they call a change agent it what what is it?

4 (9m 22s):
What what are they let you do. So the context of that time is important here pharmaceutical companies were all in a transition state because generic medicines were starting to really come out. Yeah, and there was just a lot of change a lot of attrition layoffs. Every 3-4 months productivity went down engagement went down. We're all went down. It was like a Real turning point and one of the things they came up with was get your 1020 best people and get them to help you bring productivity back and engagement back and so they called them change agents and I was fortunate to be one of them and I accepted because I really didn't know what was ahead but I felt that it was an opportunity for me to continue to move up.

4 (10m 9s):
So what would you do you would travel around? Yes, it was really really cool and also unstructured and it and this is why it was an Important moment for me and what I chose to do with that was I went and met with every single team for a week and I spent time riding along with each individual. I spent time with the manager. I spent time with each team and I just talked to them you are an internal consultant basically being a little bit Yeah, and then what happens if it's events and they are like, okay go back to your job and sales basically and you were like this, but I'm assuming you get back to your Job, and you're like I'm back to the what I was doing before that.

4 (10m 51s):
Yeah, I had all this autonomy and no structure and I could just do whatever I wanted and I was good at that but I love that and then Pharma sales is so much rules so much structure. Yeah. Yeah. No, I was not happy. So you get back and you are feeling uninspired and unfulfilled did a part of you think maybe I should find another job. No, it was I want to say it was clear, but it wasn't really clear maybe a better word is it was loud there was definitely a calling I guess you could say that I needed to start something and where did I come from?

4 (11m 34s):
I mean you hadn't done any entrepreneurial stuff up until that. I mean you hadn't been on that track right you had no, I'm thinking about that. So was it to come from someone else it came? From that change agent experience. I think it may not sound very entrepreneurial. But in fact it was I had no just a very big goal. It's so that gate that sort of built my confidence to our I said, hey, I'm really good at this sort of like lack of structure thing and taking charge. I'm also good at getting people on board and like inspiring them out and I loved that. I really love that. I felt a lot of fulfillment from getting people to sort of combine forces.

4 (12m 17s):
Has and and go and probably what was what was Justin doing at this point because he came to LA to be a musician. So what what was he doing? Well, we're glaxo. Yeah. Yeah good question because I think that's another part of what drove the entrepreneurial thing. So Justin was writing songs. We had turned our second bedroom into a songwriter room. He played for a band and on the side. He worked for an entrepreneur a very very successful entrepreneur when he do Forum just insert of I guess you could say his job was in marketing, but he really was a little bit of like an assistant and he would talk about this entrepreneur and just how successful he was in the life that he lived so that also I think drove my desires because I think we started to say well imagine what we could do.

4 (13m 4s):
So did you I mean, so you're still at glaxo and you're still working there, but did you did you start to kind of brainstorm with with Justin and and I guess also with the NASA your closest friend at GlaxoSmithKline. Did you guys sort of start to talk about hey, what could we do? Yeah, you just sit around and kind of throw ideas out. Well, it was more structure than that. The beginning was more of an emotional Journey. Like I think the three of us had to accept that this is what we wanted first and then we were like, what are we going to do as soon as we got to the place of knowing we wanted to do this immediately every Saturday. We were having entrepreneur club meeting. So it wasn't just sitting around they were structured like you to call come with ideas or yes.

4 (13m 47s):
Yes, so the idea was in the week. You were supposed to have a notebook with you and at any point during the week if you had a pain a struggle at all. You had to write it down. That was what we gathered around. So we had all kinds of ideas like what like, okay, so they ran the gamut so parking was a pain in the ass. So the idea for an app that would solve for looking around for parking in Downtown, LA Vanessa. Someone would come in and say I remember one of the ideas she brought up was her high boots. She has these like knee-high boots and they would slouch they would fall when she would walk. What could we create? That would hold those boots up?

4 (14m 28s):
Oh, yeah, I mean really all over the place. So if we liked the idea like the three of us would look at it and brainstorm Solutions and we thought that there was one that had legs we would move into the next phase which would mean somebody would take it on and do a little research. What's what is the competition look like out there? How much would it cost to Just sort of initial broad-stroke stuff. Yeah, and most of the stuff would get crossed off the list because we just didn't have any significant money and we had gone through several weeks of this process in the entrepreneur, but maybe even a couple months and by the way Vanessa and I did start one in there start a business. We did we did. Why would you think I would say we actually started a business we made business cards we felt that parties could be better.

4 (15m 17s):
If they had like a theme and that we have themes for birthday parties as kids. Yeah, why don't we have theme parties more an easy theme parties for adults and then eventually this could turn into a really great writ business. We would sell kiss like that was sort of the thought and so we called it the mattock. So like if the party if it was like the theme was The Flintstones you would go decorate a house like The Flintstones. Yeah. Okay, so we make business cards. We even went and sold a party. To a record studio in Hollywood. Wow. And what was it was Halloween? And I don't remember which is really sad.

4 (15m 57s):
We never ended up doing it. No, that's why I don't remember we sold it in and they were excited to do it and then like it just sort of put it out. They ended up canceling the party for reasons unrelated to the the theme it was like they were cutting budgets or something and they decided not to do a Halloween party this year, right? So there was a bit of frustration. Asian you know in the group and we were going to get another party going and Justin basically came into one of the meetings and said guys I feel like what you're talking about is just is going to be a lot of work. I'm not particularly interested in that. I mean the three of us really were broke by the way and you're still both of you still working at GlaxoSmithKline at this point, you still yes because he needs the income.

4 (16m 39s):
Oh, yes. All right. So you guys are having these entrepreneurial meetings and I guess that the problem you decide to settle on was because In raise this problem. What was the problem he had and what what was the idea the problem with hair loss? Okay. So his entrepreneur that the one that he was working for he became Successful by selling a product that basically solved for hair loss. And so Justin was see how far people would go consumers would go to protect the hair on their head. And so he came in saying Geist we could make something here. I think he had recently gone to represent that company at a trade show or something and he just saw the incredible opportunity so he brought that to the table.

4 (17m 26s):
So he's thinking we got to get into hair loss because this is a big deal. It's a huge industry and has room to kind of enter that market. Yeah. And and so what did you guys I mean, where did you start? So Justin Vanessa and I started researching what would regrow hair and yeah, the idea was we create some kind of products that work though. That was the goal. This is a bold swing this Like a big swing for the fences because for at least 2000 years humans have tried to answer that question and it's pretty bold that the 3D viewer like we can figure this out. I'm a love that yeah, so I was particularly interested in finding a natural substance. And so I was sort of researching what could you eat?

4 (18m 7s):
What vitamins would you need and just started researching that that was my angle and when I came back the following week I had report is it basically I found all this Anecdotal evidence like all these people all over the world is talking about using a kombucha scoby on their head to regrow hair. Well if Potter SEC, okay, I'm a kombuchas. I know what you're talking about. But in Kombucha, there is a large Gloppy sort of pale mushroom kind of thing that sits on top of the kombucha called a scoby. It's an acronym. Yeah. What does it stand for symbiotic culture of bacteria and yeast scobie. It is a like a mushroom kind of thing that Just eats Up the sugar.

4 (18m 48s):
It's a fungus and that's what makes the kombucha that's what ferments the kombucha and helps make it sour so you read the thing that the kombucha scoby it. What if you stick it on your head it promotes hair growth. That's right. Wow, and I wasn't just being that once I was seeing that in a lot of places what? Yeah people talking about taking that scoby mixing it with something. You're just putting it straight on the head as a mask. But what I really thought was I know how to make kombucha and therefore I know how to make scobie's that we could try this thing. Yeah, so you thought alright. Let's try this out because you couldn't you knew this from working at a big pharmaceutical company that there's something called the FDA.

4 (19m 34s):
Yeah. I mean you couldn't just put out a product and say this will stimulate your hair growth made out of a scope. So yes, and I did know all that and for this to work, I knew we would have to prove it right so Has Justin was thinning. We're like, okay, here's our guinea pig. Let's start with a sample of one and and see if this stuff really works. So I just had to make kombucha and I tried to make a lot of it because each time you make a kombucha as you know guy you make a scoby right and you're gonna test this out. And what were you going to do? Are you going to just directly put it on his head? Are we going to mix it with stuff? So we were going to just put it straight on his head first, but I think are sort of line of sight was that we would have ventually mash this up into a really beautiful mask that had like beautiful smells and would have other things in it.

4 (20m 23s):
That would probably be good for hair like avocado coconut oil something like that that was sort of the goal. But at first we wanted to see the you know, if with the active ingredient work aka the scoby so yeah, but we never actually put one on his head because we got in there is an intervening happening what happened? I mean, you've got this idea. You're gonna try a remedy a mask for your loss. Oh, yeah, but Vanessa's. Friend of a friend. I don't know if she actually ran the farmers market, but she was one of the leading positions at a farmers market organization in La one of the biggest and she had called us to say listen. One of the farmers is dipping out for the summer. I'll give you the spot to sell your hair loss product if you want so we didn't have the hair loss product yet.

4 (21m 7s):
But that didn't matter we said yes. Yes. Yes. Yeah, and this is in 2012. This is 2012. This has got to be like January of 2012. Okay, and so you're thinking we'll take it and when was the spot can open up in March March 26 was the first market and it was going to be for the summer. So you've got two months or less than two months to get this into the market. Yeah. Are you scrambling to try and make this work? Yeah, so so I've got like 60 scobie's gathered. So I've also got like 60 cases of Kombucha and my apartment which is just like useless to me. It's like byproducts, even though I made really good kombucha. The goal was to make really good scoby. So like I was just sort of handing that kombucha friends.

4 (21m 49s):
You were just bottling up and leaving it. We are bottling it up and cheap bottles that we got from General bottle Supply in LA and just every time a friend would come over I would just give him a case and I remember the week after the lady we said yes, the following weekend was when we got together and we're like, okay, let's bring all the ingredients together that we've seen online make a difference and everything was very natural. So we had like avocados coconut oil vitamin C different kinds. Of food products that had anecdotal evidence around hair growth and we started messing around, you know, and the goal was to you know, get to a place where we would be able to create a really smooth beautiful smelling mask that someone would want to put on their head.

4 (22m 35s):
Right and you would sell that for like 50 bucks a pop at the farmers market like that was kind of what we were we're envisioning and I think the three of us all thought that was going to be pretty easy and you know, it took an afternoon. For us to realize like this was way of formulating a product is going to be way harder. It was so complicated and the scoby did not blend well and it was it was really smelly, you know, like it's and Justin kept saying I just don't know how anybody's gonna put this on their head. So once you realize that this is not going to you're not going to be ready in time. What did you decide to do? Well, what was originally a byproduct?

4 (23m 17s):
Suddenly became the main show, you know, we saw 60 cases of unlabeled kombucha and we're like, okay wait check. We know this is really good. Kombucha. Everybody tells us that check. We already have it check, you know a lot of checks. And so we said, okay, we're gonna we're going to sell that and what did you call it? Do you have a name for it? Yeah, it's called health aide. How did that happen so quickly. It happened in about a two hour meeting around a circular table the same table. We started the entrepreneur Club at And you know, there wasn't a lot of pressure for this drink. I wanted to say when we decided to sell the kombucha. We hadn't given up yet on the hair loss idea. We just kind of realized it was going to be harder to make than we could make in the time that we needed to make it by so it was like we still thought the big idea was hair loss.

4 (24m 5s):
And so there wasn't a lot of pressure to make All the Right Moves with this kombucha. We each had different things we were working on for me. It was create an awesome package. I had stayed at a friend's house in Our city and I loved she had this like Apothecary setup of like old medicine bottles and stuff just like decoration and I just loved that look and feel and so I took a picture and I drew something on a piece of paper that says, you know bubbly probiotic tea and kombucha and then I took that sketch and send it to a friend who was Justin's musician friend, but also happened to be a graphic designer and you know gave him 50 bucks.

4 (24m 47s):
In a case of Kombucha. Wow, and he came up with a really awesome label for us that we printed on our jet printer and Scotch taped on the bottle. So you've got the labels and you label them on and you guys just what pack that up in a car and you drive to the farmers market. Did you get like a one of those like white tents? Yeah, would you do you like a sign? Oh, it's way more than that. I mean I took this very seriously. It was like everything had to match. It was I felt that the whole theme of the booth had to be Apothecary. So Our sort of thought was it was going to be a little bit like come one come all experienced the elixir of life, you know, like that was sort of going to be the theme and it would draw people in the market.

4 (25m 27s):
It would almost be we thought maybe we could make our farmers market like a show. And so what happened did you start like getting customers buying it right away? Oh, yeah. Wow, I remember the first purchase the first guy who came, who was it? Just some dude and he's name is Mark, but he showed up and we like ask a couple questions took a sample. I mean Justin Ware like sitting there, you know. Yeah looking at this guy like is he gonna buy one and he asked for two two bottles two bottles $10 baby a $5 bottle. That's a lot. Yeah. Yeah. Well at the time actually that was sort of what they were going at interest or two. They were like 450 or something and or and and how many bottles did you sell that day?

4 (26m 7s):
All of them? Wow, you sold them out. We sold them out in like a couple hours. Wow, it surprised us and it surprised the farmers market people. They're like what the word this team come from and it and what frustrated us as we sold out. I want to say by like 11:00 a.m. And the market didn't close till to so we could have made a lot more. So the following week, you know, we could only do so much because kombucha takes a good week to make but true, you know two weeks after that. We showed up with a lot more and there were days in the summer that we were making 1,500 bucks and a market and and by the way, where were you living? Where were you and your friend Justin living at this point?

4 (26m 49s):
So we had this great apartment off Sierra Bonita Boulevard in LA right near the Grove and where were you Brewing the kombucha in our closet what so because so you so it was fermenting and but of course we used our kitchen for you know, making the tea and yeah, well you making a gallon jars we were making in the same jars. We make it today two and a half gallon cookie jars from Bed Bath and Beyond huh, and that apartment just happen to have a huge closet. Bunch of shelves and we put in stainless steel shelves to add to that. You could fit 10 jars per shelf and we probably had a good 20 or 30 shelves so we could make it a lot of Kombucha and then we bought I mean, I'm not sure if this is electrically safe, but we bought one of those space heaters and just sort of put it in the closet.

4 (27m 39s):
So it warmed up the room to make the fermentation go a bit faster. All right, so you got all this kombucha going and then you spend the summer just slinging Shh basically slinging kombucha, but during the week you were still working. You were still selling. Yeah, from what it was. It was hard man like so yes in the week I was working and at night be just working so hard at making the kombucha making more kombucha at the height of the summer. We were in seven markets and there were only three of us so you are seven farmers markets. Yeah. And by the way, how are you? I mean, this is not just on the weekends, right you have to do weekday markets, but you and NASA had weekday job. So what did you do and third it Justin?

4 (28m 21s):
Yeah. I mean we didn't do the weekday markets at first we did weekend markets, but then we did pick up a Thursday Market, but we hired somebody to do that. So he would do it for a hundred a hundred bucks and a percentage of sales. And so that's how we were doing the seven. Of course three of us. Each of us would do a market and then we had four people. All right, so you are sounds I'm assuming you can repeat customers people coming back to your stall at the farmers market thing up. I have to suffer. It was great. I want few more bottles. Yes, at least half of our customers were repeat and then the other half were knew which was so cool. We were really driving people to the category of people who were new to kombucha and we would first of all you couldn't walk through the market and not taste our kombucha.

4 (29m 5s):
We would make sure that everybody who walked by our booth got a sample. It was just had to do it. Hey you you with the kid you want to try some probiotic? And who are your customers? Were they like yoga people? Were they like it? Was it just La it's just La people are kind of health conscious. It's kind of just La I mean for sure the ones that knew kombucha were probably more like the yoga customer, but I would say a lot of customers that came to us and bought really had never heard of Kombucha before, you know had heard something about probiotics. Yeah, and we're just like, well, my doctor told me I should have probiotics. I'll give this a try yummy by one.

4 (29m 47s):
Yeah, and another thing we were doing at that time pretty quickly customers who love it would say, will you just bring this to my house? Like I don't want to carry a case around the farmer's market. Will you just deliver if I buy a whole case? Will you deliver to my house and we're like, yeah, so then this whole other business started which was us Distributing cases to homes all throughout Allah after the market. So like Saturdays and Sundays became extremely busy for us. No, here's a question. So this is this is for promising, you know, you're selling a lot of Jur at farmer's markets, but it's a it's a farmers market business. Did you you know, did you think hey we should take this beyond the farmers market. Did you think this is going great. This is it going to be a great Farmers Market business.

4 (30m 29s):
No. No, we quickly saw I want to say it was like June or July when we had 2012 when we add when we had realized this was the business. Wow, to be honest. It was about the consumer to us. Like there was a response. They like loved our kombucha. We were getting they would say things. He's like I drove a hundred miles to buy this kombucha, you know, it was like that and we were like, okay, we have something here. It felt wrong to go back to hair loss. After that. There was something here it was alive and like growing what we come back in just a moment how Dinah Justin and Vanessa started to ramp up production while burning through cash and how one single week would determine whether health aide would survive or die stay with us.

4 (31m 15s):
I'm guy Roz and listening to how I built this from NPR Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible. First two epic Provisions maker of Epic bar. Beef was Nature's idea. The Epic bar was their idea the new beef sea salt and pepper bars have three grams total carbs why it's in their nature after all they're made with 100% grass-fed beef and Nature's macros 3 grams total carbs 11 grams of protein find them in the bar.

4 (31m 57s):
I Or at Epic bar.com. This message comes from NPR sponsor access and opportunity a podcast from Morgan Stanley. Join Morgan Stanley's vice-chairman Carla Harris a 30-year Wall Street veteran as she introduces listeners to the dynamic investors entrepreneurs policymakers and others who are working to close the funding gap for entrepreneurs of color. Listen And subscribe to access and opportunity with Carla Harris on Apple podcasts Spotify or wherever you get. Get your podcasts. Thanks. Also to Microsoft teams. Now. There are more ways to be a team with Microsoft teams. Bring everyone together in a virtual room collaborate live on the same page and see up to 49 people on screen.

4 (32m 45s):
Learn more at microsoft.com teams. There are these networks staunchly pro-gun groups on Facebook. And one of them is run by these three brothers the door Brothers. It turns out they don't just do guns. The door family name has been attached to other causes their goal is to eliminate public education and to replace it with Christian School the roots of the door family on the no compromise podcast from NPR. And just one more thing the how I built this book is now available. It's a great read and a great gift for anyone looking for ideas inspiration wisdom and encouragement to have the courage to put out an idea into the world.

4 (33m 35s):
It's filled with a ton of stories. You haven't heard and have some of the greatest entrepreneurs, you know and respect started out at the very bottom check out how I built this the book available wherever you buy your books and please if you support what I do on the show, you can show that support by picking up how I built this the book and thanks. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's toward the end of 2012 and in less than one year Dinah and our co-founders have pivoted from selling a hair loss treatment to a business selling kombucha at farmer's markets around La and at this point they can tell that health aide has the potential to become much much bigger.

4 (34m 27s):
The problem though is time all three co-founders. Still working their day jobs and they had to decide whether it was time to jump into this side hustle full-time. Well, everybody in our families is telling us not to do it. Everyone said, you're nuts. Don't leave that job. Don't don't leave that job don't sensible advice. Yes, but I mean, but for you the decision to quit, I mean was it just obvious that it was time and this this new thing with kombucha was going to take off. No, it was so scary. It was so scary. I was so afraid to call my father and tell him oh my goodness. I remember that. I was like shaking. Would you tell him, you know, I've made the decision to quit my job and give health aide a full-time go, huh?

4 (35m 15s):
He was sort of like come on. You don't have to do that. I mean listen, I'm supportive of health aide. It's going well. You should keep doing it. But like don't quit your job. You should be making some money first, you know, yeah because it wasn't at that time. I think Justin and I had scrounge together enough money to have a couple months of rent saved up. So at the end of the year, we found ourselves in this place of being like it was like our dream all three of us had the dream to give this thing a go. So we made a sort of pact at November. I want to say it was around Thanksgiving where we said. Okay, let's put in our notice and of the Year. Boom. We're done January 3rd. We come back is game time baby. That's perfect. That was the thought and it really was as soon as we showed up.

4 (35m 57s):
I call that one of the most important Marquis moments because it was We came back that we could put our full mindshare to this business and growing it. And that's when we moved away from farmers markets. All right, so you you quit by the way, you're making all the kombucha in your apartment. You guys are making it in your apartment. Oh, yeah. No, I had like our apartment literally turned into a factory of Kombucha Factory a smell by the way of Kombucha. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We were like definitely I mean neighbors who lived at the urban you stay with us. Thank you because we really Yeah, their lives were worse off because of us not only did it smell like kombucha all the time, but we had people coming in to help us make it.

4 (36m 40s):
I mean any friend that needed, you know, some cash sure but there was a point where our kombucha, you know, because just could not fit anymore and we needed some space plus we started to sell in stores like stores would come to our markets and say hey, can I sell this in my really awesome, you know craft cocktail store. Can I sell this in my like high-end? Market, and so we would deliver not just individuals but also to small wholesale accounts and when we did that that was when legally, you know, they would say things like hey, you know, where is your nutrition label where we're sitting here session weight and like where's your like business location and were like, yeah, we can't be like Sierra Bonita Apartment A, you know, right so we found a it was called Cake Bake Shop in Manhattan Beach and the owner's name.

4 (37m 31s):
Is Laura and she was closed on Sundays and Mondays and in exchange for us opening on Sundays and Mondays and Manning her shop. She let us use all the extra space she had for free. I mean, there's so many like really cool strategies here because you didn't really need a lot of money to start up you didn't have an office. So you just kind of harder to use the space. Uh-huh. It was a barter, but did you edit and get to buy jars and buy bottles. Did you at any point go out to people that you knew and Hey, can we take a loan can can you help us out? You'd like to nothing like that. Ya know we were so busy guy and we were the type of people that in the walk-in fridge at the bakery shop when the light was out.

4 (38m 16s):
We didn't like fix the light we would just like work in the dark so ya know I mean we probably should have been thinking ahead because there's no question that as we got bigger cash was coming back to us at a later time and that was starting to really infringe upon our cash situation. Operation, but we weren't really thinking about that. So no when we needed money the first time we really needed money. We needed money to buy our first filling line, which already we were past the cake bake shop stage. It was the next stage but we asked both of our parents for that. Vanessa asked her dad and I asked my dad and they they gave us money at like a, you know, I don't even think there was an interest rate. It was like pay us back in a year and how much more did you need to get a filling machine or whatever 60 Grand so 30 grand each, right and That was just for a filling line.

4 (39m 3s):
That was like drawn. It was literally the price of that and so we were yeah, we were out of cash fast. And what was the the sort of the division of labor between you and Vanessa and Justin? I mean you were the chief kombucha Brewer, right? Well, yes and no, I mean I was also the marketer okay in the beginning it was like anybody who has arms and legs and has like we all shared the shores and the responsibilities and Brewing was the Most physically difficult. I mean it's a lot of lifting cases of liquid moving cases around filling bottles. So it was like no one person could do that all week. So we would switch there was no clear kind of job responsibilities yet.

4 (39m 46s):
But once we quit our job, what we did is we put jobs individual jobs and responsibilities onto postcards. So we have like a hundred post cards each with a job from you know, making deliveries to Brewing the kombucha to Opening accounts and we put those on a wall and we sat at the back and we just said, okay go pick up the postcards the three of us go pick up the postcards that you you know are most drawn to and you think you're the best at wow, and naturally Vanessa picked up. The sales ones. I picked up the marketing and leading people ones and then Justin picked up a lot of the operational manufacturing ones. So it's are we very naturally fell into our roles of CEO for me.

4 (40m 31s):
Chief of sales for Vanessa and CEO for Justin and when it came time to having a difficult conversation sometimes difficult about how to divide up the business was it difficult or not? Was it just like if a third a third a third, how'd you figure that out? It was not difficult. Yeah, we all are very grateful that the three of us landed with each other because I know a lot of people have found her issues its natural, right? You've got a thing of value but for us, it just really hasn't ever been the three of us were equally devoted. Dedicated put the same amount of work into health aide. So we worry a third a third a third all the way and always have been. All right. So you guys starts you decide.

4 (41m 11s):
All right. Let's get this in stores. Right? And how do you or do you start because I guess did you approach stores with your kombucha? Did you like and and where they instantly guess we're in or did you get more pushback, you know some you know, we had a sales sheet that like I had, you know used my as inspiration for my sales Farm. Go sales days. Sometimes you get somebody that was super stoked about it. One of the biggest early on challenges was refrigeration. And this is we've done this before on the show with like, you know, honesty and other products that some need Refrigeration some don't it's very hard to get onto refrigerator shelves.

4 (41m 53s):
Yes and story. Yes because there's limited space and everybody wants at space. Yes, totally Cutthroat and you're just some three friends making kombucha. Yeah, we're kind of a joke. Yeah, and but you would what would you do you would go to these sources of hey contact the manager and you would have like samples with you. Yeah and six pack of Kombucha is usually what we show up with and we just we'd say, you know try it and you know, sometimes we be able to put it right in the fridge right then and there and we created a whole self distribution model for a good two years. We ended up buying a van or rent in a leasing of an a big white man. It wasn't refrigerated. But we put a bunch of coolers in there. But yeah, I mean it wasn't it. Easy to make a wholesale sale as it was to make like a customer sale on a farmers market, but it was worth the squeeze because usually the bigger the store the more cases they would order at a time, but there was a period of time where Vanessa just and I we would each take a day to deliver during the week couple days a week.

4 (42m 51s):
So we delivered every single day and our days were full and we would just drive around La and drop off products to restaurants cafes small grocery stores. Yes, and they were buying like what couple cases here and there. Yeah, like probably the average delivery was somewhere between two and ten cases. So I guess you eventually in 2013 you land a deal with are one which is a larger market like an upscale market in La. Yeah. It's like a proper grocery store, but they only have three of them at that time actually at the time they only had two so it was still not a huge chain like we could make the deliveries and with all of the beverage options at a place like Erewhon already by 2013. That was a pretty crowded space.

4 (43m 32s):
Not just kombucha, but just beverages fruit juices natural is a cold, press this, press that press enter and you know, it's all it. How are you getting people to notice health aide kombucha in the refrigerated case. We just wouldn't let it lose. We would show up and do samples like Justin Vanessa and I were doing samplings at least once a day and then you know, we did a good job of creating a bit of Buzz around the product to yet. I think people like that. We were like a trio, you know of on tripping ores that were just getting started and we had a really good kombucha. So, you know, hopefully people would tell their friends. I don't know it just it really did grow. But but we pushed it very hard. We were always always selling this thing.

4 (44m 14s):
Oh, I was always demoing it felt like in but did you have any employees at this point? It was just kind of volunteers or friends or interns or what we had some people that worked hourly for us in the brewery to help us and then we also had some independent sales reps that got paid. Commission. So let's say we had about 20 of those individuals that were working like some five six hours a week. So not not a lot. That was how we ran our sales that was how we were able to grow in accounts. And then on the brewery side, we probably had two or three individuals and we're you also using credit cards to pay your bills. Yes and maxing out on the cards every month.

4 (44m 56s):
All right, so you need to scale up right you're getting more demands. So and clearly you've got a winning say In here, could you go to the bank and get a loan? Did you try? Well, I always gave my middle finger at the Wells Fargo, you know billboard on the 405 because it would be like helping small businesses grow and I'm like you didn't help us. Oh you actually went and asked them her alone. I mean everybody said no because you had no collateral no collateral. No. Yeah, no assets as individuals, but also no profitability. It was just like a complete, you know, so you exhale when you met went and met with a loan officer or loan officer. Yeah, and you show them your pure like business model everything.

4 (45m 35s):
Yes. We didn't get good loans from Banks until like a couple years ago because our business was a bit like a rocket ship that you know, it was growing like crazy, but we didn't have any sense of where our next dime was going to come from and except from you know, selling the kombucha but like we were going way faster than we could keep up with for sure. So I think from a conservative Bank perspective, it just was not it was not a safe move. Move until recently. So what do you do? I mean if you know either this is a point where you know, this can be like the trough of Sorrow right where they need a bridge loan or you need some money or you know, you're gonna fizzle out right? Yeah.

4 (46m 15s):
However that and I remember the moment we were at the brewery and we had a fifty thousand dollar credit limit and we just assumed that Amex would extend our credit because we were good about paying it in full every month, you know, so we were like, oh, it's not going to be a problem. We've been great customers then. Yeah, we got a flat no a flat note to extend your $50,000. Yes, like it was like you're maxed out and you're not getting any more credit from us. So would you do we were pretty scared we had enough to make that week of deliveries, but at that point we sat down and said, okay, who do we reach out to that has money and that does Investments and we were starting to gather those people and we got a cold call.

4 (47m 2s):
From a guy by the name of JC. He was a manager at an investment company called first beverage. So yeah, he found out about your product Maybe by going to Erewhon or farmers markets. Are you okay and he called you to what to say he tried our kombucha. He thought it was the best he's ever had and you know, they really want to talk about an investment. Wow. Now they had just gone through a very long diligence process with another kombucha company that was bigger than us at the time and Didn't end up doing the deal for whatever reason. I'm not sure why but they were convinced about the category. So it's like they entered our world already sold that they needed to get into a kombucha and fast and it was like could this be any more perfect like where do we sign and they were able to cut a deal pretty quickly within six weeks.

4 (47m 51s):
We had cash and they allowed us to include some friends and family as well. So we did like a series a / friends and family around together and that was in 2014, and that was our first First investment so you get this invest and what does it mean? What were they were happening to have by the way, how much do they invest over 2 million dollars? Wow, so they put this enabled you presumably to hire people. Yes, that was exactly what he did with the money judge. So we did two things with the money we moved into our the next Brewery, which was really really important because we were way too small space and couldn't keep up like we were maxed out so we used half the capital probably You build out our next Brewery which we had already found the space and identified the equipment we needed.

4 (48m 36s):
We just needed, you know to write the checks and and then the other half to hire four or five key people and I mean that was like game changing guy because like yeah this game changing and as you kind of did this got get this investment you also land a deal a distribution deal to get into any Gelson's and then which is a chain and an LA mainly around La and then also other places in the west coast and we have a sense of how important distribution is, right because you need to get in with a distributor. Otherwise, you yourself have to go door to door to door door and it's impossible really to scale your product.

4 (49m 20s):
You need it everywhere and only a distributor can kind of help you do that. Right? Yeah, but then the Catch-22 is the distributor won't usually take you on unless you have some stores great. Like they don't want to build you from scratch. So they want to know. Oh, you've got Gelson's on board. Okay, we'll take you on got it. So this distributor is called Nature's Best that you signed was that was that just a huge turning point for you. Oh, yeah. I mean it was a huge. It was the next phase. Right? So now we're like moving away from the majority of our business being from farmers markets and and home deliveries to okay now we're talking about huge orders. Yeah. So more stores are willing to accept us.

4 (50m 1s):
And we're very focused on growth aligned with our investors at this time on just like let's grow let's grow this was it hard for you to I mean, I can't even imagine a hard it would be to all of a sudden go from just you and your husband your best friend to accompany of even 10 15 20 people and you got to be the leader in the box and it's HR issues and like it's got to be overwhelming. Yeah, and then there's the capital piece like we got that money. We thought that money was going to last us. I remember when we got the two million bucks. It was like, oh my gosh, we're good. Like let's build this now baby and then it was like Ghana your later and it's not that we were Reckless at all. It's just the capital for growth is really intense and immense and so we were already having discussions a year later of doing this again, and that's that's a lot of pressure and responsibility when I'm also the one that's still picking up the broom.

4 (50m 55s):
I mean so many pressures and responsibilities and growth. It's almost hard to pinpoint why you're You're Building. Something so proving it proving that you can do it. I mean so many times. I think the biggest fear was not living up to that. So I mean almost everything requires discomfort and push it. So in times of growth like it's probably the hardest times I guess you about having a business with your husband. I mean, yeah, it's you your husband your best friend and God that Style recipe for disaster in many instances right because because it could be to the people are in the family and one person is in and the can be tension and also the tension with was a two partners who are married and how do you guys manage that?

4 (51m 47s):
There's no way there's a tension between at least you and Justin or you invest our job. Yeah, and that's that's really where the tension is being Justin. It's not it doesn't really sit for me and Vanessa. I don't know exactly how to explain why why part of it is that Vanessa and I are wired very similarly. So I think we just really operate from the same space. I think that's a part of it. I think another part of it is we don't live together. So I think that separation time and then also the other thing that makes it challenging for Justin eyes were very different like he and I are in some ways opposite, you know, he's the operations guy. He's the one that you know wants to dot the I's cross the t's make Everything is operationally sound unlike structured and processing system oriented which obviously we need but I am a very different type of force.

4 (52m 40s):
I am I am the dreamer. I'm the one that like, you know doesn't think about that stuff. And so it calls for quite a bit of conflict between the two of us at work and I actually invite that I'm very comfortable with that level of conflict in the end. We end up having a very solid dream. I guess you could say our executable dream But you just don't really want to have sex that percent. I might cut that part out. I got you. I hear you know what I'm saying, though. I mean it's tough to come home and then and then you have this other relationship to tend to it, which is a much more personal one and it's just it's hard to transition especially with children.

4 (53m 22s):
There's no break. It's not like you can go to your yoga class and then come back and be like, okay now we're husband-wife. So, you know, we just have had to work through that. And we have so so Diana, I mean this brand right health aide that me that you started by fermenting kombucha in your closet. I mean today, I mean you're looking at hundreds of millions of dollars in annual retail sales. I think I think you guys have raised almost 50 million dollars total or something like that it is that about right? Yeah and last July of 2019. You got 20 million dollars from Coke which isn't just 20 million investment. That's like the backing of Coca-Cola. Biggest Beverage Company in the world huge milestone.

4 (54m 5s):
Do you feel now? Like you can take a breather like you're like, okay, we're going to be fine. Like I can have been grinding away since you know 2012 on this and now I'm like, okay. Um, I kind of gotta say no. Okay. All right fine. Yeah like yeah. I know it feel I will I will say for sure it was a huge milestone. I was extremely proud and I'm extremely proud that we've We've been able to build something literally from nothing from that table to something that the biggest Beverage Company in the world would want to invest at this level like yeah. I mean, it's awesome. But the keep going part didn't die down now I will say over the journey regardless of that investment over the journey.

4 (54m 49s):
I've been able to you know, pay myself more than 10 dollars an hour like we did at the beginning and sort of I feel it now. I'm at a point where I feel fairly paid and that allowed for Me to at least go on vacations. And did you board that approves your pay? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah exactly. I still have to fight for it though. Yeah. This isn't remember. We talked to Andy Dunham bonobos about this because a lot of people assume you get all this investment and all of a sudden you're loaded. Oh just swimming in cash. But it actually the more outside investment you get the less Equity you have in the business and really most entrepreneurs until or if they sell their shares in the business or equity.

4 (55m 31s):
They're dependent on the salary that is determined by a board and that could be a perfectly Fair salary, but it's not going to make you filthy. Rich. It did one of the funniest emails we got was after we got that first money. I just got an email and it was like, you know for your for your Charter flight needs, you know, think of executive Charter. Oh from a company is like, oh this person's rich now they're going to be Charter flying Pratt. Like private just addresses are like, oh and I wrote back as like we're still flying coach. Like this is and still we are here's here's a tricky question for you. We've had people like Gary Erickson of Clif Bar who owned his he owns his company. He was almost going to sell to investors and sell to a big then big company didn't we've had you know, Sarah coughs well, she owns a hundred percent of our company.

4 (56m 22s):
Some people say they couldn't have done what they did without outside Capital that it would be it would have been impossible to scale their business and some people say, I wish I Don't do it and other people say had I done it we would have grown faster earlier. They're all kinds of different views on this but there's no question that when you bring an outside Capital, you do lose control right there. Are we going to be people of opinions and and they're going to assert those opinions. If you would have done it again, would you have avoided outside investors? No, no so much of the choice you have is is yes, there's experience but it's also what's the context of the situation we Couldn't get a loan if we needed it and we were totally out of cat.

4 (57m 4s):
We it really felt like we had no choice. I know if I was back in that position. I really still would have no choice. But to be honest, they helped us a lot in the deepening that they helped us build forecasts and get into the right distribution. And so honestly, I think we did exactly right. Yeah, and I would say that to all those people if you have access to Capital outside of private Equity great go for it, but there's not only one way to do it. When you when you think about where you are right now and where you've come from how you know how far you've come and pretty short time. I mean, it's I'm sure seems like a long time. I'm sure it seems like forever and ever I know but in the grand scheme of things, it's pretty quick.

4 (57m 48s):
Right? I mean, you've become a pretty big company quickly how much you think that has to do with just the grind in your hard work and and how much because you got lucky? Okay. It's definitely not zero luck the initial number that came. Up was 20% luck. That's what I wanted to say. I would say it's 80% grit. There's definitely moments of blessings. You know that ride along with Vanessa health aide would not be where it is without Vanessa. That is a blessing, you know the phone call from the farmers market just when we needed investment the guy that chose to buy a health aide and called us and said we wanted a best many those types of things are ya are hard to explain and there's and there's more of that but Even in those all those examples you get a card dealt to you.

4 (58m 35s):
It's not the whole deck you get a card. You still have to do something with that card you have to take it and run with it. And without that grit that cards just card and it flies away. So yeah, I would say it's 80% hard work 80% pushing through and just like doing it when no one else would that's Diana trout co-founder and CEO of health aid kombucha. By the way, according to the company health aide is on track to sell 200 million dollars worth of Kombucha in retail stores this year. That's the equivalent to selling one bottle every single second.

4 (59m 18s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcast. You can also write to us and HIV T at npr.org and if you want to set a tweet, it's at how I built this or as This guy Roz and my Instagram is at guy dot Ross. Our show is produced this week by Casey Herrmann with music composed by rumty narrow blue T. Thanks. Also to Julia Carney Candace limb, leave a grand Sarah saracen and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Farah Safari. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this.

4 (1h 0m 4s):
This is NPR. With the passing of Ruth Bader Ginsburg. The president is hoping to fill the seat with the conservative judge and evangelicals who play an important part in American politics have been waiting for this moment. But how did evangelicals become such a powerful force listen now to the history of evangelicals on the through-line podcast from NPR