Ted Radio Hour (0s):
We can't see tomorrow, but we can hear it. And it sounds like a wind farm powering homes across the country. We are bridging to a sustainable energy future. Working today to ensure tomorrow is on Enbridge. Life takes energy. Did You know you are physically adapting to all your swiping, Scrolling and tapping. We're changing our bodies and what they're able to do through our habits. NPRs Body, Electric A special interactive series investigating how to fix the relationship between our tech and our health. Listen in the TED Radio hour feed wherever you get your podcasts.

The Great Creators with Guy Raz (40s):
Hey, it's guy here. And before we start the show, a question, do you ever get nervous when performing or speaking in front of an audience? I definitely do, and I have to stand in front of a lot of audiences. Well, I recently interviewed Zoe de Chanel and she had a great tip I hadn't heard before. A tip that's allowed her to get out of her head and into the moment you can find out all about it and hear my conversation with Zoe on my other podcast, the Great Creators just search for the great creators with Guy Raz, wherever you listen to podcasts. And now onto today's show,

5 (1m 24s):
Jamie and I promised ourselves that we would be together for the first time. We opened our first samples we met in the outskirts of of Calgary. It was a bit mafioso style where where the car is rolled in trunk's, open box, pulled up, box gutter open, Jamie sliced the box open, and we licked, literally opened up the box and and saw our first samples. And to be very honest, they are pretty disappointing.

4 (2m 1s):
Welcome to How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I am Guy Raz and on the show today how two Canadian brothers took inspiration from classic brands to create a modern bag business that feels like it's been around forever. Herschel's Supply Company. Every time I hold a zippo lighter or a leatherman knife or a stainless steel Timex watch, I feel a very strong sense of comfort.

4 (2m 43s):
And maybe it's because these products are exactly the same as they've always been. They feel timeless like a pair of Levi's jeans or even an in-N-Out burger. And it turns out there's a good reason why we respond to certain brands in a certain way. It touches something deep within us and it can also get us to buy stuff. And companies are well aware of this. Just look at the recent rebrands of Pepsi and Burger King. Both are retro and both evoke that 1980s vibe. So it may come as a surprise to you. It did to me at least, that Herschel's Supply company is a relatively new brand.

4 (3m 24s):
When I first saw their backpacks back in 2012, I just assumed the company had roots stretching back to the Gold Rush. I mean, if you look at that pack with its leather straps and buckles and rugged denim, you can easily imagine Levi Strauss himself flinging one over his own shoulder back in 1849. Now to be clear, Herschel's founders who also happened to be brothers weren't trying to trick anyone, but Lyndon and Jamie Cormack definitely wanted their products to evoke that feeling. I was just talking about. Anyway, when they started Herschel Supply Company back in 2009, both brothers had worked in apparel, so they knew how retail worked, but they had no idea how to actually make things.

4 (4m 10s):
A few years earlier they had noticed that there seemed to be a gap in the backpack market that there weren't any stylish backpacks that could look great on a college student and on a professional going to work. It took some time for the brand to take off. But today, Herschel products are sold at 9,000 locations around the world. And it's not just backpacks, but everything from duffles to suitcases to wallets to jackets and shirts. The brothers Cormac grew up in Calgary in Canada, and the inspiration for the name of the brand came from an old prairie town in Saskatchewan, a place they would visit as children.

7 (4m 50s):
It actually sits in this small ravine. As you drive to it, you don't even see it about a kilometer outside. You start to drop down into a pretty amazing little hamlet. I think there's about 18 people there today and not a ton of life, but still has an amazing rink and a hockey rink that is and curling rink, a school turned into a museum.

4 (5m 15s):
Yeah. And, and as kids Jamie, I mean you guys have have an older brother, but, but you and Lyndon are just I think less than two years apart. So were you guys pretty much inseparable as kids? Like did you basically you guys were playmates?

7 (5m 30s):
We were, and right from the start, my best friends were his best friends. Yeah, it's been that way our entire lives. But going to places like Herschel, it wasn't an ask, well, what we were gonna do that day, we would just go out and find something to do and it held our interests and yeah. And that's pretty special in a land that's that open and walking in and clicking the lights on in a hockey rink and just being able to play with no one telling you can get off the ice until your legs are ready to fall off. That's when you stop.

4 (5m 57s):
So, so in in, in the US right, A lot of kids, when you ask them what they wanna be, they say, I wanna be a professional athlete. When you guys were kids, did you think I wanna be a professional hockey player? Like did you guys and all your friends think that's what you wanted to do?

5 (6m 11s):
I think it would've been the dream. I I, you know, we grew up playing hockey. I mean, we spent thousands of hours playing hockey And. in fact, yeah, if the rinks weren't open or the ice wasn't frozen, we'd also be playing street hockey in front of our house in our cul-de-sac where we grew up. And there would definitely be times where you're role playing, you know, that final shot and that big game to hoist the cup above your head. Yeah, I mean I've, I've role played that many, many of times, but I, I also realized as you get into your teenage years that I wasn't gonna make the N H L and obviously also interest started to blossom in other Yeah. Other fun things that we love.

4 (6m 52s):
Okay, so I, I guess after high school, Lyndon, I read that you, you took sort of an extended trip to, to Australia and you worked at a, at a cycling shop for a while in, in Melbourne. In meantime, Jamie, you were, you were still in Calgary. What did, what did you end up doing after high school?

7 (7m 10s):
I started working at a, a skateboarding store, but I also decided to spend a bit of time in Canmore, Alberta and went to a mountaineering school there and spend a lot of time taking a path of trying to become a mountain guide and Oh wow. I would take off and work at a small ski hill near Ferney on their avalanche control team. So doing all the explosive work and really working in snow science and, and, and studying it there for about four years and Wow. Yeah, absolutely loved it. It was probably still to date one of my favorite jobs in the world, but my boss at the time actually pulled me aside and after the fourth winter and told me, you know, I'm not gonna hire you back next year.

7 (7m 53s):
And I was pretty surprised. And you know, he told me that I was just too young and too smart to be taking the same path he took and he really felt like I should go back to the city and go back to school. And Wow, his big comment that he said to me that still really resonates was, I would love for you to be the one in the back of the helicopter on the weekends, not the one working in the front. And it really hit me that, you know, I probably should go back to the city and roll rolling night classes at the time I needed to work and continue to work at the skateboard shop. And I, I, I dove from really mountaineering into graphics and graphic design and took a ton of courses at, at the local art college and And. in In Calgary?

7 (8m 34s):
In Calgary, correct. And then as well as taking courses just in type setting and trying to understand it and ended up being that I did start just a local snowboarding skateboard magazine myself.

4 (8m 46s):
The magazine was called Sequence, I think, right?

7 (8m 48s):
That is correct, yes.

4 (8m 50s):
And yeah, I mean, it, it must have been exciting, but yeah, you had to fill it with, with articles and photos and ads and, and it's expensive pop, like printing it and then distributing it and getting people to buy it. Did it, did it get any traction? No, I mean, did, did it? No. I love

7 (9m 7s):
To say yes, that's not true. My, my friend group and peers, you know, it was so much fun. Four years of running, it was amazing learning for me, but

5 (9m 15s):
I, I disagree with it didn't get traction. I mean, as you, as an athlete or as a snowboarder, you wanted to be in the, this magazine you wanted to be talked about. And so now was it a wild financial success? No, but it, the lights were on and yeah, so yeah, I mean, it was cool. I mean, it was you, it you made something and, and yeah, I mean, making something is intoxicating and whether it's a photocopied zine or a a or in this case, it was quite a professionally done publication that it was you created, created an idea, and you made something. I thought it was pretty bloody cool. Hmm.

4 (9m 49s):
Lyndon you, when you left Australia, I guess you, you came back to Canada and then you ended up working as like a sales rep, I guess for Vans, for the, for the shoe company. And, and Jamie, you, you moved on, you started doing sales for another sports brand, K two, which I think mainly the skis and snowboards. So So you were both working in, in like the outdoor sports business. I think Linda, I think you were in Vancouver and, and think Jamie, you were still in Calgary and and presumably you stayed in touch during that time, right?

5 (10m 22s):
Yeah, yeah, we talked every day. Wow. When you're, when you're moving around cities or towns or highways and move them from shop to shop or even home to office, you know, Jamie and I chatted on our phones all the time and, and we learned a lot off each other. You, you learned a lot about what was going on. You learned a lot about the industry. But I, I would say a lot of those times that we were chatting, we'd be brainstorming out loud and, and I, one of my favorite things that Jamie and I have as one of our big connections is the amount of times we've started a conversation with, wouldn't it be cool and the wouldn't it be cool sentence has been something that has sprung off so many amazing ideas and probably so many terrible ideas.

5 (11m 8s):
But I reflect on those moments back in the day with those conversations with Jamie about, Hey, wouldn't it be cool if this existed or wouldn't it be cool if this was happening? And even today, I sometimes get goosebumps in my arms when I hear a new employee or someone who's working for us now saying, wouldn't it be cool? And I, I just, I hear it and I get ready to absorb because there are a lot of special moments can come from that.

4 (11m 33s):
And, and Lyndon, can you remember some of the things that you talked about, like both of you guys were in sort of skate and snowboard that world because you were both working for brands that, you know, represented those sports. What, what kinds of ideas did you bat around?

5 (11m 54s):
I think Jamie and I are are people who have always had one foot in nature and one foot in the city. Yeah. The, the ideation of what we shared I think was a lot of the bounce between the two of those. And so the, the bag business just kept on coming up and, and So, you know, one of those conversations maybe 12, 13 years ago where wouldn't it be cool to do that?

4 (12m 18s):
So, but, but do you remember how you sort of landed on or just talked about bags, like did you have exposure to bags just with what you were doing as a sales rep? Or, or did you, was it just, just an intuition that came out of thin air?

7 (12m 34s):
Linden talked about one foot in the city, one foot in nature. We bags were part of stuff we were doing. When you have that adventurous spirit and mindset, you end up in the outdoors. I spent quite a bit of time in the outdoors even around watching guides and the way that they work. They really edit down their gear. What doesn't fit inside doesn't come, they would cut away what was unuseful. So for us, when we looked at bags in general, I think it was the one category that probably our generation didn't have one that we could call our own. It seemed like there was the right denim, the right footwear, the right eyewear, the right watches, bags just kept coming up because most of the bags we looked at in the market were too busy.

7 (13m 16s):
There was too many useless features and we really probably looked more internationally to Japan and the aesthetic of quality and simple. And you felt like you could dress it up, dress it down, and as we kept bouncing back and forth on ideas, bags kept coming up because there wasn't one there that we just loved.

4 (13m 36s):
Did, did you guys Lyndon from the beginning when, when you say bags, it was backpacks that you were talking about?

5 (13m 41s):
Travel goods, but backpacks, I mean we, for our jobs generally speaking, we used backpacks. It was kind of our thing.

4 (13m 47s):
And what kind of backpacks would you use

5 (13m 50s):
In the latter years? I was carrying a, a brand from Japan called Porter, which is sure, you know, still a beautiful, beautiful brand and it was expensive for what people would say a backpack is. Yeah. But very, very simplistic and paired down. And Jamie and I never wrote a business plan for this, but some things were quite obvious if you look at all the stuff that Jamie just mentioned about bags, having straps that people generally people don't need or extra pockets or this feature and that feature. We thought we could come up with a sophisticated product that a lot less features for a similar price, but maybe extra quality and and so into it. So it, it gave us also a lot of confidence seeing these other brands and their price points where they existed to say like, well we should be able to make a company that sells in those price points too.

4 (14m 37s):
How long do you guys, do you think you guys had this conversation around bags before the two of you were like, well let's just try it?

7 (14m 45s):
I'm gonna say probably a year that we were bouncing ideas back and forth and not so much about a business, but just ideas as you would travel as we were at trade shows, as again we would talk a ton, we just kept rolling back to this one And in a sense, probably without even knowing it, we were trying to just vet and cut holes in idea to see if it would actually work and it just kept getting stronger and stronger and every phone call ended up being about this idea.

4 (15m 11s):
Yeah. So, so 2009 is sort of the official kind of date when you guys founded the company. And, and, and I wanna sort of dig into this for for a moment, Lyndon, what was the, I mean, both of you guys still had your day jobs, So you, you both decided we're not gonna quit our jobs, but let's just kind of dip a toe into seeing what we could do. Is that sort of how it started?

5 (15m 36s):
Yeah, absolutely. I mean, conveniently enough, especially with how, how a brand like Vans bridged itself from action sports to fashion. We were already going to places and selling to stores that would, would ultimately end up being some of our first accounts. And so actually working with, with Vans and still working amongst that, actually it was a huge benefit 'cause we were still in the industry. We were still seeing changes, whether it was with our brands or, or competitors and, and actually even how retail was changing and everything was really progressing. So yeah, we kept our, we kept our day jobs for sure. And, and they were really awesome jobs, you know, and they, they were hard to replicate, you know, without having university educations or degrees or a really specialist nature to fall back on.

5 (16m 29s):
It was actually for us, really important as an insurance policy to keep 'em.

4 (16m 33s):
So. Alright, So, you start, I mean, what was the first step? I mean, the first step was to just kind of think about obviously what you wanted a bag to be. I mean, I guess you, you're thinking, let's start with like, let's, let's kind of reverse engineer this instead of just coming up with a product. Let's think about like the, the backstory of the product. Is that, is that right? Lyndon did, did you start with, with a story before you start to focus on what the actual product would look like?

5 (17m 3s):
I I think it was all happening in, in at the same time. We, we know what the, yeah, we knew the aesthetic of what we wanted the product to look like. And a and a lot of that had this, this idea of, of a classic brand. But we wanted to have a modern twist because a lot of our favorite brands are those brands that have stood the test of time. And it was between backpacks, duffle bags, and HIBT sacks were really our first foray into, into the Bag world. And we started feeding this and, and ideating out what a line plan would look like. And again, it, it seems like for us that was very natural because that's what we did for a living. Whether we were working amongst side designers at Vans and giving our feedback or Jamie at K two, giving feedback for Ride Snowboards or K two snowboards, et cetera.

5 (17m 49s):
It was understanding that, that that was really important. So it started to really become alive, although those are still the very early days, but it started to come alive.

4 (17m 59s):
Tell me more about how you thought about how you wanted this to be branded. Because, you know, for a lot of people, the first time they saw, certainly for me, the first time I saw Herschel Supply company backpack with that logo on it, I just assumed it had been around for a hundred years. Like Levi's, you know, it was like a gold rush brand, you know, but that was very carefully thought through and cultivated. And I'm curious how you started to think about doing it that way.

7 (18m 26s):
I mean, we wanted to take that creative freedom that we had as kids and build that into the mindset of a bag company. Really with everything we do, we look to the past and then try to modernize it. And we had to start that way right with, right with the logo. So

5 (18m 42s):
We had a big mood board in relation to other things that we really loved. Graphic references, brand references of what we, of what we really loved. But the, the story came back to also if we envision the little town of Herschel and having a little store in this town that sold useful goods to the farming community, the locals. And you imagine this sign sort of swinging back and forth on this little dirt road street, it was like the supply shop, it was like how the locals would come in, the farming community would come in and we'd sell them useful goods. I mean, when you're in a small community, you have to sell things at work. Yeah. It's not about all the fluff, it's not about all potentially even the branding.

5 (19m 25s):
You have to sell utilitarian goods at work. And I think the spirit of the brand was also that, where we wanted to deliver great utility functionality with a bunch of stuff stripped away. And yeah, that was a lot of the, the heartbeat of the

4 (19m 41s):
Brand. I mean, at the time, 2009, it wasn't like there were no backpacks. I mean there were, you know, I was a kid, I had a gen sport backpack, I think. And you know, obviously the, you know, the, the big brands, the Adidases and you know, Nike's made backpacks, but you felt like they fit in one category or another. Like they were either just for sports or for hiking, but there was nothing in between.

7 (20m 6s):
There wasn't a bag company that had a heartbeat. It was more of a race to the bottom than a race to a story. And the bag market, it really is a unique purchase. The value at point of purchase is so much less than the sentimental value they have once they own it. I mean it's, it's different than so many other industries that I've looked at more than footwear or denim or you know, any other purchase once they own a backpack because they do carry it every day. Especially if you carried it around university for an entire year. You remember that backpack? Yeah. The sentimental value, the first trip to Europe, the first trip here. But did they remember the shoes they had on?

7 (20m 48s):
Do they remember the jacket they wore the first day? Probably not. But that backpack, that value is so much higher after purchase. Yeah, and it was really interesting that, you know, Linda and I talked a lot about it, but we knew we had to really change the bag market and show up better and make sure we added value to the market.

4 (21m 10s):
When we come back in just a moment, Jamie and Lyndon figure out how to put together the perfect backpack by tearing a lot of other bags apart. Stay with us.

7 (21m 20s):
I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

ZipRecruiter (21m 33s):
Whether you are a small business owner growing your team or an HR director hiring hundreds of people across the nation, you have one of the toughest jobs there is. But what if I were to tell you that there's something that can make your whole hiring process faster and easier? It's ZipRecruiter. And right now you can try it for free at ziprecruiter.com/built. Instead of you doing all the hiring work, ZipRecruiter works for you. Once you post your job on ZipRecruiter, it's sends it to more than 100 job sites. So, you can reach more of theright people. Its powerful technology scans thousands of resumes to identify people whose skills and experience match your job hiring heroes. Let ZipRecruiter help make your job easier. Four out of five employers who post on ZipRecruiter get a quality candidate within the first day. See for yourself. Go to this exclusive web address to try ZipRecruiter for free. Ziprecruiter.com/built. Again, that's ziprecruiter.com/built. ZipRecruiter the smartest way to hire

Fundrise (22m 41s):
this is a huge deal. For the first time ever, investors of all sizes can invest in some of the top private pre I P O companies in the world, including those leading the AI revolution. Fundrise already, America's largest direct access alternative asset manager just launched a first of its kind venture capital product that's available for all investors. And the timing couldn't be better. You've seen the headlines from large language models to autonomous vehicles to disease research. AI's impact on the world is moving at light speed. If you're an investor, you should be asking how AI is gonna impact your portfolio. With Fundrise, you can invest in some of the top private pre I P O companies in the world before it would've been virtually impossible to invest in these kinds of companies before they went public. Join the more than 2 million people already using Fundrise by visiting Fundrise dot com slash built. That's F U N D R I S e.com/built. All investments can lead to loss.

4 (23m 44s):
Hey everyone, you know, every time I run into a How I Built This fan, the first thing they wanna do is tell me about their favorite episode, which is so awesome. So now I wanna share your favorite episode with the millions of people who listen to this show episodes they might not have heard or might want to hear again. So here's what I want you to do. Grab your smartphone and record a short memo short like less than 30 seconds and tell us your name, where you live and which episode is your favorite and why you loved it. So for example, I might say, Hey, it's Guy Raz here in San Francisco and my favorite episode of the show is the one about Hamdi, Lakay and Chobani because I learned so much about how to just push through and nothing seems to be working out and it gave me a whole new perspective on being resilient.

4 (24m 33s):
So that's it. Something like that, you know, and by the way, that's not my favorite episode. I love them all equally. Anyway, once you're done with the recording email or message it to us at HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com and we'll share your favorites right here in the ad breaks in future episodes. Thanks so much. You guys are the best. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 2009 and Jamie and Lyndon are starting to converge on the idea of launching a bag company.

4 (25m 15s):
And it's actually good timing because during this period backpacks are starting to get trendy again.

5 (25m 22s):
Yeah, I, I think we've had some pretty funny stories about that, especially maybe early on, even in, in interviews and maybe year three or four about going like, what are you gonna do when this backpack trend goes away? And they also said, what are you gonna do when this outdoor trend goes away? And I'm like, well yeah, I don't, I don't think it's gonna be trendier to be indoors anytime soon. And the fact is, we've been using backpacks well before this and we're gonna be using well after this because they're just really, really functional. And so we didn't try to invent a trend here. It was literally maybe even solving a problem for ourselves 'cause we couldn't find what we were looking for. And And, again, loving the sneaker industry, both Jamie and I together, of course I worked in it, but it was also like we, in the early days we act like more like a sneaker company than we did a bag company.

5 (26m 11s):
'cause that's more what we were into. And we weren't into how bag companies, especially in our price category were acting. And I think that was an important distinction. Well

4 (26m 22s):
Explain. Explain what you said you wanted to be more like a, a shoe company rather than a bag company. What did that, what does that mean?

5 (26m 28s):
Well, shoe companies were doing so many awesome things. I mean, they were creating segmentation in their lines to have, have tiered products that would only be available in certain channels. They were working on collaborations with, whether they be artists, musicians, other brands that were telling stories differently. The, the passion that people have for sneakers even today, whether it's collectability or new launches or, or the, the hype around it is, is something that's is intoxicating. And again, the bag business wasn't a part of this. You know, we sort of looked around, you know, most people, especially for going back to school, bought their bag at a stationary store or a big box store.

5 (27m 9s):
And oftentimes it would be the engineering of these stores to say, get your calculator, your pencils, your binders, your paper. Yep. Your duo tangs. And at the very end you'd be like, okay, where do you put this? You put this in the bag that was available there. Well those kids weren't buying their sneakers from that store. They weren't buying their Hat from that store. They weren't buying their jeans or their tees from that store. And we wanted to be able to separate that conversation into a unique buying experience. And I, I don't think there was a brand that totally existed to do that.

4 (27m 39s):
Alright. But you had to figure out what you wanted that bag to look like. And I'm assuming you guys both had pretty strong views on what that would be. Tell me how you went about designing this bag.

7 (27m 54s):
I think internationally we saw a lot, especially in Japan, that market had less complex bags. I think bags that have been stripped down. I think when we looked to the past and vintage bags and bought a lot, there was a lot of appealing aesthetic to what that was. But the feature sets weren't right or the shapes might have been a little off for the time. So for us, we had bought a lot of different bags to reference and really started opening them up, cutting them up, talking about what we would have and started playing around some ideas and, and sketching a bit and, and, and, and modernizing a classic backpack. Yeah. But the biggest weakness here, guys that we didn't know how to manufacture, we could see it, we could see it in the wall, we could see the lookbooks, we could see how we wanted to story, we could see and feel and, and hear what this brand even like, we knew exactly what we wanted to do, but we didn't know how to build.

7 (28m 43s):
And so we had to go out and buy and cut apart. And for me, I had to know, I had to measure, I had to, had to dive deep into every single det and every single feature to figure out how it was done.

4 (28m 54s):
So where did you get the first prototype made?

5 (28m 59s):
We, we had a pretty crude little p d f mood board that sort of tried to, tried to explain what we were trying to do with the brand, trying to explain the look and the feel of it. And then had some pretty basic sketches. So yeah, I had reached out to some of our connections, you know, with, with vans and I, I certainly said to some of our product managers, Hey, I'm not looking for you to get in trouble, but is there any manufacturers you know of that we could reach out to? And lo and behold, we got a couple business cards from these factories. So, and

4 (29m 30s):
These are presumably, these are factories in China,

5 (29m 32s):
Factories in China at this point in time. Yeah. And so, and

4 (29m 35s):
And in this p d f you had just one product or you had several different ones? We,

5 (29m 40s):
We had the entire range. There would been like six different backpacks, two different duffle bags. Wow. One, one different HIBT sack. Yeah. That would, that would be showing the line brand, the what we were trying to accomplish and colors that we were trying to do in that. Yeah. And so we in, we sent these emails over, you know, eagerly waiting for responses, get up the next day, hit, resend, receive, and you know, there was nothing there. So we, we, we literally turned to Google and started to Google things like how to make backpacks, how to start a backpack factory Yep. Where to make backpacks. And we took our, our little p d f on the same email and we sent it to like hundreds of email addresses we found in companies.

5 (30m 21s):
And we started to get some responses from, from various people. I, I remember a, a couple of them, one, one, I can't remember the exact name. It was something like XY manufacturing. And these actually people sent us a quote which was like, yeah, so this is what it's gonna cost to make it's minimums of 4,000 units per color per style. And I remember there was this other one that made bags and plush toys and I thought I, I had one of those, wouldn't it be cool moments? And I told Jamie, I was like, oh my god, man, we can make plush toys with these people as well. Jamie, shut that down quite quickly. Yeah.

4 (30m 55s):
Gotta stay focused.

5 (30m 56s):
Thank you. That's what Jamie said. Anyways, we, we ended up meeting, we got an email from this, this gentleman and he, his wife actually was learning, living in Vancouver, learning English. And he said he was coming over to, to see his wife and he agreed to have a meeting with us. And ultimately we Jamie and I met him downtown Vancouver and we, he ended up agreeing to make our first ever samples.

4 (31m 21s):
Okay, let's pause for a moment and just let me understand your financing here, right? Because you guys had both had jobs and I think you probably had some income coming in and so maybe you had some savings. I mean, but, but starting to, to produce backpacks is gonna cost significant amount of money. I mean maybe hundreds of thousands of dollars. How much money did you have at this point?

5 (31m 45s):
Well we, we had great jobs. We didn't pay ourselves through Herschel at all. And our oldest brother, that's where he comes into the picture, put some money in the business in the early days.

4 (31m 56s):
How did, how did he have money?

5 (31m 58s):
He, he was working as a commodities trader at this point in time. Right. For JP Morgan

4 (32m 2s):
In New York.

5 (32m 3s):
He was actually in Calgary on their, on their crude oil desk. Oh,

4 (32m 7s):
So he had, so he had some cash.

5 (32m 10s):
Yeah. And, and he was always really supportive of us trying to do something of on our own. And, and so yeah, no, he, he put a bit of cash in. We worked and bootstrapped it by not paying ourselves, not having offices. We didn't really have any real expenses aside from, you know, trying to get this off the ground.

4 (32m 31s):
That's a good brother. It's

7 (32m 32s):
A good, well we're a good salesman guy. I mean that's the key thing, right? Yeah. But he is a good brother.

5 (32m 37s):
He's a great brother. And by the way, way I, it's been a pretty good return on investment for him as well. I'm sure.

4 (32m 44s):
I'm sure he's done pretty well.

5 (32m 45s):
Don't, I think he, I think he'll be as complimentary of us as we were thankful of him. I think we did, he did pretty well off the deal.

4 (32m 53s):
Alright. So, you guys find this manufacturer, meet this guy in Vancouver. He is a Chinese manufacturer. He goes back to China and he agrees to make a sample run and how much, how many items in a sample run in that sample run?

7 (33m 6s):
Initially it was five items to him really to try to understand his capabilities as well as some costing.

4 (33m 13s):
And, and he would make how many of each item?

7 (33m 16s):
One of each initially just as a, as an early proto to actually see where we were gonna stand and try to get some understanding.

4 (33m 24s):
Alright, So, you get this, the, the, the specs to this manufacturer in China and presumably you're waiting with bated breath for them to send them back and, and probably took what, a couple months to get those samples?

5 (33m 38s):
Probably a month and, yep. Yeah, I mean this is, this is a big deal for us. I mean we, we've really never seen a sample of, of Herschel before and, and Jamie and I promised ourselves that we would be together for the first time. We opened our first samples and they actually got delivered to Jamie's office in Calgary. I happened to be at our family's summer home and I drove into the city. We, we met in the outskirts of, of Calgary, right on the right on the outskirts of, of, of town. It was a bit mafioso style where, where the car is rolled in trunk's, open box pulled up, box cutter open Jamie, sliced the box open.

5 (34m 21s):
And we licked, literally opened up the box and, and saw our first samples. And to be very honest, they were pretty disappointing.

4 (34m 31s):
How so what, what, what, what was the problem with 'em?

7 (34m 34s):
Shapes were off guy and measurements were wrong and details weren't there. The bags were stitched properly, the quality was there, but the shape, the feeling, the drape, the total aesthetic we were going for wasn't even close. So I think it's at that time that we got on the phone and decided it might be time to take a trip overseas to spend some time in their, in, in their sample room. And so I booked a trip, I think the following day after getting off the phone with him and got a visa and I headed over to China about, I'm gonna say a couple weeks after receiving those first samples.

7 (35m 13s):
Hmm. The first thing, the first deadline we had was we had booked a, a trade show in New York City and we had this deadline that we had to get these bags done and ready for. So

4 (35m 24s):
Do you remember when the trade show was in the fall presumably, right? Or in the spring?

5 (35m 28s):
This, this trade show would've been in the spring.

4 (35m 31s):
Spring of 2010. Of

5 (35m 32s):
2010, yes.

4 (35m 34s):
How so How many weeks did you have bef Like did you have have a month? Did you have six weeks? Like, I I

7 (35m 39s):
Think we had a Co I think there was, I would say two to three months. Okay. Because getting over there, I spent a, a couple weeks with the pattern makers. It was an interesting time because the owner of the facility as Atlan picked me up. He was one of the only English speaking individuals working at his facility. And he mentioned to me day one in that he was gonna be gone for about eight to 10 days during my trip. And so, so there was a lot of writing, a lot of chalk, a lot of pointing, a lot of thumbs ups and downs and, you know, sitting in swimming machines myself, it was, it was an interesting time, but that time at that facility was so crucial for this brand to truly get shape and understand what we were doing and spending time at the markets really through touch and feel and pointing and just, it, it really was a crucial time.

4 (36m 35s):
And you just needed one sample of every, every product, every skew or every color. Right. You didn't need a big production one 'cause you were just gonna display them at the trade show. Is that right?

7 (36m 47s):
That is a hundred percent correct, yes.

4 (36m 49s):
Alright. So, you guys in, you know, you decide that in 2010 you're gonna, you're gonna debut these samples at this trade show, this big trade show in New York?

5 (37m 3s):
Yeah, so we were at a, the first ever agenda trade show in New York City that was held at the Chelsea Art Museum. It was actually a perfect trade show for us to go to because they had these beautiful old patina herringbone floors. They had white gallery walls. Yeah. And, and they separated just all the booths with pallets. So it, it was, it was a great trade show 'cause 'cause we got to be on sort of like a, a even playing field with a whole bunch of really, really big established names.

4 (37m 33s):
And how many different items did you have showing at that first trade show?

7 (37m 39s):
13. 13 styles? I think there was total. Hmm? There was more than just backpacks. There was duffle bags, there was cross bodies and HIBT packs.

4 (37m 47s):
Right. And, and, and I think at this point the company is just, Herschel is just the two of you. So, alright, so you're at this trade show with all these samples in New York and what happens

5 (37m 58s):
When we, when we first walked into the trade show, we were the first people to show up. We had hockey bags full of our samples that's very Canadian of us. We, we rolled up to our booth and there was an apparel rack sitting in the booth. So we went and asked the show organizer, you know, if there was any shelves, if there any racks, if there was any other things that we could have. 'cause we were a bag company, we weren't selling clothes. And, and they said, you know, that's all we've got. And Jamie noticed a big, huge pile of pallets sitting on the other side of this art museum. And we literally spent the better half of the day, at the very least, going to get tools, ripping apart pallets and constructing our, our very first trade show booth

7 (38m 47s):
When we finished, when we stood back. And I think we were probably one of the first, in one of the last to leave that day. The aesthetic suited our brand perfectly. And so it wasn't planned, but it almost felt like it was meant to be.

4 (39m 2s):
And so what happened? I mean, did, I mean you're there and you've got these bags and who, who started to inquire about them?

5 (39m 11s):
We, we didn't have any appointments with people. 'cause to be honest, if you phoned people and you were like, Hey, we've got this company called Herschel and we're making bags and you should stop by. Yeah. We wouldn't have ever got through to the people we needed to. So we just showed up and the amazing customers started rolling in and, and when they walked by, they'd sort of double take and look and you're like, what, what, where, where are you guys from? Tell me about your products. And, and that could have been a, a Bloomingdale's or Nordstrom or a little sneaker shop. Wow.

4 (39m 41s):
Huh. So I, I guess one of the retailers that you, you met at that first show was Urban Outfitters, which obviously there's still, you know, a significant retailer today, but at the time, 2010, I mean they were, they were super influential. I mean that that's the story where you wanted to be if you were a cool brand. So when you met the buyer from Urban Outfitters, what happened? Like what, what did they say?

7 (40m 7s):
I think she said, why didn't you book an appointment with us right off the bat? And wow, of course Linden's answer was like, well 'cause you wouldn't have showed up. And it's so true. I think that organic nature of them just walking in and hearing the story and coming over and hearing it right from ours and it really, it really resonated with them.

4 (40m 25s):
So Urban Outfit clearly was gonna, was gonna put in an order. What did you guys leave that? I mean, how many orders did you leave that first show with?

5 (40m 33s):
So the, the way trade shows generally work is we're gonna get orders after So. you establish the connection. Yeah, we, we got to meet a whole bunch of the best sort of sneaker shops that were started. You know, ones that come into mind is Bodega in Boston was a, one of the first people we got to meet. We, we had an awesome encounter with GQ Magazine at that show who, 'cause a lot of times Press will circulate the shows as well to figure out what's new. And GQ the next day requested one of our bags to, to be shot in their studio. And we ended up on their, the front cover of the GQ gift guide for that here. And it's easy to reflect on this now of like, yeah, here we're on the gift guide, but our brand did not exist at this point in time.

5 (41m 16s):
Yeah. Like, nobody knew us. And for those, for those moments for, you know, especially that holiday season, it's like we, we were starting to exist and those were some of the early like, oh this is really gonna work.

4 (41m 31s):
Meantime, the both of you are still living in separate cities, right? Jamie, you're in Calgary, London, you're in Vancouver. And I know that when you went back after that, I mean that trade show really kind of opened things up for you, not just in terms of orders, but in terms of connections to like big retailers including Nordstrom's, right? I mean, did, did, did, did Nordstrom's reach out to you and say, Hey, let's meet up after the show?

5 (41m 52s):
Well, well we reached out to them and they're based in Seattle, so it's just a short drive away from us here in Vancouver. And I ended up going to meet the buyer at the Nordstrom office in downtown Seattle the night before I, I had to drive down to Seattle, I was actually playing hockey and I actually got a little bit of a scrum and, and end up walking outta that, that rink with a bit of a shiner actually. And so next morning I woke up, I had to put some eye makeup on to, to patch myself up. Ended up grabbing our samples, driving down to Nordstrom, had a meeting with them and the the first thing the buyer said was, yeah, we don't actually buy backpacks, we don't really sell them in our store.

5 (42m 39s):
And I said, well that's why we're here to change that. And, and and ultimately through a little convincing we got an order from Nordstrom. Yeah. And they're ultimately one of our largest customers still today.

4 (42m 56s):
So, you get, you'd come back from this trade show with a bunch of orders and you've got a finance those orders. So how much, I mean, you're, you don't have the cash upfront at that point was the investment that your brother made and any other sort of money that you cobbled together enough to fi it must've been enough to finance that first run.

7 (43m 18s):
I mean, we had collected orders of about 4,000 pieces and I think the minimum order after talking to our facility in Asia was 7,000 is what they wanted us to order to be able to produce every single sku. And those are some big conversations for us because

4 (43m 36s):
It was gonna be expensive.

7 (43m 37s):
It's gonna be expensive. We felt confident we had a good reaction with everybody there, but was a good enough. I think these are big conversations that to sit down and have with each other is, you know, we're gonna order about 3000 extra units and you know, is everyone gonna get a Herschel bag for Christmas and their birthday for the next couple years? Or,

4 (43m 56s):
Or you gonna be stuck with thousands of Herschel bags in a warehouse in Calgary.

7 (43m 60s):
Exactly. Yeah.

4 (44m 3s):
When we come back in just a moment, Jamie and Lyndon are caught off guard when their bags are endorsed by one of the world's most famous endorsers. Stay with us. You're listening to How I. Built This. Did you know Airbnb was almost put outta business when a competitor cloned their website down to the very pixel? It's true. Airbnb even considered acquiring the competitor, but decided against it. Years later, the decision paid off Airbnb reigned Supreme in the market while its copycat had to shut down.

4 (44m 44s):
We all remember choices like these that shaped the course of our lives in business. A world renowned venture capital firm, Sequoia Capital calls them crucible moments hosted by Sequoia's Ruloff boa. Their new podcast Crucible Moments provides a never Before Heard peek into the journey of companies like Airbnb 23 and Me and Nvidia, and their decisions that change their businesses forever. Check out the one about Block the company that created the platforms people love today. Like Square and Cash App. It was founded by Jack Dorsey and on crucible moments I learned that while trying to prove the concept for Block Jack decided he needed to give away the hardware and software for free. Tune into Sequoia's new podcast series to discover how some of the most transformational companies of the modern era were built.

4 (45m 30s):
Crucible Moments is out now and available everywhere you get your podcasts. and@cruciblemoments.com, go listen to Crucible moments today. Hey, it's Guy Raz here. You're about to hear from Go and Bani entrepreneur and Mercury customer to learn a little more about why Mercury is the best banking partner for your startup journey.

9 (45m 51s):
I chose Mercury because I feel like as an entrepreneur, my goal is to try to build a product in a company. And most banks require me to understand a little bit more about how they operate, how they work, and what I need to do to interface with them. Whereas Mercury is the opposite. I don't have to think about anything. I can just log in, send a wire, check my balance, and move on with my life.

4 (46m 17s):
Join Goggin Bani co-founder and c e o of Maven and more than a hundred thousand entrepreneurs like him who choose Mercury for banking credit cards and the resources to turn their startups into success stories. Visit Mercury dot com to learn more. Mercury is a financial technology company, not a bank. Banking services provided by Choice Financial Group and Evolve Bank and trust members F D I C. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built. This. I'm Guy Raz. So after landing a bunch of orders from big retailers, Jamie and Lyndon reached the point where they have to grow their company beyond just the two of them.

5 (47m 4s):
So in, in the middle of 2010, we brought in some people who could help us facilitate the actual sales we were gonna be doing, but also of course we needed to create a new season. So, you know, Jamie was working on creating the next range because we needed to be ready for the fall trade shows as well. And, and that's when everything started to get really, really busy. So we, we hired some people who had previously worked with us, my, myself, with Vans as well as we, we hired our first couple of employees to, to come in and, and help us get things across the finish line.

4 (47m 39s):
Well, Lyndon what was the game plan when, when these bags would start to appear in Urban Outfitters? Like how would you s was the, was the idea like let's just sit back and see if they sell themselves? 'cause you had no marketing, you weren't paying for ads, you didn't, I mean this is sort of pre-social media. I mean it was a little bit, but so was that the idea? Just let's just put them out, let Urban Outfitters put them out there on display and we'll see what happens.

5 (48m 5s):
Yeah, I mean it doesn't sound overly strategic as I hear it as you say it now, but the reality is was find amazing retailers who had a bunch of other amazing brands. Their job as retailers and of merchants is to curate offerings. So. if you are sitting next to other awesome brands, they're telling the end consumer that this brand is cool too. And, and that was really our, our marketing is, is spending money on trade shows and then having others tell the story a amongst the their, their multi-brand retail settings.

4 (48m 37s):
Alright, so they get out to Urban Outfitters and how'd they do?

5 (48m 40s):
I I had a call with the buyer at the time, his name was Tony and they had been in market for a couple weeks and, and I, I asked Tony like, how are we doing? He's like, yeah, you know, they're they're doing pretty well. And I'm like, huh, that's awesome. I was like, what, what are we talking like sell through wise? And he is like, what we, you know, we got a big chain here. It takes a while to get the bags out to on the floor everywhere, you know, some areas get 'em faster than others, but yeah, we're currently selling at about 26% a week and I'm like 26% a week. And he is, and I'm like, that's pretty good, right? And he is like, oh no, that's, that's awesome.

5 (49m 20s):
And yeah, I mean he's, and then right next to talk about all that extra stock we had, he was like, you gotta send us over what you've got. Wow. And they, they were a great partner and, and and still are today.

4 (49m 35s):
Did you guys feel like, 'cause there was a talk, you know, there's, there was talk around this time of like so-called heritage brands, right? Like people would, would buy defunct brands, like classic examples. Madewell, Mickey Drexler, who I've interviewed before is a brilliant guy in the apparel industry, was a gap for many years. He basically bought this trademark from Madewell's company that went defunct in the thirties and they resurrected it in the early two thousands. So it's a new brand, but people thought of it as an old brand. Was that part of your also the way you were positioning Herschel, even though it was a new brand and you didn't resurrect an old brand name, it had that feeling.

4 (50m 18s):
Was that, were you consciously trying to do, to do that?

5 (50m 21s):
Herschel had the logo, the brand had familiarity and we knew that that's what we wanted to create. So we wanted to create that familiarity.

4 (50m 30s):
You wanted people to see it and be like, I've seen this somewhere before, even though they hadn't,

5 (50m 34s):
I don't know if that's exactly how we said it, but we thought they, they would feel like it was a, a brand that has existed or they'd have memories of it. The reality is, you know, we were a startup and so we didn't resurrect an old brand. We, we weren't trying to trick people again. It was, it was, it wasn't a part of the pitch of that we were an old resurrected brand at all. But the aesthetic of of brands that we loved were, were brands that stood the test of time and, and we wanted to be able to create that in 2010, but, and, and have it last for decades to come.

4 (51m 7s):
I read that in that first year for full your business 2010, you sold 8,000 bags. Does that sound about right?

5 (51m 14s):
Yeah, around that, around that unit. It was between the seven and 8,000 units that we sold. And, and we were really good at the front end stuff, but we actually didn't know how to ship bags from factory to warehouses. So those, those were also fun times, you know, trying to figure out global logistics when you've never done it before and, and I feel, you know, very appreciative of people walking us through the things we needed to do.

4 (51m 39s):
When did you guys, I know in 2011 both of you quit your day jobs, right? When did you feel like you, you were comfortable doing that Jamie? What was the, the catalyst for you where you like, okay, this is real

7 (51m 52s):
For me? It was, Lyndon actually left about six months prior to myself. Lyndon had a few more conflicts in his sales agency than I did. And so I kept my job for about six more months. And I think all along too for me was trying to get bags to not just be a one season a year business for a lot of these retailers where we went out our first season and sold in back to school and that's fall. And outside of that coming into spring and into summer and into holiday, the bag business at some places didn't exist. And that word test was out there a lot is, oh, we'll give you a small test order. And we really had to take a lot of risk to sell that extra stock that we were bringing in.

7 (52m 34s):
Hmm. As I saw these replenish orders continue to come and I saw the bag market switching from a one season a year business really into two, and then for us to bring in a third and a fourth season and are really seeing it resonate. That's when I started to get comfortable where this is more than a hobby. Yeah. There's also a component that we haven't talked a lot about was just on the international side, year two and three, we were in five countries around the globe, not just in North America. And,

4 (53m 1s):
And did that all, all come from trade shows, from going to trade shows?

7 (53m 5s):
That was from both trade shows and relationships. Some great relationships Linden had in Australia and New Zealand allowed us to open them year two into the business relationships in Japan. And Linda and I, early days started to take a lot of time and go over to a large trade show in Berlin called Bread and Butter to get some great international and European distributors. So it just got to be too much that we just felt we were doing a disservice to what Herschel could become if we didn't make this 100% of our time.

4 (53m 38s):
Lydon at the time you were you, or a couple years later, you're reflecting on this, you had said that we went from like in a very short period of time, like a band playing at a small pub to then overnight going to Madison Square Garden. So how did you manage that scale and that growth? I mean, you know, if everything's being thrown at you at once, how did you scale up and bring the right people in and, and deal with the growth? Tell me what you did.

5 (54m 7s):
Well we, I think we allowed ourselves to not be perfect until we ultimately needed to be. At that point in time, we went out and re re recruited people in finance roles and operation roles that ultimately could build out an, an entire department. That's when we were diverting ourselves from being a single factory brand to, to multiple manufacturing points to make sure we had stability. That's when we started product testing, every single aspect of our products to make sure that they were passing tests and chemical tests and quality tests all around the world. And so it just got re really real, really quickly and, and, and from, well, let's, year one didn't turn a profit.

5 (54m 50s):
It was, albeit it was a very small year, but since 2011 and on, we, we've always been profitable. Really,

4 (54m 56s):
Even in those crazy high growth years, you were profitable.

5 (55m 0s):
Absolutely. You know, and some of the reasons for doing that in a normalization aspect, if we were paying ourselves and, you know, maybe we went and found these, you know, crazy executives that we took from other companies. But to be honest, we, we were pretty grassroots and pretty bootstrapped and we just made it work.

4 (55m 19s):
Did you feel pressure to constantly bring out new, you know, new products, new categories, go into new categories beyond bags? I mean, did you feel like we've gotta always stay five steps ahead?

7 (55m 33s):
Yeah, I mean, I would feel a pressure in the early days about growth, as we were growing, we were growing the line by 50%, by 40%, by 30% more every single season. We did not wanna get pigeonholed. It's a small niche bag brand. Yeah. And we wanted to show that we were being innovative and exciting. We wanted to do extensions that felt authentic and natural to us. And that was things like wallets, computer sleeves, we moved into headwear, but they felt authentic. It was all purpose driven design. So it, it, it felt natural to what we were doing.

4 (56m 8s):
And, and, and were you selling all those things only in stores? I mean, I'm assuming you were also being encouraged to, to go direct to consumer. So I mean, like, you had a website. Was it getting traction or, or, or did you have problems selling online in the early days?

7 (56m 26s):
So we had a, a website, but the thing that we thought was smart was anytime an item sold out on our website, it would just disappear and go to a dead link. Which obviously a mistake now, but there is, there is one story, the Oprah one Linden, where we finally had a website up and going and, you know, to hit Oprah's wishlist is just such a huge thing. And you know, again, you're moving so quickly and yeah, I

4 (56m 50s):
Think it's amazing you got onto to Oprah's list. Yeah,

7 (56m 53s):
This is, this is a funny one though. We got a great, one of our top selling duffle bags even today out to Oprah and a, a gray and tan one got on her list and we didn't know about it. And obviously the amount of people going, it sold the bag out instantly. And I think it was one of our mother's friends that called and said, great job on the Oprah article. And we searched it and found it and we followed the link and it was going to a dead link Oh wow. For weeks. And it's just one of those things that looking back, you know, we talk about failures and here and there, we don't think about many, but could have that helped us even more in the early days.

4 (57m 30s):
And, and tell me about, 'cause I know, I mean obviously today you're, you've got hundreds of products, different, different products, maybe not hundreds, but dozens and store retail stores and then partner stores. But I wanna ask you about Covid, because Covid was great for a lot of companies and certainly for a lot of direct to consumer brands. What about for you guys? Was Covid great? I mean, great, it's not the best word, but great for the business. Was it great for your business?

5 (58m 1s):
Covid was not good for Herschel at, at all. Hmm. The, the majority of the products we make are people going to school, people going to work. Yeah. People going to the gym, people going to festivals, people going on trips. Yeah. And, you know, it really set us back, to be honest, it was quite horrible for us, the, the, when, when it first started to, to, you know, build up in, in Asia, the biggest risk for us was actually if we could get products from our factories over to North America and Europe, you know, we, we didn't have to paint a picture that this was gonna be a global pandemic.

5 (58m 41s):
And so we really sped up production. Yeah. And then it started to hit our side of the world and all of a sudden all hell broke loose and nobody was taking their orders. There was of course, uncertainty all over the place. And, and we found ourselves in a whole pile of, of problems. Hmm. I meaning we had to make some tough decisions internally with staff, with categories that we were, that we were in, in with certain, you know, styles of products where we had to make some hard choices and, and make some cuts.

4 (59m 15s):
You, you basically used Covid as a, as a time to kinda regroup and re kind of rethink. 'cause it sounds like you, you had to make some tough decisions, presumably layoffs Right. To preserve your cash and you know, and I guess it was ati, it was a, it was a moment in to think about, alright, what are some of the big things we can do? And one of those was eventually, which I guess you, you do now, which is to focus on using recycled material for your, for your products.

7 (59m 44s):
Correct. And, and also for me, during Covid to watch the team was they were all looking for that next thing to do. And that's one thing that I think a lot of people at Covid didn't know what to do. And for me, I wanted to challenge a team with something to keep their minds going and, and really took a, a big stance on impact and sustainability at our brand. And, and we switched over 95% of our fabrics and materials to be from a sustainable fabric. That's a big, big decision as a brand. Yeah. That is selling millions and millions of pieces a year to go and do that. And to have the team that has to touch every single department within our company from costing to sourcing to manufacturing. And we went from being about five to 10% sustainable to being 95% sustainable on the other side of Covid.

7 (1h 0m 31s):
Yeah.

4 (1h 0m 32s):
Lyndon in 2022, you were quoted as saying the last thousand days have been the hardest thousand days in the business ever. And obviously that you, you you've just outlined that, I mean, are you starting now to, you know, to turn a corner or have you started to turn a corner since that time now? I mean, do, does it feel like you guys are now fully back in business or is it still, are you still coming out of the pandemic era even as we speak?

5 (1h 0m 58s):
Oh, we're back. I mean, people are out there with excitement and people are going to music festivals or going on trips Yeah. And having meetings in person and, and you know, the hybrid work environment now that most people are in, it's pretty good for Herschel too. 'cause you're taking your laptop with you from your work to your home, from your home back to work. Yeah. So, you need a bag or something to carry your stuff. I, I, I would say the, the business in general is conveniently enough. Covid is a memory now and the windshield's a lot bigger than the rear view mirror. And we're staring directly out that windshield right now and, and, and heading towards the future.

4 (1h 1m 32s):
Well, when you think about the, the, you know, this journey that you took and, you know, where, where it started and where it is now. I mean, you guys had a clearly a very strong insight into this opportunity and this, this, this category and that there was really a great opportunity there. And you had a background in design And in distribution. You, you knew what cool brands did well, but still it was a, you know, it was not preordained that this would work. How much of, of what happened to you guys and the brand do you attribute to, to how hard you worked and how much do you think had to do with just getting lucky first to you? Jamie?

7 (1h 2m 11s):
I think luck comes to people every single day and it's how you use that luck to actually turn that luck into momentum. And I think momentum only works if you work hard. And I think to keep that momentum going, it's hard work. And I think to identify that luck to turn into momentum takes a lot, but it's a complete blend. One wouldn't work without the other

4 (1h 2m 36s):
Lyndon.

5 (1h 2m 37s):
I'm a, I'm a big believer of, of timing. And I think that our timing was perfect and, and it wasn't overly engineered of being perfect timing. We didn't know, but I feel timing was on our sides and people were, were shifting. And I think maybe we were early adopters of that timing and watching it and sort of wanting something to change and we're weren't seeing it change. And so we took the reins ourselves and, and started to implement the change we wanted to see. And I, I, yeah, it's been a hell of a ride. It's been a, it's been a, it's been a hell of a ride.

4 (1h 3m 14s):
That's Lyndon and Jamie Cormack, co-founders of Herschel Supply Company. By the way, the town of Herschel, Saskatchewan, where the brand got its name as we heard earlier, it's super small and super remote, but apparently they have a pretty cool museum that might be worth checking out. It's got exhibits on the local ecology and native peoples, and even a species of dinosaur that was discovered right there. It's called Dolly Corrin. Cops Herschel Sys. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app, So, you never miss a new episode of the show and it's always, it's totally free.

4 (1h 3m 54s):
This episode was produced by a Chris Maccini, with music composed by Ramine Arablouei. It was Edited by Neva Grant with research help from Alex Chung. Our audio engineer was Gilly Moon. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, Sam Paulson, Rael Wood, Elaine Coates, John Isabella and Carla Estevez. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This Hey Prime members. You can listen to How I Built This early and ad free on Amazon Music Download, the Amazon Music app today. Or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts.

4 (1h 4m 38s):
If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Disney Frozen: Forces of Nature (1h 4m 53s):
Deep in the enchanted forest from the whimsical world of Disney, frozen something is wrong, Aaron Dell is in danger once again from Dark Forces threatening to disrupt the peace and tranquility. And it's up to Anna and Elsa to stop the villains before it's too late. For the last 10 years, frozen has mesmerized millions around the world. Now Wondery presents Disney Frozen Forces of Nature podcast, which extends the storytelling of the Beloved animated series as an audio first original story, complete with new characters and a standalone adventure set. After the events of Frozen two, reunite with the whole crew, Anna, Elsa, Olaf, and Christophe, for an action packed adventure of fun, imagination, and mystery. Follow along as the gang enlist the help of old friends and new as they venture deep into the forest. And discover the mysterious copper machines behind the chaos and count yourself amongst the allies as they investigate the strange happenings in the enchanted forest. The only question is, are Anna and Elsa able to save their peaceful kingdom? Listen early and add free to the entire season of Disney Frozen Forces of Nature Podcast, along with exclusive bonus content on Wondery. Plus, join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or Wondery Plus Kids on Apple Podcasts.