0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Xfinity fast, reliable internet from infinity can help people stay connected, head to explicity.com where you'll find plans to fit any budget. With speeds, up to a gig, restrictions apply. Actual speeds are not guaranteed. Hey, it's guy here and I want to remind you about a great opportunity. The, how I built this fellowship. Now we've done this in the past few years to help support the next generation of entrepreneurs working to build a better world. And this year we're taking it to the next level. We're going to pick 10 fellows. Each fellow will get matched to an amazing mentor, attend virtual workshops, and then have an opportunity to pitch their business idea to a panel of amazing judges, including some of our favorite, how I built this founders.

0 (51s):
And guess what one winner will be selected to receive a $50,000 no strings attached grant. If you are an early stage entrepreneur looking to make the world a little bit better and want to find out how to apply to become an HIB T fellow visit summit.npr.org/fellows for more details. And remember the deadline is March 31st. The, how I built this fellows program, including an NPR grant to one select fellow is supported by GoDaddy rules apply when we did the relaunch, you know, my first instinct was obviously to like, go raise money.

0 (1m 36s):
So I was talking to every VC, but no one would give me money. I mean, I was begging and I had this like one investor that was really holding out for, and I remember the partner at the VC firm called me and she was like, you know, we've never seen a company that was cool and then went away and then was able to come back and we just can't do it. Wow. And I was like Timberlands

1 (2m 13s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Ross and on the show today, how the one that got away, let Justin McCloud to build the dating app hinge and how hinge led him to the love of his life.

0 (2m 42s):
In 2019, a very distinguished peer reviewed academic journal published a paper about human courtships. The study led by Stanford sociologist, Michael Rosenfeld concluded that most romantic relationships now will begin online.

1 (3m 0s):
Now, if you are say under 35, this may not come as a huge surprise. Pretty much everyone, you know, either uses or has used, or has at least downloaded some kind of dating app. But to anyone older, say people over 40 this study may come as a shock because most of them met their partners at churches or workplaces or school or a party or through a mutual friend or at a bar. And sure you can still meet your future life partner in any of those ways. But the bottom line online dating now seems like the default, the norm, the path of least resistance and today dating apps alone are a $3 billion a year global business.

1 (3m 48s):
There isn't an endless array of them. So how does one app stick out from another? Well, when it comes to one particular app hinge, the company's tagline is designed to be deleted, which at first glance sounds like an unpromising business model. But when you think about it, what hinge is basically trying to tell you is we're going to help you find the one and then you won't need us anymore. Now, like any successful business, Justin McCloud built hinge on relationships, relationships with users and investors and employees. But I think of all the founders we've had on the show, Justin's personal relationships.

1 (4m 33s):
And one relationship in particular were inextricably linked to the launch and very identity of his brand. Now I don't want to give too much away here because you have to hear his story to believe it. But in a sense Justin's own romantic life became a kind of litmus test for the way he hoped hinge users would approach dating, not just as a frenetic swipe, left swipe, right. Kind of a game, but a serious thoughtful, intentional first step toward something lasting and long-term and the story of how Justin essentially turned his life experience into a brand is in some ways so dramatic.

1 (5m 16s):
So implausible that you'd have expect to see it on a TV show or in a movie, but we'll get there. Anyway. Justin grew up in Louisville, Kentucky. He was an only child who attended Catholic school.

2 (5m 31s):
I think I was a pretty sensitive kid. I was a pretty scrawny kid. I was small. And so even like, literally in second grade, when all the boys would be playing sports, I would be like hanging out with the girls. I just like, I just, and if I had to play sports, I would usually fake an injury pretty early so that I could be nursed back to health by the girls. So I think I was, I don't know something about me always. I wasn't a guy's guy.

3 (5m 58s):
Yeah.

0 (5m 59s):
Did that continue into high school? Like your kind of hanging out mostly with girls or, or did that start to change?

3 (6m 6s):
Well, when I was in seventh grade, I had this girlfriend actually I had a girlfriend, fifth, sixth, and seventh grade. Her name was Kristen and I was like, totally in love. I mean, I was like done. I was like, I found my person. I'm like, I'm done this is it. Yeah. And then one day in English class, she just turned around in her desk and dumped me. And that was it. After three years I was at, and I was so sad and heartbroken and also at my school because it was so small, it was a little bit cliquey and everybody knew and everyone knew, and I was sort of like kicked out of the cool kids group.

3 (6m 45s):
And so for seventh and eighth grade, I, it was like, it was just torture. And I was supposed to go to this high school. It was like, it was like a feeder for a big Catholic high school in Louisville. And I just decided like, I'm going on a different path. I want to get away from these people. And I chose a small private school in Louisville

0 (7m 6s):
And let's be honest, seventh grade. You're not at your most sophisticated life yet. I mean, this is yours. This is still puppy. Love you.

3 (7m 14s):
It was traumatic. It was traumatic to me. I know that sounds so silly, but I just was so heartbroken and I was so traumatized by the experience and like the social isolation that followed. I was just like, I'm never going to let that happen to me again. And I think I just determined that like I was going to be cool. And so I turned into like a completely different person when I entered high school. How so? Well for one partying, I mean, I was, I was actually, I mean, I definitely had a troublemaker class. Clown got a lot of detentions and things and in grade school, but it was always kind of like good nature, funny, fun, or like not doing my homework or being late to class.

3 (7m 57s):
And when I got to high school, there was like a senior there named Billy who I like idolized. And he was like a big drinker and a big partier. And I literally remember the first weekend before school started my freshman year, we went to a field hockey game, which was the it sport at my high school. And there was like this big party later that night. And I knew the cool kids were going and I went home and this is, I mean, this is reflective of who I was at the time I went home to my mom and dad and I said, there's going to be a party tonight. There's going to be drinking. I want to go.

3 (8m 37s):
Cause I was like really honest. I was like, I had just, I was really earnest. And I was like, and I really want to go. And they said, absolutely not. And I argued with them for like two and a half hours probably. And finally my dad drove me to the party and I got dropped off. And I remember that night I had two beers and two shots and I was floored and like passed out in a pool house. And I woke up the next morning and I just felt like a golden God. I was, I just like thought that was the coolest thing. And that began a career at high school of being the center of a party scene.

3 (9m 19s):
I mean, yeah.

0 (9m 20s):
To have been good enough at school. Right. Cause you went to college, you got into

3 (9m 24s):
In college. I did. Well, I had this other side of me that was still an overachiever. Like in high school, I got both the most detentions in history and the, I took the most advanced placement classes. I was the captain of the tennis team. I was the graduation speaker. So I had that whole side. It's not like I was just like partying and not doing any work and actually really reveled. I think it was a big part of my identity to be able to do both, to be able to be this like overachieving person, but also at the same time have this troublemaking party side. Alright. You,

0 (9m 59s):
You go to college, you went to Colgate university, which is a pretty small place in role sort of upstate New York. And I guess from, from what I understand, like you continued your kind of approach to life, I guess is fair to say. Right? Like a lot of times

3 (10m 14s):
I think I let the overachiever go to the wayside and I, and I doubled down on the partying. I mean, I remember around March of my freshman year, I woke up one day and I like reflected. And I was like, I have not gone to bed sober this year. And I actually went in like March or April of my first year. I actually went to go see a drug and alcohol counselor at Colgate. And she was like, you know, I think you might have a problem with alcohol and drugs. And I think maybe you should stop doing alcohol and drugs. And I looked at her and I was like, don't you think that's a bit rash?

3 (10m 54s):
Like I just wanted to like, come and talk about my feelings. I didn't anticipate having to just stop. And so I didn't go back to see her, except that I then got referred back to her when I got written up three times in one night, like a few weeks later. And she was like, I've already met this kid. He needs help. And that's how I spent my first summer after college and rehab all summer. Wow.

0 (11m 21s):
It sounds like you were a kid exposed to this early on and you just a combination of maybe you had a, sort of a predisposition to addiction, plus you were young and you didn't quite know how to handle it or how to moderate your behavior. And so it combination of that and addiction really kind of took over.

3 (11m 40s):
Yeah, I think that's a good way to put it. I think going back to what I was saying before, I was a pretty sensitive kid and I think I had a lot of emotions and I think, I didn't really know how to express them in a productive way. And when I overwhelmed, it just

4 (11m 54s):
Felt the easiest way was to like overwhelm the uncomfortable feelings with this better feeling of getting high or drunk.

0 (12m 2s):
What are your, were your parents aware of it? And if they were I'm assuming they were worried.

4 (12m 8s):
Yeah, I think they are worried. I think my mom was especially worried. You know, I was really good at holding it all together though. And that's what I would always point to. I'd be like, well, look at my grades. I don't have a problem. You know, I have like a three seven GPA and I'm taking a 400 level courses my first year and I hit it. Well, you know, I, wasn't a, I wasn't a dummy, I'd figured it out over time, how to hide it and how to get away with

0 (12m 32s):
During college. You met somebody who you started to date and Kate and,

4 (12m 37s):
And I guess you kind of, you guys dated basically throughout college. Right? I met Kate her first day of her first year and it was my first day of my second year. So I had just gotten out of rehab and Kate was like, the polar opposite. Kate showed up to school, never had a drink, never kissed a boy. So like very different human being than me and my roommate had gone out in search of like finding some girls like the very first day of school. Right. So it was like going out and like any finds these couple of girls out on the quad and invites them back to our place.

4 (13m 18s):
And he's walking up the stairs with them. And there I am passed out in the stairwell, like literally on a landing and the stairwell, Kate, I think was scared. She'd never seen a passed out person in her life and an RA sauce. And Kate got her first. She was in trouble just for being around me. I wasn't even conscious that was our first interaction. But later that year, she and I had a class together and we would sit together sometimes and she developed a little bit of a crush on me. And one night she came over to my dorm room. We were chatting for a little bit and she asked me to walk her home and I walked her home and we had our first kiss that night.

4 (14m 0s):
Then we were just inseparable after that. But I guess

0 (14m 7s):
Shortly before you graduated from college, you and Kate split, was it your decision or was that her decision? Well, we had a,

4 (14m 15s):
We'll say Rocky relationship, as you could imagine, trying to be with someone like me and someone like Kate and we had this really strong, personal connection and bond and really loved each other. I mean, we really just were really attracted to one another and like magnets to one another, but it was also tumultuous because I was always going out and getting into trouble. And so we broke up and got back together like six or seven times during college. And at the end we broke up. She actually transferred to transfer to another school. So I transferred to Wellesley and we got back

3 (14m 52s):
Together one last time. And I just like, I just couldn't do it. I don't know why I just let her go. And then I almost immediately regretted it. I wanted to call her like two weeks later and I just said, I have to stay out of her life because I just kept interrupting it and messing it up and then leaving again. So I just vowed to like, not contact her anymore.

0 (15m 15s):
All right. So 2006, you graduated college, you guys are split and that's the end of your relationship and, and you obviously had to kind of deal with sobriety. How did you, how did you do it? I mean, how are you able to give up drugs and alcohol?

3 (15m 33s):
On graduation day? I woke up and I'd been out partying the night before and I was, I woke up at like a stranger's house and I had to get back home in order to like shower off and meet my parents who are going to come over and meet me. And I was walking home that morning and I just thought to myself, it feels like the steering wheel on my life is broken. I just had this innate sense that I was like supposed to go do something big. And I did, I held onto this belief that I was like destined for success and I was going to do all these great things. Where did that idea come from?

3 (16m 13s):
By the way? I don't know, but I always had it. I only child syndrome, perhaps. I'm not sure, but I, you know, I was looking at my life at that point and I was like, God, like I keep wanting to go in this direction. And yet every day I wake up and go this other direction and I feel like I do not have control. And it scared me, you know, I hadn't gotten the job that I wanted. I was taking some other random job in DC that I didn't really want. I'd lost the girl, just, it felt like it didn't seem like I was on track for success. And, and I just vowed that morning to like stop.

3 (16m 56s):
And I did well, you know, I participated in 12 step programs and I like really threw myself into work. And that was that.

0 (17m 5s):
I mean, it's, in some ways you're really lucky that this happened early to you in your life and you're able to deal with it early.

3 (17m 12s):
He usually lucky, I didn't feel lucky, you know, I'd go to these meetings and these old people would be like, I, you know, I drank for 50 years and you know, yourself, you know, it'd be like, I'd be like, you're so lucky you got to drink for 50 years. I have to stop. And I'm 22.

0 (17m 28s):
All right. So you see you graduate and you move to Washington DC and, and I guess you work in, in management consulting for, for a few years. And then you had to business school right. To, to Harvard business school. I did. Yeah. And your, your previous experience in a college environment was like super partier and drinker. And I imagine that's also kind of that drinking helped you meet people right. A little bit because it totally, and now you're in this new environment where you're, I'm assuming no longer drinking. What was that like?

5 (18m 2s):
It was so hard there. I mean, there's just a lot of partying and it's how people connect and how people bond, especially in the early days. And I just felt like a fish out of water. I just felt, so I just couldn't be around that. And so I kinda just stayed away and, and socially, it was very hard for me to be there really out.

0 (18m 23s):
So you are at your Harvard business school. And one of the advantages of going to business school is it creates a network. And a lot of people go to business school with that intention in mind finding their future. Co-founder like, you know, Andy Dunn of Bonobos did when he went to Stanford or, you know, Jen Hyman of rent, the runway found her co-founder at Harvard business school. Was that your intention to, to find like your co-founder and, and start a business when you got there?

5 (18m 50s):
No, because startups wasn't really a thing. I did have a sense that I wanted to be an entrepreneur. My dad ran his own business when I was growing up. So he was his own boss and he lived this kind of leisurely existence where he really felt in charge of his own destiny. And he really instilled into me like you should go work for yourself. How did you start to think about while you were at business school, something connected to relationships or dating? What, what was the story? I mean, it's so out of left field, I had no idea what I wanted to do. And interviews were starting. You have like, most people have jobs by Thanksgiving and the consulting firms are interviewing. And I applied to all the consulting firms.

5 (19m 31s):
I got rejected from all of them except McKinsey. So I took the job and signed with McKinsey. And so it's around Thanksgiving and I've gotten John McKinsey and I'm actually dating this girl from HPS. And I just couldn't get Kate out of my head. I mean, everyone that I tried to date to ever since I'd lost. Kay. That was like four years ago. At this point I would just compare to her. Wow. And were you in touch with Kate? No, not at all. I wouldn't, I didn't reach out to her. I just wouldn't. I wanted to, you didn't even, but did you know where she was? I knew that she had graduated and met someone and moved to London with him.

5 (20m 15s):
Right. That's all I knew, but this is stuff four years after you split up and you're still, she's still on your mind. Yeah, I just, it was just such a magical relationship and I think every, every relationship I had, I would compare and just, no one felt like home to me in a way that she did. And I'm a business school and I can't get Kate out of my head. And I'm finally like, okay, Justin, it's been four years. You've been sober for four years. You've gotten into Harvard business school. You've got a job at McKinsey. Do we think that we can reach back out to Kate? And so I did. I wrote her an email. What did you say? I said it was kind of like an amends letter.

5 (20m 59s):
It was kind of like a, you know, I know that I did not act with a lot of kindness or integrity during our relationship and I don't know how I could ever make it up to you, but I would love to try basically. And she called me like the next day and we had this phone conversation and we actually agreed to meet back in New York that Christmas. And I was so excited. And then she called back the next day and she said, I'm sorry, Justin. I just can't like, I see you. I don't know what's going to happen. And I have a life now. And I just moved in with a sky. We have a flat together in London and I just,

3 (21m 41s):
I can't see you. I was totally heartbroken. I, in the back of my mind, again, I have these like these feelings, but I had this feeling like Kate and I were like, meant to be together and we were going to be together. And when that happened, I was like, Oh my God, like, it's like over I've, I've messed it up. And I felt like I had like torn the fabric of the universe or something. I mean, I know that sounds grandiose, but I just felt like this is not the way that it's supposed to be. And I like went into this total depression, like for, I think more than a week, I just cried. I like went to go see the therapist. I was like to get any depressants. I just like wanted something. I just felt so horrible.

3 (22m 21s):
And, and then I emerged from that. And Harvard business school is throwing this Valentine's day party in February. And I back to try to rebound, I was like this socially awkward person didn't like to go to parties, but there was this one girl in this one class that I sort of thought maybe there was a thing. And so I was like really excited to list her as like a, it was like a crush party where you'd like list people that you had a crush on. It was kinda like a last chance dance dynamic. And then one day I'm walking to class in early February with the class president Brett and we're chatting. I was like, Oh yeah. And this dance is coming up to last year at sands. He's like, yeah, you know what? We decided that it was just too complicated.

3 (23m 3s):
It's like thousand people listing people and all that stuff. So we just scrapped that whole thing. And I was like, what? I was like, this is my chance. So I, I took it upon myself to build this and computers are something I really threw myself into as a kid. I love to code. So I decided to build an application that would allow people in the class to list their friends on Facebook. And if two people matched it would alert them. So I was going to build that and release it at business school. It was a Facebook like a web app, right. Because it was pretty, yeah, it was a web app. It was a, it was a Facebook canvas app was like Farmville.

3 (23m 44s):
I don't remember farm brand was just like, sure. You could build an application within the Facebook frame. Right.

0 (23m 48s):
That's what it was. And the idea was that you would just, people would S would like sign up for this and then it would match them with other people in the app that they knew. Yeah.

3 (23m 58s):
It would use the Facebook network. You know, you say you log in and you have a list of your friends. I mean, this was, this was the wild West, early days before there were a lot of privacy regulations and all that. So, you know, you'd log in, you download all their friend lists from the API. You would display them, their friend list. You'd collect the people, you have a crush on, you'd have to go through and select them. And then if they selected you, then it would let you know that it was a mutual match.

0 (24m 18s):
Was, was the fact that the dance was canceled. Did that have anything to do with, with you launching it or was that just kind of coincidental?

3 (24m 27s):
No. I mean, it's what sparked the idea. I don't think I would have that initial spark would have happened. Had the dance not been canceled. And I hadn't been walking with Brett that Wednesday afternoon, the class. Wow.

0 (24m 41s):
So this was basically this idea kind of replaced the dance because the dance was designed to kind of do the same thing. Exactly. But it just in real, in real life.

3 (24m 48s):
Yeah. The original name of this by the way, was called secret agent Cupid. And it was this whole thing of like your undercover listing, your crushes. It was a terrible name. I can't talk about it, but it was this, it was the beginning of this whole dynamic of this what's called like the double opt in of, you know, you list someone and they don't find out unless they list you too, or they like you too.

0 (25m 6s):
And, but how was this idea connected? Anything in your personal life? I mean, I know you were heartbroken because Kate didn't want to meet you and, and you kind of didn't have a whole lot of success dating, but how was it? Was the D was this in a sense, a way to kind of solve your own problem or was it just an idea that kind of came about and it seemed fun?

3 (25m 24s):
No, it's totally to solve my own problem. I mean, it was very practical. It was very like, there's a girl in this class that I have a crush on that I, I w I want to like, wanted to find a girlfriend. I had always wanted to find, I just, I don't know why, but I've always just been this romantic who just really wanted to find my person and had this belief that when I found my person, like everything would just be amazing forever. So I built this very practically for me.

0 (25m 48s):
All right. So you put this up there and you're at Harvard business school. So presumably it wasn't that hard to get people to notice it. Cause you just told people, Hey, check this out.

3 (25m 57s):
Yeah, it's a small class and a bunch of people hopped on and did it. And it led to a few matches. It didn't lead to much, but it got me thinking. I just thought, why doesn't this exist in the real world? Because at the time the culture was, you'd sort of like creep on your friend's photos on Facebook. You know, you get on, get on Facebook and you go through your friend's photos and you'd see someone kind of like cute. And one of their photos that maybe you didn't know, it was like a friend of a friend. And so this idea sparked of like, if there was a dating app that was connected to Facebook, people would use it because it would be so simple. You already have your profile. It's already done. You already have your photos set up.

3 (26m 38s):
You have social verification. If you just connected something that was really simple and connected to Facebook, I'll bet young people

5 (26m 45s):
Would use it. As opposed to at the time all web dating websites used screen names and you had to sign up and fill out these long profiles and do all this stuff. And it was a lot of friction. And so that excited me. I was like, there's really, there's something here. I mean, this is still like, you're still in Boston and at business school. And this is like your last semester there. And you have a job lined up at McKinsey. But what happened to make you start to think that maybe this is something you should pursue after you graduate? Like we're friends at business school, like finding success where they were people saying, Hey, this is awesome. I love this. Like w was that happening?

5 (27m 26s):
I was obsessed with this idea. I don't know how to say it. It was like, I mean, the closest analogy I can imagine is like being, you're like pregnant with this idea. And it is like coming out of you one way or another. And that's what it felt like. It was like, I couldn't stop. I couldn't sleep. I just was like, thinking about it all the time about how the algorithm would work and about how you would get people to sign up to it. And I just, it was like being possessed. And then I found out that other schools and other people had had this idea and what happens is a lot of people join people, list their crushes, and then you find out whether you match or not. And then everyone goes away. And then that's when the insight came to me. You know, people

3 (28m 6s):
Just like cruise their friends photos. And like, what if this were actually not about people you already knew, but it was about your friends of friends. It was. And that's another piece that I think made it really accessible to the next generation. It's like these aren't random strangers that you're going to see on this app. You're going to see friends of friends. It's the same idea of like listing a crush, except now it's just people that you have a mutual connection with and you can see some of their photos. And then, so you listed them as a crush. That was like the idea that really got me to be like, I'm not going to take the job at McKinsey, or at least I'm going to push back the start date and see where this goes.

0 (28m 44s):
So you graduate in may and you decide to pursue this. And, and did you need money? I mean, I have to assume you need some money to try and get this off the ground. Right.

3 (28m 54s):
So I, I got together with a friend. Her name was Francis at business school. She worked at Google and we each put in $12,000, which is obviously like a lot of money for us, both, but it's what I had. And so we put in this money and we hired a team of engineers down in Argentina to start building a prototype

0 (29m 16s):
Argentina. Cause I'm assuming that was a lot cheaper than doing it in San Francisco.

3 (29m 20s):
Yeah, exactly. And so I followed her out to San Francisco where she was going to take her job at Google, but sort of halftime work with me on

0 (29m 30s):
Change. And that was all the money you had $24,000.

3 (29m 33s):
Yeah. $24,000. That was that. And so that's what we use to pay these developers and started to develop prototype. And I was sort of the product person imagining what the interface was going to look like. And she would help talk to the engineer just cause she had, she also coded. And so I follow her out to mountain view. I'm sleeping on her floor in mountain view. And eventually she's like, this has been fun, Justin, but you know, I'm a stay at Google. This isn't really my thing. So I left her apartment in mountain view. I bounced around for a little bit around SF and then Berkeley. And then I just was like, this is not my place. I don't know anyone out here.

3 (30m 14s):
And so I, I drove cost country back to DC where I had worked before and knew people and had a network and I decided to start it there on my own.

0 (30m 24s):
And the idea was to build like a website, a dating website

3 (30m 29s):
Initially. Yeah. Initially it was a dating website. Initially it was this Facebook canvas app. And then it was still, I think that was primarily the idea. And it was initially clunky and complex. And it would like ask you like questions about your friends. And it had all these bells and whistles features and it was way over complicated. But I, I was able to, you know, I ran around and I was able to raise a little bit of money. I got into this little incubator in DC called fortify, raised like a little bit from my little friends and family round of maybe like a hundred, $150,000. You know, most of these C's of course it wouldn't pay attention to us at all. We, I mean, we always trying to, you know, you come out of Harvard business school and you think the way that you start a businesses, you write a business plan and you go to Greylock and then they give you $50 million and then you write like write.

3 (31m 18s):
And that is not, that's not how it works. So we, you know, I go to these VCs and I feel like, you know, we're getting this, we're going to create a dating app. It's going to be, you know, young people are going to use it. And P and VCs would be like match.com like owns this market. You know, you'll never be able to beat them. And, but I, you know, I got a few believers and yeah. And we just started building this website. And, and was it still called? Cause originally you called it secret agent Cupid. Was that what you still were calling it at that point in 2011? No, no, no. That was like pretty, pretty early on. We moved away from like, it went through a few iterations in the early days, they went from like double Cupid to secret agent Cupid to two degrees, to three degrees.

3 (32m 2s):
And each of these names had like trademark issues and I just needed like a placeholder name. And that's where hinge came from. I was like, I just, it was a friends of friends app and I was like, I just need a name for something that connects two things. Like, it's the thing in the middle. And I was staring at a door and I was like, I'm going to call it hinge and

0 (32m 21s):
Got it. Interesting. I did not know that. So, so that's why, cause a hinge connects the door to the doorframe. I was, cause when I first heard the name hinge, I was like, Oh, that's sort of a, it's like the, you know, the door swinging out, back and forth. Like you're coming in and out of the door. Like one day, two days, three days, four days, five minutes, like the door, not in the hinge keeps swinging open and closed, but that's wrong. That is not where hinge comes from.

3 (32m 43s):
That is not where hinge comes from. It was just, it was like a placeholder name. Honestly. Don't love the name. I mean, it's kind of stuck now, but it was just, it was a placeholder. I was like, I needed something that connected to things that wasn't already trademarked and anyone, any founder. Who's probably tried to name something before and spent lots of time on uspta.gov, trying to find a name that hasn't been trademarked, especially in the, like the love and dating space is no joke. Yeah.

0 (33m 8s):
So you are, you got a little bit of money you're in Washington, DC. And did you have an office or w were you working out of the accelerator in Washington, DC?

3 (33m 16s):
We worked out of the accelerator. I mean, first I was just working out of my apartment. And then when we got into the accelerator, I started working out of the accelerator. Got it. You know, we are there like four of us.

0 (33m 27s):
And what was the, I mean like I'm trying to think in 2011, when you started to look for potential investors and I think it would be a little while before he got real money, I would say to you, what differentiates you from match.com? Why would somebody use or, or OkCupid or J date or whatever was out there now? I didn't even know if Tinder was out there yet. What makes you different? And you would say why

3 (33m 55s):
We're going to be stigma free. There was a lot of stigma around dating websites at the time. I think a lot of times VCs think by analogy and they're like that dating website has stigma. So like dating websites has stigma. Like, that's just how that goes. But you have to look at like the principles underneath that. Like why do dating websites have a stigma? And the stigma was because it was difficult. The stigma was because you would have to spend a lot of time setting up a profile, answering long questions, paying a lot of money. So no one would do that. And less, they were really struggling in their dating lives and had to resort to that. And no one wants to admit that like no one wants to admit to themselves or certainly to other people that they like struggle in their dating lives and can't meet people.

3 (34m 39s):
And so the idea was people still want to go to and meet new people. You just have to make it frictionless. You just have to make it easy. If you make it easy and you make a one-click sign-on, it won't have stigma. And if it doesn't have stigma, you're going to unlock the biggest single market, which is people who are 20 to 35 when those people didn't use dating websites. So that was the pitch. Right.

0 (35m 0s):
But how would you match people? I mean, when you were pitching this to investors in 2011 or 2012, like why would somebody, why would people use hinge when they asked you that question? You would say, okay, it's easier. But then you would say, I would say, well, but how do you match people? If it's, if the, if you're just one click.

3 (35m 18s):
So that is where the complexity of the original idea came from. We would ask you questions about your friends that we would use for the algorithm. So we'd show you Susie. And we'd say, would you describe her as more athletic or more book-smart or more something like, and you would, you would answer that. And we'd like, build up these sort of like personality profiles based on quizzes that we would give you about your friends. And so we would show you someone, and then let's say someone liked your friend, Susie, tell her to join hinge. And then you tell Susie, and then she would join Hanjin and she would start answering questions about her friends. And it would unlock more people for us to have access to.

3 (35m 58s):
And it was, it was complicated and people were a little confused, cause they were like, well, I'm joining us to find new people. Why are you asking me questions about my friends? But that is how it worked in the early days.

1 (36m 9s):
But, but, but basically it originally you were saying, there's going to be no friction, no nothing to answer, but you did, ultimately you did have to have a way to gather information about people, right? Yeah.

3 (36m 20s):
It was these fun personality quizzes about your friends as opposed to these, like,

1 (36m 24s):
So it wasn't filling out a bunch of forms. It was just answering questions, like a quiz you would get. Exactly. So what kind of feedback were you getting? I mean, it was still, you still had, didn't have a whole lot of people using it, but was the feedback at least good? No, not really. It was people,

3 (36m 42s):
They were weirded out by it. People weren't used to it. Like people didn't understand why you had to answer these questions about your friends.

1 (36m 49s):
You know, people were nice and they'd sort of nod their heads, but you know, you could tell, like they didn't really get it. Like,

3 (36m 58s):
And there's just no way that we're going to be able to sell one. You know, maybe at the end of like an hour long focus group, we would have sold someone on like how it works and why it's

1 (37m 6s):
And why. It's great. Yeah. But you know, we, weren't gonna be able to do that thousands or hundreds of thousands or millions of people when we come back in just a moment, how Justin decides to simplify hinge and winds up, building an app that a few years later he'll decide to pretty much rebuild from scratch. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick, thanks to our sponsor. Web flow web flow gives businesses the power of code without having to write it.

1 (37m 48s):
Web flow changes the way teams build for the web by empowering designers to create and launch completely custom websites without engineers. It combines the power of HTML, CSS and JavaScript and places, them all in a completely visual interface. Now marketing and design teams can own web publishing like they're supposed to web flow, the modern weight build for the web. Thanks also to click up, you don't need to exist on four hours of sleep to be productive, enter, click up a completely customizable work platform with all the features you've ever needed to build your business.

1 (38m 27s):
All in one place, join 100,000 teams across companies like Airbnb, Google, and Uber who are already using

4 (38m 36s):
Click up to level up their productivity and save one day a week, guaranteed click up is free forever. So it gets started@clickup.com slash NPR today

6 (38m 54s):
On NPRs pop culture, happy hour podcast. We talk about what we're watching, listening to, or just trying to figure out like what concert films you should watch. If you miss live music and great books to read alone or in your book club, all of that. And around 20 minutes, every weekday listen now to the pop culture, happy hour podcast from NPR.

4 (39m 18s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Roz. So it's 2012 and Justin is trying to take the friction out of dating by building a site that's meant to help people meet friends of friends. But in order to do that, he's got to raise some cash. I was mainly talking to investors in Washington, DC. You know, there are some, a few VC firms there and the amount of money we were looking for, it wasn't like Santo road money. It was just a few hundred thousand dollars. Right. And I guess you didn't have a whole lot of success with them.

4 (39m 57s):
No, the wisdom at the time was that there was a saturated market, you know, match.com E harmony owned it. And it would be impossible to break into, which I, you know, I looked at it and I'm like, I am in my mid twenties. None of my friends use dating websites. It is not saturated. There's just, it's very clear. But they were saying no, no match and match.com was owned by IAC. Right? Yeah. And even if you get bag, like they'll copy you, et cetera, et cetera. I mean, did did that in any way, discourage you, I mean, did you ever feel like God, I really, maybe they're right. It frustrated me, but it did not discourage me because I had a strong thesis that they were not dismantling.

4 (40m 41s):
They were just drawing these other irrelevant analogies. And so a big part of being a great entrepreneur is being hopelessly idealistic, but ruthlessly practical at the same time, you really have to balance these things. And I was being ruthlessly practical. I was like, no, no, no. Like there isn't a clear market opportunity here. And so I wasn't discouraged because they weren't dismantling the argument. You're a year in now and it's really not getting much traction and you're burning through cash. What kept you, you know, from not just getting depressed or anxious about the possibility that this will just collapse? Oh, I mean, I was definitely depressed and anxious.

4 (41m 21s):
I, I, I, I, I was worried and I was concerned with all the feedback that we were getting. And at a certain point it became pretty clear that like iterations weren't to get us there. And

3 (41m 35s):
Around Thanksgiving, this is 2012. We have like $25,000 left in the bank at this point. And we probably raised like 150 or something like that. It's pretty clear this isn't going to go anywhere. So I had this kind of crisis moment over Thanksgiving and I called the team and I'm like, let's start over from scratch. This needs to be simple. We got to get rid of all these questions. And by the way, it's 2012. So the world's going mobile and this needs to be a mobile app.

0 (42m 9s):
And that was because by 2012, you yourself, presumably, and all your friends were using iPhones.

3 (42m 16s):
Yeah. It was starting, you know, the app store was starting to become more popular. There were more companies starting to develop things for the app store. So it just felt like if we're the dating company of the future, the dating company, the future is probably on mobile. And I, and I think again, the simplification, it dovetailed with the simplification of the interface, which is that we'll just make this thing really simple. And if it's really simple, it should fit on mobile. It's almost like a good forcing function to make it simple. Right. Because you can't fit that much on a three and a half inch screen. And so let's just distill it down to like a photo age location, a few interests and just like yes or no, do you like this person move to the next person?

3 (42m 59s):
And if it's a match, we'll let you know.

0 (43m 1s):
So, all right. So the idea here was to just do a pivot and focus on building a mobile app. I'm trying to figure out how you did that though, because in 2012, building a mobile app was a lot more expensive than it is today. How did you guys do that?

3 (43m 18s):
We used at the time there were these, I don't want to get too technical, but there was a way to essentially build a website that looked like a mobile app and behave like a mobile app that you could package as a mobile app. So that is essentially what we did.

0 (43m 37s):
Who is your strategy in terms of getting it out into the world?

3 (43m 41s):
So my, one of my really good friends from Colgate had moved down to DC with me. His name was Bennett Richardson. He where he and I were original roommates when we first moved to DC and he was just very plugged into the social scene. And so we just used his email lists and, and we would just like hustling to get people on and telling them to tell their friends when we started with just iOS. And we, when we just burned, I mean, we just, we just worked all day and all night. Cause we, cause we had to be when we were going to run out of money, which was February 7th, 2013 ish. And we took our last $25,000 and we threw a 2,500 person launch party in DC.

3 (44m 24s):
We set the date and we just work backwards from that.

0 (44m 27s):
All right. So, so this party that you're talking about, you, you working on app

5 (44m 32s):
And I guess you decide we're going to relaunch the company with a party. We're going to throw a big party invite everybody we know and hopefully people would download the app. That, that was the idea. Well, yeah, because the other issue was the cold start problem. And when you get one or two or three people coming in at a time, you know, in the early days I would sit and look at the logs and I would watch someone would log onto the site and I would be like, Oh my gosh. And I would watch them, you know, they would like, like someone and then pass on someone and then like someone and then they leave and it's like, Oh, I mean, that's the trickle that was happening. And we were just like, we've got to get everyone on at once.

5 (45m 12s):
Like, no one's going to stick around if there's not a lot of people on this thing. So we've got to just like throw this hail Mary we've only got 25,000 left, we're going to pivot to mobile. And we're just going to like get 2,500 people in here. They're going to be like the coolest trendiest people in DC. And they're all going to see each other downloading the app. And so they're going to think it's cool and they're going to keep using it. This was in February of 2013, where was the party? It was on a floor of an office building that was about to be built out as a new incubator that we were moving into and they hadn't touched it yet. So it was just this big empty floor. And so we just used that. And I mean, how did you entice 2,500 people to come to the party open bar?

5 (45m 55s):
We had, we had a liquor sponsor who would just, I think Tito's vodka just like shipped us a bunch of alcohol for free. We had like a DJ, we had an art exhibition, we had photo booths and a dance party. And everyone had to download the app to get in the door. Now mind you, we actually didn't have an app almost because we had submitted the app to the app store for approval and they were not giving approval. And we submitted like two weeks early and it is the day before the launch party. And we still have not gotten approval for the app. So we were about to throw this like launch party and we have no app

3 (46m 40s):
For people to download. I was just like, I was trying to get in contact with people at Apple. I mean, who cares? Like we really like nobody, but I'm like trying to reach out to the head of the app store and reaching out to any VC I've ever met and seeing if they have contacts there and just like begging and writing emails, trying to get this thing approved. And I remember like the night before the launch party, I just was like curled up in a ball in the floor of our little office at this incubator crying. The last two years have been for nothing because we're going to launch this and we're going to have no app. And you know, we skirted, we had like days of cash left at that point. So what happened?

3 (47m 21s):
I went to bed and I woke up in the morning and the app had been approved. Wow. Yeah, it was nuts. No explanation, never got an back. Never know why, but it was approved that morning.

0 (47m 33s):
All right. So that night to get into the door, you had to download the app, which meant that's 2,500 downloads guarantee, which is pretty good. How much of an impact did that have? I mean, did, did those 2,500 people, presumably not all of them, but did a percentage of them start to use it?

3 (47m 50s):
Yeah. The next day we had like 500 people log in to use the app who didn't have to, you know, they like just came of their own volition and use the app. And then the next day, like 600 people came and the next day, like 800 people came and we were off to the races

0 (48m 8s):
And I know this would eventually change, but initially let's be honest. I mean, if you, if you want to increase your chances of making money, there are a few places that, you know, we'll, we'll do that sex. Maybe alcohol, a few others was a proposition in your mind, like, or, or that you guys were kind of, let's say selling to, to potential customers. Users was like, Hey, this is a way to hook up. Was that in, I mean, initially part of the value proposition. Cause I would think that that would make sense. I mean, that's, that's what people want.

3 (48m 43s):
No, we were, we were such a wholesome brand. We were friends of friends. Right. So people would equate it to like, you know, a house party or a wedding. And that was the kind of crowd and the vibe that you'd feel on hinge. Whereas maybe on the other ones, it was a little bit more just like people nearby and random. And so it just felt a little bit more like a club. And so we sort of gained this reputation as the more wholesome or relationship oriented app. Right. And that was our niche.

0 (49m 14s):
It sounds like you didn't really change your approach or your strategy too much. I mean, you went to mobile, but w w the value proposition was the same. Like this is, you know, friends of friends, relationship app. What explains, I mean, is it, is it that, that launch party alone, that explains how you really started to acquire users?

3 (49m 34s):
Well, I mean, the details make the difference for sure. And those are pretty big details. Mobile only simplified interface everyone's on it is very different than clunky interface. No, one's on it. So, yeah, I mean, th those details definitely made a big difference. So we started in Washington, DC, and then a waitlist built up in New York city. And then we opened up New York city and threw a launch party there and then a waitlist build up in San Francisco and then, you know, et cetera, et cetera.

0 (50m 1s):
And presumably now you've got raised money. Was it now easier for investors now more open to, to giving you money?

3 (50m 11s):
Oh, my well, one, we had traction and two, we had Tinder, Tinder was exploding and no one could invest in Tinder because it was owned by IAC. And so the only place that people could put their money as a competitor to Tinder at the was basically us. Wow. And so we were, we raised like a few million dollars towards the end of 2013. And then we raised a big round of like 14 or $15 million at the end of 2014. And I was turning away millions. I was like, I don't know. Like, I can't, I can't take any more. Like we have to close the round.

3 (50m 51s):
Like, I don't even know what I would do with all this money. So we're going to stop here

0 (50m 56s):
All of a sudden, like there's tea, there's Tinder, there's hinge, and there's some others, but you were very different from Tinder because Tinder was swipe left swipe. Right. Okay.

3 (51m 4s):
That different, the apps really converged over time. They became a similar, yeah. You know, we were very focused on our competition and our competition release a feature and we released a feature and yeah, they became very, very similar in their appearance. And we were still friends of friends. And so we had this different vibe, but practically speaking, the apps were very similar in how they operated.

0 (51m 30s):
There was a, an article that came out in vanity fair, I think in 2015, it's called like the Dawn of apocalypse dating or something

3 (51m 38s):
Like on of the dating apocalypse. Right.

0 (51m 40s):
And, and it's mostly about Tinder, but there's quite a bit in there about hinge. And there's a paragraph in there and it's an, I'll read it to you. It says, Marty who prefers hinge to Tinder. He says, hinges. My thing is no slouch, a quote, racking up girls. He says he slept with 30 to 40 women in the last year. And the, he says, I sort of play that. I could be a boyfriend kind of guy in order to win them over. But then they start wanting me to care more. And I just don't now forgive me. I don't want to sound judgmental, but like, this guy just sounds horrible. Right. I mean, when, when you hear that and you saw that and you saw what you created, did a part of you just like, I don't know.

0 (52m 22s):
I mean, yeah, you, it was amazing. You built this amazing app and people were using it, but I don't know. Did, did a part of you kind of feel like, Oh, this is not what I wanted to do.

3 (52m 33s):
A huge part of me felt like that, that article. So it was by Nancy, Jo sales. I mean, I went to go meet with Nancy Jo sales in New York. And I was like, I want to hear your experience as you put together this article, it was a really big, yeah. It was a pretty big gut punch. And that wasn't it. I mean, there were some other things going on in 2015 where, you know, our, our growth was starting to slow a little bit, but I do think more importantly, it was like, this just isn't the company that I wanted to build. It's, it's not, it doesn't have the values that I want it to have. It doesn't have, it's not having the impact that I wanted it to have were kind of just this copy cat app that has the same interface with like a small twist.

3 (53m 16s):
We're just friends of friends and

0 (53m 17s):
Still a, a, let's just say quote, unquote, like a meat market. Yeah.

3 (53m 21s):
Yeah. I mean, again, it was, I had a little bit, it just wasn't designed for

0 (53m 26s):
What we wanted it to be for, which is long-term. I mean, I got, I started this because I wanted a girlfriend that was out of this because I wanted that real connection and it was not designed for that. Yeah. And, and again, like, I, I, I have to be really careful because like, I'm older than a lot of people who use, he used these apps or were using these apps in this article. And so it's like any, any, anything that is not familiar, you sort of see it differently. And I, it's hard for me to talk about it without sounding judgmental, but like, you know, you read these stories like in that article in vanity fair, and it's like, just stories of 10 people just talking about yeah.

0 (54m 8s):
I had, I've slept with eight people in the last, like 10 days. And it's so easy because I think one quote in the article is like, yeah, it's just a numbers game. Dating is a numbers game. If I went to a bar, I'd have to talk to a hundred different girls. Is this with this? I could just swipe all night from my apartment and do better. Yeah. I, you know, and I thought it was a numbers game too.

4 (54m 27s):
I had a different objective in mind, but I also believed when I created that version of hinge that, you know, you just, you just go through enough people. And then when you find the perfect one, everything's easy from there. And so that is the kind of ethos that I built hinge around. Let's go back to something we talked about earlier in this, in this interview about Kate, this woman that you dated in college, that you loved and wrote to her and were almost forced to see her in 2010. And then she said, no, and now it's 2015. And there was a New York times reporter who was a writer who's writing for the modern love, or Sue's ran an article for the New York times about hinge named Deborah Copake.

4 (55m 11s):
And so she meets with you in 25 and you were like, you know, this young, hot shot running hinge, and it's raised all this money and doing them really well. So she wants to do a story about, about you and what happens during the interview. Yeah. So rewinding a little bit further. It was like end of 2014. And Deborah writes me this email. I didn't know she was, she had downloaded hinge and the very first person that came up for her, she had matched with and started dating and fallen in love with, and she was like, I have to know how your algorithm works. Like, how the heck did I just download this app, hit a button and someone comes up and I match, and now we're dating.

4 (55m 53s):
You know, I want to write a story.

0 (55m 54s):
Got you. So she reaches out to me and we go for this like pretty standard founder interview about whatever we were always talking about at the time I could tell, I was just kind of like, it was an okay interview. And we were about to finish up, you know, as we were packing, she said, have you ever been in love? And I was like, well, once a long time ago, but I didn't realize that until it was too late. And she's like, well, tell me the story. And so we sat down, I told her the, of Kate

3 (56m 24s):
And me and this magical connection we'd had and the sort of twists and turns and the breakup and the drug addiction and alcoholism and, and me reaching back out and how, in a way she'd sort of, I realized, especially at that time, she'd inspired him.

0 (56m 40s):
And I guess, I mean, it makes sense for a reporter to ask the guy behind hinge, like, how's your love life. Exactly. And you were not dating anybody at the time.

3 (56m 49s):
No, again, there was someone that I was dating on and off during that period, my sort of usual pattern, but no, not really. And so she shuts off the tape recorder and she says, I've got to tell you a story. And she tells me the story of how she had this like amazing romance when she was younger and really felt this person was the one, she was a war reporter or a photographer actually in Afghanistan. And they were supposed to rendezvous in Paris is like this very romantic transcontinental story. And he lost her number. And so they didn't meet up. And then they lost her. You know, this is like the eighties and nineties. So they didn't really email pre cell phone, pre pre email, pre cell phones.

3 (57m 32s):
And so they didn't connect and she ended up marrying the next person she dated and he ended up marrying the next person he dated. And then 20 years later, she's researching a story, comes across his name and reaches out to him. And it's like, Hey, are you the same? So-and-so that stood me up 20 years ago, they ended up meeting like coming together and they met. And I think it just lit her up in a way that she was like, I'm going to leave my marriage

0 (57m 59s):
Because this guy that she had was supposed to meet in Paris, he didn't stand her up. They just both, he lost her address and yeah.

3 (58m 7s):
Yeah, exactly. And so she left and downloaded hinge and it had met this guy.

0 (58m 12s):
And if this sounds familiar to anybody it's because it was written in a modern love article by Deborah Copake. And she wrote this part of this story in that, in this article. But, but, but, but anyway, so she tells you this story

3 (58m 25s):
And she said, listen, don't get me wrong. I don't regret my life. I love my kids, but you still have a chance to be with the one. Well, and I was like, lady, nice to meet you. You're a little nuts. It's been eight years since I've seen Kate at this point, she's, you know, engaged to be married. As far as I know, she still lives on another continent. It's too late. And she's like, you won't know until you try and early February, we were going to be throwing a launch party in London. And so about a week before the launch party, I happened to run into Kate's best friend from Wellesley and we're chatting.

3 (59m 13s):
And she's like, I think you should reach out to Kate. You know, at this point, by the way, I had written Kate an email every year on her birthday after told me no. And some of these emails would be like, you know, I'm over it. I hope we can be friends, no response. I think my, my last one in like 20, 2013 had been something like, I'll come over with an engagement ring, please. It was, you know, like range depending upon the year and how I was feeling. Wow. And after that one, you know, she had like, de-friended me on Facebook. And you know, it was like pretty clear though, like that had sent her. That was it. So I, after that, I I'd let it go.

3 (59m 54s):
And I was headed over to London and I'm like, you know what, whatever, like, I'm just going to say,

2 (59m 58s):
And one last email. And so I, I compose a really short note. It just said, Hey, going to be over in London, weird to think. I'm never going to see you again. Would love 15 minutes just to say hi and goodbye. And I woke up the next morning to a response saying, sure, I'll see you in London. No saying you're a terrible stalker. I don't live in London anymore. I live in Switzerland. My fiance is not a huge fan of yours, but I'm willing to chat. So he'll be away this weekend. If you want to just hop on the phone. I said, great. And then I went to the airport and I bought a ticket to Switzerland and I flew to Zurich.

2 (1h 0m 44s):
And the next morning, which was a Friday, she thought she was like in another time zone. And she was like, I'm awake. Like, whenever you want to chat, we can chat. And I said, great, because I'm going through customs in Zurich right now. Wow. You know, I flew over there. Definitely having Deborah, having inspired me to do something like big, but I have to admit that it had been eight years. I had changed a lot. I mean, I'd gotten sober. Then the HBS side, like started a company. You know, it was like a lot had happened since I'd seen her. I assumed a lot had happened for her. And you know, a pretty big piece of me thought we would maybe see each other and then laugh this off and, you know, bring some closure to the whole thing and I could move on and she could move on.

2 (1h 1m 32s):
So we met in a cafe in circ and five minutes in, I was like, I don't know what I am doing without this girl. The conversation started off. And we obviously, there was a connection still there. And she was like, well, obviously I'm not clear off my wedding. I'm getting married in a month, 400 people coming from five continents getting married in a month. Yeah. Imitation San plane's booked. And she's like, well, obviously I'm not calling off the wedding, but you know, we should stay in touch. And then, you know, halfway through the conversation, it was like, well, if I were going to call off a wedding and we sat there for like eight hours straight, I don't even think we haven't got up to get a coffee. And then by the end of the are like eight hour chat, she was like, I think I'm going to cough the wedding.

2 (1h 2m 18s):
I mean, wow. I mean,

0 (1h 2m 20s):
It's, it's, I have so many, so many feelings and thoughts about it because obviously this was meant to be for two of you, but like, wow. I mean, that's, that's a lot, right? I mean, shit was done. Both of you guys were making a huge decision too. That was going to be really hurtful and painful to somebody. But clearly this person she was going to marry was not the right match for her, but still like, she was a month away from getting married. And, and I'm assuming that once you decide to call the wedding, she also kind of implicitly decided that she was going to move to, to New York.

3 (1h 3m 1s):
That's right. Yeah. I moved from a big chalet in the Alps to my 300 square foot studio apartment in Manhattan. So, and this will lead us back to the discussion about hinge, which is that, you know, here I am thinking like, Oh my God, like I got the person, the one, the one I've been dreaming about all like all this time. I, you know, and then I flew to London and we did the launch party and I flew back to the States and then she met me back in the States and she moved in and it was amazing for like two months. And then, you know, we're two people living together in a 300 square foot apartment and we're like figuring each other out. And it's not perfect.

3 (1h 3m 41s):
All the stuff that I wanted to run from because I did, I mean, there's a piece of me, like two or three months in that was like, Ooh, like, should I have done that know? But there was like, but she'd given up her whole life. She'd come back. And so I'm like, yeah, I'm going to stick it out. And we just worked it out together one step at a time. And I realized that it's not a volume game. Love. Isn't about trying to go through enough people until you find your perfect puzzle piece. And then everything's smooth. Sailing love is about the way you approach it. It's about vulnerability. It's about connection.

3 (1h 4m 21s):
You don't find the one, you create the one that completely overhauled my approach to how I thought dating apps should work.

0 (1h 4m 32s):
But, but this is the thing, like, again, like now the thing that you had built was let's say a lots of people were using it in ways that didn't lead to that. It was, it was more like a hookup factory. And again, please, anybody listening, I am not judging you. I am not being judgmental. I'm not saying there's anything wrong with that. That's perfectly fine if that's what you're looking for, but Justin, that's not what you want it to build. You didn't want to build a hookup app that's right. But you were kind of pushed into that direction just because of the forces of, of, you know, the economy and of what, what people wanted and what investors wanted you to do and what you thought was going to work.

0 (1h 5m 15s):
It was a lot of pressure running that at that time.

2 (1h 5m 19s):
And we are really trying to keep up with the competition. And the natural thing to do is to like, be obsessed with your competition and look at what they're releasing. And then they release a feature and be like, Oh, we have to have that feature. And our users would be like, why don't you have this feature? And so then we would want to like, copy what they were doing. And we were always a step behind because we were not as well funded and not as experienced. So, I mean, not only was it not aligned with the values, it just wasn't going to succeed. Like it was just not hat different or interesting of a product. And so, yeah, on both fronts, I was frustrated and I remember it was around Thanksgiving that year. It was around 2015.

2 (1h 6m 0s):
I was headed home for it for Thanksgiving. I was about to fly back home to Kentucky. And I had lunch right before I left with Katie hunt, who is our chief brand officer. And she and I sat down and I was just like, Katie, I just want to tear this whole thing down. Start over. Like, I drink, I'm just like done. And she looked at me and she was just like, what's stopping you. And I pause. And I, and I was like, nothing is stopping me. What is stopping me? When we come back? Just a moment, how the effort to relaunch the app would lead to a dramatic drop users and how an

4 (1h 6m 46s):
11th hour investment from a one time

2 (1h 6m 48s):
Competitor would help revive the brand, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR

4 (1h 7m 11s):
Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish world service working together for more than 30 years to build a more, just an equitable world. Learn more@ajws.org On NPR is consider this podcast. We don't just catch you up on the news. We help you make sense of what's happening, whether it's how to tackle the challenges that come with pregnancy during a pandemic, or how to understand the crisis unfolding along our Southern border. We'll fill you in for 15 minutes. Every weekday. Listen now to consider this from NPR, Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Raz.

4 (1h 7m 53s):
So it's the fall

2 (1h 7m 55s):
Of 2015 and inspired

4 (1h 7m 57s):
By his rekindled relationship with Kate. Justin decides a once again to completely

2 (1h 8m 4s):
Rebuild hinge. We're going to rip down. There's a whole thing, bigger deal. Now we're not four people anymore. We're 30 and we don't have 25,000 in the bank. We've got 10 million. And I called up my COO. Sam talked to Katie, you know, I got them rallied around this idea that what we built is not going to succeed and we have to rip it down, start over from scratch. And by the way, there's a market opportunity. So now it had been what, three or four years since the dating apps had launched. A lot of those people who have like 22, 23, when they came out are now like 26, 27, 28, and they're looking for something more serious.

2 (1h 8m 50s):
So let's start over and let's build the app. That's going to be accessible to young people and have a cool brand, but is really designed to get people into relationships and off the app. And by the way is a great word of mouth. Like if people always ask, how did you meet? And if we're the best at getting people who are in relationships for the best at that, and people will tell their friends, and as long as they're single people in the world will do great. Right? And like, we're not thinking about competitors anymore. I don't want to talk about it. I don't want anyone to have those apps on their phone for competitor research. That was the biggest decision we made. And we said, we're going to actually measure whether people are going out on great dates or not.

2 (1h 9m 31s):
We're still the only app that asks whether you went on a date and whether it was good. And that is our North star metric

0 (1h 9m 38s):
Period. How are you guys going to make money? How are you, you know, I mean, presumably charging a fee to join a monthly fee per dating fee. Like how did the editor work?

2 (1h 9m 50s):
Well, that was one of the massive mistakes we made when we launched. So we had this thesis that the serious dating websites are all what are called hard paywall businesses, meaning that in order to engage pretty much at all, you have to pay a monthly fee, but it's usually pretty expensive. It's like 39, 99 or 49 99

0 (1h 10m 11s):
A month, each time. And just going with the, the big sites, like, like E harmony and match.com and stuff like that.

2 (1h 10m 17s):
Yes, that's right. So we were like, we're going to create a hard paywall app, but it's going to have a millennial sized price of nine 99.

0 (1h 10m 28s):
And that gave you like basically unlimited. No, just access to the platform. Gotcha. I gotcha.

2 (1h 10m 33s):
No, you couldn't even like, we're just like, we're the intention platform. If you're not willing to pay 10 bucks a month, then like, you know, go on, just go somewhere else. Right. And the other apps by the way were free. Right. And the other apps are free. Yeah. But we had, we were very idealistic and we're like, people will pay, like, that'll be the model that was a totally wrong thesis. People were not willing to pay. And then we had to like give people free trials. And then we had to, and then by the time it was like, it was such a mess

0 (1h 11m 1s):
Because the market, the market for dating apps, it's like sorta like podcasts, like people are used to free dating apps. All of a sudden you're coming on you to pay for it. People are like, no, I'll just go on this other dating app. Yeah. And even more

2 (1h 11m 14s):
Important than on podcasts, like there's network effects. So if there's not a lot of people on it, then people don't find it valuable to be, you know, loses its value.

0 (1h 11m 22s):
Okay. And you figured this out because it was like crickets, like no one was paying for.

2 (1h 11m 27s):
Yeah. We got like, you know, a few hundred thousand people to sign up, but then no one really would hit, like when they hit the paywall, everyone was just kind of bouncing. So, so we started giving away free trials. Like if you've had a hinge account before you can have the first three months free, we thought like, if we could just get the engine going then, like the new people would come in and pay

0 (1h 11m 45s):
Because before that it was free, totally free before you, you kind of relaunched it before.

2 (1h 11m 50s):
It's totally free. I we'd never made money up until that point.

0 (1h 11m 53s):
But now you needed to make money. You had real investors and real money behind you. Yes, that's right. So what did you had? You salvage it? I mean, given that you, this, it sounds like it was kind of a disastrous relaunch in that sense, even if the other features were great people weren't buying it, what did you do?

2 (1h 12m 10s):
Yeah, that was, it was pretty rough relaunched. Cause we, you know, yeah. And that whole period of time was tough, by the way. I mean, I felt like Moses leading people around the desert, like we didn't know where, like we were testing things and you know, we're just like, didn't know is like the best thing is the only thing to have the swipe feature is that the only way that an app can work is this, like, what are we going to do? That's going to be really any different. That's going to be better than that. And we did figure that out by the way. And we did come up with a very different way for people to interact that had very significant ramifications on how people behave on a dating app. What coming, tell me more about that. Well, one of the biggest changes that we made is we did get rid of the swipe feature and we had people fill out longer profiles, still, relatively simple, but you had to add six photos and you had to add three prompts, which are responses to short questions that are designed to help you get into a better conversation.

2 (1h 13m 11s):
But more importantly is when you like someone on hinge, first of all, you like something about them. You have to choose something like one of their prompts or one of their photos, and you can comment on it and you send that like, and that seems subtle. And maybe not that big a deal, but it has a pretty dramatic effect on people's behavior. They are way more selective and way more thoughtful because when you're not just throwing people to the left and to the right, you actually have to think about what you want to like about them, what you want to say. It just makes people way more thoughtful and selective. And when you're way more thoughtful and selective about who you like, our data is way better about learning your tastes. And if someone likes you, we would just notify you and tell you that someone's a liked you.

2 (1h 13m 55s):
And they like this thing about you. So that there wasn't a strategy of disliking people to see if they liked you back. A lot of people will use the site feature and they'll just like, like, like, like, like, and they'll just see who matches with them. And then they kind of figured out from there, which creates a lot of engagement, but it's a lot of noise and it frustrates people

3 (1h 14m 12s):
Because a lot of matches don't go anywhere. And so when you can actually, I can distill it down and it's not as engaging. It's not as noisy, but it's a lot more substantive. There's a lot more signal there for people to latch on to. So that was a very fundamental change that we made. So you just sort of offer up a free version, right? Like a freemium model, which a lot of these,

0 (1h 14m 35s):
And basically users can go back to using it for free. But if they want to want more features, they got to, there's like a tiered system. How does it work?

3 (1h 14m 45s):
Yeah. So now you pay for certain upgraded features like advanced preferences or unlimited, like,

0 (1h 14m 55s):
And I have to assume it's a tough business, right? I mean, there are lots and lots of options. Right. And so a big part of, of differentiating yourself is through the branding, like what you represent. And now you guys were kind of really focused on being the relationship app, like, okay, Tinder's the hookup app and bumbles, you know, women initiate, but we're the relationship app. Is that fair to say?

3 (1h 15m 20s):
Yeah, that was actually I think our original tagline, but yes, it was very much branding around. If you're looking to get off dating apps, this is the place for you.

0 (1h 15m 29s):
Let's talk about this, this tagline that you guys eventually settled on. Cause it's, it is it's hinge designed to be deleted, which I love. Yeah. Your tagline now is, Hey, download us. But really we want you to delete us because if you succeed on hinge, you won't need us anymore.

3 (1h 15m 48s):
That's exactly right. And I mean, that's how a dating app should be. And by the way, designed to be deleted has two dimensions to it. One dimension is we are the experts in getting you into a relationship. We get this better than anyone. We research it. We spend all our time looking at how users behave and how do we get them on better dates. And that our whole company is organized around that. But there's also an element of digital wellness to it as well, which is that we don't want you spending all day on our app. Like we don't want you stuck playing a game on hinge. And, and this really grew out of my experience with addiction and, and I, you know, I don't use social media.

3 (1h 16m 34s):
I don't, I don't use Instagram. I don't really have an Instagram account or a Facebook account. I don't spend any time on it. Cause it's, you know, I didn't escape drug and alcohol addiction just become a slave to my phone.

0 (1h 16m 46s):
But do, do you think, I mean, given, you know, given the fact that you relaunched a few times and your tagline is, you know, we want to be deleted, do you really think that hinge is no longer the place or a place for someone who just wants a casual hookup? Like how were you able to now change the behavior of people who went on the app if in 2015 in vanity fair, some guy was saying, yeah, I love hinges. I've slept with 30 to 40 people in the last five months. Like how do you change that person's behavior with the relaunch.

2 (1h 17m 15s):
It's just too difficult. If you're looking for a hookup, it just requires too much effort. You asked about the, you know, how do you, aren't you going to still have people like that person in the vanity fair article using your app? And what we find is that when you have to answer all these prompts and have to send, you know, like a piece of content, like if all you're looking for as a hookup, like this is way too much effort to do that. And so that's, I think the difference, you know, we lose more than 20% of our users during the signup process on, on other those other apps, you hit one button and you're in and you're swiping on your phone. So if you, again, if you were like talking to a Silicon Valley, social media investor, they would be like, Oh my God, you can't lose 25% of your 20% of your sign outs.

2 (1h 18m 3s):
Like, are you crazy? And for us, it's a feature, not a buck, you know, it's like, yeah, you have to finding a relationship is hard. If you're not willing to put in the effort to fill out this profile and answer some prompts. And then, you know, you're probably not there. It's not the right service for you. Like, we just want people who want meaningful relationships full-stop period. Like we just want to get amazing at that. Okay. So w when you did go ahead and can do the relaunch of hinge in 2016, how did it get, like, how was it received? Well, I mean, it was not a breakout success. Like when we did the relaunch in 2013, we got off to a Rocky start, but the numbers started to look really interesting and really promising.

2 (1h 18m 51s):
And so, you know, my first instinct was obviously to like, keep this thing going and go raise money. So I was back out in the fundraising game, flying all over the country, talking to every VC, and now I could get in the door of anywhere. Right. I mean, any VC firm would at least take my meeting. Yeah. But no one would give me money. So, I mean, it was, I mean, I was begging, I mean, I, well, I was offering valuations that are in bear singly low.

0 (1h 19m 22s):
So given your existing investors were getting cold feet,

2 (1h 19m 26s):
My existing investors were willing to rally to put together a few million dollars, but a few million dollars is not going to get us to where we needed to go. So I really wanted to raise a bigger round. And, and I, I tease that, you know, I said, you know, are we existing investors? We'll put like three or four, but I need five to 10 more at least. Yeah. And I just,

0 (1h 19m 50s):
I mean, I went everywhere trying to make this deal happen. I talked to everyone. I mean, it's amazing because you had already had a record of success. You had launched this thing, you defied the, the skeptics by even putting this out into the world, you had achieved quite a bit of success with it, you know,

4 (1h 20m 8s):
Millions of people had used it. And then, and still you had a hard time raising more money.

3 (1h 20m 15s):
Well, we made a decision when we decided to do the reboot that we were just going to not touch the existing app. You know, this is a big debate. Like, do we keep the app like on the rails and keep adding updates and kind of just keep it going or do we just let it go completely and divert all of our focus to this new thing. And we decided to do the latter. And so meanwhile, the app had started to go down and the user numbers are going down because we just weren't putting any effort into it at all. Where were you putting the effort into developing the new hinge?

4 (1h 20m 45s):
Gotcha. And while you were developing that you weren't even updating the yeah,

3 (1h 20m 48s):
No. So it sat there stale for almost a year. Right. And I had this like one investor that was really holding out for, and I really thought we were going to get across the line. And I remember the partner at the VC firm called me and she was like, you know, we just can't get our heads around. We've never seen a company that was cool and then went away and then was able to come back and wow. We just can't do it. And I was like, Timberlands.

4 (1h 21m 24s):
Great. Actually, you're totally right. Yeah,

3 (1h 21m 28s):
Exactly. It's just like fashion brands are not the same

4 (1h 21m 33s):
As at,

3 (1h 21m 34s):
And I said FairPoint, but

4 (1h 21m 38s):
Our numbers were actually starting to look really interesting. And if you had the right eye for it, you knew that there was something here with the new version of hinge. Yeah. You know, on the old version of hinge, the biggest thing, just to give you a sense, you had to send a thousand likes in order to get to a date and on the new version of hinge, it was 50. So a thousand to 50, 20 times more effective at getting people out on a date. So, I mean, I think finally in 2018, you guys did get an investment, a pretty big one, which was a, a majority stake in the company from match group, which is match.com owns Tinder.

4 (1h 22m 20s):
So former competitors, and then in 2019, they fully acquired hinge. Yeah. There are lots of reasons to, to get acquired. I mean, obviously you've worked on this for many years and it's a chance to kind of get a payout and to take a breather and not to worry about having to raise money every year or every, you know, every few months and it takes, and now you've got a bunch of resources behind you, are all those reasons why you put creep to the acquisition? You know, funny enough, the way that the relationship with match group started is I tried to poach their head of business development to come run finance attendance. I mean, that's the level of audacity that I had. We had like three months of money in the bank and I'm trying to like steal their head of that can like run, finance

2 (1h 23m 6s):
It at hinge. And he very quickly turned the conversation around and was like, have you thought about, you know, maybe we can partner with you and that started a conversation. And so the more time I spent around that team, the more I realized that the combination, I think of our different perspective on the him side with their wisdom financial backing, it was going to be a really good success. And then there's a reason I think, you know, you see that the, this, the startups that have really taken off and grown in the dating space were all started in house. Yeah. They were all, I mean, Tinder was started within IAC, right.

2 (1h 23m 47s):
And match was owned by IAC and they had huge resources and marketing dollars. And it's not surprising that they, they exploded in growth. That's right.

0 (1h 23m 58s):
So it sounds like the calculation you made was these guys have a lot of resources. Like it's like Proctor and gamble. It's like you have a product and Procter and gamble comes and says, look, we want to acquire you. And we have this, all this research money and marketing dollars and could be a really attractive idea to go in and work for them

3 (1h 24m 16s):
And scary at the same time. Right. I mean, for us, like, you know, Tinder was the enemy and right. So like, you know, it was like, it was kind of a lot to get your head around that. And at this point I had friends who'd sold their companies and had agreements and it like almost never works out. Yeah. Either the company goes sideways or the company goes up, but then they, the relationship doesn't work with the founder and they leave. And so I was really conscious of that, obviously. So it was scary, but ultimately I just thought I wanted to do what's best for hinge the company. And I think this is it.

0 (1h 24m 55s):
W what did that allow you to do once you were acquired by match to that? I mean, and then you sort of became more comfortable with this idea that you could still run the company the way you wanted it. Does it take some of the stress out of, of hinge knowing that, you know, the money's there, you're not, you don't have to worry about firing people or going on begging for money. Does it kind of de-stress you a little bit?

3 (1h 25m 20s):
Well, you're trading some stresses for new stresses, right. But it's like a new relationship. It's, it's just like with Kayden me and you like happened to, you know, you're now living together and you figure each other out. And just like that relationship, I was really, really committed to making this one work and they were committed to making it work too. And we, and we figured each other out and we have a pretty incredible relationship today.

0 (1h 25m 45s):
That was 2019. And I think that the relationship with match really enabled you guys to, to grow and to scale more, and then comes 2020, which I imagine at the beginning of the pandemic, you must've thought, Oh, we're in big trouble. Nobody is going to be going on dates. Is that initially, did you see a steep decline in users?

2 (1h 26m 8s):
Yeah. It's been really volatile. Yeah. We planned in 2019. Our growth was really incredible and we planned a very big 2020, you know, you're going to grow the team. We're going to double the size of the team. We're going to do all this stuff. And the pandemic hit. And I think initially, you know, everything went into lock down. It was cold outside. And so we definitely saw some shakiness in the business to say the least, but then as things started to stabilize and it started to warm up outside, it actually like completely turned the other direction because now people can't meet at house parties and weddings and bars and yoga classes and gems and all the other places that theoretically they would have met.

2 (1h 26m 56s):
Now, we're the only game in town. And I also think this period of time has been, people have been rethinking their dating lives and rethinking their lives in general. And I think people have become more thoughtful and more serious during this time about their intent and what they're looking for. And so then when I started warm up and, and the number of stabilized, then it was a huge boon to the business. What were there things that you guys features that you introduced during the pandemic that made it easier like that, you know, made it easier for people to connect virtually? The biggest shift that we saw was a shift to people willing to try video dates, because people wanted to like, spend a little bit more time getting to know you and decide whether it's really worth, you know, risking getting COVID to meet up.

2 (1h 27m 46s):
And so video dang, like more than half of our users now have gone on a video date. And so that was something that seemed like a pretty clear thing to build it.

0 (1h 27m 56s):
Yeah. And also just less risky. Right. You're just on a video call with somebody and if it's weird or you're just not connecting, then, you know, that's it, he didn't, he didn't have to leave your room.

2 (1h 28m 5s):
That's right. And that's why I think, you know, when we talked to our, our users who have tried it, most of them say that they want to continue to do it even after the pandemic, because it just makes a ton of sense. I mean, it really is like doing a quick 15 minute screen before you go spend an entire evening and spend money and energy to go meet up with someone I think will actually make us a much, much better experience if that becomes part of it.

0 (1h 28m 30s):
Yeah. This may be a hard question for you to answer, but I'll ask anyway, you're still pretty young. You're in your thirties, I think your mid to late thirties, and you started this app, which is a pretty big deal. It's a major dating app and now fully acquired by match and you work for a match. You're an employee, so you're the CEO, but, but presumably, you know, like any employee, if, if, if they wanted to find a new one, they could, and if you want to move on, you could, and probably eventually you and maybe start something new. Can you, is that what you imagined doing? Like, or do you, do you feel like you've got another business in you?

3 (1h 29m 10s):
I don't know the answer to that question and believe it or not, I actually don't think about it that much. I have so much on my plate at hinge right now. I think the opportunity is so great. I'm actually very happy. And, you know, I worked so hard to build this culture and this company and this service and this brand. I mean, it is so difficult. I am so invested. I mean, this is still my baby. And so doing that over again sounds now that I know how hard it is, you know, when I started hinge, I just thought like, Oh yeah, this is a $2 billion company. This should take about a couple of years. We'll sell it.

3 (1h 29m 51s):
And you know, like if I had any idea how like many tears were shed and how many nights, I just like, I, I don't know if I would have started it. And so it's hard to imagine that again, I think everyone finds their sweet spot and I think some people are really good at the beginning and the starting and the ideation and pulling the resources together and getting something off the ground. And then some people are good at the scaling and some people are good at the operating and I've really enjoyed each part of the journey. And I enjoy the challenge of the constant shift. And so I'm still very much on that trajectory. Like I love this challenge of scaling from 50 to 150 employees remotely, while still trying to innovate and grow internationally.

3 (1h 30m 34s):
I mean, that's, that's, that's a lot of intrigue for me

0 (1h 30m 38s):
And yeah, I don't need more when you think about just when you think about your story and everything that's happened and all the ups and downs and where you've come to, how, how much do you do attribute to, you know, your, your hard work and your skill and telling it how much to attribute to luck?

3 (1h 30m 57s):
I feel pretty lucky. IVA, if you go through my story and, and going through it today has really reminded me of that. There are so many serendipitous twists and turns that had they not happened. It's hard to imagine I would be here. I would be somewhere. Maybe, you know, there are a lot of really lucky things that happened to me. There are a lot of like really tough things that happened along the way. I mean, having the company fail multiple times, like drug addiction, alcoholism, like there's all these like really tough things. And when I look back, I think the hardest things is losing the girl drug and alcohol addiction, the company failing, you know, ended up being my biggest blessings.

3 (1h 31m 39s):
If those things hadn't happened, I certainly wouldn't be here today either. And if there is skill involved, I think it's how we roll with the bad things that happen, you know, do we resist it and fight it and judge it and get resentful about it? Or do we lean into learn from

4 (1h 32m 0s):
It and like keep showing up the next day. But that said, I feel unbelievably lucky. I choose to feel lucky. That's Justin McCloud, founder and CEO of hinge. And if you were wondering, yes, he and Kate are actually married. And back in the fall of 2019, they had a baby, a boy named Oliver. And by the way, if you think their story sounds like a movie, well, it kind of is because it became the inspiration for an episode of the Amazon prime series, modern love, which Justin found out was being made literally on the last day of filming.

4 (1h 32m 46s):
And so I called Kate and I'm like, so never going to believe this, but someone's filming a show about our lives, like down the street. And it's okay. Now I hop in the car and we like go to the location and we get out and it's like 150 people there. And they're filming the 2013 hinge launch party. And dev Patel is up on stage and they put, and me in his extras. So you hanging out with like TEV and Catherine keener now, like, wow, we have, I have like a photo with them, but Deb doesn't call me that often.

4 (1h 33m 26s):
Thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you are not a subscriber, please do subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us, our email address is H ivt@npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter, we're at how I built this or me at guy Ross. And on Instagram, I'm at sky dot Ross or at how I built this NPR. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by REM teen Arab Louis. Thanks also to Liz Metzker Farah Safari, Doris gales, Juliet Carney Neeva grant, and Jeff Rogers, our intern, Janet Lou, John Lee, I'm guy Ross. And you've been listening to how I,

7 (1h 34m 6s):
Nope. This is NPR

8 (1h 34m 20s):
Support for NPR and the following message come from block advisors, a small business service by H and R block by taking care of taxes, bookkeeping and payroll block advisers allows small business owners to focus on what they love get started today@blockadvisers.com.