Amazon Music (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built This Early and Ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

NPR and Futuro Studios (9s):
When you leave home, can you ever really go back? Soccer legend. Leo and I both left Argentina. As kids, You know, you're that piece of a puzzle that doesn't fit anywhere To so many immigrants is a way to reconnect. Listen to the last cup in the embedded podcast feed to hear the latest collaboration from NPR and Fudo Studios.

Amp (31s):
When it comes to Radio Amp Hits different. AMP is a free live radio app where anyone can hop on the mic and play the music they love from hip hop to house music to heavy metal, discover, new to you tracks and playlists made by music lovers who know what's good. And that includes you. Jump in the chat or call in to share your taste and add your own picks to the mix. Download amp, that's Amp for free in the app store, or go to on amp.com.

Amazon (1m 0s):
Amazon pickup is a convenient and secure way to collect your Amazon packages from locations near you. This season. Help keep your holiday gifts a surprise when you choose to pick up from an Amazon locker or counter packages can be picked up on your schedule and you can rest assured knowing that your packages are kept safe and secure. Plus, there's no additional cost to use an Amazon locker or counter find a convenient pick a point near your home work or the places you already visit. Amazon Pickup is the worry-free option for the times when home delivery isn't ideal. To find your nearest Amazon pickup location or to learn more, go to amazon.com/package pickup. That's amazon.com/package pickup.

6 (1m 41s):
I went to a and m. I knew that I wouldn't be seen by the top guy, but I went to the guy, the guy that signs the artists, you know, right? So I went in and I said, look, I have nothing to recommend this group. I've got no press, I've got no tour, they've got no fans, I've got nothing except I've got a great record. And here's the deal I'm gonna make with you. It's free. Hmm? Just pay me the highest royalty a and m page if it sells. If it doesn't sell, no skin off your nose. No skin off my nose. The record's yours. Hmm. Now let me play the record.

4 (2m 21s):
Welcome

0 (2m 22s):
To How I Built This, A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz, and on the show today how Miles Copeland helped rejuvenate rock and roll by taking a chance on unknown artists founding a record label and bringing us the police, the Gogos, r e m, and many more. The music business is really tough. Every single day, somewhere between 20 and 60,000 songs get uploaded to Spotify.

0 (3m 5s):
That is an ocean of music being put out every day, more music than at any other time in human history. And it means that for most artists, it's almost impossible to make money on selling music alone. You've gotta turn your band into a business. Live touring merch sales, maybe a Patreon or a band campsite, brand partnerships, whatever it takes. And if you're a record label, streaming services like Spotify pay a fraction of ascent every time someone plays your music. Which means, unless your artist is Drake or Taylor Swift, it's pretty hard to make the kind of profits you used to make from record sales.

0 (3m 47s):
But in the 1980s, running a record label was almost like printing money because if you could sign an obscure artist for next to nothing and figure out how to get their music played on the radio, you could make a lot of money from selling records. And it really only took one good band to make it work. And for Miles Copeland, that band was the police. It just so happened that his small record label was starting to get some traction. In the late 1970s, right around the time, Miles' Brother Stewart, a drummer, met a singer named Sting. And it was one song in particular, you know the one, go ahead, sing it.

0 (4m 30s):
It was that song that Sting and Stewart played for Miles that convinced him that the police were destined for something big. And you will hear that story in this episode. If you listened to FM radio or watched MTV in the 1980s, it was impossible to avoid hearing the artists on Miles's label IRS records. He would go on to sign the Gogos, r e m, the Strangler, fine Young Cannibals, Wingo Boingo, the Bangals, and many other bands that would come to define the decade. And what made Miles Copeland particularly successful was his instinct for good music. He simply signed bands he liked, but the story of how he became a record label mogul really happened by accident after college Miles had considered following in his father's footsteps and maybe joining the cia, his dad also named Miles Copeland, was at one point the CIA station chief in Damascus.

0 (5m 30s):
And Miles grew up in Beirut, Lebanon at the height of the Cold War, the oldest of four kids, including the aforementioned Stewart and another brother Ian, who would go on to become a prominent music promoter in the US as a teenager. Miles attended the American school in Beirut. And just like any American teen in the 1950s and sixties, he was glued to the music on the radio.

6 (5m 55s):
Well, I would listen to the bbc, you know, I would listen to The Voice of America. I would, every time my father went back to the United States, I would say to him, you know, walk into a record store and buy the top records.

0 (6m 7s):
And what do you remember? I mean, this is the late fifties, early sixties, what do you remember listening to

6 (6m 11s):
Jerry Lee Lewis? Great Balls of Fire, you know, little Richard, the big bopper, Elvis Presley had been a big deal when I had just left America. But later on it would be what was going on in San Francisco. And, and you know, the Doors and Sure. Jefferson Airplane and all those sort of bands. You know,

0 (6m 32s):
You, you actually attended college in the us you graduated, I think in 1966, but after that you came back to Lebanon, to Beirut to do a master's degree at the American University there, I guess in, in economics. And, and the story I wrote is that while you were a student there, you what, like, started to promote some concerts on campus. What, what did that mean? Like what did, how did, what were you doing and how'd you get into that?

6 (6m 58s):
Well, it actually was a, a series of accidents, you know, that had really no plan involved. You know, my little brother Stewart had decided he wanted to be a drummer and he had got himself a drum kit. And as it happens, there was a local group at the high school, you know, called the Wichita Vortex Sutra. And they lost their drummer who went back to America for Christmas. And so they went to Stewart and said, well, we've lost our drummer. Will you sit in and drum with us? So obviously Stewart invited me to the show and he was some silly little club, you know, and I went with a friend of mine and, you know, Stewart was up there drumming. And I thought, there's my brother who's actually in a band in the, so all of a sudden, the music business, the distance between me thinking that there was a chasm between me, the, the kid listening to music and the music business itself, that chasm sort of disappeared.

6 (7m 55s):
Yeah. And as it happened later on, the group comes to see me and says, look, would you help us? We've got a gig at the university. So I said, well, what the hell? You know, it was literally that. It was, wow. It was one of these moments where as you just say, well, I got nothing better to do. So, okay, yeah, sure, I'll do it.

0 (8m 15s):
You, you went to help arrange the concert for them on the campus of the American University? Well,

6 (8m 19s):
I, I went to help organize the, this sort of show, you know, they had this idea that, well, we wanna have the kind of a psychedelic happening. We've been reading about this thing that's going on in San Francisco, so, you know, we need somebody to help us do it. And I had no clue. We did create it happening. Of course, it had nothing to do with what was going on in San Francisco. I mean, there were no drugs, for instance, but it was a big success. The kids went crazy. Hmm. So then the group came to me and said, well, you've gotta come and help us on all the other shows we doing. Well, there weren't very many, but the words had gone out that I was, you know, helping. And then I was approached by a promoter who was importing groups from England.

0 (9m 0s):
This is a Lebanese promoter.

6 (9m 2s):
Yeah. The, the group that was brought in by this promoter was a group, an English group called Rupert's people.

0 (9m 9s):
Rupert's people.

6 (9m 10s):
Right. And the next thing I knew, I was helping him with his show, you know, he sort of sold them as from London, you know Yeah. Rupert's people.

0 (9m 18s):
So, so from what I understand, you graduated, I think in 69 and, and I guess around that time, your family actually moved to London. Right. And so you moved there too. And I guess there was this, this band, this, this band called Rupert's People, right. That you'd worked with before. And what they got back in touch with you and said, Hey, we need a manager. Can you help us out? Is that, is that right? Yeah. Like what's the story? Well,

6 (9m 42s):
Rupert's people had had a single that went top 30, you know, but at the time that I was seeing them, they all had jobs. You know, they were not a professional band. A lot of 'em didn't even have equipment. So it was, you know, they said they wanted me to manage them. And I said, well, I don't know anything. And they said, well, we'll show you. Well, the first gig they took me to was to a club near my parents' house. And I happened to meet a group who later became Wishbone Ash, who really became my first management artist. Yeah. Rupert's people sort of faded into the background because they really weren't a professional group yet. They were hoping that I was some sort of rich American who might finance them.

6 (10m 25s):
And I think that's why they asked me to manage them.

0 (10m 28s):
Hmm. Alright. So that kind of fizzled out. But you went on to, to be involved in this group, wishbone Ash, which was a massive group, a prog rock group, right. In the early seventies, people forget about them. They never really had a revival in the US but they were even big in the US at a certain point.

6 (10m 47s):
Well, they, they were, I would say they were moderately successful. They weren't as big as, let's say, Jetro tall or 10 years after some of these big bands. But they were successful enough that people know who they were. And I learned a lot from them, and they learned a lot from me. We basically, it was a learning experience cuz I knew nothing about the music business, but I did learn about touring America. You know, I brought them to America. That was a big deal for British artists, really, because they, the whole idea of, you know, oh wow, we're gonna play America. You know, that's the big game. The fact that I was an American kind of opened the doors, I think.

6 (11m 26s):
And a lot of the groups that I was started to work with were thinking, well, I could take them to America, which was their big dream.

0 (11m 34s):
So at this point, you're clearly mean, this is the early seventies. You're clearly now in this business. Yeah. And you are starting to think, okay, what does this mean? I mean, what was your, were you thinking, all right, I'll be a manager, I'll manage bands? Or were you thinking, did you start to think, well, maybe I should really think bigger about what I wanna do in, in this industry?

6 (11m 56s):
Well, I, I kind of went with the flow, and I think a lot of people do that. I think, you know, to sit back and say, well, I'm gonna do this, this, and maybe some people plot out their lives, but do they really know what they're gonna do? I had a group called Wish Bon Ash. I then picked up the Climax Blues Band and Renaissance and Curved Air and Caravan and, you know, Al Stewart. And then, you know, did I know when I had signed Wishbone Ash in the beginning, that I was gonna end up managing five acts? You know? No, I didn't really know. And one thing led to another, led to another, led to another

0 (12m 28s):
H I mean, what did it mean to manage a band? I mean, you were managing their finances, you were managing their booking schedule, and presumably these bands weren't making a whole lot of money at the time.

6 (12m 38s):
Yeah, I, I booked the shows. I was the publicist. Yeah. I even helped them carry their equipment. I was forced to learn every aspect of the business. And I think one of the advantages that I had was I had an American accent. Hmm. So when I'd call up a club, you know, it'd be, hi, my name is Miles Copeland, I've got this new band to book. You know, and they would not be quite so sure as to who this guy was. Well, maybe he's somebody important, you know? Right. Whereas if I was some British person, you know, I'm Miles Copeland, I group, they'd think, oh, yeah, yeah, this guy's from Birmingham. Yeah. He's a schmuck. Click hang up the phone. But they assumed that maybe I did know something.

6 (13m 20s):
So they would listen, you know, and then I would basically sell him a group.

0 (13m 24s):
One. One of the things I, I read about something you did early on in your career, and I, I don't know how you did this, was you, you started a industry trade magazine called College Event. This was basically like a phone. It was like a listing of all the artists touring who their agents were, what their booking fees were. And apparently nothing like this existed. But I guess also you would write positive glowing articles about your artists that you represented in this magazine, except your name was nowhere to be found in this magazine. So, no, no one knew that Miles Copeland was behind this magazine yet you were promoting your own bands in the magazine.

6 (14m 1s):
Well, I, I learned very quickly, you know, okay. One of the major jobs is to let the world know that your artist exists. Well, the reality is, when you're started off with an artist in England, you literally had to only reach the people that booked the acts, which was probably two to 300 people maximum. Right. So I said, well, if I have a magazine, all I have to do is send out 200 copies to 200 people. And if they have booked the act, then, you know, I, I've done my job of marketing. It doesn't need to be fancy and flashy, but it's gotta have credibility.

6 (14m 43s):
So I found a, one of the university kids that at University College London, who actually books groups and said to him, Hey, how'd you like to be the editor of a magazine? And he thought, well, cool. So I now had the credibility of a guy that actually books, acts as the editor of the magazine. Hmm. So basically the magazine started off with a couple of mimeograph pages, and it had reviews of my artist plus others. Of course. Yeah. But I would have great reviews of wishful ash in it, you know, of course. Right. So, and actually the magazine kind of took off because unbeknownst to me, there was literally nothing like it.

6 (15m 25s):
So a lot of the agents and everybody began to take advantage of it because now they could advertise for, you know, 52 cents and reach who they wanted to reach. Whereas the act and the record companies were busy spending fortunes in the big magazine. So it was definitely one of the ways in the beginning that I used to let people know the act existed.

0 (15m 46s):
All right. So you are managing these bands, and I guess in, in 75 you organize this, you launch this like multi-band tour of European festivals. This is called Star Truck in 75, and it had Soft Machine, and Lou Reed was part of it, but apparently it did not go as planned. This was supposed to be a huge tour. What happened on that tour?

6 (16m 16s):
Well, the idea of the tour was if you could associate your up and coming artists with bigger names, then people would assume your artists were bigger than they really were. Yeah. So, my idea was to say, well, if I could have John McLaughlin's ish orchestra, and I can have Lou Reed and I can have, you know, these big names, and then have my acts on the same bill with them, my acts will appear to be bigger. And I got the bands together, and off we went. We did the tour. Well,

0 (16m 48s):
Where did you start? Where was the first city that you went to?

6 (16m 51s):
It was in Holland somewhere. I, I can't remember what the

0 (16m 54s):
First show was. And you had all your band, all your bands, Lou Reed, John McLaughlin's group, soft Machine, ready to go, ready to perform.

6 (17m 1s):
Yeah. Well, I had different groups. I had in different countries. Like Lou Reed was very big in Spain, so I made sure that he was booked for the Spanish show. Right. The headliners would fluctuate based on who was big in that marketplace. But my acts were always there. Unfortunately, Lou Reed never showed up.

0 (17m 19s):
He never showed up. He never even flew to Europe.

6 (17m 22s):
He, he had changed, unbeknownst to me. I had booked him. I had made a contract with the agency. Little did I know that he had left the agency. And I, I was getting kind of worried at one point because I was waiting saying, well, you know, we need to know when Lou Reed is showing up in Spain, because we had a meeting at the airport and all that, you know. So I contacted the agency in America, and of course, no response. And something's wrong here. And then I finally found Lou Reed in New Zealand. Wow. I realized at that point that now I was really in trouble. Lou Reed was not gonna show up in Spain, which of course meant that the promoter then took advantage of me and said, well, you know, your headliner hasn't shown up, so therefore I'm gonna pay you half the money.

6 (18m 10s):
And that wasn't enough to cover all our costs, and it went downhill from there. So it ended up as a financial

0 (18m 17s):
Disaster. Disaster. You had to pay transportation fees and all of the venue fees and the, the artist fees. So, I mean, to say the least, you lost a lot of money.

6 (18m 27s):
I lost not only a lot of money, I lost everything. I lost every penny I had, plus money I didn't have. And I could not pay Wishbone Ash and some of the bands that I was working with. And I said, I had to say, look, I'm sorry, but this whole thing has become a complete disaster and I don't have the money to pay you, but I'm, I feel so bad about it, I'll resign. So I resigned as Wish Bon Ashe's Manager.

0 (18m 54s):
So this is 75, you're 31 years old, you're bankrupt at this point. Completely bankrupt.

6 (18m 60s):
I'm on the verge of bankruptcy. And I went to all the people I owed money to, and I said, look, if you bankrupt me, you know what's gonna happen. You know, I'll go to the courts and you'll end up with one penny for every pound that you're owed, if that, but if you give me a couple of years, I'll give you 50% of what I owe you. And luckily for me, everybody agreed. So I did not actually go bankrupt, but I was on the verge. I should have gone bankrupt.

0 (19m 30s):
But you certainly had, had a major failure. I mean, that's, that was, oh,

6 (19m 34s):
It was, and a lot of people wrote me off. A lot of people said, well, that's it. Miles Copeland's finished.

0 (19m 39s):
Yeah. And you did, did you think that at any part of you think that?

6 (19m 42s):
Well, I couldn't really think about it because the reality is, what am I gonna do now? Yeah. I knew the music business, which was an asset. I just didn't have any money.

0 (19m 54s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment. How Miles went from the verge of bankruptcy to just a few years later, managing and recording some of the biggest bands in the world. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz, and you're listening to How I Built This.

Amazon Music (20m 24s):
A teen solo hiker is terrorized for days by unknown figures dressed in white. Two cops quit their jobs at a local theater because of encounters with an alleged demonn and isolated forest in Canada where people keep turning up headless. These are just a few of the unbelievable stories you'll hear on the Mr. Ballen podcast. On Amazon Music. Each week you'll hear about inexplicable encounters, shocking disappearances and other strange, dark and mysterious stories. And they are all true. Like the case of Haley Ziga, she disappeared on a hiking trail for 51 hours. And when she was found again, she said a friend helped her survive. And this friend of hers exactly matched the physical description of a little girl who had gone missing in that exact spot 23 years earlier, and who had never been found. Hey, prime members, listen to the Amazon Music exclusive podcast, Mr. Ballen podcast, strange, dark and Mysterious Stories in the Amazon Music app. Download the app today.

0 (21m 30s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's around 1976. And Miles Copeland is in London starting over after losing all of his money. And fortunately for him, right around the same time, there's a new movement in the music scene where the bands couldn't really care less if he was broke.

6 (21m 52s):
And that was the punk rock marketplace. Yeah. The fact that you didn't have any money meant nothing to Billy Idol, you know, the Generation X or to Susanna Banshees or to the, the fa any of these bands. What they wanted was somebody who could call up the, the various clubs and knew the music business and could help them get a foot in the door. I had no money, but I had the experience.

0 (22m 16s):
So you could book some of these bands into clubs because you had the connections. And how did you find the, the bands? I mean, how did you identify or how did they find you?

6 (22m 25s):
Well, as it happened, my old time partner, who I first started into business with, had an office in a place called Dried and Chambers off Oxford Street in London. So when I basically had fallen into hard times and given up my fancy offices and all of that, I called him up and said, look, do you have room? Can you give me a desk and a phone? And he said, well, okay. So it just so happened in that same building, there was Malcolm McLaren and the Sex

0 (22m 54s):
Pistols. The manager of the Sex Pistols,

6 (22m 56s):
The manager of the Sex Pistols, he, he was on the floor above me. So I was reading in the newspapers about all these bands that, that the music business literally had written off and said, well, they can't play their instruments. It's a fad. So I, I read that, you know, the Sex Pistols couldn't get a gig. Well, I said, well, yeah, let me call up some of the people I know. So I'd call up one of the clubs and I'd say, well, you book the Sex Pistols. And a lot of the people said, well, okay, if the price is right, I'll do it. So I'd go back up, I'd go up to Malcolm and say, well, I've been reading this. You can't book a show. I just booked three shows for you. And he would look at me and go, oh, what dates are they?

6 (23m 38s):
And then he would tell me, no, we can't do them. So I'd go back downstairs and I'd call the clubs and say, well look, those dates don't work. And I go back up to Malcolm and say, look, I can you do these? And he started yelling at me. He said, don't you understand, I get more press saying The bad, can't get a gig. You're screwing up my whole rabbit. Get out of my office. And I said, well, by the way, I know you're gonna scream at me. But I did book one show in Holland and he says, oh, Holland, oh, we can do Holland. So I went with the Sex Pistols to Holland. So I became the first promoter to do you a period date with the Sex Pistols.

6 (24m 21s):
Well, that gave me huge credibility among the punk world. Yeah. So all of a sudden, Billy Idol, the whole lot, they all were at my door saying, well, you book my group. And that's really how I got into the punk world, because I was the only person who actually would call up some of these places and book the groups. Hmm. And these groups, the whole rationale of the punk world was, you don't need a lot of equipment. You don't need a lot of roadies, you don't need a lot. You know, it was really minimalist. The problem was a lot of the groups were so disorganized they couldn't get to themselves to shows, you know, so I would book Generation X, let's say in Birmingham.

6 (25m 3s):
I'd get a phone call that afternoon, hello Mall. Sorry, we can't make the show because can't find a van. Well, my brother Stewart had also become enamored with this whole idea of the punk world, where it's minimalist. Very few people, he had formed a group called The Police. Yeah. So I'd call up Stewart and say, look, I got this gig for Generation X, but they can't make it to Birmingham. Can you get to Birmingham? And he said, sure. So the police ended up being a fill-in act for a lot of the punk groups.

0 (25m 36s):
So, so this is an important pivotal moment in your life and career. And also in your Brother's Stewart's life and career, which is, he co-found his band called The Police with this guy named Sting. And eventually a guitarist named Andy Summers, when you first saw them play, and you met Sting, you know, this is 77, this is your brother, he's a drummer. Turns out that he would become one of the greatest drummers and rock and roll. Were you blown away? Were you like, oh my God, this guy Sting is an amazing vocalist and front man. Like, what was your impression?

6 (26m 10s):
It was, again, another situation where you're going with a flow. Basically. You know, Stewart was not a punk sting. Hated the whole punk rock scene. You know? I mean, he was a jazz player. Yeah, yeah. You know, he, he knew a lot more than three chords. You know, most punks had trouble finding three

0 (26m 28s):
Chords. He was a teacher. Right? He was a music teacher.

6 (26m 29s):
Yeah. He was a professor, you know, so Sting was intellectual, but he didn't know what he was gonna do with life. And Stewart had talked him into this punk group and he'd read the newspapers too. So he figured, well, what the hell, you know, know Stewart didn't co-found the group. He founded the

0 (26m 47s):
Police. Yeah,

6 (26m 48s):
Right. It was his idea. He came up with the name and he said, well, the minimum I can get away with is three people. So he got in Henry, who was looked right, he looked like a

0 (26m 58s):
Punk. This is Henry Patavan, who was the first guitar player, Henry

6 (27m 0s):
Patavan, who later became a great player. You know? Yeah. So basically, I didn't realize that there was something special there in the beginning. I mean, it was my brother. I threw gigs his way when I could Sure. Sting didn't really like punk rock. I mean, I remember him walking on a stage one saying, well, well, we call ourselves a punk group, which means we sing banal lyrics and we're full of crap, or something to that effect. Yeah. And I was thinking cringing to myself thinking, sting for Christ's sake, don't say that. You know? But it wasn't until I had heard Roxanne that I realized that there was something really special there.

0 (27m 36s):
So I guess there was a really important turning point. The police were a band that you were, certainly, it was your brother's band. You were promoting them, managing them, but, but you're also booking gigs for much bigger acts at that time, like Blondie. Right. And Lou Reed, I think you did his tour in, you know, in the uk you were, you were promoting Patty Smith, some big acts in the uk. Yeah. But then in, in 1979, I guess you saw the police rehearsing, or I guess they, they, they played the song, Roxanne, for you, tell me what you remember. Like where, where were you when you first heard that song?

6 (28m 9s):
Well, actually what happened was my brother was impatient. He, he had a burning desire to succeed. He had formed the police. He wanted to be a punk group. And nothing was good enough, you know. And I had come across a studio just outside of London where the, where the doctor, the MD by day was hoping to become a record producer, engineer. And he said, he said, look, I've got this studio I've built in the back of my medical practice, and I'll give you a month in the studio for a thousand pounds. Hmm. So I said to Stewart, how about let's make a police album?

6 (28m 53s):
So I became effectively the record company. So the police went in to this studio in Leatherhead for a month and put down the album. Yep. And towards the end of it, I, I went in and they played all the songs and I was not particularly impressed. And I finally said, okay, well what else you got? And they said, well, there's one other song, but you'll hate it cuz it's a ballad. So the idea that Roxanne, which was a sweet love song to a prostitute, you know, was really not what they figured I would be looking for anyway, I, I said, well look, I'm here. I've come all the way to Leatherhead. It's an hour time. Play the song, play the play the damn song.

6 (29m 33s):
You know, well, finally the engineer just said, well, it's a good song. And he stuck it on and they had mixed sort of reggae with, with the sort of punk energy. And Roxanne was just, just this unique combination of stuff, you know. So at the end of the song, I looked at the guys and I said, gentlemen, that song is gonna change our lives. You've written a classic. They all looked at me like I had two heads. They said, what? You like that? Well, of course then Sting has some more up his sleeve. That's when it, you know, can't stand losing you and some of these other songs begin to percolate. And I said, look, I think this song is so good.

6 (30m 14s):
It's bigger than I can do myself. So I'm gonna go to a and m Records and I'm gonna try to make a deal to put you on a and m a a real major label respected record company. Cuz I just don't have the wherewithal to do it justice. Yeah. And I knew a and m wanted to be in the punk world. They knew something was going on, but they didn't want deal with crazy people. So I went to a and m I knew that I wouldn't be seen by the top guy, but I went to the guy, the, the what they call the, the artist and repertoire guy. The, the, the a and r, the guy that signs the artists, you know? Right. So I went to him and I said, look, I have nothing to recommend this group.

6 (30m 56s):
I've got no press, I've got no tour, they've got no fans, I've got nothing except I've got a great record. And here's the deal I'm gonna make with you. It's free. You've got it. Just pay me the highest royalty a and m page if it sells. If it doesn't sell, no skin off your nose, no skin off my nose, the record's yours. Now let me play the record. Cuz I knew that if I had, I'd gone in there and asked for money and put risk in the game, the guy would think, well, you know, it's gonna take my budget. Suppose it fails. What do I say to my boss?

6 (31m 36s):
So I had to eliminate all of the negatives it could possibly be there. Yeah. And I think that's probably the first time he ever listened to the music without thinking, Ooh, what's this gonna cost me? What if it fails? So he just listened to the music and you know what? The music was good.

0 (31m 53s):
Wow. You were giving up the IP of the record because you had no cash. You would no options. But I guess the upside, you, you would get the upside if it worked out. That was the plan.

6 (32m 3s):
We would get our high royalty, which would mean we'd make money. Right. So now the police were on a and m Records, which was a prestigious label. Right. And the only caveat was that they would put the single out in America, which they ended up not doing by the way. So they put the record out, doesn't really do a lot in England, but the police could say we're on a and m records. I then called up my brother Ian, who I had taken a job with an agency in, in Macon, Georgia. And I said, look, can you book me a tour in America?

0 (32m 40s):
And, and just to be clear, your other brother, Ian Copeland also was very successful, I guess at the time. He was working at this agency that booked and, and promoted bands like Rock, rock and Roll bands in the US Yeah. Okay.

6 (32m 54s):
Got it. And he said, look, it's gonna be really tough. There's no record released here. A and m is not, hasn't put out the record. And I said, yes, but can you do it? He said, okay, I'll try. And sure enough, we got a five week tour of America playing every dive you can think of.

0 (33m 8s):
And did people show up?

6 (33m 9s):
Very few people showed up. And the most significant club, which was in Northern New York, four people showed up. Hmm. But one of the four people was a DJ

0 (33m 22s):
In the, in watching the show was a dj. Okay.

6 (33m 24s):
And he loved Roxanne. And he went back to Boston and he started banging that single Wow. So all of a sudden we ended up with a heavy airplay in one of America's big cities. And that got the attention of Jerry Moss, the M of a and m records, who didn't know from Adam, who the police were. Right. But he could see in Billboard, it said the number one import record in the United States is the police. And it had a and m next to it. Well, so I get a phone call from Jerry Moss saying, I'm looking at Billboard and it says, the biggest import record is the police. Is that my record in America?

6 (34m 4s):
I said, yes it is. And he said, well, we better do sl. I said, yeah, you better. He says, well get the band over here and we'll start working the record. And that started the police off.

0 (34m 15s):
But, but it's still an a and m record. Right. So how does your label IRS emerge?

6 (34m 22s):
Well, IRS records probably would not have existed had it not been for the police. And when the police became really big, I all of a sudden gained a certain credibility as well because I, I had sort of masterminded in their view, this opening of the police to come and break America. And it was the first punk rock band that really sold some records and was really happening. And, but I then had these bands back in England who were saying, well, you know, what about me? So I decided I would go to Jerry Moss and do the same thing I did with the police in the beginning. I went to Jerry and I said, look, I've got a lot of bands that I've already recorded in England.

6 (35m 2s):
I'm prepared to put my own money in, so I'm not gonna ask you for a penny, but I want to have a record company that a and m will distribute. And you can decide how many records you press, whether you're gonna market it or not. It's totally up to you. I'm giving you the label for free, but you have to put out the records. And you know, Jerry Moss would've sort of thought, well, this Miles guy seems to be onto something, he's gonna pay for the record. So yeah, okay. We'll give you a label. Hmm. And IRS Records was formed,

0 (35m 35s):
But what I don't understand, miles, is you were, I mean, was it a joint venture? My my understanding is that IRS was basically an independent record company and you kind of worked with a and m as you, you owned the master recordings as IRS records. They would then sell them and, and press the records in the United States and distribute them. Promote them. Was was that basically the arrangement? Yeah,

6 (35m 60s):
I, I owned the records, but I gave them the permanent distribution rights and as it turned out, I probably had to do that to get Jerry Moss to say yes. So I made him a deal he couldn't refuse. And guess what? He didn't refuse. Yeah. And I think that was one of the secrets for me. I mean, I, I say there were two things make yes. An easy answer. And secondly, make something affordable. Because if it's cost too much money, you can't do it. So the punk thing was affordable. IRS Records was affordable.

0 (36m 33s):
Why wouldn't you have just formed IRS and just come to the US and done it yourself? Why, why did you feel like it was important to have a and m as a partner?

6 (36m 45s):
You know, to take a record to market in America, you need somebody to go to the radio stations, you need somebody to go to the record stores. You need an organization. America is a big country, so you could be huge in New York, but nobody has ever heard of you in, in Los Angeles. Hmm. So I knew I needed, number one, I needed credibility number two, I needed some sort of team that could take a record to marketplace. And I needed enough of a prestige that I could go to certain acts and say, look, we're distributed by a and m Records. Yeah. And if you give me your record, I can give you major distribution in America. And that's what they all wanted.

0 (37m 26s):
So, and, and this was a time where bands made money from selling records. They don't anymore. They make money from touring mainly now. But at the time, right, this was, you really wanted your band to just get big so they could sell lots of records. That was how they were gonna make money.

6 (37m 41s):
So nowadays, you know, people say, oh, well you don't make any money selling records. Well selling CDs, no, you don't sell a lot of records. You know, but Spotify now, cuz there's billions of people who have signed onto it, that 0 0 0 1 cent times x billion actually is real money. So you can make money now with having, being on some of these platforms. But yes, the Grateful Dead sell more t-shirts, you know, than they do records. Sure. Kiss make a lot of money for merchandise. So depending on the artist and what their infrastructure is, you can make a lot of money from all sorts of different areas of, of the entertainment or music

0 (38m 21s):
Business. So essentially now you've got this Relabel irs, which was based in London, right? Or and you had an office in New York too, I think.

6 (38m 29s):
Well, our main headquarters ended up being Los Angeles. Cuz what I realized is that I'm gonna be flitting all over the place with the police or squeeze or whatever. I needed some team here to, to work the label. So I had to make like my, the one of my first employees was a guy named Jay Boberg. I couldn't pay him a normal salary. So I said, I'll tell you what, I'm gonna pay you a hundred bucks a week. Which was a joke. But I'll give you 5% of the record company each year. You stay with the company for the first five years. Hmm. So Jay ended up with 25% of the label. Wow. And I made him vice president of the label. So for him, here's this kid still in college and he's vice president of IRS records.

6 (39m 15s):
The fact that he makes a hundred bucks a week, who cares? He's probably living with as parents, you know,

0 (39m 19s):
Was this y because, you know, within the first two years, I mean you were, you would go on to sign r e m, the Buzzcocks, the beat. I mean some r e m of course would go on to be one of the biggest bands in the world. W was he the guy that had identified some of these acts?

6 (39m 35s):
He identified he, he got into r e m before I did. But he, you know, most of the acts I signed, it was my record company. And eventually I relocated to la

0 (39m 48s):
Alright La An important place for you to be because there were some really important LA bands that you would go on a sign <unk> The Gogos became the biggest act in the US and one of the biggest acts in the world had. Was there a lot of competition to get at the time to get these acts to sign? Were there a million ARS coming to them from different labels trying to, because IRS wasn't a major, major label compared to the other ones at that point. So how were you able to sign these, these bands?

6 (40m 17s):
Well, I think the go-go story is, is would answer your question because please, the Go-Go's wanted to be on a big record company, but nobody would sign them cuz they were all girls. And they, they say like, and they, they did a documentary for Showtime a couple years ago and they actually say, they said we were rejected by everybody because

0 (40m 37s):
We're all female banded

6 (40m 38s):
Because they were all FE females. Yeah. So I went to the Whiskey A Go-Go and I saw the band play and they were fantastic. And I, I looked around, there was not one single a and r person from another record company in the room. And I looked at it, I thought, five girls, how bad could it be? What a great hook. And I went backstage and I said, well, I'd like you to be with IRS Records. Well, they thought, well IRS Records, it isn't a real record company. I mean yeah they've got I and m distribution, but we really wanna be with a big company. So they said to me, well, okay, well think about it. And then they went around to all the other labels and they said, IRS has made us an offer. Will I signed us? Everybody said no. So they came back to me and they said, okay, we'll sign with IRS records.

6 (41m 20s):
But they were not thrilled initially with IRS records and nor should they have been because we really had never had a hit. But the reality was, once the Gogos went to number one, the world woke up and we started having competition. But by then we had already developed a reputation. And so we managed to sign, continue to sign a lot of bands. Yeah. But it got harder and harder as time went on.

0 (41m 44s):
So this was the, the record you're talking about, I think is Beauty and The Beat, right? The first Gogos record that our lips are sealed and we got the beat. And that, I mean, I think they were the first all female rock band to have a number one album on the billboard

6 (42m 0s):
Tracks. Well, they remained the only female rock band to ever have a number one record on the billboard charts. There have been plenty of singles that were number one, but never an album. Hmm. They were a lot more important than people give 'em credit for because they, they really did open up the world to girls being able to play as musicians and they got to be huge

0 (42m 22s):
Miles. Let me, let me try to understand the economics of a record label back in the, in the early eighties. Right. You, you have a band like the Go-Go's and you put out this record Beauty in the Beat, which, you know, you're financing as I r s and it just goes gangbusters. It, it becomes a number one hit at that time. How much money would a bandwidth the Gogos make from that record?

6 (42m 45s):
I remember writing a check for a million dollars at one point for them. Yeah. But of course the first thing that happens, you know, people always talk about record companies and they always make 'em out to be evil people and all that. You know, which case, some cases it's true.

0 (42m 59s):
They are, they are. Yeah.

6 (43m 0s):
Sure. But there's just as many times as the groups are, cuz they're usually very young and they don't really appreciate the fact that, you know, it takes a lot of money to make something successful. Yep. The first thing that happens when you get a number one record is you renegotiate your record deal. Yes.

0 (43m 15s):
Right.

6 (43m 15s):
So when the police really started happening, well, of course the lawyer comes to me and says, look, let's go to the record company and let's get more royalty and all we have to do is give him another record on the deal. Yep. So we did that many times with the police. So the Go-Go's after that record went to number one. Of course their lawyer calls me up and says, well, we wanna break the contract and we wanna, we want more money and we want this. Well, we ended up in dispute and finally Belinda Carlisle calls me up and says, miles, I don't know what's going on, but will you meet the band? Just you and the band? No lawyers, no managers, nothing. And I said, well, great. So we go in and we meet and we realize, really there's very little dispute between us, you know, and I remember writing a check for a million dollars.

6 (44m 2s):
I said, look, we're happy to give you more money. Just give us a few more records. Of course, needless to say, they broke up on the third record. Yeah. So those extra records I negotiated, I never got.

0 (44m 13s):
So, I mean, here's a thing though, right? When you're running a record label, you always have to know in the back of your mind that yes, you are putting money up for an unknown band. And, and, but you know, if you're smart and from, from what I've read in your books and, and about you, you are very tough negotiator. You got deals that understandably were in your favor. But you always know that once that band gets big, they're gonna figure out, find a way to, to go to a bigger label. You, you always have to know that Right. In your business.

6 (44m 47s):
Well, somebody once said to me, if you want loyalty, get a dog. Because there is no such thing in the record business. You know, because everybody has starts whispering in their ear. You could make a lot more money if you were so-and-so. Hmm. Thankfully I ended up with a good relationship with a lot of people we signed. But there were some people that I have never had a great relationship with because they just assume that if you're on the business side, you have to be a crook.

0 (45m 14s):
Do you think though, in order to be successful, miles you in your position, right, running a record label knowing that there's always gonna be competitors and sharks circling the waters waiting for your bands to jump ship. Right. And they're also, there's fierce competition. This is the eighties when people are making a lot of money off record sales in order to be successful. Do you kind of have to be an s o b?

6 (45m 38s):
Yes and no. The reality is, you know, everybody wants more later on. Do you think Jay Boberg would've accepted a hundred dollars a week salary, three years in and after we've had a number one record where the go goes, well no. And so that's why a lot of labels never make it and why a lot of groups break up is that they imagine that, that things are gonna be like it was in the early days. Yeah. Well it never is. You know, and I mean, I remember the RM deal RM came to us at the end of the contract and said, look, you offer us the best deal, we'll sign with you. We, we love irs, but we owe it to ourselves to go to the marketplace to see what the marketplace will offer.

6 (46m 19s):
And I remember with our eem, I had finally gotten to the, paid the most money that I could possibly pay. So I went to Jerry Moss and he says, well I'll, I'll contribute you 3 million. And I was putting up 3 million. Anyway, I say to the group, this is what we'll offer. And it ended up between us and Warner Brothers, and then the manager and the a the lawyer come to me and he said, well Miles, we just left the Warner Brothers offices and here's what they said, whatever Miles offers you, we'll double it. Yeah. I looked at the group and I said, here's my advice. Get out of my office right now. Go straight to Warner Brothers, sign that deal before they change their mind.

0 (47m 3s):
So 1984, you have a massive year, you have four albums in the top 40, you have the Gogos, you've got r e m, you've got the police, A police that year would go on hiatus and that they never record another studio record after that. But I mean, I think by 84 they'd already sold like 75 million records. I think I read that synchronicity sold 8 million copies in the US alone. So this is a big

6 (47m 30s):
Year. Yeah, I mean, it it, the police were a phenomena, let, let's be honest. You know, I mean, I can say, alright, I've sold over 300, 350 million albums of all the acts that I worked with. Well, you know, that's probably an underestimation. I don't, I have no idea. But it was a lot of records, but at that

0 (47m 47s):
Lot records. Yeah. And I mean, it's kind of nutty because here you are running probably the hottest label, one of the hottest labels in, in the world. And your brother is the drummer of one of the biggest bands in the world, and you kind of built this business up together.

6 (48m 3s):
Yeah. We, we had, and my brother Ian was, had the FBI agency, which Right.

0 (48m 8s):
Your brother was a promoter and, and a manager.

6 (48m 10s):
He was the biggest agent in the, in the whole it's amazing field of, of the new wave. You know,

0 (48m 15s):
Are you closer with your brothers? Were you, I know Ian's obviously,

6 (48m 17s):
I was very close to Ian and very close to Stewart at the time. My brother Ian, unfortunately died. Yeah. And, and Stewart, I, he and I don't talk very much anymore. But the reality was yeah, we, we were onto something. We were at the right place at the right time. Yeah. And we did open doors for a lot of people.

0 (48m 37s):
You know, I don't wanna pry into your family affairs, it's just sad to me that you, you guys aren't in in contact because you both helped each other a lot.

6 (48m 45s):
Yeah, no, I think we all, we recognize that, I mean, I would not be where I am if it wasn't for Stewart, if it wasn't for Sting, if it wasn't for Andy. And they wouldn't be where they are if it wasn't for me. So we have a history that is intertwined.

0 (49m 2s):
All right. 1985, you leave your relationship with a and m and you move to M C A records. And from what I gather, from what you've written about it, it really, you call this a missed opportunity, that you really regret that you didn't figure out a way to continue working with a and m in 1985. What happened?

6 (49m 23s):
The, the reality is that sometimes you have a relationship that should be more important than just what percentage you're making or what, what money you're making. You know, when I moved the label to M C A, we had a better deal. Yeah. We made more money per record, but we didn't have quite the same relationship with that company in a way I look, when I look back at it, I said, well, I, I think we probably should have stayed. I should have figured some way to, to remain there.

0 (49m 56s):
You wanted to merge with them. Right? That was what you were hoping.

6 (49m 59s):
Well, Jerry Moss, I wanted to merge with a and m and get shares in a and m and Jerry Moss had said initially, yes, we'll do that. Then when I went in to finally make the deal, he said, well we can't give you shares in a and m, but we'll buy irs. And he quoted a number which was so low that I took offense and, and stormed out. You know? Yeah. What I should have done is saying, look, no we won't do it, but we would like to, you know, with Jerry Moss, I had a relationship that was, was worth something. A and m received the money a and m paid me, I then paid the act and you know, each of us made a piece of it along the way.

6 (50m 42s):
When we went to M C A our piece was bigger.

0 (50m 45s):
Yeah.

6 (50m 46s):
But it was only bigger. If you saw records

0 (50m 49s):
When we come back after the break, how the deal with M C A takes some unexpected turns and how Miles's ongoing relationship with Sting also goes into some uncharted territory, including a ride in the desert. In the Jaguar. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This. Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So in 1985, IRS record signs a new distribution deal with MCA A deal Miles thinks will be better than his previous deal with a and m.

0 (51m 36s):
But it doesn't quite turn out that way. What's interesting is, I guess one of the things that happened with this move away from a and m to M C A was you had more freedom to do more things. But I guess it also meant you increased your overhead cuz you were a lean operation. I mean, I think even in into the mid eighties you had like 12 employees at IRS and you were bringing millions of dollars. All of a sudden you had to double your team or triple your team. And I guess it really started to weigh on your, on the business, right. It started to really eat into your ability to run an efficient business to the point where it wasn't looking as profitable as it had been by 87, 88, 89.

6 (52m 19s):
Well the, the reality is that we were making more per record, but we needed to make more per record. Yeah. And we needed more records and unless the company we were being distributed by really rolled up the shirt sleeves and helped us and we had the hits that we needed to pay for everything, we would be short of money. Yeah. Well one, we were having, we were facing more competition. Two, my staff was beginning to want bonuses and the increases in salary and they were getting offers. And three, we were not getting the same support from our company doing the distribution as we had from a and m records. So you, you, you know, your overhead goes up, your, the pressures on you go up, you start signing acts that maybe you would not have signed had you been under less pressure.

6 (53m 7s):
Yeah. But now you needed the sales. So sometimes you're telling yourself, well I don't really love this act, but they're gonna sell records so I better sign them cuz I need the money. And when that starts happening, you kind of lose the idea that you started with,

0 (53m 25s):
You know, it's interesting, a couple years ago we interviewed the founders of Sub Pop and they were talking about how, you know, once Nirvana, just like once the, the single smells like Teen Spirit just went crazy. Every record label just converged on Seattle and it became hard for labels like them to sign people cuz it was so much competition and there was so much money being thrown at acts that none of us have ever heard of because they never went anywhere, you know? Did it become harder for you to sign acts over time because of the competition?

6 (53m 57s):
Yes, that is exactly what happened to IRS records, which meant that the money I had to offer to sign the act had to increase, which meant the risks increased. And I think in the end it finally killed irs.

0 (54m 8s):
And in the end you say killed irs, you were, you were sold, you sold to Emmi in 1994, they bought IRS estimated to be about 20 million. I mean, sounds like a good outcome. Was that a good outcome for you?

6 (54m 20s):
Yeah, it was a good outcome. But you know, was it the outcome that I expected in the beginning? No. You know, would I have liked IRS to build and become a hundred million, 200,000,003? Yeah. But those days had passed.

0 (54m 35s):
Right. So, and IRS was essentially shuttered by em I, two years later with a, a few other labels. Yeah. By that point where you just detached from it, that it was not, you had no emotional connection to it at that point anymore.

6 (54m 48s):
No. You, you have an emotional attachment, but you also have to be realistic is that some of your people had gone to different companies. Yeah. Some of the acts had left Rem left, the Gogos broke up, you know, so it changes and you know, you have to adapt with it. The police broke up after a period of time. You know, you're working with Sting, you know, you're working with, so things change in some ways. You're in control of it in some ways you're not.

0 (55m 13s):
Was it your, I mean, after you sold emi, I mean you continued to manage Sting. You managed him, I think until 2001, and then you would go on to found and create other record labels. A lot of your focus was on world music and also some of the ax you've worked with in the past. I mean, you never had any intention of just like taking the 20 million and retiring. This sounds to me like this was the next chapter. You were gonna start something new. For sure.

6 (55m 43s):
What was I gonna do? Just stop. Yeah, no, I mean, but you know, as I said earlier on, one of the rules I had always followed was that you, you have to be able to afford something. Yeah. So, which acts were affordable? They were ones where other labels had passed over them. They were acts that, you know, people had thought, well, maybe their day is over, therefore their price would drop. World music was not considered a big music. You know, acts that that sang in foreign language were not doing well in America. So you could pick up a lot of these acts for very little money. So a lot of the acts that I would sign later on in life were acts that were, were priced.

6 (56m 24s):
Right.

0 (56m 25s):
Miles as you, you know, sort of through the nineties you continued to manage Sting and sort of shepherded, you know, him through his l well really I think one of his last major hits, which was Desert Rose. Tell me about why that relationship ended. Well, you know, what do you remember about that?

6 (56m 45s):
Well, you know, it was funny that I have very fond memories of Sting, but I think he was under pressures as well. I remember getting phone calls from other managers saying, well, I'll bet it's the wife, isn't it? You know, I was located in Los Angeles now I was married, I had kids he's located in, in Italy or New York. There was no real reason for us to separate other than the fact, well, you know, we'd been together for 25 years and maybe it's time, you know, I think Sting is, was said, well, I've set Miles free, but from my standpoint, I have no ill feelings whatsoever.

0 (57m 28s):
O one of the things that you, you did with him, which I, I read about and I thought was so interesting was he had the song Desert Rose that was a, it was a song that he did with, oh, what's the name of the, the singer? She Mommy. She Mommy. Right. And, and so it's an Arabic and it's an English, a beautiful song. And, and that was really, it was a hit for Sting. I think it was his last really major hit. And that song, in that video for that song Sting is, you know, is in a car driving to the desert. The car happens to be a Jaguar. And apparently you contacted Jaguar before this song was released and you said, Hey, do you guys want to collaborate and push this song out? Right? And so it was really that Jaguar commercial that made that song huge.

6 (58m 10s):
Well, again, it was a situation where we put out the album, we put out the single brand new day and it did reasonably well. So I would go to the record company and say, okay, well we've done okay with the first single, let's go to the second single is got Desert Rose. And the label said, well no, it's not a single because the opening voice on it is not in English. But Sting believed in the song. I believed in the song. And the European said, well, we'll put the single out, but we have to have a video. So we were given a fairly limited budget. We got a director involved and he decided on a Jaguar because it sort of looked like an English car and stings English.

6 (58m 54s):
And it was a simple thing. Sting in Shema in this car, driving to Las Vegas singing this song. The video goes out, I'm looking at the video with Sting and I'm looking at this car driving across the desert and I'm singing Desert Rose. And I'm thinking to myself, wow, that's a pretty nice car. And I realize as I'm watching the video that we made a car commercial and I'm thinking, well, I'm gonna find out who the advertising agency is for Jaguar and see if I can get them to do something. Yeah. So the next day I call a friend of mine who was at one of the advertising agencies and they say, well, Jaguar's with Ogilvy and Mather, so call him up.

6 (59m 35s):
So I call up this guy who must have thought, who is this idiot? I said, look, hi, my name is Miles Copeland. I managed Sting calling you to let you know that we used your Jaguar car in a commercial of Sting's new album. And I'm gonna send you a copy of it, see what you think. Yeah. Well, three or four days later, I get a phone call. We've seen the video, we, we, we'd love to do something, you know. And I said, okay, here's the deal. Your car looks fantastic. I have a problem selling the single. Now if you make a ad that looks like it's selling the single, I'm gonna give you the video for free. So then comes the team to New York to show us what they've done.

6 (1h 0m 18s):
It's an ad, so it shows the stinging shit mommy singing the song and the Jaguar. And at the very end it says Desert Rose from the New Sting album. Brand new day. Yeah. And the day earlier, I had asked the Jaguar what they were gonna spend on putting out that video. So they gave me the advertising schedule 18 million. Wow. Including an ad on the Super Bowl.

0 (1h 0m 47s):
And all they did was they just recut the video. That's all they did.

6 (1h 0m 50s):
They recut the video so that it looked like a commercial for Sting's record. I then go to the record company and I say, look, I've given the video to Jaguar. And they looked at me like, you idiot, you're supposed to get money from him. And I said, okay, if you can match this ad budget, I'll go back to Jaguar and ask for money. And I threw down to the marketing director, the ad schedule 18 million. The guy looks at it, his jaw drops to the floor. He had never seen a TV advertising campaign as big as that.

0 (1h 1m 24s):
It's just incredible. So, so when that ad came out, what happened? How did people react?

6 (1h 1m 31s):
So when the ad came out, the record company still hadn't released a single in America. Fans started phoning up the radio station saying, why aren't you playing the New Sting single? And the radio stations would go like, what? Sting single, the the one with the, you know, St in the Jaguar and the desert. And so a and m, which is now Universal. Yeah. Rush out the single, it gets 140 top 40 stations, goes to number 10 in the charts. It was the most successful tie in ever between a product line and an artist record. And from now on, nobody would say, which they did say to me, well, sting selling a song for a commercial he's selling out.

6 (1h 2m 17s):
Yeah, right. Well that ended with that song

0 (1h 2m 20s):
And, and Sting was fine with it. He didn't care.

6 (1h 2m 22s):
Sting wanted that song out.

0 (1h 2m 25s):
So he was d he's like, however it happens, I don't care. Yeah. You know, obviously there's so much you've done in your life and career and there's too much for us to, to focus on and you know, we can't talk about every single twist and turn. You, you tried film companies, you've tried a bunch of different things. You've done management companies. But I'm curious about something, how did you know, or, and, and even now, how did you know who to sign? I mean, you know, you, you are a music fan like anyone else, and maybe your music taste is a bit better than other people, but still you're gonna, you know, there's no way you can, any single person can have, you know, a perfect hit rate or even a a better than 50% hit rate.

0 (1h 3m 9s):
So how did you know when you saw an act that you were like, I wanna sign them.

6 (1h 3m 14s):
I I had a very simple rule. Do I like it if I like it, all I have to do is find enough people who are like me that also will like the act. Yeah. And if the price was right, you know, if I could hear an act like in the case of the B 52 s, I wanted to sign the B 52 s. Yeah. So I went to Jerry Moss, he wouldn't gimme the money. So I didn't sign the B 52 s cause I didn't have the money, but I loved them. I thought they were great, but there were other acts that I did sign that I thought were great, that I did have the money for. So that was my rule. The reality is that sometimes your own gut is your best judgment,

0 (1h 3m 53s):
You know, miles, I'm curious, as you approach 80, right? You're a couple years away from, from being 80 Yeah. You, you've a lot of perspective. You've lived, you know, a life that's given you a lot of perspective. One thing that surprised me a little bit, and I I'd love to hear you kind of talk about this, is in your book, you, you basically say that you assume the worst of people, nor that's your default. That you assume people are not good. You kind of always or generally expect things to go bad, which allows you to be pleasantly surprised when it goes good. So can you unpack that kind of philosophy around, around that outlook for me?

6 (1h 4m 33s):
Well, I, you know, I say that partly as a joke, but the reality is it's true. You know, if you constantly look for good, you're gonna find bad. If you know that bad is gonna be there and you find good, well then you're pleasantly surprised. You know, when, when money is thrown at something, it causes dislocations, you know, and sometimes the people with the best intentions do the stupidest things. Yeah. You know, it's not a perfect business. Human beings are not perfect. So I've always had the view that, you know, don't be naive. That's not to say that, you know, I, I just, I assume everybody is a son of a bitch from day one. No, that's not true. But you have to accept the fact that, you know, not everything is gonna work out.

6 (1h 5m 16s):
And I, I think if you approach life thinking that everything's gonna work out, you're gonna fail. And I think you have to approach it from the standpoint, look, things are gonna get screwed up, but you gotta keep hammering it away at it one way or another. And in that way you'll succeed.

0 (1h 5m 33s):
There's something else you wrote in your book, which is you described, you write, I could think that I r s Records was a very unlucky record label given all the acts I worked with. What do you mean by that?

6 (1h 5m 48s):
Well, you know, when you look at, you know, record contracts, you know, people always say, well, you know, you sign acts to five album deals and seven album deals and this and that and, and, and or aren't the record companies really bad and they aren't they making all the real money, you know? Well, I I look at IRS records and say, how many acts ever got to five records? Only one. It was r e m Acts broke up after the first record. After the second record. We had a couple acts that got to the third record. The Gogos, for example, fine Young Cannibals broke up after the second record, which reached number one in the US charts.

6 (1h 6m 28s):
Yeah. They never made another record. So you think, well, wait a minute. In a perfect world if you'd had a number one record, which was your second album, you would think you would at least go to album three or four or something, you know? So I, I said that Iris Records was unlucky in that respect and that we had one act that actually went to distance. And you think acts like the Moody Blues and these, they're still putting out records, you know, they're Grateful Dead, the, you know, a lot of these acts, they're still doing things, you know, a lot of the puck bands have disappeared.

0 (1h 7m 3s):
You know, you mentioned IRS as an unlucky label, but I wonder when you think back on your career and you know, everything that, that happened from Beirut, basically, you know, guy grew up in Beirut and then you became this major label guy and founded several labels and introduced these massive bands. You know, if you think about the eighties, right? The bands that you signed and that you put out into the world had a massive global cultural impact. It's a pretty big accomplishment. Do you attribute your success to the hard work you put in, or do you think there was some luck involved as well?

6 (1h 7m 40s):
I think that no matter who you are, there's always an element of luck. You know, are you at the right place at the right time? Do you make one decision that really works? And my title of my memoir was, you know, two Steps Forward, one Step Back. Yeah. My Life in the Music business was really to say, look, you know, you're gonna make mistakes and you have to accept the fact that you're gonna make mistakes. And that's part of it. So, you know, I I would say overall, yeah. Was I personally lucky? Yeah. I I I have to say I was lucky. Did I have things that I say were unlucky? Yeah. But you can't dwell on those things, you know, I have to say, well, overall I did fine.

0 (1h 8m 21s):
Yeah. What's one song that should have been a hit that wasn't a hit? Let's make it a hit now, so let's revive it. What was the song?

6 (1h 8m 29s):
Oh, I, now you're, now you're pushing. I, I'd have to go through and there were, there were probably many, many of 'em. But, but I, I would rather not say, but sometimes I, I'll go to a restaurant and, and I'll be, you know, eating and I'll hear four or five songs come across the radio and I think, wait a minute, I was involved in every one of those songs, you know? Yeah. And, and those are moments that I think, well, you know, I did have some significance after all.

0 (1h 8m 57s):
That's Miles Copeland, founder of IRS Records. And yeah, I get why he didn't wanna choose just one song that could have been a hit. But if I may, I think there could be a case made for going down to Liverpool by the Bengal. Check it out. It's a great song.

4 (1h 9m 13s):
Hey,

0 (1h 9m 13s):
Thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you wanna contact the team, our email addresses ibt id.wondery.com on Twitter, you can follow us at how I Built This, and mine is at Guy Roz and on Instagram or at How I Built this. And I'm at Guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by Casey Hermann with music composed by Ram Team era Bluey. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Sam Paulson. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Liz Metzger, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, and Carla Estevez. Our intern is Susanna Brown. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built

Amazon Music (1h 9m 53s):
This. Hey, prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon Music app today,

wondery Plus (1h 10m 10s):
or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts.

Wondery (1h 10m 14s):
If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear wondery shop.com.

0 (1h 10m 22s):
Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.