1 (0s):
Hey, it's guy here. And before we start the show. I wanted to let you know about a short Anonymous survey that you can take to let us know what shows and podcasts you're listening to if you want to help you can go to npr.org / podcast survey. It won't take up too much of your time. And this is a great way to support your favorite shows that's npr.org podcast survey and thanks.

3 (26s):
We had half the company basically was to some extent. Going out to soybean farms for you know the better part of a year and it was in retrospect a bad idea. But this is the kind of thing you have to do. You have to be not afraid to you know, try things that may fail I can tell you for certain we are going to have more expensive failures in the future and if we're afraid but we shouldn't be trying to do this.

1 (1m 5s):
From NPR it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm Gyros and on the show today help at Browns mission to slow climate change, let him to launch impossible foods and to invent a plant-based burger that tastes and even bleeds like beef. Along the 101 freeway in San Francisco are tons of billboards that advertise startups that can deliver cannabis to your home faster their ads for enterprise software to help you manage projects and even a company that has robots to prepare your made to order pizza that company by the way raised 375 million dollars before it went bust and recently yet.

1 (1m 57s):
Another media company was launched one that raised more than a In dollars with the goal of bringing us 10 minute video clips. Now. I have no problem with any of these businesses and I wish them well, but every once in a while when I'm strolling through San Francisco, I think about how much brain power in the tech sector is spent on scaling lifestyle and productivity products and how little is spent trying to solve world scale problems. Now, there are a few notable exceptions. Of course say what you will about his quirky personality, but Elon Musk, Is 100% committed to ending human dependency on fossil fuels and he's trying to do it at scale.

1 (2m 39s):
Another exception is my guest today Pat Brown when pet set out to start a business. He didn't just want to solve a problem. He had or make a better more efficient product. He literally wanted to change the world for most of his career Pat was a biochemist at Stanford. He was even involved in groundbreaking genetic research, but around 15 years ago he heard Statistics that floored him worldwide Agriculture and Forestry and particularly livestock production is responsible. For more greenhouse gas emissions than all the emissions from Transportation all the emissions from Cars planes ships and trucks combined our love of beef and poultry and lamb and pork is one of the biggest drivers of climate change in the world and I am as guilty as you are because I eat those things too.

1 (3m 30s):
Anyway, all this got Pat thinking How could there be a way to stop producing meat from animals away to make meat that would taste as good as animal meat, but require considerably less water land and waste and he knew from his bio chemistry background that in theory. It was possible that you could do it from plants. So when Pat set out to make meat from Plants he wanted to make beef that beef lovers would love beef that looked and smelled and even bled like beef even. It didn't come from a cow in short. He wanted to make plant meat that was indistinguishable from animal meat with the hope that if more animal meat lovers could come to love plant meet greenhouse gas emissions would go way down and the story of how Pat built would came to be known as The Impossible Burger is amazing and not just for how he and his team figured out the science of it all but also because when Pat set out to do this, he was almost 60 years old and he walked away from an incredibly successful career to take a huge risk, and now just a few years later The Impossible Burger is in fast food restaurants across the country and past company and possible Foods has been valued at four billion dollars.

1 (4m 48s):
Now these days during the lockdown like so many of us Pat is not going into the

3 (4m 53s):
office. I'm sitting in a room that was originally for my three kids shared a bedroom and most Finley was my youngest son Isaac's room which I've usurped as

1 (5m 8s):
my office and that's who you running and possible Foods out of right now you march ya later in the episode. We're going to hear a bit more about how the pandemic has affected Pat's business, but let's start at the beginning when he was growing up which kind of happened all over the place.

3 (5m 23s):
My dad worked for the CIA. I didn't realize that until I was quite a bit older and his job sent me to various overseas. Posts so we lived in Paris for four years. That's why I started school and then came back to the States and then he was sent to Taipei.

1 (5m 44s):
Was he a spy or was he more of a sort of a

3 (5m 48s):
desk? He was an intelligence officer. I guess you could say and was gathering Intelligence on Mainland China and ran various operations, but he never did. Danny you know sketchy bad business. So he is a sweetest most altruistic guy who's like the opposite of what you if you have this notion of you know, the CIA and spies being very Sinister and unethical characters is dead opposite of

1 (6m 19s):
that. So when you were a kid, what did you think your dad

3 (6m 23s):
did well, I it's embarrassing in a way. I mean, he would just say, you know when I asked him what he did you say. Well, you know, I work for the government and I thought okay. Makes sense works for the government. I only found out what his real job was when one of my good buddies somehow mentioned that his dad worked for the CIA and I thought well, that's kind of weird because he works for my dad

1 (6m 48s):
anyway, and you got a pretty big family right

3 (6m 51s):
six siblings. Yeah, pretty well.

1 (6m 54s):
We have to assume this is dancers. Yes. Were you a pretty good student as a kid?

3 (6m 60s):
I was actually not a pretty good too. Sometimes when we came back to the state, I felt like I just been sent back a grade and I just became very disengage because I thought it was kind of like why am I wasting my time and I was a chronic cutter of classes. And I mean when I was in Taiwan, we my classes were in a three-story building that had this kind of concrete Grill work on the one side of the building. So one thing I would sometimes do would be just randomly walk out of class. Class and go climb on this. It was like a climbing wall in retrospect. I just feel like it's amazing and kick me out, but you must have

1 (7m 42s):
been a good enough student because you went you would go on to the University of Chicago, which is a pretty hard school to get into.

3 (7m 50s):
Well. I mean, first of all a lot of people don't realize back in the day. I think getting into college was much less competitive, but I had good SATs So I think that that made up for my grades to some extent but yeah, I mean, I was just lucky that I grew up at a time where you could be a less dedicated student and still get into a good college.

1 (8m 13s):
When you got to University of Chicago. Was it clear to you that science was going to be the thing that you would do in life was that already just a given as far as you are concerned?

3 (8m 25s):
I think I was kind of open to a lot of things when I was in college, but I tend to gravitate. At eight toward science and math. I mean there was a period of time and I thought I have seen Mike. I loved math. I loved sort of higher level math classes in college, but I felt like I wanted to do something that made the world better and I didn't think it would be a satisfying for me in this in the sense of feeling like I was contributing something. I'm

1 (8m 55s):
curious about something that that happened when you were in college or like right as you graduated from college. Which was you you ate your last Burger? I guess you became a vegetarian and in 1976, which was kind of a hippie thing to do and itme. You were 21 like it's not that common.

3 (9m 16s):
It was not a hippie thing. I mean so really what it came down to was a non-trivial fraction of kids at some point in their lives try to become vegetarian try to stop eating meat right primarily because of discomfort with the ethics. And in my family that was true pretty much most of my siblings in myself and there was a time when we all sort of in concert decided to stop eating meat, you know, I felt like if if I don't need meat to be completely healthy and well-nourished then I'm only eating it for aesthetic reasons.

3 (9m 58s):
There's no physiological reason why I need to do is purely the Aesthetics. And I felt like that was I just couldn't justify The Killing and making animals miserable for my pleasure basically as opposed to for my sustenance. And I think that was kind of the way my siblings and my parents felt about it that that was that was why we all just like bam like a square wave decide to stop eating meat.

1 (10m 22s):
Well, so but when you made this decision you would you had no idea that one day you would be involved in food or food production your You get your bachelor's degree in chemistry and then you jump into a Ph.D program in Biochemistry also at the University of Chicago. So presumably you're thinking. All right, I'm going to do I'm going to do a lot of my life is going to be about, you know, working in a lab and and pursuing scientific

3 (10m 49s):
research. Yeah. I mean the direction I was going was so I was in MD Ph.D program and I wanted to go into research to help people by basically. Standing human biology and human diseases and and the PHD part was kind of related to that but was also just a lovely idea of discovering things for the first time. Yeah.

1 (11m 14s):
So you did your md Ph.D. And you actually did a residency in Pediatrics during that time, right? But from what I understand you didn't go into Pediatrics you eventually landed at Stanford and you can into into basic research. I think in fact, I think one of the first things you worked on was was the AIDS virus, is that right?

3 (11m 32s):
Yeah, exactly. It was timely and important and it was the reason one of the main reasons. I felt like I had to go into biomedical researchers that as opposed to staying in clinical medicine is that if you're a clinician you keep coming up against problems that you don't know how to solve and it's just incredibly upsetting. You know when you're taking care of a sick kid. And you just don't know how to help them. Yeah, and so I felt like that's much higher leverage. If you can work on really hard important medical problems and find Solutions,

1 (12m 8s):
you know. Yeah, so so Pat basically from from what I've read. I mean you have this incredible a trajectory when you you eventually became a young tenured professor Stanford you created a lab you worked on something called the DNA microarray, which is so complex. To be its own podcast episode of cell we will be able to go into it now, but I mean we worked on all this groundbreaking research that that helped with things like ovarian cancer detection to gut microbiome and all these incredible things in this must have just been a dream life for for a scientist like you

3 (12m 43s):
right? Yeah. I mean it was the job I would have created for myself is if I'd been able to completely rewrite the specs for the job, you know, you get to the joy of discovering things you you if you get a new idea you can you know immediately start working on it. I had great colleagues great students. It was I used to say this all the time. It was my dream job.

1 (13m 7s):
All right. See you and I should mention you also co-founded the public library of science, which is now one of the biggest open source scientific journals out there which caused a lot of em, but we actually just talk about this for a moment because when you co founder this you create a lot of friction because the academic publishing World is a for-profit industry and they don't want everyone having access to their papers unless they pay for it. You basically created this new model and had a lot of people saying hey, what are you Pat? What are you doing here in academic and what you would be wasting your time with publishing

3 (13m 43s):
for? Well, I mean, that's the way that I saw my job or you know my purpose. I guess it wasn't defined in terms of some particular scientific problem. I was working on you know, it's if you see something that you can have a positive impact on I was in the very fortunate position that I could do it and it was kind of like understood to be part of my job and that case I realized that to most of the world if you know for parent gets sick and they want to read the best current medical literature on the subject as many people do I mean many people who are not Physicians when they have a family member who has a medical problem, they'll go and Try to read it.

3 (14m 26s):
Well, you can't you have to pay you know, 30 to 50 bucks to read a crappy paper

1 (14m 33s):
right? Because especially back then like in the early 2000s many medical journals were behind pay

3 (14m 39s):
walls. Yeah exactly that infuriated me and the reason that the public library of science the reason that I and my co-conspirator my guys and my former postdoc Mentor Harold varmus founded it was basically as much as anything else to throw a wrench into the business model of scientific publishing because it was so perverse and anti-social and we felt that if we create a vehicle where scientists could publish free to everyone in the world scientists would flock to it and it would pull the rug out from under these conventional Publishers and it did to a considerable extent.

3 (15m 19s):
Although the job still isn't done

1 (15m 21s):
unfortunate. I mean you see you create this academic Journal By the way, you had to find funding for it. And this is a very this is an entrepreneurial venture. You were a tenured science professor at Stanford and you weren't doing this to make money. This was kind of the a non-profit right? That was a an open science and open open source, right people could anyone could have access to it. And this is a pep. But most of our pain I was a lot of work to get off the ground.

3 (15m 50s):
Yeah. It was it was a lot of work, but I mean I was so motivated. Like a lot of these things if you're doing something because you want to do it. It doesn't feel

1 (15m 58s):
like work. Yeah, I think that was in 2001 when you found it found that the public that co-founded the public library science and help just just by, you know, give us a sense of scale. How big is it today? Because it's there's tons of like + PL OS one and there's a bunch of like POS medicine, right? I mean, how big

3 (16m 16s):
is it? Well one when that journal was launched within a couple of years. It was by far the highest volume. Scientific journal in history terms of publication volume, but the thing I learned was I believed it would be super successful and the lesson I learned is which is something I repeat all the time at impossible Foods. You have to bet on your own success. If you expect an intense something to be super successful, even when it's not you have to make that investment that you're betting on your your growth. It's just from possible foods that the analogy is if we believe we're going to be as successful as we intend and do believe we have to make huge investments in production capacity a couple of years in advance that are predicated on the idea that our volume will be 10 times greater, you know in a year and a half.

3 (17m 13s):
Yeah, which is you know, I think a lot of companies would regard that as kind of a risky bet and since our mission requires us to on average double. In volume every year for the next 15 years. We're going to have to be making that big bet on our success again again again, and that's something that you know, like a lot of businesses would say, well, let's go more slowly but will never achieve our mission if we don't go for it. And so, you know, the lesson again is BET on your own success.

1 (17m 48s):
Okay. So here you are. It's the early 2000s you have this incredibly impressive career that you Borg and you could have continued doing that kind of research and teaching and Publishing and then around I guess 2008 you took a sabbatical which turned into a kind of a detour. Can you tell me what like what was the thinking behind that

3 (18m 10s):
so I had decided that for my sabbatical that I was going to try to identify the most important problem in the world that I could contribute to solving. And it could have been anything but but I was pretty confident that it was going to be something about avoiding environmental catastrophes basically and and I was looking at a variety of different things relatively early on it was looking at you know, what's the state of research in making more efficient solar energy devices and stuff like that, but relatively quickly, I would say within a month or so I had zeroed in on what is unquestionably.

3 (18m 54s):
The most important and Urgent problem the world is facing right now and that is the catastrophic environmental impact of our use of animals in the food system.

1 (19m 6s):
And how did you by the way how did you know about that? I mean lots of people know about it, but I'm not everyone knows about it. How did you come to that understanding that that agriculture particularly raising livestock was so damaging to the environment.

3 (19m 22s):
I mean, I'm kind of embarrassed that Wasn't more aware of it had of ahead of this. I just I was basically reading about environmental problems. And what are the contributing factors and so forth. I became aware of the greenhouse gas emissions from the livestock industry which are which are huge. They're greater than all forms of power Transportation combined and because of its huge land footprint. It is responsible for a catastrophic meltdown in global biodiversity. And the other thing that related land footprint is if you could snap your fingers and make that industry go away which I would do in a heartbeat if I could the recovery of biomass trees and shrubs and grasses and so forth who is growth is suppressed by animal agriculture would immediately start pulling In out of the atmosphere because the ultimate carbon capture technology is photosynthesis.

3 (20m 30s):
That's the opportunity cost of using all that land for animal agriculture. So bottom line is there's nothing even comes close in terms of its destructive impact on the

1 (20m 42s):
environment. So you're thinking all right, if I can figure out if I can focus on this thing livestock production and I can figure out I don't know maybe had a think about solving this problem. Then we can really push the needle right that could actually potentially make a difference. Is that where your mind was in

3 (21m 1s):
2008-2009? Oh, absolutely. So that was it. That was the obvious thing to do. And then the question is how do you do it and I organized a national research Council Workshop to just look at what how the world might be affected if we could switch to an entirely plant-based diet figuring that if we got a bunch of a Objective people who had no conflict of interest to just look objectively at the date of the the answer would be so overwhelming that it's better from for the economy. It's better for the environment better for food security and so forth

1 (21m 36s):
it'll convince people to change their

3 (21m 38s):
weight might convince people change it works, but then I realize that actually nobody at nobody I don't want to sound cynical but none of these kinds of you know, all the facts in the world. Don't move the needle on on public policy. And so So I realized that know what you have to do is something more subversive and the other thing that I think it's kind of a no-brainer, but I'll just say it is that you're not going to you're not going to be able to persuade people by education or or nagging to change their diet significantly to significantly reduce meat consumption or consumption of animal products. Look at how well people follow nutrition recommendations for their own health as opposed to just the good of the world.

3 (22m 21s):
They don't And China about three years ago asked it says and to reduce their meat and dairy consumption by half and what happened? Absolutely nothing. Right? So the bottom line is that doesn't work public policy doesn't work education doesn't work. When you go to an environmental conference where every single person knows how problematic this is. They're all having steak for dinner. Yeah. So you need a more subversive solution and the subversive solution is Create products that compete successfully in the marketplace against the products that are produced by animal farming.

3 (23m 3s):
And if you can do that effectively eliminate the economic incentive for this ridiculous industry. You can solve the problem

1 (23m 12s):
quickly. So I guess what fairly quickly you came to the conclusion that that you basically wanted to make meat, but not from animals you wanted to basically you accept the fact that many people still want to eat meat they're going to eat meat it's going to be hard to get them to stop eating meat. So why not just give them me but Don't make it from animals. That was your conclusion.

3 (23m 36s):
It was exactly the conclusion. And here's an interesting fact about me consumers pretty much around the world and all across the u.s. They don't actually like the fact that it's made from the corpses of animals that is not part of the value proposition of me to pretty much anyone they love it because they love the you know, special kind of deliciousness they get from it. They like the, you know high protein and iron and familiar. Rarity and convenience and so forth they like it in spite of the way it's made and it stands to reason why would anyone actually feel like you know, what I particularly like about this product isn't so much that tastes good. It's that it's made from a corpse of a you know, Cal that had a miserable life.

3 (24m 21s):
Nobody wants that so that basically means that it just comes down to a simple thing. Give meat lovers the things they do love about Mead, which is the very particular kind of Your experience in the sensory Pleasures the nutritional value protein and iron primarily other micronutrients and convenience and affordability and you win.

1 (24m 44s):
Let me ask this question given your background in chemistry. You must have thought in your mind because if you asked me right and I'm not a scientist obviously, but if I thought you know, I really want to solve this I wouldn't have been able to say, you know, I think we can make me from Plants because I wouldn't know that but did you know that? It was theoretically possible to do this that you already know that in 2009.

3 (25m 10s):
I can't say I knew it in the sense that there was incontrovertible evidence, but you had a hunch but I would say very high confidence. I believe it was doable because really what it comes down to is the components that are in meet, you know, the amino acids other small molecules lipids many of the proteins are extremely conserved their founding. Plants as well as animals and so forth. It seemed to me that if we could understand what were the Salient characteristics of that kind of molecular composition Salient in the sense of the deliciousness aspect.

3 (25m 50s):
That there's no reason why we couldn't find sources from plant of ingredients that we could assemble into something that from a sensory perspective was essentially indistinguishable from the animal project basically meat made from Plants. It's it's just like, you know, a camera is a camera whether it's using film or Digital Imaging so that was all just thinking but I just felt like okay, of course, this is doable it's hard. That's for sure. It's going to be really really hard. And the hard part is figuring out the deliciousness part of it. The rest is he's packed

1 (26m 27s):
when I want to just kind of go check for say because you are at this point your tenured professor. You've a lifetime job, right? You're almost 60. I don't believe you were independently wealthy and you decide to between 2009 and 2011 actually launched this company, but surely there were people who were saying pain. Now are you sure you want to do for

3 (26m 52s):
yourself? Yeah, I mean a lot of people thought it was food wacky, but I believed it was doable, you know like to be a scientist you almost have to be insanely optimistic because you know, if you're doing science that matters you're doing experiments that you don't know will work, but you have to be an inherently insanely optimistic person.

1 (27m 16s):
So I was sure we'd figure out a way to make it work. I mean, did you colleagues? That you know in the in the biochemistry department at Stanford any of them Say pat your this distinguished academic like you want to be a businessman really did any of them say that to you

3 (27m 34s):
there is there is a bit of that. I mean I looked at business and I feel like you know business is really important and it's not like it's some inferior thing to be doing except that I just felt like going into business for the sake of going to business. I would hate it. Yes, it's it would just be insanely boring. And so I never had the slightest interest in. Yeah, I didn't think of it all as oh, I'm going into the business world. It's that the only way to solve this problem involves competing in the marketplace and that requires starting a for-profit business and everybody expected me to come back very quickly and in fact You know when I first started I thought well, maybe I'll just kick this into gear and then I'll just go back to my Sanford job, but when I realized very quickly is no this is not a hobby.

3 (28m 30s):
I have to be all in

1 (28m 33s):
when we come back in just a moment. How patent the team of scientists spent a year looking for the molecules. I could turn a plant Burger into an impossible burger and how that eventual Discovery turned into an expensive failure that burned through a year of cash. - stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible. First to Del. The nation is an Uncharted Territory and many Americans are looking for ways to support their communities Dell Technologies is working to ensure that small businesses have the right Tech Solutions Del Technologies advisors are helping small businesses stay connected and productive while working remotely with Windows 10 and Microsoft teams and are deploying remote work solutions to minimize.

1 (29m 34s):
Upfront costs with Dell Financial Services Dell is standing by its customers call 877 ask Dell. Thanks. Also to Signature Hardware signature Hardware helps Inspire home renovations to spruce up your space signature. Hardware's online Resource Center is prepared with DIY and how to guides for easy updates in your own style with statement pieces that are classic or on Trend whether it's changing out cabinet hardware or hanging style is shelf brackets. Their customer service team is there to help guide you through the process head to Signature Hardware.com flash NPR for inspiration on your next renovation Thanks.

1 (30m 20s):
Also to stand for small and American Express stand for small.com. Is your One Stop Shop for resources offers and tools to help your small business. Get back to business visit stand for small.com. We're spending more time at home than ever before. So now's a great time to finally adopt a dog, right

3 (30m 44s):
socialization is going to be harder because socialization and social distancing are definitely at

1 (30m 49s):
odds. So before you decide to adopt a canine companion during quarantine, listen And subscribe to NPR's life kit. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's around 2011 and Pat Brown will soon be walking away from a 10-year job at Stanford to create meat from Plants. But before he can even begin to find the ingredients and do the hard science to create an impossible Burger Pat's has to raise a ton of money and so he starts just down the road from Stanford with a well-known investor named vinod khosla.

1 (31m 34s):
You went to vinod khosla and you pitched him what like you had a core the pitch Deck with slides. And and what did the what was your give me your give me your elevator pitch. You have an

3 (31m 44s):
elevator pitch? Well, it was know the funny thing was it was extremely amateurish. Okay. I'm a business perspective because basically it was like mostly a lecture about how incredibly destructive you know, and we'll be Salinas. She isn't and then practically my last slide was oh, by the way, this is 1.5 at the time trillion dollar Global Market, you know in retrospect that could probably have been my first and only slide that I buried the lead. Yeah. So you you

1 (32m 23s):
raise the money you raise some money from from khosla to launch a company that would kind of reimagine a way of producing me. And by the way, how did you come up with a name impossible

3 (32m 36s):
Foods? So when I started the company first, we just had a placeholder name be 2.0 and then we when we decide we're going to you know, launch a product we felt like okay now we need a name that actually works as a brand name and we engaged naming company as an advisor and we were they told us by far the most difficult clients they ever had because they were they would give us 20 names and we say those Suck those are terrible and then in the fourth round one of the names they had was impossible. And as soon as I saw that one I felt like okay, we're done. It's perfect because we wanted something that was you know memorable that actually looked good in type.

3 (33m 22s):
That was a an impactful word a word that gets a little bit of an emotional response and that captured some of the Challenger. Spirit of the company and a lot of our investors thought it was a bad name because I said well possible that such a negative way.

1 (33m 41s):
So when you first sort of launch this thing you got its 2011 how roughly how much money did you have to

3 (33m 47s):
remember? We had 9 million

1 (33m 49s):
dollars. Well, okay. So you had 9 million dollars and who do you who do you recruit it to help you? You want to you you have this hunch pretty strong hunts that you can basically replicate animal meat. From plants and we're not talking about like a tofu Burger. You're literally talking about the completely new kind of neat

3 (34m 13s):
that it only works if hardcore meat

1 (34m 17s):
lovers love it right

3 (34m 18s):
prefer it prefer it to what comes from a cow because otherwise we're not going to out-compete the incumbent

1 (34m 26s):
industry. So how do you recruit a team? I mean, you've got some money and a Runway now, you've got probably a Runway of who knows maybe A year at least before you for raise more money and just to be clear in this is not a knock on you. I think this is actually a great compliment because you're a science your scientist. But obviously you showed some entrepreneurial spark throughout your career at Stanford, but you did not have a business background. So you have to start to build a business. Who how did you find the people to help you out?

3 (34m 55s):
Yeah. I mean I literally was you know, I would say the large majority of people in the in the US. Probably have more business savvy than I had when I started this company, seriously, seriously, in fact, you know, my wife madge's all our finances. Thank God she does so we needed someone who actually knew what they were doing because there's obviously a lot of a lot of expert management required to run a business even when that's that's not making money. So the very first person I hired was a guy who had just was about to graduate from Stanford. Business school very sharp guy he had grown up on a dairy farm and had actually worked as an engineer at General Mills.

3 (35m 43s):
So he knew something about the food business. He understood the problem. We were trying to solve and he an MBA and he had an MBA and he and he was and he was a very smart guy. So yeah, so that was taken care of and then the rest was pretty much all scientists and we were hiring people basically, what who had a hardcore. Basic science background sort of molecular biology biochemistry biophysics and they went to work basically studying meet in molecular terms the same way they would study, you know, a disease or something like that.

1 (36m 16s):
So you in all these scientists were going after this idea that you could make meat without animals, right? So, what did you do? Like, well, where did you start to look

3 (36m 26s):
well before I founded the company I had an idea that particular. Molecule in meat myoglobin which is a heme protein and it's what makes me read. Myoglobin is always called myoglobin. It's okay. It's very it's closely related to hemoglobin. It's a him protein and him is what carries oxygen in your blood. That's what makes your blood

1 (36m 50s):
red and heat the heme molecule is found in all animals.

3 (36m 55s):
Now, we all animals but in pretty much all plants and bacteria and fungi and every form of life,

1 (37m 3s):
It's a building block of

3 (37m 4s):
life. It is pretty much a basic building block of life. So he has a very obvious aspect of meat because it's what makes meat red or

1 (37m 13s):
pink. Okay? Okay. Yeah, I'll get the color, right?

3 (37m 17s):
Okay, but there's another aspect of him, which is it's one of the most potent catalysts in nature. And when you think about meat when you cook meat something really dramatic happens that doesn't happen when you cook broccoli. And that is it transforms, you know, if you cook broccoli or or a veggie burger soft. Yeah, it gets warmer. It might get mushy or nothing magical happens. When you cook meat you get in the cooking process this wheel absolute explosion of Aroma that's you know, this meet that in the raw form has minimal odor maybe a slight bloody odor and taste suddenly be becomes totally flavorful and generates has this explosion.

3 (38m 3s):
Nova Roma, and I knew that there is a molecule in in legumes the root nodules contained a lot of molecule called leg hemoglobin. That's a him protein. It's actually very similar to

1 (38m 15s):
my own ha ha and so you're saying that that legumes like like peas or or soybeans have these these root nodules and and inside then there's something called what's called

3 (38m 27s):
again. So for soybeans, it's called sorry like hemoglobin and I suspected. So there's one obvious thing that team does which is it gives the meat it's red color. But what I suspected was it had a role in the flavor because he was such a good catalyst. So anyway, I did some calculations and concluded that there's as much himin the root nodules of the US soybean crop as there is an all the meat consumed in the US

1 (38m 56s):
and if you could isolate it if you would get it then you've got the Holy Grail here. Yeah. That was yeah

3 (39m 2s):
we Harvest apart. Soybean plant that nobody really cares about therefore we felt like we could get practically for free and get this molecule. That would was going to be important for for me anyway, so when I had raised the money one of the first projects we started was figuring out how to isolate like hemoglobin from sorry root nodules. And

1 (39m 24s):
can I just ask you a stupid question. So forgive me, you literally pulling out the the root nodules right physically is that it's a pretty something that you hold a ton. Touch and then you've got to extract the extractors like hemoglobin that's the idea from from these tiny little nodules on the roots of a plant. It was a

3 (39m 42s):
cockamamie idea.

1 (39m 44s):
Why is that? How come this was? So

3 (39m 45s):
complicated? Well, it's let's let's put it this way. It's totally doable. But the problem was that it was just a very difficult scaling problem. First of all these root nodules, you know, are these little tiny balls? They're mixed in with the soil. You have to separate them. You have to get rid of all the other stuff to get pure enough like hemoglobin that's food safe and all this sort of stuff it just all those all those scale that exactly it's totally doable. It's just not scalable in any

1 (40m 17s):
practical way. Yeah. It's like trying to pick leaves off a tough time. Have you ever done that little thyme leaves? It's a

3 (40m 24s):
lot of work. That's a very good analogy Lopez. Yeah, the seeming Simplicity and the actual challenge of doing it at scale. So it was in retrospect A bad idea, which I'm a hundred percent responsible

1 (40m 38s):
for that idea because you had to burn through a lot of cash to write your that out. We had half the

3 (40m 43s):
company basically was to some extent involved in this going out to soybean farms for you know, the better part of a year, but this is the kind of thing you have to do when you're working on an unsolved problem. Will you don't know the route to the solution is you have to be not afraid to you know, try things. That may fail and accept that as part of the job. My family has this is not the last expensive failure. We're going to have in our history by a long shot. You know, as of today we are going to I can tell you for certain we are going to have more expensive failures in the future as we try to figure out, you know, how to achieve our mission but you know, the point is we don't have a map to where we're going.

3 (41m 35s):
It means we have to explore we have to try things that we don't know for sure will work and some of them won't work. And if we're afraid to do that then, you know, well, we shouldn't be scientists and we shouldn't be trying to do this and I'm proud of it because that's the way we have to be.

1 (41m 55s):
Yeah, so, okay. So you spent a year basically on this idea. That didn't work exam which I'm sure was was hard. But but then I guess I mean you discovered a way to essentially grow the the leg hemoglobin by right by putting it in yeast

3 (42m 15s):
and putting it into the cell. Yeah,

1 (42m 17s):
and then by doing that you can make it at scale you can bake basically have

3 (42m 20s):
lots of if yeah, then basically you just grow giant from enter tanks full of the yeast and break open the yeast cells and extract the low hemoglobin and it's it's very scalable the economics work.

1 (42m 33s):
Well see you you basically From from what? I understand like this is around 2012-2013 that you really kind of start to produce this stuff at scale. But that's not the impossible Burger. You can't just go into those Vats of yeast and grab a handful out and form a Patty and Grill it that's that is not your you are still far far away from the actual mm. Like impossible meet at this point.

3 (42m 58s):
Right? Well that certainly wasn't sufficient. This was not like a sequence of things. So we were we were working on scaling up to him protein at the Time we were working on figuring out the texture and the rest of the flavor chemistry and so forth.

1 (43m 11s):
Okay so bad, even before you launched even before you had a product people were clearly paying attention because Google reportedly heard what you were doing an offer to buy your company that they reportedly offered like two or three hundred million dollars just an astounding amount of money which which you turn down.

3 (43m 33s):
Yeah, so we've never confirmed

1 (43m 35s):
That I got you, but you're not going to confirm or deny it but let me let me just ask you this question. Why would you have turn that down?

3 (43m 44s):
Well, you know, I think Google is a great company and the people there are lots of super smart people there. This company impossible Foods has a very simple highly specific mission that we are completely a hundred percent, you know focused on achieving Nobody else has that level of focus and commitment no matter how smart they

1 (44m 12s):
are. And the mission is to get people to stop eating animal

3 (44m 15s):
meet. The mission is to eliminate the Need For Animals As a food technology and by doing so to save the planet from an environmental catastrophe. Nobody cares as much about it as I do and my colleagues do and I don't want to put the mission at risk by by putting it in the hands of someone who's not as As committed to it as we are that's really what it comes down to seeing

1 (44m 39s):
you forge ahead and you continue to kind of iterate and work on this product until you got something pretty workable. Not just workable. Good good enough to actually put out put out into the world in 2016. The burger The Impossible Burger was launched and you guys sort of formed a partnership with David Chang the famous chef in New York of Momofuku. Tell me why you guys decide Do that instead of like, you know ship it all the stores you decide we're going to start with this one place. How did that was the thinking behind

3 (45m 13s):
that? I think it was something that was pretty obvious under the circumstances. So we had been in contact with a number of chefs that we would give samples of our product to just to get feedback because you know again the thing is we were not interested in launching a veggie burger if it didn't satisfy a very hardcore meat lover. It wasn't going to move the needle on our mission. So we were setting a high bar for ourselves. So we were giving samples to chefs to get their feedback and have been doing that for quite some time and my CFO at the time currency of flow to David Lee belonged to some Korean American organization that Dave Chang also belong to and he was going to that event in New York and he brought a sample in case he could see Dave Chang to have him tested those objects Kitchen restaurant.

3 (46m 5s):
And he cooked it on his stove and then just like immediately started tweeting. Like my mind is blown. Yeah. And the point is that Dave Chang is exactly the kind of person we want to launch with because the main value we would get from launching our product at the time when we had very limited production capacity, you know, the amount of money we could bring in from sales was was irrelevant. Okay, the only the value of US they all to us is awareness and brand building and the single most important message that we needed to deliver to Consumers who never heard of us is delicious meat doesn't have to come from animals.

3 (46m 51s):
Yeah, and Dave Chang is such a hardcore meat guy that he wants banished all vegetarian items from his menu. Yeah. I'm principal. Okay, and there's no more. Sincere and valuable endorsement then to put our product on a menu for a chef to put on the menu because every one of Chef puts a dish on the menu, they're putting their livelihood in the reputation on the line for the the subsequent restaurants. We launched initially again, they're not high volume, but they were high credibility restaurants because they were run by uncompromising chefs who are known.

3 (47m 35s):
Primarily for their

1 (47m 36s):
meat. Yeah, you were going to like high-end restaurants and in like New York and San Francisco and

3 (47m 41s):
LA, right? And the thing about chefs. Is that what they want is something new something challenging. Yeah, and the thing that's different about our products and any plant based product is that it has the magic of meat that that only a chef can see and there's never been a plant based product because of the heme primarily that does the magical thing. that meat does when you cook it which is it transforms completely you can tune the flavor profile by whether you cook it you know rare or well done and stuff like that and I think for a chef having the creative possibilities that that opens up just makes it exciting for them so I think that's part of why we were so fortunate to be able to work with these great chefs is that it was something new for them to put their artistic skills to use on

1 (48m 34s):
Pat I I want to talk to you I know that obviously a lot of what you do is proprietary and patented and secret but I'm curious like how do you as you kind of improved it and got it to where it is today how do you is it spices is it is it like I don't know is it is it different like ingredients how do you how do you is that how you get that taste

3 (49m 1s):
it's not spices at all I mean and it's actually the ingredients are Relatively few. I mean it's the flavor is almost entirely from simple small molecules, like amino acids vitamins sugars things that you can find in vegetables animals, whatever same simple, you know, ubiquitous biomolecules + PM as a catalyst and that's most of what's behind the flavor. We don't put spices in. There's no like meat flavor. It's in there. It's pretty straightforward. It's that the way that we approach the problem was we basically asked the question.

3 (49m 41s):
How does how does meet do it? How does meat from a cow produce that flavor? Because if meat from a cow can produce in flavor with the biomolecules that that it contains which we knew at the time were extremely similar in composition to the things that are found in plant cells if we can figure out how Meet does it then we don't have to fake the flavors. We can build in the exact same flavor chemistry into our product so that it does the same thing and it literally creates the flavor in real time. When you cook EF in the raw form, which you can you can actually eat it raw, which I wouldn't recommend for the coverage and the flavor is completely different from the cooked

1 (50m 24s):
version

3 (50m 26s):
and that's unlike any plant Drive food before and it tastes bloody because he is so weird. Yeah gives it a bloody tape. Except my

1 (50m 34s):
gosh like you have not eaten the beef burger since 1976 and though I've touched a lot of people who are full on vegans and they're freaked out by impossible Burgers because they taste so much like beef do you eat them do even possible Burgers?

3 (50m 51s):
I mean, I've let's say about grow my craving for meat a long time ago, but I do like impossible burgers. In fact my sister who's been pushing as long as I have can't bring herself to eat

1 (51m 3s):
while Because in 2002 meaty to beefy,

3 (51m 7s):
right? Yeah, exactly. Yeah, exactly. It's just it's just even though she knows of course everything that's in is nothing from the animal. It's just like a visceral thing people have very visceral reactions that are it's not your frontal lobe, you know calling the shots

1 (51m 23s):
at and it's just mentioned Pat that that last just last year you you upgraded the recipe for the burger and then you began rolling it out at grocery stores and And then at Burger King, which introduced The Impossible Whopper that people in crazy for and then Applebee's and White Castle and all these other chains started selling it and people loved it. I mean, I think even even like Glenn Beck, you know people like who are like you would imagine would go after vegetarians are like like they loved it right here. It was here somewhere.

3 (51m 57s):
Did you see that video? Yeah. Oh

1 (51m 59s):
Solaris. Yeah. Yeah Glenn Beck's like this is ID, this is great. I Of difference and you went from like just you know, David Chang in a couple restaurants in 2016 to now it's they're everywhere like 7,000 Burger King locations right impossible and they were there were shortages people waiting in line. They can get them. So, how do you how much do you have to produce a this stuff to meet demand now?

3 (52m 23s):
Unfortunately, that's one of those numbers. I think I'm not supposed to talk about but I can just tell you lots many millions of pounds.

1 (52m 31s):
Are you able to meet demand?

3 (52m 33s):
Well, the as you know, a big part of our fundraising is that it's exactly this betting on our success. We have to be building capacity on the premise that the demand will be, you know, many fold greater than current sales and have to keep doing that to stay ahead of the demand what happened you're and a half ago was we were, you know planning on building capacity, but we weren't prepared for this surge in demand that happened. Very short period of time it happened so fast that then we know basically we were playing catch up because you know, this is this is a problem of being in a business that produces stuff, you know you it's a big investment to build capacity it takes time and you're guessing you're doing something that's never been done before where there's no road map and we have to say, okay what's demand going to be in two years?

1 (53m 29s):
Yeah as you started to get more popular. And people started to say hey, this is great you then came all kinds of push back. Okay, let me talk about some of the pushback and you know what? I know, you know, I'm going to get people saying let this is unhealthy. It's full of sodium. It's full of saturated is that this is you know, it's full of a bunch of you know, GMO stuff. Then you had the meat industry saying you can't call this Burgers either states in the US where I think you can't call it unless it comes from an animal. You can't call it a burger and you know other groups saying, you know, you know your this is frankenfood or lab grow all this stuff when you hear people say Hey, you know, this isn't healthy.

1 (54m 17s):
What do you say

3 (54m 18s):
I would say from a health and nutrition standpoint. We have been extremely deliberate and conscientious to make a product that we believe is substantially better for the consumer than what it replaces and it has the same. Same protein bioavailability the same bioavailable iron people make a big deal about the fact that the sodium content is higher, but you could say yeah and the sodium content of a pair is higher than a peach. But the fact is that the sodium content in 4-ounce impossible Burger is I think one sixth of the sodium allowance in a sodium restricted diet.

3 (55m 1s):
Okay, so this is Not kale salad. It's a burger and it's targeted at someone who would otherwise be buying the animal version. Yeah, we want to make it the healthiest most nutritious product. We can possibly make and still have it be a burger. Okay? if you want a kale salad please go buy a kale salad if you want a burger you're better off buying our burger then the cowl version

1 (55m 32s):
when you hear about these states that are proposing to prohibit companies like yours from using the word meat in their packaging I mean what happens if you can't call it a burger in like Missouri or some State what are you gonna do

3 (55m 47s):
well first of all I think that those most most of the bills that have been proposed to restrict our labeling have not passed in the state legislature jurors yeah and those that have I'd say that The smart money is that they're not going to pass constitutional test. But even in the hypothetical case where someone tells us we can't call it leaked. Well, whatever the point is that consumers will figure out what it is and we'll call it whatever we need to call it.

1 (56m 19s):
Do you think they're threatened the below associations that they feel threatened by us and credible still tiny compared to them but your

3 (56m 26s):
tighty because his because they know this is coming and it's just a matter of time when we get the economies of scale that they have and when we've you know, expanded our suite of products and so forth that it's going to be game over for that. And I think that's why even from before we had our first product. I know from a direct source that a representative of that industry actually reached out to a lobbyist and basically said to you know, ask that asked the lobbyists to to get Congress. So the US Ta to shut us down. Well,

1 (57m 5s):
that means you've arrived Pat.

3 (57m 6s):
Yeah, I mean they're fighting a rearguard action and they're on the wrong side of History.

1 (57m 13s):
I'm wondering you've now raised over a billion dollars at this point which state a lot of money to do this and you could tracked it investment from people like Bill Gates and celebrities and athletes and tons of different Venture firms, but why Why is it so expensive like is it is it just like all the equipment you need and all the sorts of labs and the resources and the materials like why is it so expensive? Why does it cost so

3 (57m 41s):
much I would say a large fractions expect. So, you know, we have an R&D team that's probably a hundred and twenty people really just as good a group of scientists and any company pretty much ever in history, but the work they do isn't insanely expensive, but we have to scale up production. a physical product that you know we sell on the scale of tens of millions of pounds a year we had to build a supply chain for our heating protein and and those things are relatively expensive there's you know just the capital investment in building a manufacturing facility and all that capacity and that's a big part of it is that and the thing is that you have to invest just ahead of growth and and you know betting on your success basically so if we're going to increase our volume by several fold this year and several fold the next year well we need to be building capacity right now that it's like 10x what we're selling it's very different from if we were building an app or something like that where You know, it's just you're just paying for coders

1 (58m 57s):
basically, right? Right FairPoint. Yeah, Pat obviously, you know, we have to talk about everything that's going on right now in the world with with the effects of the pandemic and the economy and I mean has it has it affected your business.

3 (59m 16s):
Well, definitely we have to operate differently. I mean, I think you know, the the workspace our workspace is deliberately designed. Meant to be effectively one large space where people are in visual contact with a lot of their colleagues. It's very it's very interactive environment. So it's quite compromising to the to a lot of the things that are important to us. And of course our R&D Labs the the ability to do actual wet lab work you can't do because even though it's essential to the future of the planet. It's not immediately essential to day-to-day life. For us to be operating so we're so the Rd operations.

3 (59m 58s):
Basically, you know, the people are still getting work done planning experiments analyzing data and stuff like that, but it's compromised manufacturing. Yeah. It's complicated.

1 (1h 0m 10s):
I want to go back to something we talked about a little earlier which was when you turn down that giant offer from Google to buy your company because had you said yes to to that offer you would have been An extremely wealthy person right now and you know, I think that every entrepreneur the interview has said, you know, they don't care about money and for the most part I believe most of them, but I actually really really don't think you care about money at

3 (1h 0m 40s):
all. I mean, I'm not motivated. I mean first of all I live in a nice place same place. I lived in for 36 years. Yeah. I have enough money to you know, take care of my needs and so forth. Earth and if I didn't I'd probably be spending a lot of my time thinking about money and where do I get so forth? But the situation I'm in right now is not going to be improved a bit by by more money.

1 (1h 1m 7s):
Okay, so they become super rich if you become a

3 (1h 1m 9s):
billionaire would probably make my life worse. I'm going to tell you I'm serious. I'm serious because I know a lot of people who are super rich and I would say by and large they're not as happy as I am. Their kids are much more likely to be miserable than my kids are. it sounds like such a stupid thing but once you have your basic needs met I think more money adds very little value and if you're trading if you're talking about something that's as incredibly valuable and motivating to me as the mission of this company and so forth and so important to the world of course I wouldn't trade that for

1 (1h 1m 44s):
money when you think about it right I mean if you didn't ever do impossible foods and you are honored after your retirement at Stanford and they would talk about the research you did in genetics and all the breakthroughs that led to and and co-founding this academic journal and you know but but you went on to do this thing after you left Stanford and you left that safe comfortable job you started this business it's not reported to be valued for billion dollars and I know as you said that's not motivation but I mean it is a fact it is a it's a value of 4 billion dollars and I mean when you think about all of the things that got you to this point you know and the risk you took by leaving and you know doing this and all that happened before I mean do you think that your success is because of your intelligence and how hard you work toward you think you know more of it has to do with luck

3 (1h 2m 39s):
I think the most important thing is I feel like there are a lot of people who are as smart or smarter than me and in terms of the kind of problem solving skills were entirely capable of doing this so what what I think is important that I contributed is the initiative and the determination to do it it's basically the critical thing that I provided was that I looked at this problem. I saw that nobody was seriously taking it on and I basically decided I'm going to take responsibility for solving this problem not because I was exceptionally capable of solving it but basically because I decided to do it, I think that's the most important thing and I feel like it's the one thing that that keeps a lot of valuable things from happening is people feel like you know, Else must be this is someone else's job to solve.

3 (1h 3m 42s):
You know, why would I be the person to do this? I'm so unqualified, you know because I was unqualified. Well, the answer is someone's got to do it and I feel like a lot of good things would happen if people were more willing to just say I'm going to take responsibility to solve this problem. And so I think that's the the main attribute that enabled me to take this on.

1 (1h 4m 9s):
That's that brown founder of impossible Foods. In addition to plant based beef. The company is also recently rolled out plant-based porks the challenge still to overcome making a nice juicy plant-based steak. The pat says quote. There's no question. We're going to get there. and thanks so much for listening to the show this week you can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts you can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet it's at how I built this or add Kyra's this episode was produced by Rachel Falkner with music composed by routine Arab Louis thanks also to Candice limb Julia Kearney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers I'm Gyros and you've been listening how I built this this is NPR