ZEN Insurance (0s):
Running a new business can be stressful. And the last thing you need is to worry about unexpected accidents or lawsuits. So if you're an entrepreneur or startup owner, don't overlook the importance of liability insurance. It's a critical investment in the success and longevity of your business. Protect yourself, your assets, and your reputation by securing the liability coverage for your specific needs. With a customized liability insurance policy, you can face challenges with confidence knowing that you have a safety net in place. Take the first step in safeguarding your business today. Go to zen insurance.com/save 35 for a free business insurance quote. Get the low cost insurance protection you need from Canada's small business insurance experts.

Black Stories. Black Truths. : NPR (51s):
We can't see tomorrow, but we can hear it tomorrow. Sounds like hydrogen being added to natural gas to make it more sustainable. It sounds like solar panels generating thousands of megawatts, and it sounds like carbon being captured and stored, keeping it out of our atmosphere. We've been bridging to a sustainable energy future for more than 20 years, because what we do today helps ensure tomorrow is on Enbridge. Life takes energy. Black perspectives haven't always been centered in the telling of America's story. Now we are taking center stage, introducing NPRs, Black Stories, Black Truths, a collection of Stories from NPRs podcasts. Search NPR, Black Stories, Black Truths, wherever you get your podcasts.

The Great Creators with Guy Raz (1m 44s):
Hey, it's guy here. you know, we hear a lot about pivots on How, I, Built, This, how a simple change in perspective can create a whole new opportunity. And this made me think of a conversation I recently had with Keenan Thompson, who's the longest running cast member of Saturday Night Live ever 20 seasons. and I asked him, what if one day, instead of performing on S N L, you were given the keys to run SS n l. You will definitely wanna hear his answer. Check out my interview with Keenan Thompson over on my other podcast. The Great Creators just search for the great creators with Guy Raz, wherever you listen to podcasts. And now onto today's show,

4 (2m 30s):
We had this oh seven foot tall, very beautiful wood floor standing fixture, the laser cut logo. We spent a ton of money on it. And our idea was, this is the display you're gonna use in your golf shop.

0 (2m 45s):
Okay?

4 (2m 46s):
But people would look at that display and just like, go, what are you thinking? We don't need, we can't put that in our shop. We would never sell that much product. They just weren't interested in Jeff's like, this isn't working. We gotta pull the plug and we gotta go get real jobs.

0 (3m 11s):
Welcome to How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz, and on the show today how Curran and Jeff Dandurand took a gamble on men's skincare and managed to build a $100 million brand. Jack Black. The men's skincare market is a tough one to crack. It's a tiny fraction of the overall skincare market. Guys just don't spend much time moisturizing or exfoliating their faces.

0 (3m 55s):
They might shave or use shampoo and soap in the shower and that's it. But that's slowly changing. Between 2018 and 2021, sales of Men's Prestige skincare brands grew by 21%. And part of that growth has to do with a brand called Jack Black. It's a brand that was designed specifically to appeal to men. Blue colored tubes, labels that look like cigar brands. Even the name Jack Black sounds like a rugged dude in a bourbon appreciation society. The name, by the way, was picked before the actor, Jack Black was well known anyway, when Kern Dandurand founded the company with her friend Emily Dalton in 2000, almost no one wanted to touch Men's personal care, in part because it was, and still is dominated by the big players like Gillette.

0 (4m 49s):
But the other reason is that some of the prestige brands like Clinique and Shiseido already had men's skincare lines that weren't really flying off the shelves at department stores. But Kern had a hunch that if she could redesign men's skincare, make it appeal to men in say, Texas, she might be able to break through. And that's what Jack Black did. They would lure guys to department store counters and give them samples to take home. And over time it won them over. Early on, Curran recruited her husband, Jeff, to help with sales. And it took many years before they managed to eke out a small profit. Today, Jack Black is owned by Edgewell.

0 (5m 31s):
It's a company that also owns brands like Schick and Playtex. The co-founders sold the company in 2018 and made a hefty return, but we'll get there. Curran grew up in Florida and went to college at Vanderbilt. Jeff grew up in Indiana and went to college at the University of Mississippi. They met in Dallas after they both graduated. Jeff was working as an executive recruiter, and Keran was working in market research at Mary Kay Cosmetics.

4 (5m 59s):
I thought that Cosmetics would be fun and exciting and creative. I really wanted to be creative. I didn't have any experience in Cosmetics. I was a minimal user of Cosmetics at the time, but it had all the ingredients of a product category that I thought I would be good at and enjoy.

0 (6m 18s):
And explain what I mean for people who, who aren't familiar with it. Mary Kay, basically it's a old school direct to consumer company. Right. It's a direct marketing company where

4 (6m 28s):
Direct selling.

0 (6m 29s):
Exactly. Direct selling. And basically so they don't sell in stores. It's you've got an army of independent entrepreneurs, mostly women who sell Cosmetics to their friends door to door parties. Right, right.

4 (6m 43s):
And so you would, you have a hostess and you would sell to a group of the Hostess's friends. And I moved up very quickly, so it was very stimulating and challenging and rewarding for me. They were growing like crazy. So it was very fast-paced. Yeah, it was a good life. I had, I loved my job, but I had a good social life. I was dating a lot. I wasn't married, I didn't have kids. Didn't have that responsibility.

0 (7m 11s):
And at the same time, you decided to do a, an m b a, I guess, sort of at night or part-time.

4 (7m 17s):
Right at night. On and on the weekends. I, it took three years.

0 (7m 21s):
Okay. So Jeff, I know that, that you were in Dallas around the same time as current. Yeah. Working as an executive recruiter, correct.

6 (7m 28s):
Yeah.

0 (7m 28s):
Okay. And current, you're sort of working your way up at the time at Mary Kay. So tell me, how did the two of you meet? Like what do you remember?

4 (7m 36s):
Well, we met at the downtown Y M C A. I was doing aerobics. Right. It was back in the Jane Fondo aerobics days. Yep. He was playing basketball and he sent some friends over that were mutual friends that I knew, and they asked me if I would be interested in going out with him. and I said, well, what does he look like? And we peeked over the basketball court and they pointed to him, and I'm like, yeah, he's good looking. I'll go out with him.

6 (8m 3s):
And she started walking towards me. and I was just so nervous. I was just like, do you want to go out? And she said, yeah, I'll go out. and I just thought, man, this girl is just beautiful. And and you were

0 (8m 16s):
Like, you were like, I'm, I

6 (8m 18s):
Was just like thinking I'm going way, she's never gonna go for me. I'm way above my program here.

0 (8m 20s):
Yeah. It's outta my league. Yeah, yeah. Out

6 (8m 22s):
Of my league. I'm

0 (8m 23s):
Like a goofy dude playing basketball.

6 (8m 26s):
Yeah. I've got an afro and, you know, long hair. And it was

4 (8m 30s):
Totally well, and he had the super shiny suit on that Wow. Was like, too short. It's a

0 (8m 34s):
Bad style on top

4 (8m 35s):
Of it, like above his ankle. I'm like,

6 (8m 38s):
Oh, geez.

4 (8m 38s):
First impressions weren't so great.

0 (8m 41s):
But you, you agreed, you, you guys were on a date. And, and how did, how did that date go, Karin?

4 (8m 47s):
Well, I, I wasn't, I didn't think it went very well. He talked about himself the entire night. He went into minutia detail about how he keeps a index card filing system about all his recruiting prospects and how he works that system. He got up several times to go use the payphone. Wow. He never asked me. That's charming me, what my job was, where I was from. and I was

0 (9m 13s):
Like, this is promising.

4 (9m 14s):
Yeah. That's, it's gonna

0 (9m 15s):
Be a long and fruitful relationship.

4 (9m 17s):
Never going out with this guy again. That's one. And done. And,

0 (9m 20s):
And Jeff, how did, how did the day go for you?

6 (9m 22s):
Well, I was living with my brother at the time, and he asked me, he said, how did that day go? I said, it went great. I said, I'm gonna marry that girl.

0 (9m 33s):
Had you had insight into her thinking, you would never have thought that?

6 (9m 37s):
No, I would've been very disappointed for sure.

0 (9m 40s):
So Kern, why did you agree to go out with him a second time if he was boring and talking about index cards on the first date?

4 (9m 47s):
Well, he was so persistent, and this is a trait that really benefited us at Jack Black many years later. He did not take rejection. He didn't take no. And so finally he wore me down and I went out with him again. And he started being a little more interesting and having a conversa two-way conversation. Wow. And then he lied and he said, I want a trip to Mexico and I'd like to take you with me. And I said, no, about 10 times. Finally he wore me down. Wait,

0 (10m 17s):
Sorry, pause. Jeff, you made up a story about winning a contest.

6 (10m 22s):
I wouldn't say I lied. I'd say that I, I bended the truth a little bit. We were talking about a sales trip at our company. I just decided it was gonna be Cancun, Mexico and that I had won that trip.

0 (10m 36s):
Okay, I got you. You were gonna, you were gonna engineer this trip. So eventually you convinced her to go to Cancun with you, and you, you agreed, Kern you agreed to go.

4 (10m 46s):
Yes. And that was the turning point. Then I, I started to, you know, fall in love with him and things changed after that.

0 (10m 54s):
Alright. So you guys become a couple and then a few years later, I think you've been 1989, maybe you get married and start a family. and you were current, you were kind of climbing the ranks at Mary Kay. And tell me what you were doing there. Tell me about your job.

4 (11m 15s):
When we got married, I was director of marketing, and then a couple of years after we got married, we had our son. And then by the time we had our daughter, two years after that, I was executive VP of Global Marketing and Business Development. So I was over product development marketing for the entire world, many countries. And they were public when I joined. And the owners, which were Richard Rogers and Mary Kay Ash decided to take it private. Yep. And so that was, that was an important milestone for the company. And it also afforded me some phantom share options that they granted to key people, which I was later able to use to help fund Jack Black, startup

0 (12m 4s):
Keran. Tell me about the culture at Mary Kay. I mean, now you were sort of rising up the ranks and, and eventually as you're in your late thirties, you're getting into the executive suite there into late thirties, and you basically started there when you were 22. So, right. I grew, you, you know this, you were a lifer. I grew up there. Yeah. You were a lifer. Right. What was the culture like there?

4 (12m 27s):
Well, I think towards the end of the time I was there, it got very political, more bureaucratic. I felt like I was solving the same problems over and over. And then they brought in a new c e o that I didn't think had the chops or the experience or the knowledge of the business. and I just felt like it was time for me to move on.

0 (12m 52s):
Yeah. Did you have ambitions to be the c e O?

4 (12m 55s):
Yes.

0 (12m 56s):
Yeah.

4 (12m 57s):
I wouldn't want it to be given to me, but if I was the best candidate and I had earned it, yes. I wanted it.

0 (13m 3s):
When you decided to leave Mary Kay in 1998, that must have been a difficult decision. First of all. you know, you guys were not independently wealthy. I mean, Jeff had a job and money coming in, and you had some shares, but it wasn't enough to stop working for, for the rest of your life, like, no. So that must have been a difficult decision.

4 (13m 26s):
Yeah, and I was the major breadwinner, and Jeff was very distraught at my decision. and I, I pretty much decided I'm leaving, but I didn't know exactly what my next move was gonna be. I just knew I had to do it.

0 (13m 42s):
Jeff, when she made that decision, I mean, of course I'm assuming you were supportive of your husband, but were you worried about that?

6 (13m 51s):
Yeah, I was. And when she started talking about leaving, and, and she would tell me she was, you know, very upset and she didn't want to be there anymore. you know, I would try to talk her into staying and I, I was able to do that for maybe six to nine months before she finally left.

0 (14m 11s):
Right. And, and now Jeff, the pressure's a little bit on you because you're, you've got the sole paycheck coming in.

6 (14m 19s):
Well, and my job was straight commission. I was basically month by month having no idea what I was gonna get paid that month or make anything that month. Because

0 (14m 31s):
If you didn't place people in, in jobs, you didn't get anything. Correct. Yeah. So you were constantly having to hustle, constantly having to sell. Yeah. So that's going on. And keran, you're, you're out of Mary Kay and what did you start to do? What did you, I mean, did you start to have conversations with people? Did you just, or did you completely stop thinking about work for a while?

4 (14m 54s):
No, I, I just knew I was gonna keep working. It wasn't like I was gonna retire, but I was starting to realize, hey, you know, I don't wanna go back to the corporate world. I wanna do something different. I wanna be in control of my destiny. I wanna be in control of who I work with and how I run the business. And then the turning point was after I had resigned from Mary Kay, several of the key marketing people that worked for me also resigned. And one of those top performers was Emily Dalton, who eventually was the co-founder of Jack Black with us. And we had lunch and she said, why don't we start a business together?

4 (15m 36s):
Hmm. I'm like, well, what are you thinking? And she's like, well, it's gotta be in Cosmetics 'cause that's what we know. and I'm like, right, sure. And she's like, what about men?

0 (15m 46s):
What about men? She said,

4 (15m 48s):
Men. Yeah. and I. I'm like, what? Like

0 (15m 50s):
Cosmetics for men?

4 (15m 51s):
Yeah. I'm like, what? And I'm like, no, that is such a small non-existent market. 'cause people had tried it. Mary Kay tried it. It was like 0.1% of their business. And she's like, no, men are changing. Nobody's doing it. Somebody's gonna figure it out. Let's pursue it. Let's think about it.

0 (16m 12s):
So when the two of you started, 'cause it's exciting, that conversation, that first conversation gets your blood pumping and you're like, wait a minute. Maybe there's something here. But when you started talking, I mean, was the conversation around Cosmetics for men, like concealer and, you know, things like that for men? Or was it

4 (16m 31s):
Never It was never Cosmetics. It was skincare, grooming, head to toe care for your body.

0 (16m 40s):
So personal, like what we call personal care.

4 (16m 43s):
Yeah. Functional products like deodorant, antiperspirant, shave cream, but then moisturizer, sunscreen, a brand that was luxury because you had the mass market grooming brands like Gillette. And in the prestige market you had fragrances, but you did not have a complete line of skincare that was positioned at the luxury end of the market. Yeah. Targeting more affluent guys, luxurious textures that didn't exist.

0 (17m 15s):
So, what did you do? I mean, did you go home and, and start to talk to Jeff about this?

4 (17m 21s):
Well, Emily and I talked amongst ourselves extensively. We were both marketing people, so we're putting together tear sheets and imagery and crafting the brand personality. And we knew we had to do almost everything totally different than the women's brands were doing to break through to men. Our insight was that that's why it had failed before.

0 (17m 46s):
Right? 'cause it was like there was Clinique for men, right. and I remember, remember? But it and I think it's still around, but it just looks like Clinique for women. Right? It just says Clinique for men. Right. And that didn't quite work.

4 (17m 57s):
Totally. So they basically cost reduced their women's formulas, put it in stock gray packaging, and put it on the shelf with the women's stuff and never supported it. So we were busy brainstorming, okay, what is our strategy? How are we gonna make this work when so many others have failed?

0 (18m 17s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Curran comes up with the name Jack Black. And while Jeff takes their first display case for showcasing the product and winds up smashing it into bits, stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

Mercury (18m 37s):
90% of startups fail 90%, just 10 out of every 100. Last. In order to succeed, startups need grit, talent and the ability to perform at the highest level. That's where Mercury comes in. Mercury is banking engineered for the startup journey, a modern solution to help your company become the best version of itself. To eliminate the hurdles that come with traditional banking, to offer a product crafted to help you scale with safety and stability. To go beyond banking and provide access to the foremost investors, operators, and tools. Because when you can operate with competence, building your company becomes an art form. Join over 100,000 companies banking with mercury@mercury.com. Mercury is a financial technology company, not a bank. Banking services provided by Choice Financial Group and Evolve Bank and trust members F D I C.

NetSuite (19m 35s):
If you're an entrepreneur growing your own business, then you've probably experienced times when it took forever to close the books. Maybe you have too many manual processes and the things that you used to do in a day are now taking a week. If this is you, you should know these three numbers. 36,000, 25, 1 30 6,000. That's the number of businesses which have upgraded to NetSuite by Oracle 25. NetSuite turns 25 this year. That's 25 years of helping businesses do more with less close their books in days, not weeks. And drive down costs. And one, because your business is one of a kind. So you get a customized solution for all of your KPIs in one efficient system with one source of truth, manage risk, get reliable forecasts and improve margins. Everything you need all in one place. Right now. Download NetSuite's popular KPI checklist designed to give you consistently excellent performance absolutely free at NetSuite dot com slash built. That's NetSuite dot com slash built to get your own KPI checklist NetSuite dot com slash built.

0 (20m 46s):
One more thing before we get back to the show, please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. It's usually just at the top of the app and it's totally free. One more thing before we get back to the show, please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And it's totally free. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's the late 1990s and Kern Dandurand and our colleague from Mary Kay, Emily Dalton, our brainstorming ways to launch a brand of skincare products for men.

0 (21m 27s):
And it turns out that their first tough pitch meeting isn't with investors. Instead they have to convince Curran's husband, Jeff.

6 (21m 37s):
I was out playing golf one day and I came in through our garage to the Our Family Room and Kern and Emily had, you know, all the things that she talked about out on our tables. and I said, well what are you guys doing? And they said, well, we're thinking about starting a company. and I said, well what kind of company? And they said, well, we're gonna start a skincare company for men. I said, that's a crazy idea. you know, guys don't care about skincare. I said, where are you gonna get the money? They said, we're gonna use our money. and I was like, that's even a crazier idea. But then they spent a little bit of money on doing some market research where they talked with men about skincare, what they used, how they used it.

6 (22m 23s):
We got those reports back a couple weeks later and I was reading the reports one evening in bed and I thought, you know what, they're really onto something here.

4 (22m 33s):
Yeah. So we did focus groups and we basically presented our brand concept, which was rugged masculinity, but there was a luxury and a polish about it. Yeah. So we showed different pictures of celebrities, Tom Landry, Steve McQueen, you know, these are the kind of guys that this brand is for. And men really liked that. Hmm. One of our inspirations was to have our packaging kind of be inspired by liquor labels and cigar labels, which are kind of timeless and cool and interesting and they liked that. And so we got positive feedback. Yeah. I'd be receptive. I'd like to know more.

0 (23m 14s):
Alright, so you decide that you're gonna jump into this and tell me about how you're gonna finance it.

4 (23m 21s):
Well we, we did wanna raise money. We spent a lot of time putting together a very beautiful business plan.

0 (23m 27s):
This is you and Emily, me

4 (23m 29s):
And Emily, because

0 (23m 30s):
Jeff is still working. He's still recruiting. Yeah.

4 (23m 32s):
He's involved on the periphery. He's aware of it, but he's still working. you know, we had to have some income coming into our family. So we networked with people we knew that were connected to investors and we sent out a bunch of business plans. We got mostly crickets. Nobody even bothered to respond. The one response we did get was, I'll pass. Hmm. This won't work.

0 (23m 60s):
I'm just surprised because both of you had come to the table with such deep experience in the industry. It wasn't like you were just out of college. I know with this pie in the sky. Like,

4 (24m 11s):
And we were pretty cocky, you know, we're like, okay, this business plan's gonna wow 'em, they're gonna see the potential. Yeah. We just got total thumbs down, just not even the courtesy of a response. and I look back and I, I don't know exactly why we kept going. We were totally undeterred and we're just like, okay, well we'll fund it ourselves. And which in hindsight I'm so grateful. 'cause we had total control. We had no outside investors. and

0 (24m 40s):
You had a little bit of a nest egg from your time in Mary Kay. Correct. How much money did you have to use?

4 (24m 46s):
Close to half a million.

0 (24m 48s):
Was that pretty much everything you had?

4 (24m 50s):
Yeah.

0 (24m 51s):
Wow.

4 (24m 52s):
And Jeff at this point, Jeff got laid off from his recruiting job

0 (24m 57s):
At around this time.

4 (24m 58s):
Yes. So Jeff was on board. 'cause then there was three founders, three co-founders.

0 (25m 4s):
And Jeff, from what I understand, the company where you were working, I guess their, their business really started to slow down. And so there just, there just wasn't much recruiting for you to do at that point. And, and you were laid off. Right?

6 (25m 16s):
Correct. Yeah.

0 (25m 18s):
But, but can I just ask kinda where your head was at the time? Because I mean, you'd read the surveys and research that Kern and Emily had done and you thought that was encouraging, but but still, like you did not, now you didn't have a steady income and Kern was gonna put, put in all of your money into this business, which was a, a huge risk. I mean, were were you worried about that?

6 (25m 42s):
Yeah, I mean I would

0 (25m 43s):
Because you guys were like four, you know, 40 years. 40. Yeah. I mean that's, you

6 (25m 48s):
Know, well I thought the numbers, the business plan they put together was very achievable and I thought, gosh, we're gonna be killing it in five years. Hmm. 'cause the numbers supported a hugely successful company in five

0 (26m 1s):
Years. The projections. Yeah.

6 (26m 2s):
Projections.

0 (26m 3s):
Right. But the projections are numbers. Yeah. Yeah. The projections are projections. Yeah.

4 (26m 7s):
And we did, and we didn't make our projections.

6 (26m 10s):
We did, we didn't even come close to that. But the reality was that I just didn't think about us not being successful.

0 (26m 18s):
And it was, it was sort of like this incredible stroke of luck that you lost your job at this time. I mean, of course at the time I, I probably didn't feel that way. But Emily and Kern had expertise in marketing and in product, but not in sales. You were a sales guy. They needed a salesperson.

6 (26m 36s):
Yeah. and I, you know, I talked to Emily and Kern about helping them with sales and developing a database for us to contact golf country club buyers all over the country.

0 (26m 49s):
And these were for golf shops. You thought golf shops on golf courses. Yeah. This is smart because you, that's a tribe. And Jeff is a golfer. Right. Jeff, you're right. Good golfer. And so That's right.

6 (26m 59s):
Okay. And So I mean we really thought that this golf club strategy of distribution would be a very strong one. Yeah.

4 (27m 7s):
When we first started the company, we were more thinking we're gonna focus on sunscreens. Yep. But then we're also gonna add on things like shave cream and hand cream, lip balm. 'cause we're thinking, well the men, they're playing golf every weekend. They're not going to the mall, so let's reach them where they're going. We were trying to be innovative in our distribution.

0 (27m 30s):
And Kern was Emily at all nervous, like, Ooh, your husband coming in. Like, was there any any of that weirdness? Yeah.

4 (27m 37s):
Yeah. She had some advisors, some lawyers that were like, you don't want to get involved with a married couple. Like what if that goes off the rails? Yeah. And also, you know, with Jeff and I combined, if we voted against her, you know, we could go, Hey, we just want this whole thing for ourselves. We're

6 (27m 55s):
Fine

4 (27m 55s):
You out. you know, kicking you out. Yeah. But she trusted us and believed in the concept and she moved forward. But we did have to talk through that.

0 (28m 5s):
And tell me about the name. How did you, how did you, 'cause you didn't initially didn't have a name, you just said concept, right? Yeah. Tell me more about that. Well,

4 (28m 13s):
I actually came up with the name. I was on a flight, I had a yellow legal pad and I just wrote down Jack Black. I liked the strength of that name, the simplicity of it, the timelessness. It felt very masculine and it could have authority over a lot of different product categories. It wasn't so narrow like the art of shaving or your just body or you know, you're just sunscreen

0 (28m 41s):
And you wanted the name of a person because,

4 (28m 45s):
Because I wanted the guys to relate to it like it's their buddy. Yeah. And they're not embarrassed at all to say I used Jack Black. Yeah. Versus I use something that I can't pronounce or it's a French name. Yeah. Or it's a girl's name.

0 (28m 60s):
And Jack Black could be the person who who started the company like Vidal Sasone or, or you know, like it's Jack Black. It's my company. Just

4 (29m 8s):
A, a very strong, rugged masculine athletic guy.

0 (29m 14s):
You wanted like the, maybe this isn't the best analogy, but you kind of wanted the Marlboro man. Yeah,

4 (29m 22s):
Exactly. But not a smoker.

0 (29m 24s):
You said not smoking. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Not smoking. Yeah. And

4 (29m 26s):
The big potential was getting the vast numbers of heterosexual guys that cared about how they looked, that worked out, spent money on their clothes, tried to eat right. Get them to use skincare. Right. 'cause it totally makes sense.

0 (29m 42s):
Alright, so you have this name Jack Black. And by the way, just coincidentally, I mean this was kind of before the actor Jack Black really blew up, I think High Fidelity. I can't remember when that came out. That was his first

4 (29m 54s):
Before, shortly thereafter. Like Yeah, we had already trademarked the name and locked into that and designed the packaging when he had his first movie.

0 (30m 3s):
And God bless him. But he is not like the Marlboro man. He's, he's he amazing. I love him. He's, if he was here right now, I'd have a beer with him or a coffee, but he's not, I don't think of like rugged Americana when I think of the actor Jack Black.

4 (30m 16s):
No. We would not have ever picked him to be our, our

0 (30m 21s):
He's Kung Fu Panda. Kungfu

4 (30m 22s):
Panda. Yeah. Yeah. So there, there was confusion in the early days and, and people were thinking he owned the company and we'd get emails to our info at Get Jack Black, Hey Jack, I love your latest movie and I Love Your Line. And,

0 (30m 42s):
Alright, so you've got this name and this brand. Now let's talk about the colors and the label. What, what did you do for that?

4 (30m 50s):
Well this is was Emily's strength too. She was so good at design and it, everything was just meticulously crafted. The label and the overall design was more inspired by cigar labels and liquor, upscale craft liquor.

0 (31m 7s):
It's a diamond shaped right. Sticker on a, looks like a sticker, but Right. But was it diamond shaped logo on top of a solid colored and the color was blue.

4 (31m 18s):
Right. It was a royal blue. And at the time the men's lines were white, gray and brown.

0 (31m 27s):
The competing lines you're talking about. Yes. Competitors. Yeah. Were white, gray, and brown. Okay.

4 (31m 31s):
And we knew we had to have, you know, massive eye appeal to get men to notice it. So we liked the strength of the blue and the black together. Yeah. And then after we did the first focus groups, we didn't do any more research 'cause we didn't have any money. So we're just, this is all gut feel and instinct, but we settled on what we ended up going with and it's what we still market today.

0 (31m 55s):
Yeah. Alright, so you have the, the logo, you've got the name and you've got the money to get this, this out there. And I'm assuming you didn't build your own facility, you didn't have enough money for that. But there were contract manufacturers that you could presumably go to and pick out the ingredients and say, this is what we want. So did you already have relationships with some of those manufacturers through Mary Kay?

4 (32m 19s):
We did. And we went to three different contract manufacturers that we had worked with at Mary Kay. So we knew the people and they were willing to work with us. And we, all, the formulas were custom. We did test the formulas amongst different guys that we knew in the Dallas area and got really good feedback. So that was encouraging.

0 (32m 39s):
And what kind of scents, what kind of smells were you going for?

4 (32m 42s):
That's a good question. 'cause the aromas are so important for guys. Yeah. And what we had found in the market was either they were super heavily fragranced or they were just not fragranced at all. So we really took approach, the approach of light aromas, not fragrance. There was a lot of eucalyptus and peppermint, very fresh kind of tingly spa-like fragrances. And the other thing in the formulations that we focused on were the textures. Men really object to heavy, greasy kind of occlusive feelings. So the products were very sheer and light and didn't weigh heavy on the skin, which was important.

0 (33m 22s):
Alright. So 2000, you launched the brand. The idea is you're gonna be in golf stores, so you have, you know, a few hundred thousand dollars worth of product Right. That you've ordered. And what are you gonna do from there? Like, how are you gonna start, how are you gonna get people to notice? What, what, how did you decide to like launch this product?

4 (33m 41s):
Well we, we decided to debut at the 2000 p g A show in Orlando, which is a massive show. Like 30,000 people attend.

0 (33m 50s):
This is like presumably one of the biggest golf trade

4 (33m 53s):
Shows. It's in the world. Biggest in the world. In

0 (33m 55s):
The world. Okay. So you're preparing for this show and you know, you need to get the word out. There probably aren't gonna be too many personal care products. Right. Shown there. So, what did you do?

4 (34m 6s):
So Jeff had meticulously compiled a list of, what was it, like 5,000?

6 (34m 13s):
Yeah. It was about 5,000 golf country clubs, resort clubs all over the country. And then when I got laid off, I just spent my whole day calling country clubs and making sure that the database that we were putting together had the right address and the right buyer's name, email address, follow up, phone number, and then the mailer. Right, Kern?

4 (34m 37s):
Yeah. So we designed this mailer that featured our product line, beautiful photography. And we mailed it out to all these 5,000 buyers that Jeff had carefully researched. And we didn't design the mailing panel correctly and the post office read the return address as the ship to address. So all of them came like within two weeks later, three weeks later, like right before the show, we get 'em all back to the executive suite.

0 (35m 10s):
So the mailers never got there to anybody. Never

4 (35m 12s):
Got there. Wow. So like nobody knew we were there. Yeah. So that was the first sign. It was going to be an interesting show.

0 (35m 21s):
So you get to Orlando, this p g h trade show, you've got a booth there and you show up and tell me about the show.

4 (35m 28s):
Well, it's, it's massive. There's just people everywhere. We had terrible location for our booth. We're in the very last row at the very end of that row in the back corner. Not even by a bathroom or anything. We had no traffic coming by. So we would kind of walk the aisles and grab people and bring 'em back and put the product on their hands. And,

0 (35m 51s):
And what did your display look like? I mean, did you have all the products in, you know, all labeled and everything?

4 (35m 57s):
Well, we, we didn't have production yet. Okay. So we had lab samples, which were basically white tubes that were hand crimped by the lab.

0 (36m 5s):
Okay.

4 (36m 6s):
And then we had this oh seven foot tall, very beautiful wood floor standing fixture, the laser cut logo. We spent a ton of money on it. And our idea was, this is the display you're gonna use in your golf shop and it'll hold $4,000 worth of Jack Black product and doesn't it look beautiful?

0 (36m 26s):
And you were gonna provide that to whoever. If

4 (36m 28s):
You ordered 4,000, you could get the free display,

0 (36m 32s):
The wood display. Okay.

4 (36m 34s):
So first of all, when we finally got a few people back there, we would, you know, take the tubes and get ready to let them feel the product and the crimps would bust and shoot out the other end all over their shirts. So the crimps were busting everywhere. People would look at that display and just like, go on, what are you thinking? We don't need, we can't put that in our shop. We would never sell that much pro sunscreen product or shave cream. Hmm. They just weren't interested. They were there to look at the latest equipment, the latest golf balls, range finders

0 (37m 10s):
Hat clothing.

4 (37m 12s):
Yeah. They just, the category. They're just like, I don't care. Yeah. I don't get it. And so finally Jeff rounded up seven of his good friends in the Dallas Fort Worth area that were head pros at the various country clubs and got brought them over and we got a sale, probably a pity purchase from each of them. So it was a big, a big fail.

0 (37m 41s):
So, alright. So this, I mean, you had put, your entire strategy was this tribe of people, right. Golfers and golf courses. And did you ask yourself, what did I get wrong? What, what, what happened here?

4 (37m 57s):
Yeah, I think we were starting to go, Hmm, you know, we might need to expand and go to traditional retail. But we, after we left, I will say Jeff took that floor standing seven foot wooden display. He cracked it into a million pieces and put it in the dumpster. He was so mad. And then we went to the Orlando airport, we went to Chili's to have dinner before our flight. And Jeff's like, this isn't working. We gotta pull the plug and we gotta go get real jobs.

0 (38m 32s):
Wow. Jeff, you're the guy who's like, was persistent in know, in pursuing Kern, I never taking no for an answer. Know you're the guy that, and she was like, no, I'm not gonna marry you. I'm not gonna date you. And you're like, no, come on. You are the one who says, let's ba let's pack, pack this in.

6 (38m 47s):
I, I was so discouraged by the lack of sales at that show and Kern looked at me and said, no, when we get back to Dallas, you gotta get on the phone and start making some calls to open up accounts. We have $450,000 worth of inventory coming in in March and April and we need to start selling that So I thought, okay, you know, I've got a really strong database here. We, we did meet some people that seemed interested and found a couple independent reps. and I started talking to those reps about carrying Jack Black. And then I just got on the phone and cold called all day.

6 (39m 27s):
Literally all day.

0 (39m 29s):
So you needed a different approach. You were not gonna build a scalable brand through golf shops.

4 (39m 37s):
Yeah. We didn't abandon golf, but, and Jeff continued to build golf and we opened some really amazing accounts, which, you know, a few months later led to a great PR mention. Hmm. So we opened, was it Austin Country Club? Jeff?

6 (39m 53s):
Yeah. Austin Country Club.

4 (39m 54s):
Austin Country Club. The pro told Jeff that Matthew McConaughey was using our products and loved him.

0 (40m 3s):
How he, he was buying it at the shop there? Yes.

6 (40m 5s):
In the Golf Pro shop because

4 (40m 7s):
He lives

0 (40m 7s):
In Austin. So they said the Golf Pro there says Matthew McConaughey likes your stuff. Right. But you didn't know that for sure.

4 (40m 14s):
We just heard it through the Pro. Okay. So this was at the height of InStyle, the InStyle magazine. And there was always celebrity features about what the celebs are using. So Emily was based in New York and she was really hitting the streets, you know, talking to the editors, trying to get some ink on Jack Black. And she landed a meeting with In Style and she shared the Matthew McConaughey tidbit and they published it in September. Just

0 (40m 41s):
A photo of him and then saying, Hey, he likes Jack Black products.

4 (40m 44s):
Right. And then they had a picture of the beard loop and the lip balm.

0 (40m 48s):
Wow.

4 (40m 49s):
And so that led to specialty stores calling us. We actually got inbound calls from people interested in Yeah. Taking our line, which was a first,

0 (41m 0s):
Here's my question about that. She could have been totally lying. Like she could have said, Hey, Matthew McConaughey. Right. Or Jack Nicholson. And they, they were just like, yeah, great, we'll we'll run a story. Like Right. I'm amazed about that. I mean 'cause and Matthew McConaughey probably doesn't read it in style, but like he could have been flipping through it at the grocery store. If he goes and had been like Matt Jack Black, first of all, what is Jack Black? Or he might've been like, how do they even know this? Like Right, right. They just ran with it.

4 (41m 28s):
Well that was back in the day, back in 2000. That doesn't happen anymore. Does

0 (41m 33s):
Did not happen anymore. Yeah.

4 (41m 34s):
You get sued. Yeah. Yeah. So the magazines, you know, they carefully do their diligence and all that, but back then it was very, very common.

0 (41m 43s):
Alright, so you have Matthew McConaughey maybe, or maybe not using the product, but doesn't matter. You're getting attention and you, but you also knew through the disaster at Orlando that you had to probably start to look at retail shops. Right. And, and So I. Guess the first big store was a, a Dallas department store. Stanley Korsch? Is that what it's called? Yeah. So tell me about, about that approach. How did you get in there?

4 (42m 11s):
Well, they just have one location, but it's super special store, very upscale, great selection of merchandise. And the buyer granted me a meeting and I presented the line. At that point, it was still in lab samples 'cause we didn't have production. He took everything home and he tried it. And he called back very quickly and he's like, I love your formulas, we'll take it. And we're like, oh my gosh. Like that's great. And they immediately did well with it. They had good sell through and were reordering. And so we started really to focus on more traditional retailers, but to not abandon golf either though.

0 (42m 51s):
And once you got into the stores Right, you still, the problem that you have was not, was far from being solved. Which is the behavioral change because, you know, it reminds me, we did a story on the show about Guayaki Yerba mate. Right. And, and it's a big company now, but like, when they first started trying to get people to drink it, they're like, this is, this tastes awful. It's bitter. What is this? And it took them like 20 years to, you know, to kind of introduce it to people. It's still growing. But you're in a, in Stanley Korshe. And then what, like, don't you have to like show people how to use it and get men to start using it?

4 (43m 29s):
Well they had really great salespeople that did a lot of consultation and personal service. Yeah. But what we, when our eyes were really opened was when we opened Nordstrom. We pitched the guy in Dallas. His name was Mark Lance. He said he liked the formulas, but he wasn't sure it would work. you know, because retailers are very protective of their valuable real estate on the floor and they gotta make sure you're gonna sell. Yeah. And so men's skincare was absolutely not proven. And it was very risky for them. Finally, he's like, okay, we'll bring you into Stonebriar. We'll test it.

0 (44m 8s):
Stonebriar is a, is a, where is that?

4 (44m 11s):
It's in Frisco. Okay. That's where the Dallas Cowboys headquarters are. It's like a boom. Yeah. Booming town. So they invited us to come to the grand opening of the store. It was the last minute invite. We could not get a babysitter. And so me, Jeff, and our two little kids went to the opening and I kind of manned our product. And Jeff followed the, chased the kids around the mall. So I didn't sell anything, but I did see this woman making sale after sale. Her name was Elaine Syke. And she's the best salesperson I've ever laid eyes on.

4 (44m 52s):
Wow. And at the end of the night, I went up to her and I introduced myself and we started talking and I'm like, well, we just started this line and would you be willing to work a few hours for us? And she, she agreed to give us five hours a week. And she sold like crazy. She would pull guys over, start to talk to them, put the product on their skin, let 'em feel it, let 'em smell it. And they would buy. So here's this, this model of how you educate guys and they would come back and reorder.

0 (45m 29s):
What would she sell them? Shaving cream or,

4 (45m 31s):
Well, our strategy was guys understand shave product, you hook 'em with just a superior shave cream. And that was our hero product. It was called Beard Lube. Right. It was very unique. It was translucent. It had a lot of natural oils in it. Had some skincare ingredients in it. So it was a great shave. And it left your skin feeling really soft and silky.

0 (45m 53s):
That was the gateway. The the shaving

4 (45m 55s):
Cream. That was the ga. Yes. Okay. You would talk about the beard lube. They would say buy it. You'd give them a sample of the face buff, which is your cleanser and your scrub. Use this in the shower before you shave it, exfoliates gets you a closer shave. And then you give 'em a sample of the post-shave cooling gel after you're done shaving. Put this on to cool the skin and gently hydrate and So. I saw at that moment the power of what a great salesperson can do at the store level. What we had to invest in. Yeah. You had to pull the guy in. 'cause he's not just walking up going, I'm looking for grooming products.

4 (46m 36s):
He's walking by and you're literally chatting him up and pulling him from what he's doing and bringing him over to your area. Yeah. And that's what we had to do. It was very time consuming and labor intensive. But you had to do that. That's how you get the behavior change. Educating these guys one by one

0 (46m 59s):
When we come back after the break, how Jack Black shows up at Cowboys Stadium and the Super Bowl. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This. When we think of sports stories, we tend to think of tales of epic on the field. Glory or incredible against all odds comeback stories. But the new podcast Sports Explains the world, brings you some of the wildest and most surprising sports stories you've never heard. Take the teenager who wrote a Wikipedia page that got a young athlete signed to a million dollar deal, or a tennis pro who came at a retirement to fight off an invasion.

0 (47m 38s):
What about the Ugandan national basketball coach who was really an undercover agent for the C I A from award-winning journalists across the globe? Sports explains, the world goes beyond leagues and stats to share stories that will redefine your understanding of sports and their impact on the world. To hear these and other incredible stories from the wide world of sports, listen to Sports Explains the world on the Wondery app or wherever you get your podcasts. You can listen to Sports Explains the World ad-Free on Wondery Plus get started with your free trial at Wondery dot com slash plus.

0 (48m 22s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 2002. Two years after launching Jack, Black and Curran, Jeff and Emily are shifting their initial strategy from selling to men in golf shops, to selling to men in department stores. And they're starting to get some traction hitting $2 million in annual sales. By the way, your projections, right? Is that what you had anticipated for 2002?

4 (48m 49s):
Oh, from the original? No, we were way under, no way, way under. I mean that business plan was bogus and off target from day one.

6 (48m 59s):
We may have had at the end of year two, $8 million in sales in our projections. It wasn't even close.

0 (49m 6s):
And that's because you overestimated initially how big the market was going to be at that point.

4 (49m 11s):
Yeah. And how, how much golf shops would sell.

0 (49m 16s):
So let me ask about your relationship during this time because it's, you know, yes you're growing and there it looks good, but still, you know, you're not, I mean, bringing $2 million in a year, you guys were not making, you're not profitable. and I have to assume you guys had almost no salary at that point because you had to spend money on product. What was your relationship like? I mean, was it stressful being married, raising kids, and running the business? Like did you guys, did you guys fight?

4 (49m 45s):
Yes, it was very, very stressful and there was a lot of tension, a lot of pressure. We didn't pay ourselves for maybe four years, pay ourselves at all. And you know, you're just, you're struggling to survive and your family's all in on it, right? Yeah. So we got through it, but you've gotta know what you're getting into. I advise other couples that are thinking about starting a business. It, it's gonna really strain your marriage because you could disagree at work and have a heated discussion. If it's not your husband, you come home and you don't have to see that person that you just had that big fight with.

4 (50m 27s):
But when you're working with them there, there they are. And you're still fighting when you get home from work and then you're fighting when you're back on the job and there's no escape.

0 (50m 38s):
Jeff, did you, I mean it sounds like you really, Kern was the c e o that, that you defer to her leadership? Or, or did you, sometimes, I dunno, medal is maybe not the right word. Did you sometimes question her leadership?

6 (50m 51s):
No, I never really questioned her, her leadership or Emily's, I mean, they were just, in my opinion, extremely talented and I mean. I will say that in my annual physical, my, my doctor who I'd known for many years asked me how things were going. I said, you know what, it's pretty tough. I said, it's things at home are are rough because, you know, we're, we're working together and we're trying to build this business. And he said, yeah, had you ever thought about, you know, going to therapy? Hmm. and I said, yeah, you know, I, I have. And he gave me the name of a therapist and I Kern and I went to, you know, for an hour visit. And you know, I thought it was pretty helpful.

6 (51m 31s):
And she said, you know, your wife is really, really smart and you need to stop arguing about the little things and save your ammunition for something that really matters. and I stopped that that day. The next day I just, I just said, I'm not gonna do, I'm not gonna keep arguing about this little stuff. And then a couple years later when we started, you know, really doing better and started paying ourselves more, I mean that helped a lot. Those two things helped a lot.

0 (52m 7s):
I think you guys started to break even, or maybe even turn a slight profit in your maybe third or fourth year. Your sales were about $5 million that year. Did that ease the pressure a little bit?

4 (52m 21s):
Yeah. I think you could breathe a little easier, but I was still super conservative fiscally like yeah, we still didn't have a lot of money to spend. And So I was very tight-fisted about what we spent our money on. And we had, we had a saying that we're fabulously frugal, try to make it positive. you know, we didn't have, we had really crappy offices. No trappings and Flow coach stayed in budget hotels and we would not spend money unless we knew it was gonna drive sales because we were not out of the woods yet.

0 (52m 59s):
Yeah, well

6 (53m 0s):
And we were operating with a line of credit at that point that was expanding. you know, I think initially it was two 50, then it was 500, then it became a million dollars and that was within five, six years of starting the business. And of course there weren't any bankers that were gonna give you that money without a personal guarantee. So we'd have to take our stock portfolio and personally guarantee that to have the line of credit.

0 (53m 29s):
Yeah. What about what, I mean, of course you're still small, even as you grew, you know, you're growing every year, which was impressive. I mean by, you know, I think 2011 you hit $35 million in sales. So 11 years in, but still small compared to the overall Cosmetics industry. Did that in a sense shield you from potential threats and competitors? Or did you already start to see the Sharks circling saying, wait a minute, maybe they're onto something? Oh

4 (53m 59s):
Yeah, it was just hyper immediately competitive. Yeah. Oh my gosh. You had everybody from the big companies to the little startups to everybody in between. Because in the industry, everybody's look, you know, it's pretty quick to copy something that's working well. So there was a lot of competitors and it was even more brutal than the women's because the total size of the market was so much smaller. The space you were granted on the floor was smaller, but yet there were so many more people wanting to get a piece of it. And some of them could be ruthless. They'd try to steal your employees, steal your customers, you know, you'd have your space all set up and the next day you'd go into work and it was gone 'cause your competitor moved it.

4 (54m 45s):
So there was just a lot of battles on the store floors.

0 (54m 49s):
One of the things that you guys did, and I think it goes back to the, to the sort of the golf strategy was you started to partner with N F L teams. Like you would put your product in locker rooms so players could use them. You parted with the Dallas Cowboys. I mean this is, you know, you're in Dallas, America's team, right? And did that move the needle? I mean, being in, in luxury suites at Cowboys Stadium? Yeah. Or being in the locker rooms at at at, you know, N F L locker rooms. Did that really, does that really matter? Does that make a difference?

4 (55m 18s):
Well, it was hard to quantify, but I do feel like it was a game changer for us. We first got into the N F L program through the Cowboys, the Joneses were building the new stadium, and it was gonna be the absolute epitome of luxury stadiums. And Jerry Jones used Jack Black and we were invited to meet with them about putting our products in the luxury suites and we would co-brand the products. So we'd change our labeling to include the cowboy star. And then we would also in return for providing the products, we negotiated advertising in the stadium and on their website.

4 (56m 1s):
And also we would do gifting to VIPs, which is a great way to sample. Yeah. And you know, you're creating this relationship with the guy's favorite football team and That'ss. That's a good, good combination for us and it's positive aura for our brand.

0 (56m 21s):
If Tony Romo is using Jack Black, it's good enough for me. Yeah, yeah.

4 (56m 25s):
Or like the Cowboys, like Jack. Black. Wow. I'm gonna check that out. Yeah, so the Super Bowl, I think it was in 2011, was at the Cowboys Stadium and all our products were in the suites. And all the other N F L team owners and executives of course came to the game and they saw our products and we started getting so many phone calls from the other teams, we wanna put your products in our suites, we want it to be co-branded, you know, with our Packers logo, with the Bears, whatever. And we reached so many men that way that we wouldn't have otherwise reached.

0 (57m 3s):
I mean the growth really was organic, right? I mean you just kind of cash flowed grew. I mean, once you were in Sax Fifth Avenue and Bloomingdale's and these big, big retailers, was it still a hustle? Did Jeff, did you still have to like call people up and try to open accounts? Or did it get significantly easier?

6 (57m 25s):
Well, the cold calling was obviously heavy for the first six or seven years. And then from that point forward, you know, I dealt with our independent sales reps who sold to gift stores, specialty shops, spas, men's clothing stores. I mean, it was a whole different category that no one else was, was going after either. We had, you know, at one point, maybe six or 700 independent retail type stores that were selling Jack, Black and I dealt with all the reps that were helping us open those types of accounts.

0 (57m 60s):
When did you feel Corinn that you were like, okay, I think we have crossed the threshold like now. Now we have done enough work where there's momentum in people understanding what these products are, how to use them.

4 (58m 17s):
I think it would be, you know, around 2011, 12, so 10, 12 years into it, we're with the N F L teams. We have that great sports program. Our brand awareness was growing. We were number one with almost all our retailers. We had 35% share in the luxury category and we were the dominant leader. But I never felt like I could rest because there was always somebody trying to take you out. Yeah. There's so many competitors. And so even to the point where we sold the company every day, I was still like fighting the good fight.

0 (58m 58s):
Let me ask you about that because you did of course. 20 18, 18 years in, you were acquired by Edgewell and there's, they're pretty big personal care company. They paid you a significant amount of money for the brand and I, imagine 18 years in, you guys were exhausted. And so had you been looking for an out at that point?

4 (59m 21s):
Yes. We actually at that point in, started a process with investment bankers to pursue selling the company. Emily had two small, they were in junior high, high school and she was ready to just spend time with her kids. We'd worked so hard. Jeff was ready. I was getting there. I was the last one to finally say, Hey, you know, it's time to retire for Jeff and I. Everything we had was tied up in the company and so we had little liquidity at that point. So we just felt like it was time and we had grown the business to a good point and we had a great story to tell.

0 (1h 0m 3s):
And did you ever think about, I'm sure you were approached by like private equity groups or like, look, we'll buy a chunk of it. You can take money off the table and let's make this even bigger. Right.

4 (1h 0m 13s):
They would go, you have two bites of the apple. We weren't interested in that, in that option, but we, we did talk to some private equity groups as part of the process

6 (1h 0m 25s):
Prior to the actual hiring of an investment banker. Two years prior to that, we were approached by a very significant player in the category. They made us an unsolicited non-binding offer that was, you know, very nice offer. And we spent nine months with them giving them every detail of our business. They knew that they were the only ones bidding for our business. We, you know, provided them with details on new products, on how we sold on the sales that every store that we sold to. And two weeks prior to closing, they came into Dallas.

6 (1h 1m 6s):
We met at the Four Seasons Hotel. They probably had 40 people. I think we had five or six. And they said, you know, that offer we made you nine months ago, non-binding. Well, our board can't get to that number. Oh,

0 (1h 1m 19s):
Wow.

6 (1h 1m 20s):
I mean they basically, the offer that we made we're not that number's off the table. you know, we asked them, well what, what do you have in mind? I mean, what, you know, the number's X what's the new number? And they were, they just wouldn't give us a number. They just said, you're not gonna be happy with it. And we were like, well, what is it? And then I asked them, I said, well, how much do you think you can grow our business by? We only think we can grow your business by 15 to 20%. Hmm. I said, we can grow our business 15 to to 20% without you. Wow. And it ended, I mean, it basically just stopped that day.

0 (1h 1m 53s):
And this is after you'd opened your entire data room for nine

6 (1h 1m 55s):
All online books For nine, yeah, for

0 (1h 1m 56s):
Nine months. And what year was this?

6 (1h 1m 58s):
2015. 2016.

0 (1h 2m 0s):
Wow. So they had, they had new lawyers, trade secrets.

6 (1h 2m 3s):
They had everything. They

4 (1h 2m 4s):
Had our formulas, everything. Ooh. Yeah. So we learned a very painful lesson.

6 (1h 2m 10s):
Yeah.

4 (1h 2m 11s):
You need to have competition in your process.

0 (1h 2m 14s):
That must have been quite devastating. It

6 (1h 2m 16s):
Really was.

4 (1h 2m 17s):
Oh yeah. And we did not see it coming 'cause they were just whining and dining and sweet talking and,

0 (1h 2m 24s):
And it was non-binding so they didn't have to Yeah. Right. Pay a penalty or anything. Didn't have

6 (1h 2m 28s):
Zero. So we waited a couple years before we hired a, a banker to, you know, do it the right way. Do

0 (1h 2m 34s):
It all again. Yeah. You reportedly the Edgewell paid about a hundred million dollars for the brand. I don't know if that's accurate or not. That's been reported, but still amazing. An amazing exit for a, a brand that you started, you know, in, in 2000. I mean, once that happened, I think Jeff, you left right? You sort of retired.

6 (1h 2m 57s):
I stayed for one year. Okay. I agreed to stay on for a year to help with the transition.

0 (1h 3m 4s):
Emily left right away, or she left pretty soon after, right? Yeah,

4 (1h 3m 8s):
She left in, we closed in January and she left in December.

0 (1h 3m 12s):
And you ke and you stayed for a while as an advisor even up until like 20, 21 I think, right? Yeah,

4 (1h 3m 18s):
I was worried I would be bored 'cause I've always been pretty much a workaholic. But when I did retire and I kind of weaned myself from work 'cause gradually reducing my hours that I was working after we sold the company. But I never had any girlfriends when I was working. 'cause it was just so all consuming. You had your work and then your kids So, I never had any friends. And now I've got time to have some good girlfriends, which I, I'm enjoying. So it's been good. I

0 (1h 3m 49s):
Mean, when you guys think about this journey and, and you know, everything that led up to it, how much of it do you attribute to, to your work? And how much do you think has to do with getting lucky? I mean, I I've heard some luck in there. I mean, I think the fact that you were, you got laid off. Jeff was a little lucky. I mean, I felt that at the time, but yeah. What, what, what do, what do you think, Jeff, first, first to you? I,

6 (1h 4m 10s):
I believe in luck. I'm a lucky guy. I was lucky to have met Curran. She changed my life. We were lucky to have Emily as our business partner. I think we were lucky to open some of the retailers that we opened. But also, you know, we worked extremely hard. you know, it seemed like we were always working. It, it just seemed like for 18 years there, that, that we didn't have a lot of downtime, but we were lucky. I think we were very lucky.

4 (1h 4m 41s):
But if we hadn't been resilient and pivoted when we needed to and worked hard, then I think we wouldn't have capitalized on the luck. So you gotta have, I guess all of it firing on all cylinders.

0 (1h 4m 58s):
That's Kern and Jeff Dandurand, co-founders of Jack Black, by the way, probably not a huge surprise here, but one of the company's most loyal customers is Jeff.

6 (1h 5m 10s):
I am not lying. I use probably 14 or 15 Jack Black products every day. Oh my gosh. Every day. And when I take a shower, I use the body wash, I use the shampoo, I use the conditioner, I use the face buff in the shower.

0 (1h 5m 22s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. I use after, please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast apps. You never miss a new episode of the show. And as always, it's totally free. This episode was produced by Casey Herman with music composed by Rum Arablouei. It was Edited by Neva Grant with research help from Katherine Sypher. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Sam Paulson, Ramel Wood, Alex Chung, Kerry Thompson, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, and Carla Estevez. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This Hey Prime members.

0 (1h 6m 7s):
You can listen to How I Built This early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

1 (1h 6m 34s):
We can't see tomorrow, but we can hear it. And it sounds like a wind farm powering homes across the country. We are bridging to a sustainable energy future. Working today to ensure tomorrow is on Enbridge life takes energy.