0 (0s):
The following message comes from NPR sponsor Phreesia patients want a safe, secure, and convenient healthc ！ are experience. Phreesia has tools for contactless check-in flexible patient payments, and more learn more@phresia.com slash NPR. Hey everyone. So what kind of person has the nerve to build an airline? I mean, think of a complexity, the high-maintenance airplanes, the endless regulations, oil prices, bad weather, cutthroat competition, angry passengers, but today's guest David Neeleman is so passionate about airlines that he's launched five of them.

0 (46s):
His best known airline is jet blue. And a few years ago, he told me the whole incredible story of how it came about here it is. And I hope you enjoy

1 (59s):
Her. Invited me to Ruth Chris steakhouse in Dallas and said, this isn't gonna work. You know, you're driving everybody insane in this company. And he reached across the table and held my hands. I was crying and he said, everybody, even your, even the people that your biggest supporter said, I, you had to go

0 (1m 22s):
Robin PR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movement s

2 (1m 30s):
They built. <inaudible> I'm guy

0 (1m 35s):
Roz and on the show today, how one man reinvented airline travel again and again, and again, to create one of the most innovative carriers, us jet blue. So a few days ago, I flew on a budget airline, you know, it's public radio guys. Anyway, this was a short flight. So no big deal. I know what to expect. Non-refundable ticket middle seat in the back of the plane. I board last, no recline, no leg room, no TV, no snacks. Print my ticket out at home. And it's fine. That's the trade off. As long as I get to where I need to go safely, I'm more or less fine.

0 (2m 18s):
But once in a while, the route I'm taking is one that jet blue flies and the price is the same. And with that ticket, I get a seat that does recline a snack and a beverage, really nice flight attendance, and even a little TV, which is why when jet blue debuted in 2000, it made such a big impact. It was a discount carrier that offered stuff. The more premium airlines were already offering, or in some cases not offering the customers noticed pretty fast in less than a year. Jet blue flew more than a million passengers and quickly built a super loyal following. And that was the vision of JetBlue's founder, David Neeleman to build a more humane airline.

0 (3m 6s):
But the thing is David's passion for a better flying experience actually came from his own background. His own faith David's family is Mormon and the Mormon faith emphasizes civility and every practicing Mormon is expected to go on a mission when they're in their late teens or early twenties. And back in the 1950s David's father was sent on a missionary trip to Brazil. He loved it so much. He went back as an adult and started a family there, which is why David was born in Sao Palo in 1959. And when he turned five David's dad moved the family back to salt lake city, where being a Mormon was just kind of baked into everyday life, pretty

1 (3m 49s):
Conservative place. I mean, it was obviously a place that was founded by Brigham young and as they started the church, they moved across the country. And my mom's side of the family were, were pioneers. They came in covered wagons, my grandmother, seven generations back a lady by the name of Sally Hewlett, the family stories that she was given a book of Mormon by Joseph Smith himself, who was the founder of the, of our church. And the lot of people have those stories. I mean, almost everyone you, you meet in salt lake has a story of somebody who either crossed the Plains or crossed the ocean, or, you know, had a grandmother die on the Plains. It was just kind of part of our Laura of our religion and, and these pioneer families.

0 (4m 30s):
And as a kid, were you, were you entrepreneurial in any way? Did you like wash cars or walk dogs or anything like that?

1 (4m 40s):
My grandfather had a few grocery stores, small grocery stores. He called them miniature markets that were like fast food. And we, he would make the sandwiches in the back and bring in fresh donuts and, you know, kind of a precursor to maybe a seven 11, but everything was done fresh. So when I was nine years old, I got a job there, standing on a milk crate, working the cash register, checking out people, you know, counting money. And so that was kind of my introduction to business. And my grandfather was a really kind of old school. He was born in salt lake, but his whole family came from Holland. And so, you know, he, he paid me 50 cents an hour, which kind of made me mad cause everyone else made a dollar an hour. He expected more out of me than the other kids.

1 (5m 20s):
And he was really focused on customer service. If somebody, if there was something in the store that somebody wanted and that we didn't have it, he'd run out the back door and run over to Safeway and buy it and bring it back for him. You know, he was, he never wanted to lose a customer. You know, I, I looked back on those years and I didn't get to participate as much in high school and do things as sports has. Maybe it was, I would have wanted to do. But, you know, I think it probably taught me a lot about a lot of things.

0 (5m 45s):
Was church, a big sort of center of life for you as a kid that go into going to services and going on Sunday and things like that. Yeah,

1 (5m 53s):
I always was. I mean, it was three hours on a Sunday and it's a cultural thing, you know, I think as much as a religious thing. So you have both elements, you don't know your neighbors, you talk to them at church on Sunday, you have a boundaried areas in our church where if you lived in a certain geographical area, then you have to go at this church at this time. And when it was my time to serve a mission, there wasn't even a question. It was, you know, I'm going to go on a mission, just like my dad did.

3 (6m 20s):
How were you as a student? Horrible.

1 (6m 24s):
I was, you know, I, it's not for lack of not wanting to be. I just, you know, it was something I discovered later in life, but I had a raging case of add, and I know everyone likes to say they do today, but it was really something that was tough for me because I, you know, I was, I was gregarious and I could get my way through things, but I couldn't read. I mean, it was really hard for me to read and, you know, I would read a page in a book and I could tell you everything that I thought about why I was reading that page, except for what was on that page. You couldn't concentrate in the book now, you know, it was really hard. And I mean, if you asked me today, what was my favorite book I read in high school? I couldn't tell you. Cause I don't recall even reading a single book in high school, you know, I got through it, you know, with pretty well decent grades, but did horribly on the act.

1 (7m 12s):
I think I got like an 18 or something. And I think my reading was below 10. My counselor said, I don't know how you got a score. The SLO had you just marked C on every answer, you would have gotten a higher score. And then what you did, it's like he tried to get it's like he tried to get the lowest score possible. And this is what I learned about add afterwards, if it was something I was interested in, I would devour it. But if it was just something that I wasn't interested in, I just couldn't focus on it. It was really hard. This is

0 (7m 39s):
It. And this is like the seventies when people weren't really diagnosing add it. Wasn't like a common thing that people talked about

1 (7m 47s):
Now. It wasn't. And it wasn't until years later when my little brother have a little brother that is 18 years younger than I am almost almost 19 years that he was diagnosed with it. And my mom, she read this book called driven to distraction by Dr. Hallowell. And my mom sent me the book and she said, you know, mark has been diagnosed with this. I think you might have this. And it was the, you know, I, of course didn't read the book, but I did read, there was, there was 21 characteristics of somebody who has add, and I read those 21 things and I just put the book down and I just like got tears in my eyes and I go, wow, this is me.

0 (8m 31s):
So I guess you were, you were 19 when you went on your, your mission for the church and, and basically you are sort of assigned to a country to go and, and do mission work. Right? Correct.

1 (8m 46s):
And I was so fortunate to be, to be assigned to Brazil. And I think part of the reason is because I was born there and I had a Brazilian passport. So it was just, it's just kind of random. You just put it in and you received your call and your call says, you're going, you're going to Brazil.

0 (9m 3s):
What, what was your impression of it? I mean, what, what, what stood out to you when you got there?

1 (9m 8s):
You know, I had been there several times and I was, but my dad being a journalist and being a foreign correspondent and he knew all the rich and famous. And so every time we would go visit Brazil, we were hanging out in the sports clubs or hanging out at the beach, we're going to the best restaurants and, you know, everything was just like, wow, Brazil is a cool place. Everything's so amazing. But you know, when you're a missionary, you don't hang out with those rich people. They've, they've already got their gods, you know, it's their money or, you know, or whatever, they don't, they're not humble enough to change. It's really the people that are really downtrod and really down on their luck, those that have virtually nothing that listened to your message. And so I spent all my time with those people and, and wow.

1 (9m 52s):
It was an eye-opener for me. I, you know, obviously in the United States we have disparity of income and classes, but at least you have an ability to move from one class to another, if you work hard and you're like, you know, you have some luck and you know, you do certain things, you have student loans and other things in Brazil, it's virtually impossible to do that. And it made me very resentful. And, you know, I really in that, you know, I got it tucked away in my mind that I w I wanted it to come back to Brazil and I wanted it to do something, to help these people at some point in time in my life and kind of make my contribution.

0 (10m 27s):
And did you, cause I, I I'm, I'm trying to remember my experience seeing young, young missionaries, like, did you wear a black tie and a white shirt and like go run on a bike,

1 (10m 37s):
Just like the guys in the play in New York city in the book of Mormon, we didn't have a bike, but we had white shirts, short sleeve, white shirts, you know, just the tie, not necessarily a black tie and slacks, but I also, I was very successful in kind of, you know, being a leader in the first time I had ever done that before. And then, you know, also just learning discipline and kind of overcoming my add and being able to read scriptures and to learn a language. And when I came back from my mission, I was able to go back to university and where I left getting seasoned DS, I was home getting straight A's cause it made me, I grew up a lot and it taught me discipline, which is something that I hadn't learned in my, in my childhood, you know, because of my add,

0 (11m 23s):
I mean, it might be kind of a stretch, but I mean, in some like a weird way, it's almost as if your experience as a missionary, because I mean, you are essentially pitching something to people you're, you're pitching. And in this case, the word of God, right. You're pitching your faith and you're trying to convince people about what it's done for you and how it's fulfilled your life. It's like business, right. You're pitching to people, something you believe in.

1 (11m 52s):
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's, there's a lot companies that are in Provo, Utah that do door to door sales of alarm systems and pest control and whatever. And they take all these, these guys have come and gals that have come home from missions that are kind of fearless now. And then they say, go sell alarm system or go sell pest control.

0 (12m 12s):
It's so interesting. Yeah. Some people

1 (12m 13s):
Go out for the summer and make $50,000 just, you know, selling pest control or selling alarm systems door to door.

0 (12m 21s):
So when you got back to, to the U S were you, were you single at the time

1 (12m 26s):
I was, and you know, got married right away and started having kids and went to work while you were in college. Yeah. Yeah. It's kind of what you do, you know, it's the way it works in the church. You get home and you're encouraged to get married and yeah, we got married in December and our first child was born on November 1st. So we did the kind of 11 months later. And it was just kind of off to the races from there when you

0 (12m 52s):
Were, when you got back and you started up at college again, the university of Utah, and we can see you, you started a business, right. As while you were a student.

1 (13m 0s):
I did, I was sitting in my accounting class one day and I was talking to someone who was seated behind me and her name was Lulu Ronak. And so remember, and she told me about this guy who who's this man who is a friend of her mother's that own some timeshares in Hawaii at this place called the Imperial Hawaii resort. And he was having difficulty selling the timeshares. And so I got this idea to go talk to him. I said, give me his name and I'll call him up. And his name was Al Libra. And so I called him up and I went down to meet with him and I said, Hey, how about if I just rent your timeshares out? Cause he was paying him a weekly maintenance fee on all of them.

1 (13m 40s):
And it was kind of drained in him. And I said, let me, let me fill them up. And he said, okay. So I under the resort accommodation section of our local newspaper at the time, I would just run little wand ads and say, Hey, Hawaii condo for $75 a night or whatever, 50 bucks a night sleep six. And so I'd started getting phone calls and I'd book them and I'd, I'd pay him 135 bucks, I'd collect 400 bucks. And then I would just keep the difference. So it was, I was doing a couple of hours a day and next thing you know, I was making some pretty good money, just filling up these condominiums. And, and then I started getting other ones. And one day I, I heard about an airline.

1 (14m 20s):
It was right after deregulation. This is like the early eighties, the early eighties, 78 was deregulation. So there were airlines that were kind of sprouting up. So there was an airline called Pacific east. And I called the guy that was running it in LA. And I said, Hey, I'm not a travel agent or anything, but if I send you some money, will you, can you send me some airline tickets? And he said, sure. So I would say to the money he had sent me the tickets and then I, I would package them with these hotels. And then I would say two 99, you can fly to Hawaii, but you got to drive to LA. So people would say, oh, we love Hawaii. You tons of always loved Hawaii. They'd jump in their cars and they'd drive down to LA hop on this specific east old DCA and fly over to Hawaii.

0 (14m 58s):
You did this while you were a college student, you would just like create package holidays for people.

1 (15m 4s):
Yeah. That's how I did it. And I eventually dropped out of college. The company was doing $6 million a year. Yeah. Your

0 (15m 12s):
Company was doing $6 million a year.

1 (15m 15s):
Yeah. And it was, I had a whole staff of people and we were salespeople. People would come in and sit down, would show on brochures of different hotels that we had or different condos. Cause then I would call in Hawaii over to other places and say, Hey, could I buy a block of rooms for 20 bucks a night? That's okay. And so I just started packaging them. That was all working well until there was a new airline that started. And I was a little NABARD with this because it was Hawaii express. And they had a big pineapple on the tail and they flew seven 47. So I said, well, I want to switch to these guys. So I started buying tickets from them. And then right before Christmas, it was 1982 or maybe 1983.

1 (15m 57s):
They called me up and said, you know, Hey, we're ceasing operations tomorrow. I said, you can't see some races tomorrow. They said, well, we don't have any money. And I said, well, I've prepaid all these people. It was right before Christmas people have paid for the hotels, but I had no way of getting them over there. All of course, all the airplanes tickets were full. I didn't have money to send everybody over there. And so it was kind of a disastrous time. And I learned a huge lesson from that that suited me well through the years. But it was obviously very difficult to go from a point where I had this thriving business to when one day, the next day virtually had nothing wait that, that wiped the business out. It did because I had prepaid, you know, every single ticket and it was about a half, a million dollars.

1 (16m 40s):
And you know, I probably had, you know, a couple of hundred thousand that I had of my own money. And, you know, I should have at the time, just called everybody up and said, look, I can just give you half your money back. But of course, you know, you filed for bankruptcy, not personally, but it was the business. And, and then the judge, you know, the lawyers end up, get it, getting most everything. So I was, at the time I was in my early twenties, I think it was 20, 23 or 24. So like that, I really didn't know anything about business or how this all works.

0 (17m 8s):
So you were like a living, you were probably like thinking I'm a sad, like this is going to be like, I'm going to be a millionaire.

1 (17m 17s):
Yeah. I was, I went out and bought myself a BMW. I thought I was, you know, things were great. You know, I never, I never bought another one again after that, because I learned, I learned my lesson, you know, you're young things are coming easy. It's good. The money. I mean, you can imagine you, you know, your first condo you sell, you get to make 350 bucks on it. You're like, wow, that could last me for, for two weeks just for that one sale. That one phone call. So it started up fast. It was very successful. And then boom collapsed. Collapsed. Yeah.

0 (17m 49s):
All right. So you are college dropout with a failed business. And by that point you had at least one kid, I guess, two kids by the two kids. So what did you, what did you do? What'd you do for work?

1 (18m 4s):
Well, my father-in-law had it, the drapery business and I was kind of working in the back room, kind of doing the counting and stuff. So I went to back to doing that and my grandma, my grandfather's grocery store, I went back to work my grandmother's door. She started just like I did when I was nine years

0 (18m 19s):
Old without the crane that standing on the crate, I guess,

1 (18m 22s):
No, I didn't. I lost the milk crate. It could stand up the cash register, but yeah, it was pretty devastating. I mean, maybe I didn't want to get out of bed and do anything, but, you know, I just kinda like said I gotta keep going. And so, and then I got a call from my, my uncle Stan, who just happened to be the estate lawyer for the Morris family, June and Mitch Morris and June ran a very successful travel agency in salt lake city. It was dealing with mainly corporate travel at the time. And so Michael Stan called up and said, June Morris wants to talk to you about doing some of the things that you were doing on your own for her company.

0 (19m 2s):
She was older than you, I guess, right? Oh

1 (19m 5s):
Yeah. She's about the age of my parents. And so we sat down and she gave me a big smile and she said, you know, I, if you come to work for me, I'll make sure you get a piece of the company. You know, you we'll we'll can do this together. And you know, I really liked what you did. And so she convinced me, she convinced me to do that. And so I kept the job at the store at night. I would go there during the day and, and, and called up all those hotels and said, Hey, I'm back. And then I called up Hawaiian airlines and I had this contract in my drawer at my, at my old office. It was a charter contract to fly it.

1 (19m 46s):
Hawaiian airlines chartered from Hawaii to salt lake directly, you know, bypassing the drive to LA. And I just didn't have, I was just getting together the bond, my, you needed a $250,000 bond cause it was a public charter. And I was just trying to arrange that when the other airline failed. So I went back to the drawer, I got the contract out, I went to June and I said, if Mitch, your husband can, can help with this bond. We can launch these flights directly from salt lake city,

0 (20m 12s):
A Hawaiian airlines flight direct from salt lake

1 (20m 16s):
To Honolulu or wherever. Yeah. It was a, it was a re what we call the reverse rotation that plan would on a Friday night would start in Honolulu and it'd fly nonstop to salt lake. And then it would turn around Saturday morning and fly back. So that was the flight you'd spend, you know, basically seven days, six nights in Hawaii and then fly direct. And the whole package was three 99 because we were buying the charter flight. And so we started this company called Morris air charters. And that was kind of the hallmark of our, of our trip was this DCA that would, that would make this trip. And so Hawaiian called me after one and said, Hey, this plane's going to be going back in about six months. Can we come and base the plant in salt lake? And so you can fly straight to Hawaii and back, but for the other six days a week, is there anything you want to do with this airplane?

1 (21m 1s):
And I said, yeah, I want to fly to LA. You know, there's a lots of, lots of Mormons in LA and lots of family interests between the two. My grandparents were there. And, you know, I kind of spent my whole life in the backseat, you know, back of a station where I can driving death valley between salt lake and LA. And I thought if I could sell those tickets for cheap. And I had read up a lot on Southwest airlines, you know, herb was my Hertz shelter, who was my, was my hero. And I had read every annual report ever on those guys. It was kind of my dream to, to be like them. So I put flights on to Los Angeles for $69 using this old airplane flying into the old west Imperial terminal.

0 (21m 38s):
So this was a Hawaiian airlines plane that was just parked in salt lake for six days a week because it was going to Honolulu once a week. And those, and they said, look, you can lease this from us and do whatever you want with it for those other days.

1 (21m 52s):
Right? So I said, let's fly to LA three days a week. And so we ran an ad in the newspaper and the first day I didn't give me calls. And then I remember coming in the next day at work and I heard <inaudible> who was our receptionist saying I have 24 Los Angeles calls on help, somebody

4 (22m 12s):
Please help me. And so

1 (22m 13s):
I would ready get there and start answering the phones myself and booking people on pieces of paper. And it was funny because there was a glitch in the system. So we were basically overbooking every flight by a hundred people, as we were all booking everyone, we lost a little bit of money on that, but you know, it was, it was a kind of a big success from the very get-go. So June,

0 (22m 33s):
I mean, June Morris had set up a travel agency, which then kind of focused on package tours and chartering planes. And that seems manageable, but, but then you become, you essentially become an airline. Did, did you in June sit down, did you ever sit down June and say, Hey, let's become an airline or did it just, it just kind of happened that way? Well,

1 (22m 52s):
It was about that time that Steve HASI, who's a well-known entrepreneur in the aircraft leasing business. He called up and said, Hey, my wife's from Utah. You know, my relatives come flying on you guys all the time. You need to get legitimate. You know, I have some air, I have some airplanes I will lease you, but I want you to get your own airplane certificate

0 (23m 10s):
At this point. This is what like 80 mid eighties, something like that. Yeah, it was probably late eighties. So Steve <inaudible> famous guy, he's made tons of money in aviation and funded one of the aerospace museums outside of Washington, DC. He comes to you, he says, Hey, you should start your own airline with your own name

1 (23m 31s):
On it. Right. And he said, I got a guy that can help you. And it was a guy named USO Schultz. And you still was that old FAA guy. So I called <inaudible> and he was living up in Idaho and he came down and said, okay, let's certify this airline. He's still alive. He's in his mid nineties. This guy called me up recently and said, if you've got a little something for me to do, I'm still here. So, but he did do it through the certification. And, and, and June was really funny. She wanted a compass rose on the tail, cause that was a logo of her travel business. And so we put a compass rose and then she wanted it to be magenta. That was her color. And so we made these planes with the blue towel, with the magenta compass rose, and it was called Maura.

1 (24m 15s):
Sarah

0 (24m 15s):
Who financed this? I mean, did, did, did June Morrison her husband finances? Did you get investors to, to cause you had to buy planes I guess, or lease them

1 (24m 24s):
Initially, we were just making enough cashflow. We were just using that. And you know, you aren't buying the airplanes. You're just agreeing to pay them like a monthly rent payment on the airplanes with, with leasing. And then they take a certain amount per hour in reserves for maintenance. And then when the planes go in for maintenance, they use that money to do it. So it doesn't require a lot of capital from the very beginning. And so we were, we were just kind of bootstrapping it. And that's what we got. Mitch was really funny though, because during those years, while we were making money, Mitch, which wasn't a Mormon

0 (24m 54s):
And Mitch was, was June's husband. Yeah.

1 (24m 57s):
He was really a great guy. One of the most amazing men I've ever met and he was a great mentor, but he'd say, okay, this is what we're going to do, guys, we're going to do a third, a third. And a third, third is going to the government. A third is staying in the company and a third is going to be whiskey drinking money. That's our whiskey drink and money. So it's okay. So that was our term for what we distributed. So, so when one year I got my, I was in my maybe 26 or 27 and I got my whiskey drinking money and it was enough for me to pay off my house. And so I went, the first thing I did is I went down to the bank where my family had done business forever.

1 (25m 38s):
And you know, where this banker was kind of knowing that my dad was always, he was always covering my dad's overdraft tracks. And my grandpa's overdraft checks kind of knew that these Neal Romans, you know, didn't have a lot of money. So I walked in there with, I think it was $165,000 check. And I said, I just want to pay off my house. And he said, okay, took the, took the money. And so I, by the time I got back to the office, June called me in and said, Hey, your banker called and said that he needed to inform me this, but someone in your company is embezzling money. She, she got the biggest kick out of that. So I went back and closed my account and moved on to another bank.

1 (26m 20s):
But it was, she could imagine that somebody, that my age kind of a new woman, that, you know, always hardworking people, but didn't have that kind of money could, could walk in and pay off their house when they were in their mid twenties.

0 (26m 33s):
And then just a few years after you launch Morris air Southwest in 1993, buys the company for $130 million. I mean, it must have been incredible to, to, to, to have that happen.

1 (26m 47s):
Well, a couple of, a couple of, you know, really incredible things happen around that time. I idolize Southwest and, you know, I kind of, I just like, I can't even tell you how I felt about that company. You know, when I was building, I would pattern everything we did after Southwest, you know, there was a few things that we did at more Sarah, that Southwest wasn't doing one of them is that we invented easy ticket travel. I mean, the first ticket list travel was done at Morser in the world. And it all came about because a guy who worked from at the time named Stewart Thatcher came into my office and he goes, yeah, you know, I just went up to the fourth floor. We have like 50 people up there, printing tickets and stuffing them and mailing them out.

1 (27m 29s):
Why don't we just come up with a computer driven form that we can just go through it, you know, automatically gets done and has a confirmation on Miranda. And we just Mel people that way, and we just accept their confirmation number. And I said, well, why don't we just give it to them over the phone? Why do we have to mail them anything as well? People want to have something in their hands. So I said, well, let's get a fax number. We can still mail it to them, but we don't really need it at the airport. You know, rental cars don't have it. And, and so we didn't have a repository for that information. So I had a young guy that was backing up the computers and he kept telling me he could write us a new reservation system. So I said, why don't you write us a reservation system? And he said, I don't know if I can do it.

1 (28m 10s):
And I said, well, I'll give you $20,000 and you can buy yourself a Jeep if you can do it. And so he, he went out and, and wrote the system and got it all done. And we were, we launched this thing as the first E ticket airline. Well, Southwest didn't know what a great thing they were buying. That was really kind of the best thing that they were buying from, that they were at half credit today in the Smithsonian as being the first ticketless airline. But it was really our system that did it. Wow. But, but kind of going back a little bit. So her called me up and, and, you know, said, Hey, you know, I hear you might be interested in selling and then

3 (28m 50s):
Keller her, your, your idol. Yeah.

1 (28m 51s):
Couldn't believe it. When he was on the phone, I can still remember hearing his voice at like, hi herb, would you want to come down and meet with us? And so I went down and met with them and smoke filled room with all these guys in there that I had idolized over all the years. And then I found, then I came home and then we found out that June had a very serious form of cancer. It was a, it was called inflammatory breast cancer. And so I went in my office and I was just sitting there staring at my phone and it rang and I picked it up and it was a guy named Jim Wikert. And I was, he said, how you doing? I go, oh, I'm just sick. He's the guy we had chartered planes from. I said, I'm just sick. I just found a June has this terminal, breast cancer and inflammatory breast cancer. I don't know what, what are we going to do?

1 (29m 34s):
And he said, get her on the airplane now. And I said, what do you mean? I said, she's scheduled for surgery. No, no, don't let her have the surgery. We know this doctor bloom shine that is, is, is having amazing success with this. So I called up June. I said, June, I just booked you at two tickets on American airlines. You need to get on the airplane. So she raced out to the airport, got on the airplane

0 (29m 56s):
Plane for what?

1 (29m 56s):
Because when they, what they found is if you had the surgery, it spread the cancer through your body and they needed to, to zap it and get rid of it first. So she got on the plane and he convinced her to go into the treatment. And they just took her almost, you know, to, to death. I mean, bone marrow, transplant, everything. And she left and she's still live today. And she, and I have a very special relationship from this day because of that, of that, it was a, it was a, it was a miracle. And so she was going through this treatment in Herb's there. And so I'm saying as soon as soon June, you want to sell this company, she said, yes,

2 (30m 33s):
I do. You say, you're like, in your early thirties, you

0 (30m 38s):
You've got a decent amount of cash, like at least 20 million bucks. And all of a sudden you become an employee of Southwest airlines, I guess.

1 (30m 47s):
Yeah. W her, yeah, he, he always tells the story that I had my, my book of Mormon, my Bible and my Southwest airlines annual report in my car. And that was

2 (30m 58s):
My scriptures. And it was not too far from the truth.

1 (31m 2s):
So we, we were close and, and he said, look, I want to put you on the executive planning committee, which is our top steering committee. And I would just sit in this meeting and I would just watch these guys. And they would just go on and on. And every time I would say something, they'd look at me like, why is it, what is this guy now? He's this young punk. He doesn't know anything he's never been here. And so I used to just, I should just write, don't say a word, don't say a word, just keep like writing at night, you just blurt out something else. They asked me to take two years to integrate Morris into Southwest. And within six months I had it all done. I basically joint fuel purchase, joint, ground handling, joint, everything was all done.

1 (31m 46s):
And Southwest had this, had this deal where they were charging off peak fairs on Saturdays and Sundays. And after like 8:00 PM at night. And I went to him and I say, guys, my, my highest fairs are on Sunday. And you just switched them all to off peak. I'm losing like millions of dollars every month because you're charging off peak levy charge peak on these flights. And so I sat down with Keith Taylor at the time who was the head of revenue management. I showed them all the numbers and, and it was during that time, they switched, you know, and started charging peak for Sundays. And they, you know, Southwest has made profit for 43 years in a row or whatever it was.

1 (32m 26s):
And they were so successful, you know, they didn't really need to find. And I was just absolutely paranoid all the time. And I had to keep tweaking everything all the time. And so I was pressing all that stuff with them. And finally, her invited me to Ruth Chris steakhouse in Dallas and said, this isn't gonna work. You know, you're driving everybody insane in this company. And I said, well, you're paying more for long distance permitted than we are. I'm just trying to get them to take our contract instead of your contract. And herb, I got the peak fairs and I got the thing integrated, and I got this. He said, I know David, but that, that that's five months. It should have taken you longer to do all that stuff. And I said, all right, I'm outta here. I was in tears, you know, but

0 (33m 7s):
So you were supposed to stay at Southwest for at least two years. And within six

1 (33m 12s):
Months, he kind of led me to believe that if I just minded my P's and Q's that I would be a successor one day, you know, that I can, you know, follow in his footsteps. And, you know, obviously there were other people that wanted that job and I was young and, you know, insurance completely didn't fit into the corporate culture. My, my add was just raging. So you,

0 (33m 31s):
You were supposed to, I mean, this was going to be your employer and maybe you would have succeeded herb. Kelleher's the head of Southwest. And you were basically were fired after like five or six months.

1 (33m 42s):
Yeah. In may. So I started in December and they fired me in may.

0 (33m 46s):
Did he let you down gently? Oh

1 (33m 48s):
Yeah. He reached across the table and held my hands. I was crying and he just said, you know, it's just not going to work. And he said, everybody, even your, even the people that your biggest supporter said, you had to go,

2 (34m 1s):
David

0 (34m 2s):
Neeleman may have been out of a job, but not for long. When we come back, how he built the framework that would become jet blue, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Vanta if you're a startup, doesn't have the right compliance, certifications. You can't close major customers. Vanta automates the time consuming and expensive process of preparing for a SOC two HIPAA or ISO 27 oh one audit Banta integrates with your cloud provider and tools creates a customized to do list and continuously monitors your security trusted by over 1000 S a S companies redeem a $1,000 off coupon, advanta.com/npr.

0 (35m 8s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, snack magic, a build your own snack box service, making it stress-free and easy for you to treat virtual event attendees clients, or your global team to build their own snack box from over 500 snack and beverage options, whether it's one person or a thousand people send all your gifts in one simple email order and your recipients build their boxes online, snack magic makes it easy to boost team morale and say, thank you. Get 10% off with a code NPR and learn more@snackmagic.com. This message comes from NPR sponsor, LinkedIn talent solutions to grow your business.

0 (35m 49s):
It's essential to have the right people in place to ensure your company operates smoothly and has the potential to expand. LinkedIn jobs helps you find the best candidates for free get started by posting your first job for free to reach LinkedIn's network of 740 million professionals venues, simple tools to filter and prioritize top candidates. Visit linkedin.com/built terms and conditions apply. An officer pins, a 16 year old to the ground and punches out his teeth.

0 (36m 29s):
But are there any consequences for the cop for the first time we take you inside the secret investigations that show how police protections in California shield officers from accountability, listen to on our, watch a podcast from NPR and KQBD Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's 1995 and David Neeleman was just fired from Southwest airlines, Southwest the company he idolized. Oh. And he cannot work for a domestic airline for five years because of Southwest's non-compete clause.

0 (37m 15s):
So David, he went home, I went home

1 (37m 16s):
And I spent a couple of days at home and I feel like I can't do this. I'm not gonna, I'm not going to retire. And so I went down and I, I, I rented a little office and started going to work every day in salt lake. And by this time, Dave Evans, who was my partner had been going back and forth to Texas

0 (37m 33s):
And Dave Evans. I'm guessing you guys worked together at Morris air. Yeah. And he came

1 (37m 37s):
To me and he said, look, ticketless is the future. Why don't we build a system and sell it to all the airlines? So I said, well, how much money you think you'll take? And he said, oh, a million dollars. So I said, okay, let's do it.

0 (37m 49s):
You is hard to remember. But like, even in the mid nineties, when you were running this company, like an airline ticket was, was like a booklet with carbon copy pages in it. Like you would bring this physical booklet to get onto a plane.

1 (38m 3s):
I haven't helped you if you lost it. You know, you were, you were in trouble. If you lost it, you had to fill out a big forms, a lost ticket forms. And then they had these big auditing departments who would look for them and you'd have to keep calling them back every three months to see if there, if anyone ever claimed your ticket. And if not, then, you know, maybe they would give you a refund at the end of the time. So it was a, it was a real pain.

0 (38m 24s):
So, okay. You guys, I guess you guys wanted to build a reservation system that you could essentially then sell to the airlines, but why wouldn't you, why wouldn't airlines just, just do it themselves? Well,

1 (38m 35s):
Th they didn't airlines had these big mainframe computer systems they were using at the time and everything was done on a flat file. So there was no relational databases. The actual, the database was actually the ticket. So if you lost your ticket and you know, it became a negotiable document and they didn't have any other way of tracking anything. And then they would look at things in the rear view mirror that happened three or four months ago, they had no forward looking ability at the time. And so by us building the system, we allowed people to have real time information on all their reservations that were coming in. You know, we could tell them, you know, what the average fare was, what the, what the load factor was on each flight, all the stuff that they'd never had before.

1 (39m 16s):
And so it was a huge, it was a revolutionary change for the airline business at the time. And so, you know, did that during this period of the non-compete and about halfway through the noncompete, I called a cup, a cup, maybe a year and a half into it. I called her up and I said, Hey, herb, you know, I've consulted, you know, legal counsel that this thing is not really enforceable. I mean, I didn't get it consideration. He said, David, you're the last person I want to see in the airline business. So I will fight you tooth and nail. I do not want to see you in the airline business. And I said, all right, fair enough. You know, I signed it. That's, I'll live by my

0 (39m 52s):
Word. You ended up selling this company to HP Hewlett Packard in 1998. And, and that's when you kind of, I guess, put your head down on this, the jet blue idea. But even before then, my understanding is that you actually started to think of the jet blue idea, like within a year after leaving Southwest, is that right?

1 (40m 14s):
Yeah. I mean, I knew I had four years, you know, I had the reservation system, so I knew exactly what the reservation system would be. You know, I just, I just kind of bided my time. W

0 (40m 24s):
W what I'm trying to understand is why, I mean, the, the graveyard of airline, like failed airlines is huge, right? Like Trump and Laker and people movers, whatever it was called, TWA pan people express. Yeah. W w w what did you think the world needed? Like, there were a bunch of airlines, Southwest was thriving. Like, what was it that you thought you could contribute to that, to that industry?

1 (40m 52s):
Well, I thought that a couple of things, Southwest had a rule book that they didn't really violate at the time, one of them that they never flew into kind of congested airports. They, they didn't want, because on time percentage and, you know, turning airplanes in 10 minutes was just so important to them that they didn't want to go to New York. For example, Boston, they weren't in Boston. They want, they were in Providence. And so they, they, they kind of skirted around airports. They never went into SFO. There were an Oakland. And so they didn't really, you know, go into these, these east coast congested airports, and, you know, Don Burr, who was the founder of people express came to see me one time.

1 (41m 35s):
And I remember he was looking at starting an airline and he wanted to do it in JFK. And he was saying, you know, during the middle of the day, you could run a bowling ball down the middle of, of the runways at JFK. They're only busy at night. There's nothing on the day. And there's a lot of people there. So I just kind of filed that away. And, and, you know, his, his airline didn't materialize. So when it came time for me to, to found, you know, jet blue, I wanted to find a place that I could start in in, in an area where I knew there was a lot of people. I studied the New York travel market. And so I thought, well, this is a perfect place to put an airline.

0 (42m 10s):
You thought you could do a discount airline that would fly to places that discount airlines were not flying to.

1 (42m 17s):
Yeah, we're Southwest airlines. Wasn't. And, you know, you got to remember at the time to the, all the carriers, these legacy carriers had accumulated so much stuff. I mean, pension programs and, you know, the, the customer service at that time, wasn't very good. And we wanted to bring humanity back to air travel, and, you know, and this is something that I've kind of learned over the years. Number one is you don't just go start an airline for the sake of starting it. You have to have a reason for being, but also just because you're in a place where no one else flies or can fly doesn't mean that, you know, you can treat people poorly. So let's treat people awesome. Let's find a place that nobody else flies let's fly between rod.

1 (42m 60s):
And so layering all this. I say, I always say my team guys too much overkill is never enough. Let's just keep layering it on, make it better and better and better.

0 (43m 9s):
What did you want? I mean, did you have a vision of what you want to JetBlue to be, I mean, D been traveling in the 1990s, like there, there were some, I mean, Virgin, for example, like that was rebel. I remember going on our Virgin airlines flight in the nineties, you got little TVs and great food, and it was just, it was very different. It felt completely different from any other airline.

1 (43m 32s):
Yeah. And I, you know, I was talking to early to Richard Branson, early on jet blue was going to be called Virgin America. You know, kind of a funny story. You know, I'm still a little bit off the tournament truck coming from Utah, you know, so Richard invites me to fly over to it and I go to his house and of course, he's there with his wife and speaking in this swab, British accent, and I'm completely enamored. And then he says, let's go eat Indian food. And I'd never eat Indian food before. If you can believe that I love Indian food. And he said, let's go watch a movie. And he took me to his Virgin theater and, and he, and his wife and I, and we saw the full Monty, which was for a Mormon guy, was completely, you know, a little off color from me.

1 (44m 15s):
But I came home kinda chuckled about that movie, but loving chicken Curry, which I had that night, which I haven't been able to stop eating ever since. So, but, but Richard, at the time, then he wanted a franchise fee and he wanted to maybe change, go to, he had gone to Washington and they had convinced him that maybe that he could change the laws on foreign ownership so he could control it. And I just sit now Richard, not. So,

0 (44m 36s):
So there was a moment where you may have, instead of launching jet blue would have launched Virgin is a us domestic airline.

1 (44m 43s):
Yeah. I mean, I, you know, I thought having a brand was important. I flew on Virgin. I saw those little TVs. I, you know, saw that whole service and I thought, wow, you know, if I could create this, this would be amazing. So,

0 (44m 56s):
So that five year, like period of at like a non-compete would w ended, I guess, around 98, w at that point, like, right when it ended, is that when you announced that you were founding jet blue, did you, did you announce that publicly?

1 (45m 9s):
Yeah. I mean, I, I couldn't sell a ticket, but I could do everything, but so, you know, I had the reservation system ready to go.

0 (45m 17s):
I had, <inaudible> go. You could start working on it even before this non-compete ended.

1 (45m 21s):
Yeah. I mean, we started flying in February of the year, 2000, so we were working hot and heavy. We moved, I moved the family to Connecticut in July of 99. And we were, you know, a full bore had raised $135 million. And so we were, we were ready to go. One

0 (45m 40s):
Of the things that Southwest revolutionized was, they just, you know, they'd never served food, right. They, they was peanuts or pretzels and free drinks and a very friendly service. And w and they also only flew in the, still do only fly seven 37, Boeing seven 37. So did you kind of look at that and say, yeah, that's, that's the model that we should go for. We should get the same exact plane, because then you only have to maintain one kind of plane and not worry about food and all that stuff. Yeah.

1 (46m 7s):
That was it. I mean, yeah. I, I hired to be my CFO at jet blue, a man by the name of John Owen. And he was the treasurer at Southwest. And so he knew all the financial stuff about Southwest, you know, what? They were buying their airplanes from Boeing from, and their Boeing seven 30 sevens. And we tried to go to Boeing. We wanted the seven 37. We really wanted it. And we just said, look, how about giving us this price? And they said, ah, too low, you can't do that. We're going to go see Airbus. And they said, well, go ahead. So flew back to Washington DC, where their north American offices were for Airbus and Henri coupon walked in. He's a good friend of mine today.

0 (46m 48s):
He said he was the CEO of the head of Airbus.

1 (46m 51s):
See, yeah. CEO of north America for Airbus at the time he walks in. And he says, you know, you just here using us as foil, or are you really interested in buying our airplanes? And I said, I'm just here to using you as foil, but convince me, you have a better airplane. So he started selling us and kind of the wider cabin, the fly by wire, all this stuff, the more seats, because we could, we could go to 162 seats on an airplane. And so I completely got, got converted and Boeing ended up coming below that number, which I would have shaken with them on the first day. But we were, we went with Airbus.

0 (47m 26s):
Right. And you got the, the <inaudible>, is that what you <inaudible>? Yeah, so, and that's their version. I mean the seven 37 83 twenties, there, there are the competing planes. You go with the, by say three twenties and put TVs in the back and free TV and a nice seats snacks. I remember I've read, I read somewhere a quote of yours. You said, look, jet blue is a customer service company. Or, you know, you described it as a customer service company that happens to fly airplanes, which reminded me a lot of Zappos. You know, we, we were a customer service company that happens to sell shoes. Yeah. Is

1 (48m 4s):
That correct? Clay dries that with not even knowing, but that was my thought. I just, I just wanted to do everything. And maybe it was because I came up with this whole notion of servant, servant leadership, you know, maybe I learned that on my mission of serving others and just saw how Southwest had built their culture. And, you know, I used to develop this thing, you know, we're going to go out and we're going to take care of our people. And the people are going to take care of our customers. And it was funny because when I was talking to the investors in New York, they said, Hey, dude, you're in New York. You're not going to find friendly people in New York. And I said, well, I got a lot of ch lots to choose from. So there's, there's 15 million people there. I'm sure I'll find some nice people. And we sure did.

0 (48m 43s):
You guys were profitable pretty quickly, I think. And, and at a difficult time after nine 11, and one of the things that you did a lot, you'd fly in the planes all the time. You'd make an announcement that you were the, the head of the company. And then you would sit on the planes and serve snacks and help clean the planes. Was that a stick or was that real? I mean, what was that about now? I

1 (49m 7s):
Just really want to stay in touch with our customers. I really wanted to hear from them, you know, not only what I get up and introduce myself, but I would also say I'm going to come by and serve snacks. But I also want to hear from your experience with our company, I want to know what we did good, what we did bad. You know, what we can improve on w you know, any ideas you have for us. And then I had, you know, other people in our company doing the same. I just think it's just incredible to stay in touch with your, with your people. And then, you know, those working the flight, see that you care

0 (49m 38s):
One of the things, I mean, Southwest, their staff is unionized and you did not have a union staff. Why? I mean, did you feel like I don't want to deal with unions, that's going to just drag us down. Was there a reason behind that?

1 (49m 54s):
You know, I always thought if our people need someone else to come tell us how to treat them, then that would be pretty tragic. If I thought I didn't treat our people well enough that they needed somebody else, then you know, that's not the company I wanted to run. So by not being unionized, you know I could chip in and, you know, pick up trash on the airplane and there wouldn't be a grievance filed, for example, or, you know, one of the questions we ask in the interview process is, you know, in your career, in your, in your life, can you give us some examples of where you left your area of responsibility and help else out in another area? Because that was really something that we thought of and you would, it's amazing how many people couldn't come up with one single example of, of how they could chip in and help out.

1 (50m 40s):
You know, we didn't hire a pilot that had 15,000 hours and he was called me up screaming. I can't believe you wouldn't hire me. I'm an experienced pilot. So I went to the interviewers and they said, well, he couldn't come up with one single excuse. So anything he's ever done to help anyone other than myself. So, you know, it was, it was a cultural thing and building the culture was important.

0 (51m 0s):
David, one of the things about, about the airline industry is that it's a volatile, right? Like the price of oil is it's a huge factor. You've got recessions security scares nine 11, right. When people traveled a lot less. So, I mean, my understanding is that in general, the margins, you know, even though we think of these airlines as hugely profitable, they're generally that the marshals are generally pretty thin

1 (51m 26s):
They can be. Yeah. I mean, it's a, it's a business that you can make a lot of money and you can lose a lot of money.

0 (51m 30s):
Yeah. So what is it that you guys, I mean, how are you able to be profitable so fast and for so long compared to the other areas?

1 (51m 39s):
Well, I think it was just, we were a differentiator. I mean, people saw us and, you know, we had the word of mouth and people love flying us, but it's just building a better mouse trap and building a better company. And, and, you know, I, I became enamored with this whole thing when I was running the company and I, I read this article called the constant customer. They said, look, some companies just grow quicker. They're more successful. You know? And they D they did a lot of research into what, what, what it was about these companies that differentiated them from, from other companies. And there was actually United airlines and Southwest in the article. And it talked about the differences between the two and how they ran their businesses.

1 (52m 19s):
And the three things they named was N you know, number one is having people who work for you that are ambassadors for your brand, that adore your company that feel valued and feel loved in the company. Number one, number two was flawless execution on every single level, you need to be completely flawless. And so we have dashboards every day where I can tell you everything that's going on at my companies, you know, from on-time percentage, when the last bag made it to the carousel on the most delightful flight, you know, everything about that experience. So you need to be flawless. And then the third thing is you need to make it right with the customer. If you have make a mistake or you treat some important or whatever, you need to make them more loyal, having had an issue with your company than if they had not had an issue in the first

0 (53m 5s):
Place. So jet blue is like riding high, it's profitable to darling of wall street. Customers love it. And then comes Valentine's day, 2007, the biggest ice storm in the Northeast in like decades and what happens? Well, it

1 (53m 24s):
Wasn't just an ice storm. It was the had come out with this regulation that it was only that year. You know, it was only in 2007 where they said, if there there's what they called ice pellets in the air, then you can't take off. They reversed it the next year. They didn't have it any time before that. And they haven't had any time since. So it was just one of these convergence of events where our planes got out to the runway to take off. They called ice pellets, planes were stuck, planes were landing. And then this store moved in. We had people strand on airplanes. We couldn't get them back to the gate because we have these towers, right?

1 (54m 5s):
Yeah. Eight, actually more, I think, one of them, even 10 hours. And so it was, you know, it was a disaster and it was something that, and then, you know, Humpty Dumpty was all over the place and it took us a long time to recover.

0 (54m 17s):
But what happened was our

1 (54m 18s):
Operational team failed the airline, you know, it was, it was just simply that simple. I mean, it was, you know, they just didn't do a good job of, of handling the situation. And, you know, as, as I was, I was in the command center for four straight days after, you know, obviously we got people off the airplane and, you know, after the first day, but when we had the whole place was scrambled and there was all kinds of bad publicity, you know, to the airline, which was, you know, devastating for me personally. Cause we had pride ourselves in running such great airline. I think I set a record on that day where I started on the today show and I ended up on the Letterman.

0 (54m 54s):
You were just, you were apologizing.

1 (54m 58s):
Yeah. Apologies, explaining what happened, 27 live interviews on, you know, all kinds of TV. But I came up with this list of things that, you know, we were going to do and, and a bill of rights saying, if this ever happens again, this is how you become,

0 (55m 12s):
But how did it, I mean, how did it happen? Like I think there were 1200 flights that were canceled over the next couple days. Like why did it, did this winter storm hit jet blue harder than other airlines? Like w w was it just a failure of management?

1 (55m 27s):
Well, ironically I think the others may have recovered better, but Delta had planes out there, you know, for about the same amount of time, you know, everybody was affected by it. It wasn't just us. It took us longer to recover, but also people expected more from us. I mean, I think sometimes the media likes to build you up and then they like to tear you down. You know what I mean? It's kinda like if you're flying too high, you know, we're going to come after you. If you, if you're a rising story, we're going to tell about you, but you mess up even just this much. And I was, you know, well on the way to fixing it and making sure that it would never happen again. When in a couple months later the board asked me if I would just step up to be chairman and, you know, kind of let the COO at the time, be the CEO and you know, it was here we go again, you know, and now it was herb and this, but it was different with this time, obviously this was my baby.

1 (56m 21s):
This was your, this was your baby. I know it was, I killed myself for this company

0 (56m 27s):
And the board cause you didn't, it was a public company. And now you work for the shareholders. They said, we don't want you to run it anymore. I can't imagine that wouldn't be devastating. Yeah,

1 (56m 39s):
It was, it was, it was not only devastating, but it was, it was just absolutely the wrong decision. That was the worst part. I mean, if I, maybe I was, I, you know, my perception is better than what I actually was. My persona is taken on a much bigger role that we had a couple of guys on the board that were, had developed this thing about founder syndrome and thought, Hey, maybe it's better to turn it over to someone and I can run the company without the passion and, and just, you know, kind of run it like a regular business.

0 (57m 13s):
They felt that, that you had to be held accountable fair or not for the blizzard. Yeah. Yes, absolutely.

1 (57m 18s):
I mean, I had to be held accountable and you know, and I was taking responsibility of it. I mean, one of the board members kept saying to me, quit apologizing. You know, we don't like you to apologize. I go, why not? I said, because you know, it shows a sign of weakness, you know, or whatever. So were you blindsided by it completely? I mean, it was the most shocking thing and I couldn't believe it. I mean, it was, they break the news to you. I was, my office was just off the boardroom and, you know, two, two of the board members came in and said, you know, this is what we're going to do. And then they gala got up and left, got an airplanes and flew away. Or you personally hurt.

1 (57m 58s):
Oh yeah, totally. For years as I would land in JFK, it would be hard to even look over, you know, a tablet. Cause it was hard to even see my airline, you know, and I wrote a letter to the crew members when I left and I still had access to everyone's email. So I sent it out and I just said, you know, I've always taught you that it's not really what happens to you is it's how you deal with it. And so, you know, I've always had this lifetime dream to return to Brazil and make a difference in the country of my birth and I'm going to do it. So I'm going to leave the board and you know, I just want you to remember all those values and, you know, treat each other well and I'll miss you terribly.

1 (58m 39s):
And you know, nothing, I'd like more to be back as your CEO, but you know, that's not the way life is. Sometimes you don't get to make all the decisions and wished everyone the best. And I was gone. We can

0 (58m 52s):
Stop this podcast now. And like end of story, you start another airline. You start a brand new airline in 2008 called Azule in Brazil, by the way, which means blue was that, was that deliberate? Did you call it Zul deliberately?

1 (59m 11s):
Yeah, I did. It was, I think, you know, I obviously have great affection for jet blue in is always the closest thing. And is those blue in Portuguese and in Spanish? So I had made some trips down there and you know, I had this thing tucked away in the back of my head about going back to Brazil and making a difference. And that I had when I was a 19 year old boy. And one of the things that was amazing to me is how few people were traveling in Brazil. And I determined that there were two major reasons. Number one, the service just wasn't good. As far as non-stops between cities, the 25 largest cities in Brazil only had non-stops about 20% of the time. But then there were like 50 cities that had no service that needed service.

1 (59m 53s):
They had no one flew to these cities. They were making people drive for hours, makes airplanes the major aircraft manufacturer. Yeah, they had, they had, you know, during the, the military role, the military had done a nice job of building airports, but nobody flew to them. And then fairs were really high. They were about double where they were in the United States. So I thought, well, I'll go to Brazil. I'll buy Brazilian made airplanes, which are a little bit smaller and have a lower trip costs. And then I'll start flying to all these cities that nobody flies to and will be a big success.

0 (1h 0m 24s):
And it happened it's I think it's a third largest airline in Brazil today.

1 (1h 0m 29s):
It's the number one airline in terms of daily departures. Number one, airline in numbers of city serves, we serve over a hundred cities in Brazil. We have 800 flights a day. We fly about 80,000 people every single day. Wow.

0 (1h 0m 44s):
That's 10 years, 10 years after you launch in just 10 years, did you, I mean, you must have learned so many lessons along the way, right? At Southwest, you were, you know, they fired you up for five bucks and you couldn't do anything about it. And then, you know, jet blue, obviously the board decided that they wanted somebody new there when you structured Azule did you make sure that that could not happen to you again? Yeah,

1 (1h 1m 7s):
Absolutely. Absolutely. I can't be fired. It is old. It's privately owned. No, it's public it's on the New York stock exchange, but I have a voting control. Yeah.

0 (1h 1m 15s):
So, and so she made sure that that could not happen again. Fair enough. Which is part of like learning lessons along the way. Absolutely. David, you have 10 kids, right? Yes. How were you able to do all this stuff? Like fly all over the place and go to board meetings and run these companies and also raise kids. Like how were you able to make time for them where you did, did you, did you have to make sacrifices?

1 (1h 1m 41s):
Well, I had a couple of rules and number one is I always was home on weekends. I never, since I don't golf and I hate people who golf now, it's kind of a joke I have, but no matter where I was in the world, I would make sure I was home on, you know, either Friday morning or Saturday morning and stay till either Sunday night or Monday night. So that was really important to me. I needed to be home. I needed to be recharged with my kids and I needed to be with them. And, you know, and if my daughters were dancing and my sons were playing football or lacrosse, I always tried to make sure I worked my schedule around it. So I would always be there for them if they need me. And, and I, you know, tried to be the best father.

1 (1h 2m 21s):
I, I mean, obviously I wasn't there at five o'clock every night and have dinner with him, but, you know, I had a lot of support from, you know, my wife and, and, and the kids, you know, really helped each other. I mean, my oldest daughter was amazing. And then the second daughter, and then the third daughter, and then finally got a son number four. And so they helped with each other and they, and they chipped in. And then when the first one got the driver's license, they were, you know, helping haul the kids around to their lessons. And so it was really a family effort. It's a great family. And I, you know, you didn't mention that I have 18 grandkids.

0 (1h 3m 1s):
What is your sort of like guiding principle as a leader? Like now that you've made mistakes and you've, you know, driven people crazy and kind of had time to reflect on the kind of person you are and the kind of leader you are, what do you, what do you aspire? Like, how do you aspire to lead? Like, what do you want people to say about you? And they're like, oh yeah, David, he is,

1 (1h 3m 23s):
He made my life better. You know, I, you know, we have this thing at, at, at a Zol where I tell everyone I want this to be the best job you've ever had. I want you to look forward to coming to work every day. And so I walk around the company saying, is this the best job you've ever had is just the best job of your head. If not, why not? Because I think if you do that, you know, if you matter, if your company matters, then you're going to be more successful. You know, if you were plucked from the face of the earth, would anybody care, you know, who would show up at your Memorial service and how many lives have you touched? Because I think the more people you touch in, the more good that you do and the more people you serve and the more lives that you change, the happier you are too. So all those things all work together

0 (1h 4m 6s):
At 22, 23, you were totally broke. You, you, you like reach these, these Heights and then you were broke and then back to working at your grandfather's store. And then all of these amazing things happened to you in your life. How much of that do you think is, is because you were really smart and hardworking and how much because of luck?

1 (1h 4m 27s):
Well, I think obviously you have points of luck, but I think you make your own luck to a great degree, you know, add peoples. And I, I tell people this that have add embrace it, it's you and it's who you are and take all the good from it. And my form of add has it, I have an ability to just look at a situation that's very complex and simplify it and say, let's just do it this way. And it drives my teams crazy. Cause they're like, no, it's not that simple. I'm saying, yes, it is just go do this, this and this, and we'll have it solved. And so, you know, sometimes it's not that simple, but you know, that's just who I am and that's how I'm wired.

1 (1h 5m 6s):
I can look at a situation and, you know, I can, I can see solutions. And so rather if it was in the airline business or any other business, I think I would have probably had that skill. And, but, you know, certainly the airline business has been my ticket to a lot of exciting times in my life. And there's, you know, there's nothing like sitting in a cockpit landing, an airplane and a 4,800 foot runway in Rio de Janeiro to give you a thrill and knowing that that's your plan and your people and your happy customers on board it's, it's, it's quite a thrill.

0 (1h 5m 42s):
That's David Neeleman, founder of check blue on top of building one of the most successful airlines in Brazil, he just launched a brand new us airline that will run short flights in the south and Northeast. It's called breeze airways that when David first set out to build it, he had a different name in mind that actually fits his character a little better Moxie. Oh, and you probably noticed how Southwest founder, herb Keller, her played a huge role in David's life. Well, herb actually passed away in 2019, shortly after I interviewed David for the show, but I was lucky enough to talk to her a few years before he died.

0 (1h 6m 22s):
And you can find his amazing story in our podcast feed. And thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you're not a subscriber, please do subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us or email addresses H ibt@npr.org, if you want to follow us on Twitter or at how I built this, or at guy Ross and on Instagram, you can follow at how I built this NPR or my account at guy dot Ross. This episode was produced by James Della, Lucy with music composed by Ramtin Arablouei thanks also to Janet oo, John Lee, Liz Metzger, Ferris safari, Derek gales, Julia Carney, Eva grant, and Jeff Rogers.

0 (1h 7m 3s):
I'm guy Ross and New Zealand. Listening to how I built this.

4 (1h 7m 22s):
This is NPR. This message comes from NPR, sponsor Ford, a large chandelier dangles directly above a stationary, all electric Mustang, Mach II it's held aloft by an intricate pulley system attached to the rear of the vehicle. Visit ford.com for a gravity defying display of torque.