3 (0s):
Pete really quick before we start this brand new episode of How I built this you may have heard about our new how I built this resilience Series where I've been having video conversations with Founders and Business Leaders about how they're reacting to the current economic crisis. You can see all those conversations by the way at our Facebook page facebook.com slash how I built this or on NPR's YouTube page. Anyway this week. I'm going to be live with five liters in the fashion and beauty industry every single day starting Monday, May 18th through May. Second I'll be hosting a live video chat with an incredible lineup of guests, including Marcia Kilgore of beauty pie and fit flop Jen Hyman of Rent the Runway Sarah LaFleur of mmm LaFleur Alli Webb of Drybar and James Reinhardt of thread up.

3 (45s):
We're going to be talking about the challenges. They're confronting and how they're trying to build resilience into their businesses. So join me every day this week at noon Eastern 9 a.m. Pacific at facebook.com how I built this and if you want to learn more about NPR's other virtual events, You can go to NPR presents

1 (1m 2s):
dot-org.

2 (1m 8s):
This was a real Breaking Point. Gary came home had a pizza in his hand and I said Gary there's hundreds of orders come in and we've got to have them done by the end of the week. And he said let me just have my supper and I'll do it and he sat down to eat his dinner. And of course I touched everything in the kitchen with fragrance. So he's Pizza tasted of not making ginger and he said if we carry on we're going to end in divorce. I looked at least I'm going to go and have a shower. I'll come back in a minute and I thought oh my God. No because I'd put all these seashells in the bath and I was sending them with lavender sea lavender oil

3 (1m 43s):
and I heard him

2 (1m 44s):
scream as he went in and he came walk down the hall and he said okay, that's it. We need to shop.

3 (1m 57s):
Ramen PR it's how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built I'm guy rosin on the show today how Jo Malone turned her homemade lotions into one of the hottest perfume brands in the world, Jo Malone, London. If a tree falls in a forest and no one's around to hear it, does it make a sound this famous philosophical thought experiment can easily be applied to entrepreneurship the question might go something like this if you make a great product, but you neglect the design element.

3 (2m 45s):
Will anyone notice it? Well, probably not. I mean think about how many dish soaps there were when method debuted in the late 1990s. There's a reason why people Method soap the product was good, but the bottle design was what got you to try it when Tristan Walker created the bevel razor. He wanted the unboxing experience to

2 (3m 6s):
be as exciting as the iPhone. He even wanted to replicate that

3 (3m 10s):
whoosh sound when the top part separates from the bottom of the Box. Why did swell bottles break out in a Marketplace inundated with water bottles? Because

2 (3m 20s):
Sarah cows designed them to stand

3 (3m 22s):
out now all those things might sound superficial but

1 (3m 26s):
in a crowded Marketplace, they matter it's

3 (3m 29s):
what gets people to hear your tree falling in the forest. And that's kind of what Jo Malone did as well. Now if you're not familiar with Jo Malone fragrances, I assure you you haven't seen a Jo Malone shop in some airport around the world the logo and the look is really simple a thin black frame around three words Jo Malone London, the perfume boxes are cream and wrapped

1 (3m 54s):
in a single black.

3 (3m 55s):
Bo that's it but there's something so elegant about that look that it makes you want to buy it which is basically how her brand Jo Malone took off but this was after years and years and years of making lotions and creams and selling them out of her small apartment in London. Joe's story is almost like one of those magical realism novels. It involves a real magician or dad his 10 dwarf rabbits a mysterious Countess named madame. Blue body and a working-class childhood on the outskirts of London now, I interview Joe before the World Went Crazy. Although let's be honest. It was crazy before too and I called her up to see how she's managing right now.

3 (4m 39s):
You're in London.

1 (4m 41s):
Yeah. I'm in lockdown London. Yeah, my son, of course, we've been living in lockdown together and actually, you know, what guy it's we laugh every single day as a family and I was thinking when would I ever have had this time with my 19 year old son again? Never he was doing my highlights last night coloring my hair is thoughtful but there's some really funny moments in the whole thing as well. Yeah probably loves on and I was sitting there trying to direct him and we were literally aching with laughter Joe. Let's

3 (5m 14s):
go ahead and listen to this episode that we recorded a few weeks ago about your life and your story and then we'll come back at the end and find out about your situation now, is that okay?

1 (5m 24s):
Okay.

3 (5m 26s):
Anyway, Joe grew up in a council estate or what Americans would call public housing in the 1960s with her. Mom dad and sister Jo has dyslexia, which went undiagnosed for years and it made School a real struggle for her.

2 (5m 42s):
I just couldn't keep up. I couldn't keep words in my head the things I was really good at with things like biology because it's visual as very good at history because I could listen to the stories and I would memorize those and Very good at religious studies believe it or not because again, they're based on stories but mathematics English languages, I struggled above and beyond I would literally be thrown out the class with the others and I was told I was lazy and stupid and I knew it was neither one of those things but I just couldn't follow an exam paper multiple choice to me was the worst thing in the world because I put my cross against an answer and I'd watch all the sentences and all the letters move around on the page.

2 (6m 25s):
Age and by the end of it, I would probably have answered three or four questions out of 20 and I'd fail and then I would pick up a book and I would read it and they'll be no problem at all. And I would think I'm cured and then I'm sure enough it would happen again and it still happens to me today. Not not as much as it did when I was a child. I'm you know can manage perfectly well now but that's probably because I'm not so anxious about it.

3 (6m 51s):
What was your parents marriage like?

2 (6m 54s):
it was happy and very unhappy both in the same breath they adored each other and then they hated each other and they adored each other and they hate each other and I was caught in the middle so I was the adult in our household from a very young age and this isn't I loved my mom dad desperately and I know that they did their very best for me but it made me grow up very very fast very quickly and when they would have an argument they would death throes of that awful thing of Joe tell your father he is It's not going to be ironed and I would go in and say Dad mum says your shirts tell you on mother and they're standing in the same room and I would sit there on the stairs listening to them fight and argue and then he'd walk out and she'd walk out and I would just carry on I go to the fridge see what was for dinner, but they were loving parents, but they just couldn't live together.

2 (7m 45s):
They were too volatile. What

3 (7m 47s):
did they fight about

2 (7m 49s):
money? What does everyone what am I speak? Well, let's be honest money. My my dad who was the artist he had lots of jobs. My father that my father was a brilliant brilliant man, but did job jump a lot. So he was an architect. He was a painter he would he was also a member of magic circle. So he was a magician. I mean you name it he could do it and he was a huge Gambler so they would real that money. They would rather his gambling would he like

3 (8m 20s):
below all of his money and like a poker game?

2 (8m 24s):
And the month after that yes, and then he'd suddenly have a huge wind. I remember him one day coming home and he draws up in this amazing Jaguar works. Like well what you didn't have that this morning? So, where's that without one on a poker game? And at the back of the car was all these leather coats that he'd obviously taken as payment from someone's Factory who didn't have enough money in my mother said get rid of the car get rid of the coats. We don't want them and so they were driven off the road. So it was there was always there was never a dull moment. That's for sure in our house in never made me love my dad less or love my mom less though. I could see they were both very good people and I realized about my daily wasn't until I was much older but when he did those things he was trying to do something nice for us and he didn't realize the way he was going about it made my mom feel really insecure, but I saw that actually where he was trying to use trying to tell her he loved her and you know, let's get in the car put on the coat and let's go for a drink and even as I'm talking Think about it.

2 (9m 25s):
It brings a smile to my face thinking there was so much kindness in my dad. But my goodness it did often came out the wrong way and just to

3 (9m 33s):
clarify your dad was a like, I mean he obviously an interesting guy like he was he sold paintings and he was a magician and

2 (9m 44s):
yes, well as I said, he didn't keep full-time jobs for very long. So he was a magician he'd gone through Magician School and he was a brilliant magician and I would go and Be the magician's assistant. So in our little garden bexleyheath we had rabbit hutches with about ten white Netherland Dwarf rabbits, which of course I had to look after and I had to look after them in the show because they would appear from hats and hop around and do all sorts of things. So I was The Magician's assistant, but he would also do his paintings and when he wasn't in a full-time employment, he still had to earn money so we would do he and I would do all the markets at the weekend. We would go set up a little market stall and pulled.

2 (10m 24s):
Paintings up and I knew that we had to sell three paintings every single cut day because I knew if we didn't we wouldn't eat so I would we would set it all up and I would send my father off to go and get breakfast very early and I would try and get the first sale before he came back and I pocket the money so I pocket it so I could give it to my mom because I knew he would put it in his pocket. We wouldn't see it. So I realized that survival was an important sort of point. Part of living.

3 (10m 55s):
I guess it was around when you were at age eight your will be sort of an important turning point in would be in your life and your mom's life. She met a woman named Madame Liu body who had a skin care like shop in London and went to work for her. Who was who is madam Liu

2 (11m 12s):
body. She was oh my God. I loved her. She was such a she's such an Eclectic human being so she was in her late 70s when I first met her and she was This brilliant skincare woman, I think my mum went first of all to just be the receptionist and my mom became so involved and enjoyed very much working with her that she took herself off and got herself qualified in anatomy physiology tricks and set to work working as Madame Le bharti's partner

3 (11m 42s):
and this was a like a skincare. So on Madame La

2 (11m 45s):
bise. Yeah, it was in baker's just of Baker Street in a place called Montague mentions, which is just around the corner from where Sherlock Holmes was rumored to have Lived and walked and that's where my mom went to work for her, but it wasn't a shop. It was a very private skin care clinic. So at that time in London, there were two women who were the skinned or ends of the time who would look after all the elites one was counters chalky and the other was Countess Liberty and she had her private clinic. This was a point when women didn't run their own businesses and they certainly didn't weren't successful in the way that both of them were but Madame Le bharti. She was very tall she was Six-two six-three blood red lipstick the most amazing the most incredible smell about how it was always like crushed sandalwood and Bulgaria like the finest rose oil you ever smelled she had blond hair cropped pixie hair.

2 (12m 40s):
She was had a white lab coat on she had cream fishnet tights very high shoes and I would often come in if I went with my mom at the weekends any any chance, I had it going up to Baker Street with my mom. I would go So she was like my best friend and I would love her and I think I got when I first met her it was just before dementia started to kick in but I could see I could see signs of it. Definitely because she'd suddenly forget my name or she'd forget something and she'd look at me and she'd say Joe. Do you remember where I put it and I say yes Madam. I was like a little helper a little her eyes. And so by the time I was a part of seven eight years old, I'd spent a long time with her in the laboratory.

2 (13m 24s):
And it was this white room and there was all these like big glass like old-fashioned sweetie jars rattling glass and they would have all had herbs in from roses to Sandalwood too slippery elm to camp for crystals to I mean you name it it was there there was every jar of honey. You could possibly thing and I would watch her make face creams and make face masks up was Madame Le body

3 (13m 49s):
like a character was she really like a cow test. What was she English? Who? The Watchers were sorry. Her real name was Doris Hilda Baker

2 (13m 58s):
and she but she did marry a count and you know something I don't know whether some of this was dementia kicking in. I hope not because she was obviously in hey young 20s. She was a very sought-after young woman. She told me once that she had passed messages backwards and forwards in the top of Lids of face creams, and I said just did that mean Spy, she said no. No, we never use that word. But I suppose some would say, you know, she was as she was a great Storyteller and I just I loved her my eyes were like dinner plates the whole time and there was a moment where we walked I took her out 41 afternoon and she walked down the road and then she suddenly said to me, I don't know where I am.

2 (14m 43s):
And I knew at that man. I cry. I remember I cried and I took a hand I said I know where we are and I took a home and I told my mom and and it was at that point that we had to get help and she deteriorated. Very quickly

3 (14m 54s):
after that I guess it was around like 1974 Madam Liu body. She dies and your mom is her employee and somehow kind of inherits the

2 (15m 8s):
business wasn't just her employees sheet by that point they had bit they'd worked as partners. So my mum had worked with in the clinic and was equalled she'd looked after and help pay for her debts. My mom was very good and very kind to Mana party.

3 (15m 21s):
I guess it was should clarify this and I guess you will but what You didn't all of a sudden overnight become rich because Madam Liu body apparently was like bankrupt like she had no money

2 (15m 30s):
and we certainly didn't become I don't think my family wherever wherever Rich

3 (15m 35s):
so when when melon will body died, I guess your mom decides to build her own similar type of business right and and and continue to make face creams. And and and so how did that go? How did her business

2 (15m 49s):
go? Well, I mean very well she had she built a really successful business. She Would go to people's houses. So she didn't have obviously Montague Mansions were Souls with on Baker Street. And of course I knew how to make the face cream. So I'd been doing it. Oh no, since I was seven eight years old so my jobs work to help her and on a Saturday morning, we would, you know be in the house in bexleyheath and what she say to me. I need 50 pots of cleansing cream. Can you make them and that was you know, that was my Saturday and I knew how to do it. I wouldn't necessarily measure anything else. It was I Is everything with such precision as she had taught me and I would clean the fridge out and lay all the all the kitchen roll out and I can I'd sterilize all the utensils my boil water and put the on and I would trust my nose to tell me when I had to put the oils in at that point.

2 (16m 41s):
It was like a mineral oil and a wax. So you had to wait until it all dissipated in the enamel bucket. Then I let it cool down and the minute it's skinned. I knew that was the point at which she poured it into the face pots and then again, I would I'd sit there and watch them and then I'd leave them and then they go into the fridge and that will be the 50 pots and they would sell for five pound fifty a pot. So I don't think I was proud of myself, but I was I knew that I when I looked at it and we'd sold it. I knew that we could eat that was always my motivation.

3 (17m 11s):
So alright. So your mom has this business and you are kind of helping her out and it sounds like she's doing okay and you're still a kid and we should be clear and you were still a you know, a little girl.

2 (17m 24s):
And I guess

3 (17m 25s):
by the time you reach what we would call a high school you decide that it's not for you that you basically drop out

2 (17m 31s):
well in between that so my mum was very very sick. And the thing that really I think probably I woke up one day I could see my mom my dad. My dad had disappeared he'd gone off with run off with someone and we I was left and I could see my mom deteriorating slowly and slowly on one day. I came home from school and I found her in a chair rocking herself backwards and forwards and she wouldn't Talk she wouldn't say anything. So I rushed to go and get a neighbor and she came in and she she said Joe take take your sister upstairs. I'm going to call the doctor and I you know that they never said your mum's 6, but she your mom's having a turn. That's what that's what she said. She

3 (18m 11s):
would call what

2 (18m 13s):
well she was at. My mom was having a breakdown. That's what my mum was and she was and you know what when people go through. I mean we talked about it a lot now about mental illness. It's not about being weak. She was Was she just held it together for too long? She was strong for too long and she just couldn't hold it any longer and then it was all down to me and I remember Social Services coming round and they said that my sister and I would have to go into a home and I managed I didn't lie, but I certainly didn't tell the truth. I I just know know there's people around at one of my dad's coming home and they said well, where is your father? Oh, he's traveling. He's coming back. Everything will be fine. But for for a year, I Kamiya, and I made sure that my sister went to school every day I take and then I come back home nurse my mum bath my mum gave her a breakfast make the face creams up get on the train with a shopping trolley.

2 (19m 6s):
I'd go up to the flat of my mom worked from sell all the product put it

1 (19m 9s):
in and then come all the way back and then cook dinner

2 (19m 12s):
and I put food on the table and that's when I left when I stopped going to school. I couldn't see the point of it. You can see the point of sitting there feeling stupid being told I was stupid and lazy and it's like I'm running a business. I know how to make money and I make face creams and that was probably the last day I went to school and I was one of those people that fell through the cracks in the educational system, but for that I'm really grateful because it made me

3 (19m 38s):
so basically around the time you were 16 years old you were independent. I mean you had to work and earn money to live to

2 (19m 47s):
survive. I wasn't defending you up see right the age of 16 then when I was legally allowed. To Lisa my mom eventually became better. And I was I didn't realize at the time but it was going to happen again and it happened twice more but I thought she was better and you know that I wanted to I wanted to be a teenager or a child. So I went to live with a family friend in London with an amazing family called the souls. And for the first time in my life. I saw what a family should be. We would sit I we'd never sat at a table and eat a meal together as a family at home.

2 (20m 27s):
Whereas here every night you would sit and you would talk about your day and they were just the kindest loveliest people in the whole world and I kind of went to live with them. I got a job in just in the blanks in a little flower shop. I learn 29 pounds a week, but it was a really really really happy time and what I noticed I noticed that I had that my sense of smell was something that was very extraordinary. I didn't realize to what extent aunt but I would pick up the flowers I'd say I smell the bottom of the end of the thing and the top of the Tulip and I'd say they've been in the fridge for three days. I want the fresh ones. No, no Joe that they're absolutely footnote.

2 (21m 9s):
They have I don't want those and eventually they just knew that they couldn't if I picked up something to smell I could tell whether it was fresh or it been sitting in the fridge and that that was my first job

3 (21m 20s):
and I think Justin de Blanc was like a high-end grocery store or something like that and in London at the time,

2 (21m 26s):
he was a brilliant entrepreneur. I want to be a shopkeeper. So you open a bakery. I think first of all and then he opened a flower shop and then he opened a delicatessen a really high-end Delicatessen in Elizabeth Street. I think

3 (21m 39s):
I think you worked in there Delicatessen to write like like with just enough like before before moving on.

2 (21m 45s):
Yeah. Yeah and I left there. I went on to work in another flower shop. And then from there I went to work with my mom I went back because she was very poorly again. So that's when I went to work with her. I guess it's a

3 (22m 1s):
certain point Joe. Maybe you're 18 or 17 or you went to to Bible school. Yeah, I the reason why I asked about Bible schools because I guess that was where you met the person who would become your partner Gary who become your husband. Yeah. He was lazy. I saw his he was also student there.

2 (22m 22s):
Yes, he was David studying. He would have made me laugh now. He'd made a great Vigor, but he what He definitely was thinking about it full time and we fell in love with each other and I knew that structure was not for me.

3 (22m 35s):
So you you meet Gary and you guys the two of you got married pretty young. I met you. I think you were 20 or 21 21. Yes that was sort of around the time where you or your mom had asked you to come back and help her out and soon after she has a sounds like I think if I'm right, I mean she had a

2 (22m 56s):
stroke, right? It was like a stroke and it but there were severe complications with it as well. So the woman who was taken into hospital that night never returned

3 (23m 9s):
formation was it was almost as if her personality had changed

2 (23m 13s):
completely. Yeah completely and I don't blame her for that, but it was our relationship from that moment was never the same. She was never the mother that I had remembered everything I did was wrong and she Completely change and of course the more successful I became in the business the more she hated me because I was living the life that she wanted to live and we were young married couple by the time that she came out of hospital and everything. It was just like I just can't live like this here. There was one incident where she I was upstairs doing someone's face and I came down to the kitchen to pick up a face mask off a through and as I walked through she picked up a part of a face cream and she threw this at me and it landed all the way down my face.

2 (23m 57s):
Face and I stood there and it was the it was just the utter humiliation. I think of the whole thing and I snapped and I said, that's it and I remember going upstairs finishing. I finished the day and I finished the woman's face and I wiped my hair and I sobbed and I walked out of that house and thought that if I stay here I'll die. And so I made the decision that I was going to walk away that day and I did but unbeknown to me. I signed something

3 (24m 26s):
that made.

2 (24m 27s):
Responsible for the debt. So as I walked out of that door as a young woman newly married thinking I'm you know going to start again little did I know that I have is going to have that that I would have to pay off for the next goodness knows how many years and I did basically

3 (24m 43s):
were your your mom's business partner, but somehow this business was saddled with thousands of pounds of fat that you now were responsible

2 (24m 54s):
for yeah. I did what I've done all my life. Which is accept the responsibility even though it wasn't my fault and just get on them push through.

3 (25m 4s):
Wow. So alright. So it's like 1988 or 89 your about. I guess 24 your mom obviously cannot run a business at that point and you take on like 30,000 pounds. I guess we're rough forty thousand dollars roughly of debt at the time. So what are you gonna do? Like, how are you going to make money this start paying this

2 (25m 26s):
off? Went back to the four plastic jugs in the source from which have been my probably my best friend's all my

3 (25m 32s):
life. You meant you mean you started to make face lotions and creams.

2 (25m 36s):
I just thought what can I do? And it was by that point guy. It was in my blood and so I set up and I would carry my massage bed from house to house and I would do people's faces and I would go to one house and I'd say you got any sisters, you know, if I can stay here and do three four treatments. I knew that It was a really good day. And that's how I existed for a good six to eight months and I started a builder Cleon tell together. They were my word of mouth. You know, they did all the marketing for me. I didn't have to do it. I do the faces. I'd come home. I get a taxi or Gary would pick me up. Then I make the face creams and I get ready for the next day.

2 (26m 16s):
Huh? And that was our existence.

3 (26m 18s):
Can I ask you about food comes from and I mean, I'm curious like how do you make these creams are what are you buying and mixing together?

2 (26m 25s):
Well Cosmetics are either oil in Water or water into oil. It's like cooking. It's like making a white sauce or a red sauce. It was in those days. Anyway, it's a little bit more complex now, but I would take the the waxes down or add the oils and boil it all up strain it through muslin. Let it stand for 24 hours. Then go back add all the essential oils of the time. We had a juniper skin tonic, which was the most wonderful fresh green tonic that you'd put on your skin and your skin would just come alive. It would never dry out. So I would you know do all of those things and I suppose is making Juniper is a bit like making vodka or gin it's all the same sort of pieces in it's just different ingredients and different heating points.

3 (27m 9s):
So and these are things you knew how to do intuitively because your mom had studied how to do it and you just grew up as a kid helping her out doing it with her. I guess. Well, I'd watched I watched but it was

2 (27m 21s):
also the all the years of Madame oui Madame Le bar see, you know, it was all of those things like the yogurt face mask. I still make today that I learned to make that in Baker Street with a yogurt a honey little bit of lemon juice to kind of sell the milk. Honey is Sandalwood powder at slippery elm powder olive oil avocado oil? Jojoba oil and you had to do it and I still you know, it's still within me. I still know and understand how to it's when you do, you know, what making 10 to 12 pots are face creams easy. It's when you scale it when you get to a hundred pots and five.

3 (27m 54s):
That's hard. Yeah, because you have

2 (27m 56s):
to you have to To alter and of course health and safety and health and hygiene aware of didn't exist in those days today. You couldn't stand in your kitchen and be pouring face cream in and put it in your fridge. She wouldn't be able to do that. But way back then it was perfectly acceptable and perfectly. Okay,

3 (28m 14s):
and you are and you did this all out of your apartment. Where were you and Gary were living?

2 (28m 18s):
Yes. We had rented a small apartment in Chelsea and I would transform this little flat into a tiny little exclusive Skin Care Clinic. And we decided that this business is business was taking 14 to 16 hours a day. So perhaps we would live in the flat where we were working. But of course was no bedroom. It was just one skincare room one kitchen and a beautiful big sitting room. So we went to home base and bought a piece of blue foam and that was our bed for probably about four or five years and we would roll it out and then we hide

3 (28m 50s):
it. So when people come in for the treatments, right we

2 (28m 54s):
so Chic luxury, isn't it? We'd roll it up and it would go into the laundry. Closet and everything will be transformed and it would look like a little shop in the sitting room with this big bookcase and it would be full of product and by the end of every day everything was gone. So the minute the last client which was about 6:30 course of seven. I've made myself a big strong cup of coffee stand in the kitchen. That was just so tight. It was it was no more than two people standing there plastic jugs would come out and I would start and I'd look at my appointment list and he was coming and I knew that certain women

1 (29m 27s):
On

3 (29m 27s):
six bottles of creams how I would make a big super duper

2 (29m 31s):
thing. And by the time Gary came home hoping for dinner, he would be filling the bottles and labeling them and by about 1112. We'd roll out a piece of blue foam lie down go to sleep. And then the next day would wake up again. Well, and then I think the turning point was the third of the fourth Christmas and he walked in one evening and he had a pizza in his hand and I said Gary there's hundreds of orders come in and we've got To have them done by the end of the week and he said let me just have my supper and I'll do any sat down to eat his dinner. And of course, I touched everything in the kitchen with fragrance. So he's Pizza tasted of not making ginger. He went to make himself a cup of tea and everything bubbled up over the coffee cup and he said I can't do this anymore.

2 (30m 16s):
If we carry on we're going to end in divorce and I looked inside. I'm going to go and have a shower. I'm just I'll come back in a minute and I thought oh my God. No because I'd put all these seashells in the bath and I was Two men with lavender sea lavender oil. I heard him scream as he went in and I thought I'm really in trouble and he K worked at all and he said okay, we need a shop and I went I don't want to shop and he said no that's it. And that night we sat down and he said I think I should leave my job and I think we should go into business together and I will help you. I'll be that everything that you're not and unable you to do this, but we can't carry on living like this and he was right it Was Breaking Point?

3 (31m 1s):
When we come back in just a moment how Joe moved out of the kitchen and into a brick and mortar shop and how she managed to build Buzz even before the doors opened stay with us. I'm guy Rosner listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible. First to eat trade trading isn't for everyone. But E-Trade is whether it's saving for a rainy day or your retirement E-Trade has you covered they can help you check financial goals off your list and with a team of professionals giving you support when you need it.

3 (31m 43s):
You can be confident that your money is working hard for you get more than just trading with E-Trade to get started visit each. Dot-com podcast more information E-Trade Securities LLC member finra SI PC. Thanks. Also to zip recruiter hiring used to be hard juggling multiple job board sifting through stacks of resumes. It can be overwhelming but now hiring can be easy. Thanks to zipper Cooter. We're four out of five employers who post a job get a quality candidate within the first day zip recruiter the smartest way to hire try zipper. order for free and zip recruiter.com be UI LT

1 (32m 30s):
Face masks have become the new normal as we continue to Grapple with the ongoing pandemic. But when did we start wearing masks for our health and

2 (32m 37s):
safety this week on through line the origins of the n95 mask and how it became the life-saving tool it is today through line from NPR the podcast where we go back in time to understand the

1 (32m 49s):
present.

3 (32m 56s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's 1994 Joe and Gary both decided to go all-in on Joe's Cosmetics business. They have about a Year's worth of cash to start out with and Gary has insisted that the business needs to get out of their apartment and into a space of his

2 (33m 14s):
own. So we moved along Water Street Monday and he'd found three sites and I looked at the night. I went no. No, I just I have this with this thing about gut. That gut feeling and I looked them known as he walked down the street. He was that that point not talking to me and just he just said you just impossible Joe and I walked past this one shop and it was a building site and I felt the shop say it's me and he looked red you have got to be joking. And I when it's that one and that's where we

3 (33m 47s):
started and what when I guess it was just obvious you're going to call it Jo Malone you were going to call that that's what the name of the shop was going to be. Yeah, I'm Mean, I didn't know

2 (33m 56s):
what I was Jo Malone. I didn't I didn't even think about that and it was by that point. Of course, we have products with Jo Malone London on it and we done all the packaging. So yes, it was a don't even even thought about that. It

3 (34m 10s):
sounds like for most of the early days of your business you are making face lotions and creams and body oils. But today, of course, I think most people think of Jo Malone as a perfume. So when did that start? When did you start making perfumes

2 (34m 24s):
completely topsy-turvy? So normally it's a fragrance that comes first in what we call ancillaries right mine was the other way round. So I was doing I created a body lotion. First of all from there. I created a bath oil and then from the bath oil I went to the fragrance because of course I wasn't allowed alcohol. So you need alcohol to manufacture of fragrance, and I didn't have that.

3 (34m 46s):
Why weren't you like to have alcohol?

2 (34m 48s):
Well, I was living in a in premises. I couldn't have a whole lot of flammables. It

3 (34m 52s):
was not a whole day make it wasn't safe.

2 (34m 55s):
Didn't have the amount I needed as well. And you needed when you make fragrance. You have to let it stand. It's a bit like it's a bit like wine or if you put Garlic into olive oil and you have to let it sit and then you have to filter it is very technical but I wasn't allowed to have huge amounts of like 40 50 kilos of neat alcohol to make fragrance with so the fragrance was the last thing that came in the line, but by that point when we had the one of Gary's first Jobs when he came to work together was to go Fine factories and that man literally drove around England to all the factories and they said war Gary. Can you give us the formulation and where does follow it? He said unfortunately, it's in Joe's head.

2 (35m 36s):
So I had to go with him and I had to stand in the Laboratories which are very frustrating because they pour it in and I'd smell it and I go you can't smell it. Well, you can't put any more fragrance than that in and I went give me the thing. I'd put another light huge dollop in and I go. Yep. That's it. That's the level. And they said you can't buy that level in bar Fallen, but you can't do that. I said why not who says I can't and I remember someone saying to me no one's going to buy a fragrance called lime basil and Mandarin and I remember look at them and saying why not that's what it is. Why are we pretending to call it something? It's not. Well they were wrong. It is Joe. How are you

3 (36m 16s):
coming up with fragrances like lime basil and Mandarin or nutmeg and ginger. Like how are you coming up with the sense for the

2 (36m 25s):
perfumes? the way I create today is slightly different than when I did in those and those days I would just create single notes and then lock them together like music and I would smell it in my head and then I create it in a little little jar glass

3 (36m 39s):
jar and I'd put it into a body lotion

2 (36m 41s):
or bath oil it's often however

3 (36m 42s):
test things first of all

2 (36m 44s):
and then test it see if it worked and then if it weren't for me to get it formulated get it bottled get it out there and that was my there wasn't that in the testing period was done on me or Gary poor Gary, you said Things like that all over him to see if it lasts is because you're not just looking at the smell of something. You're looking. What is it doing 30 seconds. What does it do in a minute? What is it doing in an hour? How does it dry down? What is it? So you're looking at all of those, you know different

3 (37m 9s):
elements. Yeah, and when you talk about notes, right you're talking I mean we think of musical notes, but you're talking about sent notes, right like like for example, the the smell of vanilla or the smell of Ginger like that would each of those things would be one note. Are there multiple notes in each? Each ingredient

2 (37m 27s):
there are called so it just think of it just like music or poor mixing paint on a pallet. So what we've done what I'm doing is I'm taking if I look at a Jasmine and it's too heady. What I'm looking for is that fine Mist that comes from a fountain in the heat in Malaysia in the middle of the afternoon. So I'm taking the Jasmine and recreating it. So I'm creating these little little notes and Accords that I'm smiling and then I run around and I pick like Crush green Palm leaves and I'm taking that and then I twist it round the Jasmine so I'm looking for notes that sit

3 (38m 3s):
together and that make the

2 (38m 5s):
fragrance kind of bigger until a bigger story and then I'm delving into my memory for all the all the memories that I have of notes from either know the riding a horse in Montana the leather of a saddle and a rainstorm to the smell of broth

3 (38m 21s):
cooking on a breach in Parrot Key, which is the

2 (38m 24s):
smell of pomelo to me. Me the skin of a bit so it's an art form where but I'm telling you stories or in writing poetry to you and writing music. I'm just telling you and piecing together those notes and then allowing you to have your own memory with that fragrance. So it just

3 (38m 43s):
seemed like an obvious extension, you know, you're already making the lotions that had fragrances. So why not just just take the fragrance out and put it in its own bottle people were asking for it there were

2 (38m 55s):
people Saying that when where can I buy the fragrance from so it was a we knew it was it was a wonderful product and we knew that people

3 (39m 2s):
wanted it even in the early days when you open the store. Like I read that like they were lines of people waiting to come in before you even opened up. But what I'm wondering is how did they know about the store? I mean, were you were you did you hire a PR firm where you getting will you go and pitching newspapers and trying to get Articles written

2 (39m 26s):
about you, how did that happen? So I had a case client code Deborah Bennett and Deborah Bennett. She'd been a very dear part of our lives for a long time. And she said I'll help you and she did we did a big party to launch the shop and we did an amazing piece in British Vogue the telegraphed I mean everybody did everybody came out and supported and wrote about the shop and it just it just took off like wildfire. But by that point we had a good 1500 to 2000. People that were loyal to the product, huh? And that first Christmas, of course the minute we hit January we saw our Market literally triple because everyone had been given a product at Christmas was then coming back buying it for themselves and then giving it as a gift.

2 (40m 10s):
So it was it was a phenomenal growth pattern that we saw

3 (40m 14s):
at that time. They didn't only for a rate when you when you open the shop did you with was the label like dude already? Look the way Jo Malone products look today did was that the look already at that point? Yes.

2 (40m 29s):
Yeah pretty much and it was one of my face clients. She's a lady called Isobel attentively and she is one of my best friend's to this day. She came and had her face down one day and I was sitting there and she said what would you like to do with the packaging and she sat on the floor with me with some empty cream and black boxes? And I said, well, I want this here and it's so funny when you are successful people always claimed that they were the ones that did it. I've read a lot of Things about people who said they did it they didn't it was Isabella tetchy that did it and she was the one that put the package in together. And as we were sitting there I said, it's still missing something and she turned around on the back of the sofa. Gary had left her a tire black tie from an event that we'd been at and she picked it up and wrapped it around it.

2 (41m 15s):
And that was the black ribbon and so it was her her genius

3 (41m 19s):
and was a because its iconic their rates like The Germ Alone Box. We all square in the black bow tie.

2 (41m 25s):
She then took it to her graphic designer and they did drawings and whatever the minute I saw it is like yeah, that's it. And that was that's what we used.

3 (41m 34s):
You know, it's interesting Joker's we've done other Cosmetics brands on the show like Bobby Brown and Bliss and it's interesting cuz there was this seems like it was a turning point in the industry are you know in the US and in the UK like this is a time when people started to notice these very kind of clean. Products, you know these cook and like eels is an example of that. Right? Like you walked into Keels in the 90s and it looked like a pharmacy and it sounds like what a similar thing was happening with Jo Malone like you had a very clear aesthetic that is people seem to do kind of be attracted to

2 (42m 13s):
I think I think we were very much see the pioneers of the Indie brands that are today all of us in all of our own businesses had that turning point, but it was it wasn't just just about what's the aesthetic was it was what was in the bottle? It was a storytelling authentic real heartbeat of a person behind a brand so all of those people you mentioned Bobby Brown Marcia Kilgore of bliss and all of us were it didn't matter where we were coming from whether it be color hair skin fragrance. We were all really doing the same thing and people will identifying with them. So suddenly it wasn't it was about Going into a lifestyle and I think a lot of the Indie Brands we were the Pioneers that carved out that Marketplace for us because at that time there was a poor cousin today.

2 (43m 5s):
They're certainly not there be there the Brand's where everybody you know, the big guys want to buy them because they can see that we had created things that they with all their money and all their teams and all their budgets could not create. Yeah, and we were still very much connected with Our Brands and you could feel the personality of the founder within that. At Brand and I think that was a huge part of the success of it.

3 (43m 29s):
Yeah. I mean, this is the the story of what was it was been called disruption rate, which is like two people like you and Gary could hang on your kitchen and make just this iconic brand but huge multinationals couldn't actually do that because they weren't as Nimble, right? They couldn't they couldn't move as quickly because they had huge enormous businesses.

2 (43m 51s):
It's just they had lots of teams and by the time you have an idea When it gets through to I mean listen, I've sat on both sides of the fence. So I understand both of them. I think the agility of a young Indy brand or you know, these young entrepreneurial Brands and the way that have an idea and they spin it and they turn it and they twist it and they move with it and they are listening to the voice of the people and they're listening to their own inner created voice and it's that relationship that brings the product to Market faster and quicker.

3 (44m 21s):
This is so to like you. I mean, I think you're going to store 90 For with in like six months you hit your 5 year Revenue goal and 15 months in you hit a million dollars in sales. This is not I mean this is still kind of a time when entrepreneurs like yourself, we're not going to like private equity and outside investors. It wasn't like today you might have done that at this point, right you would have had investors coming in and at that point you were your revenue is was fueling the business, right your cash flow is allowing you to to You know more products and to expand I guess is that sort of how it

2 (45m 1s):
worked but kind of the beginning it did. Yeah, because there was a me we hit our first million on Christmas Eve, which is that was just makes me feel so good. So it was it was Christmas Eve when we shut shop and as I did the takings on the till we were 342 pounds, I think it was shorts of our first million. So I looked at Gary and I said open the door we can't shut them.

3 (45m 26s):
And so we open the door and

2 (45m 27s):
it was all men. It was all men who were so glad we'd open the door and they

3 (45m 31s):
were it was like

2 (45m 32s):
3:30 in the afternoon.

3 (45m 34s):
We open the door and they all came

2 (45m 35s):
rolling in and we could see it adding up and within 10 minutes we've done it but the guy that took us over the

3 (45m 41s):
million was he said I want the cheapest thing you've got so I can put it in their stocking

2 (45m 47s):
and it was an 895 shower. Gel. I shall never ever forget it and as I wrapped it, I handed it back to him and gave him a bottle of Dom Perignon Champagne. And I said Merry Christmas and he looked and he said you're never

3 (45m 59s):
going to make a great business and by doing that to her, but he had no idea that it was him the million. That's why so you hit a million and even though you were doing a million dollars in sales. I'm imagine that neither of you were personally getting rich because you had to buy product. You have to make product you had to use the cash flow to hire staff and to put it right back into the

2 (46m 22s):
business, right? Yeah if you want a business to grow You've got to invest back into it. So there was and by that point we were growing so we couldn't we couldn't just buy 50 plastic bottles a time. We were buying two to three thousand plastic bottles of time.

3 (46m 37s):
And at this point you still have one shop on Waltons trees and it at this point you start to think we should open more shops or were you focus on just that that one

2 (46m 50s):
shot by Molly were being hounded and when I say hounded we Every buyer every agency every single person saying to Gary we want this product from New York to LA to I mean you name it they

3 (47m 6s):
wanted they wanted you to open your own shop. So they just wanted to import your products and sell it at their shops.

2 (47m 11s):
Now. They wanted to import the product. And so what happened was Dawn Mello who's one of the great iconic shopkeepers about of time and at that time she was heading department store in New York City, which is It is the number one Bergdorf Goodman and by that point we had a lot of a New York La consumer base that were buying from London. So there was obviously a you know, a demand and a hunger for it and she said well give you a little bit of space and Gabby to her and said if you want Jo Malone you have to build us a shop. And of course we were these two tiny we had no money. We had no budget and she I remember her looking at him.

2 (47m 53s):
She was so wonderful and she went Okay, you come to New York City and we'll talk about it. And that's what we did. So we went to New York and we had this tiny little rotunda. There's she said you can have that space and that's it. And she said anything else and he said yes, I want to use my own packaging. Well that they nearly all flipped and will nearly walked out of the meeting room at that point and I was ready to go. Oh Gary just you know will use Bergdorf Goodman bags and he said no we're going to use Jo Malone bags we have to and they eventually yielded and let us let us use our own packaging. So you

3 (48m 28s):
basically work at a Bergdorf Goodman holding a Jo Malone bag. Not at Bergdorf Goodman bag. Yep.

2 (48m 34s):
Yeah. Well and I mean, let me tell you that was that was all head. That was not me. I was ready to yield on that one. And of course he had been thinking strategically. So on our run up to opening in Bergdorf governor, and you know, the rule of thumb is there's no point taking any brand or any product to any part of the world. No matter how brilliant it is. No one knows it's there. So you have to create this bars and you have to create the voice and you have to create the want ability. So we'd got back to the hotel went up to the hotel room and he started to unpack this box with all these bags in and I said, what are you doing? And he said I'm making bags up and he started to make Jo Malone bags up and put the black ribbon on the outside.

2 (49m 19s):
I said,

1 (49m 21s):
it's nothing in them. And he

2 (49m 22s):
said no one else knows that we employ. Lloyd people to walk around New York City holding 10 empty Jo Malone

3 (49m 31s):
bags for the month and the six weeks

2 (49m 34s):
run up to opening in Bergdorf Goodman. And by the time we did everybody had seen these Jo Malone bags, which had nothing in them and everybody thought that it was a much more successful brand than it was but it was converted in empty eggs. We call it walking the

3 (49m 50s):
dogs and we still do it today just have people carrying empty drum alone bags down the

2 (49m 55s):
street.

1 (49m 55s):
Yep,

3 (49m 56s):
and it worked. It was genius. I have to imagine that you are constantly getting pinged by people who were who wanted to franchises business who are saying hey, we want to invest we want to open up Jo Malone shops all over the US and how are you dealing with that? I mean was that first of all was that

2 (50m 13s):
happening? Yes, I mean, yes, it was it was happening but it didn't feel right. I was little I knew I was looking for three things. I was looking for people with Deep Pockets. I was looking for their financial bit, but I needed someone to teach us about distribution because we could see that distribution was a key and

3 (50m 31s):
it was probably one of the things we were lacking

2 (50m 34s):
but more importantly I needed somebody that really loved what we did and what they did

3 (50m 40s):
get it. So here's a question 1899. You have this hugely successful. Ran you've got lines out the door. You're at Bergdorf Goodman and you sell to Estee Lauder. I mean why why did you decide to do that?

2 (50m 54s):
Because I found all three and I knew I had so those three things, you know, you can often you can find money you can find distribution, but it was that last part about hot it was do they love me and this business and and do I love who they are. That was a really important part to me and I couldn't find that last missing piece until I met mr. Order and when I sat with Leonard Lauder, he reminded me of myself for me. He was a great entrepreneurial Spirit who love the beauty industry and who'd walked beside his mom. So there was lots of the similarities and when we were negotiating it was I was going to stay for the rest of my life.

2 (51m 34s):
So it were I needed something that I knew was going to be for the rest of my life, and I wanted to stay and I wanted to continue to be Joe and Day that we agreed it and signed was probably one of the happiest days of my life.

3 (51m 49s):
So you are now Jo Malone is now owned by Estee Lauder and you are you know, essentially an employee of Estee Lauder you become the creative director of your brand Jo Malone and you still running it and it sounds like it didn't feel a whole lot different and and I guess within two years or three years of that happening you are diagnosed with breast cancer. Yeah. Which I'm sure came as a shock. You were just 37 38 years old when when you got that

2 (52m 21s):
diagnosis. Yes, I was I was in New York City. I remember it vividly. I don't need just have Josh my son. He was sort of to I think 18 months to and I was so tired all the time and I'd never felt that. I'd never felt sick or I'd never felt weary and I was in the Four Seasons in New York City in the hotel one morning, and I found something just My kind of chest bone. I went back home went to see the doctor and that night I as I sat when they they done all the tests and I looked at the nurses face when I looked at the doctors face and I knew it was really bad news. I just could feel it and he looked at me and he said I'm you know, I'm terribly sorry to tell you but it looks like you have a very aggressive form of breast cancer and we think that you need to get your life in order.

2 (53m 14s):
They were he was basically telling me I didn't have long to live and I just might I watch poor Gary just collapsed on the floor and I was it was a whit was such a weird moment because I was dressed to go to this big party in London called the seven-time party and I remember fiddling with my earrings in my pocket thinking. Okay. Well, I'll just get through this and then I'll go to the party and all and then I suddenly realized that someone had given me a death sentence. and it started to sink in and then then all I could think about was Josh and Gary that's the only I didn't care about any of the rest of it but my son and my own I just remember thinking God I'll never see him grow up I'll never seen better school I never seen that a uni I'll never see him get married you know there's always awful awful Downing thoughts and I went home Gary was just in pieces complete pieces and trying to be strong and I sat in the end of my bed remember thinking Joe you've never listened to a

3 (54m 13s):
word anyone has ever told you in her life why on Earth are you going to listen now When we come back in just a moment how John Malone's battle with cancer bleacher to walk away from the brand with her name for good stay with us. I'm Gyros and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsor patreon where creators can build a more sustainable income Source by giving their fans monthly access to exclusive Community premium content and the chance to become active participants in the work.

3 (54m 57s):
They love checkout patreon.com right now.

1 (55m 6s):
Sticks and Stones might break your bones but during this pandemic hateful words could actually kill you

3 (55m 12s):
this is dangerous at a level which we haven't seen I think in Generations this is painting a Target on millions of

1 (55m 20s):
Americans your questions about race and Kovac next time on code switch from NPR

3 (55m 27s):
hey welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Roz so it's 2002 and Joe has just received the news of her cancer And almost immediately the lottery family connects Joe with a specialist in New York to start a treatment.

2 (55m 43s):
So we all moved out and we ran the business from New York City and Gary would commute that person forwards. Josh was Tiny. So he was very easy to maneuver around but I was I was really suffer. I just suffered

3 (55m 56s):
so badly threat, but I kept telling myself that grin and bear it Joe grin and bear it and

2 (56m 1s):
come through this and I had I mean Larry Naughton just was the most

3 (56m 5s):
incredible. W dr. Hudock Sloan-Kettering.

2 (56m 7s):
Yeah. Yeah. He's one of those people in my life that without him. I wouldn't be sitting talking to you today. And so I did I did one mastectomy then we got through all of the chemo and I had to do chemo all over again and then on that last bit when I thought it was all over they found something else in the other breast over I had to go through it. All again. I can't tell you I was the chemo had really taken over by that point and then one day Larry walked in and said it's gone.

3 (56m 35s):
Wow, it's

2 (56m 37s):
it's time to go home go back and live your life and I sublet come back and he said I don't know but we have to go back and live your life and and my life was back in my hands again. And I knew that I had to do something remarkable with

3 (56m 51s):
it, which I mean I think for anybody who goes through experience like that where you are, so close to death it puts your life into perspective and you know does And you came to a conclusion. I think 99% of people would come to including myself which is work. And that part of me isn't important. It's my family. It's taking the advantage of life and living it to its fullest and you decide That you've got to leave work. You want to leave because for obvious reasons, I mean, I think right because you you went through this experience.

2 (57m 33s):
I think well, I'd the chemo had taken my sense of smell. I hadn't told anyone that and I couldn't smell properly and that was

3 (57m 39s):
your superpower your said her sense of

2 (57m 42s):
smell it was and I hadn't told anyone that at all. I was too scared to even admit it to myself and I was standing in in the shopping. It's an Avenue and I just didn't feel as though I belong there anymore. I'd I was so concerned for everybody involved. I didn't want to do anything wrong with the Lord of Corporation and the Lord has because they'd saved my life. Yeah. I didn't want to see one person lose their job because that was their lives, but I knew I couldn't stay as the person I was so I went to Leonard and I explained to him and he they all tried to change my mind and said please think again.

2 (58m 23s):
Ending again and I was so determined guy to to walk away so I could Lu back to London and as I got nearer to that day of leaving, I knew I'd made the biggest mistake of my life. Why because I started to realize that It wasn't a job. It was my best friend. Yeah,

3 (58m 42s):
it was your knee was you your identity.

2 (58m 45s):
It was everything it was about the creativity and I realized that I would never create fragrance again and I would never do all the things that I loved and and everybody was running and getting everything ready and Gary was doing all the forms and I wanted to scream and say please can we just stop and I know if I had it would have done. I know Leonard would have made it stop and I said to him can I be the last person? Listen to turn the lock in the key on that last day. And he said yes, you can and I solved and solved as I put the bottles on the shelf for the last time and I realized who on Earth was I ever going to be again, boo.

2 (59m 24s):
What had I done what had I done? But I still couldn't smell and I'd signed a five-year lockout a non-compete a non-compete for five years. Yeah, and I suddenly felt this big heavy noose coming tighten with Tighter and Tighter around my neck. Check and then a month into it all being over. I woke up one morning and I could smell and I could smell like I'd never smelled before and of course that that's when I started to really suffer from anxiety, but this is

3 (59m 54s):
an important point because I think a lot of people hear stories on our show like yours right where people sell their businesses whether it's Bobby Brown or Kate Spade or Marcy Kilgore and you know, they might think Well now she's got it made you know, she's sold this company. She's financially secure for life and she can go and you know travel and do whatever she wants but people forget that businesses not aren't about money. They're about your identity there who you are. They're the things that you that animate us write. It was those late nights in the apartment in Chelsea eating pizzas and making lotions and getting clients and it was with all those things that made your life gave your life meaning up until that point.

2 (1h 0m 43s):
Yeah. Yeah, you're right. I'd love to with the business. I cried with that. I built it. I'd seen it, you know all the emotions that you have with a human being I'd had with a business. I know that sounds weird, but not all that's and I was suddenly I was suddenly walking away from my best friend. It was didn't have two arms and two legs, but it had a heartbeat and it had creativity and it had a conversation and it taught me things and when I walked away I couldn't even walk past the shop I could feel myself getting choked up and I felt resentful I felt angry I felt hurt I was what I now know I was going through the five steps of grief yeah I was grieving for something but you know and people listening to this was will say what come on Jay you know you had enough money in the bank but all I wanted to do was make a face cream and sell it and I had signed five years of shackles and and it was that it was the most miserable five years of my life

3 (1h 1m 41s):
so how did you I think you call it your Wilderness years or it's been it's been called that what did you how did you navigate those five years what did you

2 (1h 1m 50s):
do I when I helped other people with their businesses I sat on boards and all I wanted to do was was to come back all I wanted was to make Creer egrants and yeah but of course I was living this Smiley mask and crying every single night and just thinking And I kept I have my first anxiety attack and I thought I was having a heart attack and often anxiety is connected with energy and when your adrenaline starts to come back and I realize that's what was happening to me. My body was starting to tell me come on, you know, get ready to run again. It's time to do something. Yeah, and I made a television show actually for the BBC called High Street Dreams.

2 (1h 2m 34s):
I've formulated it and sold the idea to the BBC and we made that and I was I was In a garden with a pair of Wellington Boots on and I was filling bottles of chili sauce for this

3 (1h 2m 45s):
family and you're doing this this show for aspiring entrepreneurs on the BBC. And then one of the aspiring entrepreneurs was a family it was making like a hot sauce right like a chili sauce. That's

2 (1h 2m 56s):
exactly as filling these bottles and I could feel the liquid and screwing and I just felt this come on just try one more time. So I made it made my mind up that day standing in that Garden. I would try one more time and see if I could do it

3 (1h 3m 13s):
while you were kind of helping them out you all of a sudden had flashbacks to the excitement of filling bottles up with stuff

2 (1h 3m 20s):
yeah it just took me

3 (1h 3m 22s):
just took me back I think it

2 (1h 3m 24s):
was this it was just filling bottles it was that whole Simplicity in that simple act but it reminded me of who I'd been who I was and who I really wanted to be again

3 (1h 3m 38s):
once that five-year period that's our non-compete period ended you were free to start a new business but presumably you couldn't use your name and this is I mean this happens with like Famous Amos cookies like gee Wally Amos couldn't he couldn't use his name and and Bobby Brown can't use her name for a business and quite the same way so presumably you could not use Jo Malone for the next business that you want it to

2 (1h 4m 4s):
start I couldn't use Gemini and I couldn't Still can't I'm able to use it as the person and as my voice, but I'm not able to use it in any other capacity in in beauty or whatever, but I was allowed to use Jag. So that was I was felt like I was kind of half way there, but I had to make sure that the consumer wasn't confused. So one night at dinner. I was sitting with my son Josh and Gary and we were sitting having dinner and we were looking at all kinds of names and he'd obviously been listening to this in the background and he just looked at me and he will Mum, why don't you just call it Joe loves because you really love fragrance and fragrance really loves you.

2 (1h 4m 45s):
It was just so profound, you know out of the bowels of an eight year old or 10 year. I think it was at that time. So we went back to the lawyers and it went backwards and forwards and before we did anything and we showed anyone or anyone saw anything. We took it back to the legal team at Lauder and showed them and said, this is what we want to do.

3 (1h 5m 6s):
Wow, so you launch This new company a fragrance company called Joe loves in I guess 2011 and obviously you were established you were known but I mean did it still

1 (1h 5m 17s):
feel? I don't know. What are you

2 (1h 5m 19s):
nervous? Were you like week? I was beyond nervous. I felt I was standing on the stage in my underwear because the world had seen me on a global stage and assumed I was still there. Nobody knew I'd left and when we first set out with Joe loves we ran straight into doing a pop-up in selfridges and We moved in there overnight and four o'clock in the morning. We have there with all the builders and I looked was watching it and I hated what I saw. I hated it. I just can feel it inside and I thought why have you done this? Why have you why have you put yourself in this position Joe? You idiot? What did you

3 (1h 5m 55s):
hate? What I

2 (1h 5m 56s):
don't hate it the way it looked you hate of the colors. It was if you look at some of the images in the beginning it was all this red and black and it's harsh and it's yeah, it's almost like a teenager that's Dyed her hair red and comes in to dinner screaming. I thought that was that was the only way I can destroy that's what it felt. Like I'd done. Yeah, the packaging was all over the place the the team weren't true. I mean it was it was such a mess when I think about it and I thought you got to open tomorrow morning and you're going to have to face it and you're going to have to work through this because if you really want to do this, you're going to have to eat a little bit of Humble Pie and you're you're going to look a bit of a fool for a minute. So we open the next morning and we just Just couldn't get Traction in this business and it didn't matter what we try and what we did we could not we just couldn't get those sales and for two years.

2 (1h 6m 48s):
I struggled really. Yeah, I reckon so every single day I sat and I regretted building this business because it was bleeding money. Number one and I had no sales number two. Yeah, and nobody knew I was there it was it was ludicrous when I think about why I run like I sprinted into the on to that Arena thinking that I had I think I had the right to go back in where I'd left. That was that was the biggest lesson for me and it got to a point. I was coming up to my birthday and Gary comes in one morning and he hands me this little box. He says happy birthday and I looked and I opened it with a key and I just thought what's he done?

2 (1h 7m 35s):
Anyway, we jumped in the car. We drove down. He says happy birthday. Go be a shopkeeper again because you an absolute Nightmare and I open the door and I said to you no idea where we are. And he said yes, I do and I said no. No, you'd only said yes, I do. You've come full circle and I said, yes, it was the shop. We're just in the blank took me to be a shopkeeper.

3 (1h 7m 59s):
It was a flower show that you worked at as a young woman. It was the Delicatessen the doctor. It was the deli and it was where I fell in love with shopkeeping. I

2 (1h 8m 7s):
put key in the door and I couldn't believe I just couldn't believe that I was back home we spent a year here doing the shop creating it and the day we open the door the same that the Q was there as I came as I pulled up on that first day it was it was happening

3 (1h 8m 25s):
again well so it really took you opening that shop up to get people to know to know about the brand because it is because I guess you were doing pop-ups and you're sort of selling it at different you know cosmetic stores and but really the shop was your best

2 (1h 8m 44s):
advertisement well it always is your home isn't it you know if you invite someone for dinner and you sit on the outside pavement and you've to eat fish and chips you know you did it if you invite someone home to your brand it's going to have four walls you've got a fuel you got to feel the warmth of that brand and it was a huge responsibility see because of course if a pop-up doesn't work you move on if you sign that lease you've got to make it work so I have that nervousness I had that fear because I've had two years of feeling an absolute failure I think having those four walls and as I walked through I said to Gary and we've got to do it differently I can't I don't want to I didn't want to walk in the same footsteps as I done before I didn't I'd grown up I was a different person my my life felt very different a my creativity was much raw a much braver than it had been you know 25 30 years previous and he said what does that mean and he looked at me Gary sometimes looks at me and I can see him thinking oh here we go she's off and I said I want to create a Brasserie and he went no that's it that's it and I said no no no listen he said no I'm no it hasn't got a food license they're not throwing a Brasserie there's a pub next door and I said no I want to create a Brasserie for your nose I could see it all in my head I knew exactly I wanted to do and that's exactly what we did we created a Brasserie for your

3 (1h 10m 5s):
nose and you can go in just to get describe how it works you go in and you get a bunch of different like things to

2 (1h 10m 11s):
smell yes here you sit as though you'll just about to eat you have a menu you have and it's known as the tap as part of your nose and your tray comes out with a tagine and your bath cologne there is in the tagine you have chopsticks with cotton wool so you think you're about to eat dim sum but in fact everything is about the sense of smell your body lotions I appear from veloute guns and we painted with hot paint brushes all over your body everything is about twisting and turning the experience and causing your sense of smell to be the predominant sense and it's still with us today it's very much part of our storytelling and when we go around the world we take a portable tappers bar with us and we entertain with with our fragrance

3 (1h 10m 55s):
how much I mean a lot of a lot of times when you know you meet you I'm sure this happened to you and Gary were people how could you work with your partner how could your your spouse but I've done a lot of interviews with partners with married couples who built successful businesses and in some cases divorced and continue to run the business but it sounds like in your case like the partnership between you and Gary was really the kind of a secret of what made this work that both of you brought different skill sets and you both respected each other's strengths and weaknesses and that was really what enabled you to be

2 (1h 11m 29s):
successful we have haven't always respected each other's you know opinions we've we've had some really humbling actually where businesses concern though he and I I would say 99.9% of the time always on the same page we come at it from a very different perspective but we always meet at that point where we agree I look at him and things that come out of his head and his mouth are so smart and things that I could never possibly do there's a we're best friends yeah we trust you if we stood back to back we know that each other would look after each other but sometimes it's hard you know sometimes I remember in the very beginning I would talk all weekend about about work and he would say okay you've got five things this weekend then once you've done your five things you have to stop well 9:30 Saturday morning I'd used up my five things because I'd already spoken about it and I used to get so frustrated because I had to wait until Monday and then we realize that that just didn't work but work to us is not a job or business or a career it is part of our Lives it's been part of our marriage it's been part of our family it's part of our relationship and I think we both actually it's like a drug I think we both love it

3 (1h 12m 44s):
yeah Joe you had been through the process of starting a business and no successful brand and then selling it and and watching that brand grow right all the resources that Estee Lauder had to to Really scale Rancho Malone is at the shops all around the world and it's ubiquitous with with your brand. Now with Joe loves what I mean. Do you have those kinds of Ambitions? Do you see it as as a as a global brand one day or are you kind of happy with where it is now? And and sort of I absolutely sore as a global

2 (1h 13m 21s):
brand I'm passionate about what I do and it's not about just creating fragrance. I had this crazy idea that once in my life I wanted to Completely Challenge and change the way the world did something in fragrance. I never didn't know what it would be but I was determined I was going to find it and a couple of years ago. It was sitting right by the side of me and it was in the form of a paintbrush and I created a fragrance paintbrush where you can paint your body and this little fragrance paintbrush when I first presented it to my marketing guys at the time. They all looked at me and said, oh it'll never work. It's such a gimmick and I was so humiliated.

2 (1h 14m 1s):
that meeting and I was so angry and I thought I'll show you it works so I put the Prototype together I went to the factory as myself and I created everything within it you know what that paintbrush has been like a Golden Ticket because that is the point in Brands today you have to find that pod in your imagination and that part that connects with the consumer and the world that says we are going to do it differently and that paintbrush now is going around that's the thing that is converting China that is that is the one single product because they never seen it before and suddenly this younger generation alike it's art for your body I can paint my body with fragrance so I think Joe loves is is all about this springboard of creativity in an alien allows me to to go jump with all my crazy imaginative ideas and trust me there's hundreds of them still there and I run at this Like jump and I use her as like a like a laboratory to say what if

3 (1h 15m 4s):
I'm looking at it right now on the internet just to describe. It's like it's another way to apply perfume. Right? It's a I guess it's like a sort of a gel formula with the fragrance in it. And you can just paint it on your body and instead of spraying your yourself with perfume has another way to apply perfume and people are super into it.

2 (1h 15m 23s):
They will say I want to be a sent artists so they pick it up and the course are able to use two or three. Different layers painting different parts of their bed to layer it on or it's the creativity and it's being able to engage with fragrance and a hole with a whole different perspective

3 (1h 15m 40s):
John looking at a photograph of you kneeling before Prince Philip. When you received your CBE, do you are a commander of the British Empire which is obviously an honorarium, but I've got I mean not just a big deal for for anyone but I mean given your life story right like you grew up in a council flat like you know you had a really difficult childhood you guys had no money I mean you were from a really working class background you built this super high-end luxury brand called Jo Malone and then a second one now called Joe loves and just considering like where you came from and how you started right do you just sometimes I don't know you and Gary 82 right like you just sometimes sit back and say this is not like this is totally

2 (1h 16m 32s):
crazy every day every day I get up and I think I was meant to be here I really treasure I think as I when I was younger I was so impatient to get to the next step and as I've got older and realized actually you've got to take time and enjoy them and when something good happens or something bad happens just take that time out don't be such a hurry to get to the next at the next thing because you miss the moment you miss the part that you've learned or the part that you've enjoyed the part that you've worked for I took my son to University last year so a little choke there as well and I never dreamed I would see that day that that day when I was diagnosed with cancer I never thought I would see him go to school let alone go to university and and I cried a lot during those time but I realized that life is you you have to treasure the moment memories and moments are so pretty they look there's Solomon's riches are the things that we should be really holding onto in our lives and whether it be building a business or you know transforming a school or watching your son go to university or whatever it is or staying married for 36 years treasure it you know what treasure those moments because they are what make us and that tenacity and that's true And that resilience is a valued part of the human being how

3 (1h 18m 4s):
much when you think about all of the things that got you this point, right? And and I think it's fair to say you've had a pretty successful life. Do you attribute your success to how hard you work and your your intelligence or do you think more of it had to do with just being lucky

2 (1h 18m 21s):
little bit of everything? I think I think a little bit of all of those things I think hard work people who work hard as some of my Successful I've ever met I'm afraid it. Nothing happens without hard work and determination and that resilience my intellect my intelligence I started out with very little and I wouldn't consider myself an intellectual in any way, but I can hold my own in most conversations and in any conversation, you can learn something from somebody else and I do believe in a higher power. I believe that I was I was given a second chance at life to do something remarkable and I'm determined to fulfill that and and luck I've been this too many times in my life I've been at the right place at the right time and exactly the right moment for that to be coincidence and I think as I've got to this part of my life now I'm a little bit more little easier on myself should I say then I have been I think all the way through I'm not so not so hot yeah I'm not so hard on myself but I feel I've earned a lot of money but it's time now to do something with it we've learned from what we can enjoy it but what are we going to

1 (1h 19m 36s):
do hello

3 (1h 19m 41s):
hello Joe it's Kyra's here

2 (1h 19m 43s):
Hi how are you

3 (1h 19m 45s):
oh man what a question these

1 (1h 19m 47s):
days yeah that's for sure

3 (1h 19m 51s):
so as you briefly heard at the beginning of the episode I spoke to Joe just a few days ago to find out how her business is doing given the crisis and how she's thinking about what it might look like once we get through this moment so much of what you do depends on on human to human connections right the tapestry inspired fragrance Bar M and just you being with people and talking through personal care how are you starting to think about what that could look like without the face-to-face interaction

1 (1h 20m 25s):
I missed that human to human touch I because I am a very much a people person but we have already looked into having masks and visors we're not taking anything away But why from the Frontline where absolutely wouldn't be doing that but when those doors open, I want my team and my consumer to be safe sure and I won't open those doors until I'm absolutely sure that everyone will be safe. Even if it means staying in lockdown for a little bit longer. That's what we'll do. We've had to rethink How We Do tap us from home take away tappers. So it will be something that you take with you versus something that's uninstall. There will be no more sort of touchy-feely counters.

1 (1h 21m 5s):
I don't think not for a very long time and maybe never again. It's going to be a challenge for not just for the beauty industry, but I think every industry is going to change now and this will be with us a long time the effects that it has had on the consumer. There's always going to be that am I safe? Yeah. Yeah, so people need to believe that difficult times calm, but they passed and I was talking the other day and I was I was remembering that I've already done lockdown. Of course. I had to do lockdown in the middle of chemotherapy. because I was so poorly I don't go out with masks on and gloves and I wasn't able to see anyone for fear of infection so I'm starting to remember all the things I thought during that lockdown

2 (1h 21m 48s):
and I never doubted

1 (1h 21m 49s):
for a second that it would be over and I never doubted for a second I beat it and I have the same mentality right

2 (1h 21m 56s):
now Joe you have until worth like

3 (1h 21m 59s):
insane adversity in here you are again I mean do you think in a way that those experiences help to prepare you to ooh too kind of at least handle this one as best you can

1 (1h 22m 11s):
I don't think I'm any different than a lot of people that have gone through tough times I mean a lot of people fight cancer a lot of people go through difficult times I think that for me they're fact the whole world is going through this it's we've all got to get it together it's kind of easier than if it was just in a weird way then it was just your country but I think it's okay to cry tears you know I think it's okay to feel scared and right at this moment the thing that I would love to banish in this world the next month is judgmental people judging one another is really not helpful at this moment in time we need an attitude of unity in order to beat this virus

3 (1h 22m 56s):
that's John Malone she's the founder of German London Joe loves the way one of Joe's many fragrances is called number 42 named after the flower shop on Elizabeth Street where she worked alongside Justin the blank back in the early 1980s and thanks so much for listening to the show this week if you want to support how I built this please subscribe to our podcast and tell everyone you know about it you can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet it's at how I built this or add Kyra's our show was produced this week by JC Howard with music composed by R Mt narrow Bluey thanks also to Sarah saracen Julia Carney Kansas limb leave a grant and Jeff Rogers I'm guy Roz and even listening how I built this this is NPR