0 (3s):
My brother loaned me $85,000 and it couldn't lose my brother's money. So I was in my office, this little office. We had, I put two chairs together. I laid down and I just said, please, I promise that I will be a good employer. I'll share my profits with my employees. I'll always do right by my customers. Just please help me not lose this money

1 (37s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built guy Roz. And on the show today, how Carla bar Luci, we discovered a prehistoric grain, turned it into flour and pasta and launched a powerhouse, organic brand jovial foods. A lot of people ask us how we choose the stories we tell on the show. And the simple answer is a lot of searching. We spend a lot of time researching founders and their brands, but every once in awhile, an idea grows from something we come across in our daily lives.

1 (1m 26s):
And about a year ago in the supermarket, I noticed a box of gluten-free spaghetti made from cassava flour. I was intrigued, so I bought it and it was pretty great. The brand was called jovial and I'd already been using their diced tomatoes and rice pastas and my cooking for a few years, they make all of oil and tomato paste and even cookies all produced in Italy. But the brand is probably best known for its pasta is made from a wheat called Eichorn. And because I'm a sucker for stories on boxes, I read about how jovial helped revive this ancient on hybridized wheat, a type of wheat that is not genetically modified.

1 (2m 8s):
So some people with gluten sensitivities can actually eat it. Anyway. I decided to dig around to find out more about the brand. And I came across the story of Carla bar Luci, Carla and her husband Rodolfo grew jovial from a shaky startup into a national multi-million dollar brand. Over the past decade, they were inspired by their own daughter who had a sensitivity to wheat and gluten. But the journey to building jovial was filled with personal tragedy failures, bad business partners, and very slow growth. So I called up Carla and we ended up having a wonderful rich conversation about her life, about her working class upbringing and Connecticut.

1 (2m 54s):
And most importantly about our mutual love of cooking in the weeks after the interview, we stayed in close touch. Carla sent me her Einkorn sourdough starter. I sent her photos of my corn flour pizzas. And then a few weeks ago, I received a small bottle of boss. Samek vinegar from Modena. She wrote this balsamic comes from one of the oldest vinegar makers in Modena enjoy this black gold, which I did. And then a few days ago, I got a call that left me stunned after a very brief illness. Carla R Luci died unexpectedly at the age of 53, even though we never met face-to-face it still felt like losing a good friend.

1 (3m 44s):
And while Carla wasn't a household name, she was well-known in the specialty food business and widely respected for her vision and integrity. So while there are a lot of important business lessons to learn from this episode, we want to think of it mostly as a tribute to her remarkable life and career, a life that began in new London, Connecticut, where Carla grew up the granddaughter of four Italian immigrants.

0 (4m 13s):
Food was really important to my family. My both, my mother and father were really, really good cooks my mother. She was just effortless in the kitchen. I never can remember one bad meal, maybe one, but she would also make vegetables really good. She knew how to clean artichokes and cook them with parsley and garlic and a little white wine so that when you ate them, they just melted in your mouth. So as a kid, I would just walk by this huge bowl of artichokes and just plop them in my mouth. They were so good. She made fresh ravioli and <inaudible> with all kinds of sauces. And you know, my dad, he was a great cook too. He didn't cook that often, but he would make cabbage and beans soup.

0 (4m 56s):
I I'd never be able to, I've tried a can't replicate the flavor and you know, my dad, he re he loved fishing. So he had a lobster boat and lobster pots, and we had a ping pong table in our basement. And I still remember that ping pong table being lined with trays of lobsters, stuffed lobsters, that they would cook for our relatives. And he also made wine in our cellar. We made wine and it was nice, you know, but at the same time I was growing up in America. And so I think when the, my grandparents immigrated, they didn't want to be Italian. They wanted to be American. So they tried to lose their accent.

0 (5m 38s):
But, but they, they held onto these food traditions

1 (5m 42s):
Where you grew up in Connecticut. Was it Italian? Was it Irish? Was it like most people kind of waspy? Like what do you remember about the people in there in your town?

0 (5m 52s):
I mean, there was basically in Italy, people would choose a town that was similar to, they came from. And so a lot of people there lived, came from this one area of Fano it's called, and they actually developed a neighborhood that was called the Fort. And on the other side of the town was kind of the nice beachy area where more wealthy people lived. And my father was able to buy a piece of land on the nice side of town and build a house for us. So I grew up in a neighborhood with people, you know, who were better off than us.

1 (6m 28s):
So tell me about what, what your dad did for a living. He was a bricklayer. Did he have like a small business that he ran?

0 (6m 34s):
He tried. I mean, he really wanted to own his own business, but he had four children. And so he ended up just working for construction companies

1 (6m 45s):
As a bricklayer. And you had three siblings, other siblings. Were you the youngest by the way? I was the youngest. And were you, were you the only girl? I was the only girl. Oh, see, we're surrounded by boys.

0 (6m 57s):
Yeah. So I was very competitive in, at a young age because I just felt this pressured like to do good at it, just to do things that

1 (7m 6s):
They were doing. Yeah. All right. So you grew up, you're growing up in Connecticut. And from what I understand, when you were 16, your father was diagnosed with cancer.

0 (7m 19s):
Yes. My parents sat us down in the living room and told us, and the next day I went to height, I was in high school. I went to English class and my friend's father owned the funeral home in town. And I said, you know, Eileen, my father has cancer. Is that bad? I didn't even know what it was. And she just looked at me like, yeah, very bad. And so that weekend, I asked my mom to drive me to the health food store. It was this little teeny health food store I'd never been in, but I saw it when we were driving past it to go to the supermarket. And I walked in and, you know, it smelled like falafel mix. And it was kind of weird, you know, with all the bulk bins.

0 (8m 0s):
And, and I went to the section where they had books and I noticed the macro biotic. I think that at that time it was called cure for cancer. It was a long time ago and I asked my mom to buy it. And then I came home and I was like, dad, I'm going to cure you of cancer. I'm going to cook in. He just, he just was not interested.

1 (8m 20s):
How old was your dad? When he was diagnosed? He was, he was 56. Wow.

0 (8m 26s):
But he had been to Italy to reconnect with these relatives on his own once. And his final wish was to go back there. So he was very, very sick, but he took one of my brothers and I, and we were there for a month.

1 (8m 43s):
Wanted to go to Italy knowing that he did not have a lot.

0 (8m 47s):
No, he died a few months later. He was also a little sick there, but, but the trip was amazing. That trip completely changed my life.

1 (8m 57s):
And this is your first time going? Yes.

0 (8m 60s):
Yeah. You know, we stayed with RO with relatives. They gave us an apartment to live in right in front of the gelato store. And first of all, I noticed just how good people looked. You know, it was a time in Italy before things got,

1 (9m 17s):
This was in the, in the early eighties,

0 (9m 20s):
85. Yeah. And I also noticed that when we got to this apartment, like I was obsessed with like turning over forks and looking at the tablecloths and everything in the house was made in Italy. And I was like, wow, this country sustains itself. Because back in Connecticut, everything was getting like huge supermarkets and this little downtown that we had with a butcher shop and a fish market and everything was all closing down. And, and then I had this one memory of it's called the night of San Lorenzo when there's a lot of shooting stars. So we went up into the Hills, you could see the, the Adriatic coast.

0 (10m 1s):
And then we just sat there and the sky was so clear and there were shooting stars everywhere. And I just said, I wish I could live here someday. You know, I was, I was totally hooked. I was thinking, why did my grandparents leave? This is paradise. Yeah.

1 (10m 18s):
So that trip clearly had a huge impact on you. And, and I guess when you went to college, you went to Connecticut college.

0 (10m 27s):
I went to Connecticut college because I wanted to stay close to home because I didn't know if my father was going to be alive or not. So that's where, that's where I went.

1 (10m 37s):
And your dad, your dad passed away. Pretty soon after that trip,

0 (10m 42s):
He did a couple days before I actually started college. Wow. And it got to the point where you hadn't decided your major. So I was looking through the book and I said, let me look at Italian. And it said, if you majored in Italian and you have financial aid, you have to spend a year abroad in Italy. And the program covers like your apartment. It gives you a stipend. And I was like,

2 (11m 7s):
That's me. That's me. I have to go there. I've got to go. It's calling me. So you

1 (11m 13s):
End up spending your junior year abroad in Italy. And that year would be like, change the rest of your life. Because that year you also met the man who would eventually become your husband and business partner, Rudolfo. How did you guys,

0 (11m 30s):
How did you meet? Yeah, he, he was a friend of, one of these distant relatives that I had that lived in Montana and he said, oh, let's my mother said, you know, I should come and pick you up and take you to her house. So you can say hi to her. So we went to his house and my husband had just pulled up because his best friend lived next door.

1 (11m 53s):
He was this guy now Rodolfo,

0 (11m 56s):
As soon as I saw him, I was like, if I'm pretty enough for you, you're my man. I just knew it. He was, he was just, I don't know, it just had this feeling. Hmm. And you hit it off right away. We were just friends. I mean, we would, I would go in Italy when you're that, when you're that age, you have like this group of friends and they all go out together. So on Friday or Saturday nights, they would say, Hey, do you want to come to Montana and go out with us? So the girls would sit on one side of the table, the guys would sit on the other and they would just talk all night long. And I was, I'd get bored. You know, they were talking about things like, oh, have you ever heard of like band row? They have these roll-ons now that work as DOD.

0 (12m 37s):
And I was like, oh my God. But they would always sit next to him because he didn't have a girlfriend.

1 (12m 43s):
Hmm. Was he a student here?

0 (12m 46s):
I actually had just finished military service. And he had previously studied agriculture in bologna, but his family had had some financial hardships. So he had to go to work. Hmm.

1 (13m 1s):
So I guess YouTube start dating. And at a certain point you go back to the U S to finish college, but then you, you return to Italy and you and Rodolfo move in together, right? Yes. And what, what were you both doing?

0 (13m 15s):
He was working in this agricultural company and I had my first and only job as a translator, but after a couple of months, I got yelled at because I translated stainless steel to Inox advisable steel. And I think it was an important company to the, it was an important, you know, customer. So the man who ran the place, took me in his office and just yelled I'm in. I just looked at him. I said, I quit. You know? So I I've only had one job in my life. And it was like two months. And we were already having a hard time making ends meet because in Italy, you know, people don't really make a lot of money. And if your parents don't have something, it's almost impossible to get ahead.

0 (14m 0s):
And I didn't want to be like, my parents always worrying about money. I wanted to have a family. I wanted to, I wanted to do things. So I was very motivated to get ahead.

1 (14m 12s):
You wanted to start a business?

0 (14m 14s):
I did. And so I convinced my husband to go to the United States because one day I was like, God, you can open a business in the United States for like $200. And he said, okay,

1 (14m 25s):
Wow. So you convinced him. And by the way, did he speak any English? No.

0 (14m 30s):
He studied German in school.

1 (14m 32s):
So he knew no English. You convince him Rudolfo. You convince him to, to go to the U S and you're not married at this point, right? No, but we did have to get married for him to get married.

0 (14m 43s):
We just called my, my cousin was like a justice of the peace and we signed the papers. Yeah.

1 (14m 49s):
Got it. All right. So you get married to come back to the U S and now, what was the idea? What was the business you were going to do?

0 (14m 58s):
The first business idea was to move to Miami and open a piadina hut at the beach. So Pia Dina is like the flat bread that they make on the Adriatic coast. And they have these striped huts. And, you know, you just stuff them with prosciutto or cheese or greens or tomatoes. And that was our idea. So we drove to Southern Florida and we actually stayed in a campground in a tent. And it was very frustrating because nobody was going to give you the permit to open up a Pia Dina hut in Miami beach. And so one night I went to bed and I left my sneakers outside of the tent.

0 (15m 39s):
And when I woke up in the morning, I put them on with no socks. And there were these little, teeny fire ants inside the sneakers and bit my feet. And it was so painful. I looked at my husband, I started to cry and I said, let's go back to Connecticut. I can't take it anymore.

1 (15m 55s):
All right. And so you go back to Connecticut and did you go back to new London where he grew up? We love with

0 (15m 60s):
My parents. I didn't have any with my mother. I didn't have any money. Right. So we were in the kitchen brainstorming and my brother and his friend were there. And I said, we're going to open a fresh pasta shop with like prepared sauces in this touristy town called mystic, Connecticut. And they were like, you'll never make it. You need to make sandwiches and grinders and things like that.

1 (16m 25s):
So, cause Connecticut. Yeah. So

0 (16m 27s):
I was like, all right. All right. So we found this man who made this really good Italian bread. It was like 20 minutes away. And so we would go, we would leave our house at like five in the morning, pick up this whole load of bread. And, and then I would weave in some Italian things. So late I made full crutch. I made spinach pie and we found an empty store and it was only $500 a month. We couldn't really afford a sign or anything. So I actually painted the windows backwards in red paint. And this

1 (16m 59s):
Was, this was in like the late eighties. Right? I think it was 91. Oh, wow. So if I have my cinematic history, correct. This is after mystic pizza, the movie came out,

0 (17m 10s):
Probably we didn't get many tourists though. It was pretty much a local spot. And we also, my brother had loaned us $5,000 and we took 1500 of that and bought this old FEMA cappuccino machine. So we were the first people in town to have a cappuccino machine. And, you know, my husband was a pretty good looking guy who could barely speak a word of English. So I think people like to come and just for the novelty of getting a cappuccino from a real Italian, and then on Saturday, you could special order, you know, fresh toward alone. You tell, you tell a all kinds of sauces. You can get homemade lasagna and who was making all this stuff.

0 (17m 50s):
Me and my husband, my mother helped us.

1 (17m 53s):
So you guys are just like working like crazy. We were. Yeah. But it was fun.

0 (17m 59s):
It, retail's not my thing. I knew that right away, you know, I don't really like to be everybody's friend or talk to people. I'm kind of like a behind the scenes type of person. So after a year we decided to put the business up for sale. We just wanted to move back to Italy. My husband always wanted to own a farm or something. And we sold the business for about, I think it was like $25,000. And we had saved money because we were living with our parents. And so we took all of that money and moved back to Italy. And our idea was to buy a little piece of land and put up a greenhouse and open a nursery.

1 (18m 36s):
From what I understand around that time, you, you went back Rodolfo's brother was, was paralyzed. He was in a car accident. And then like, around that time, your mom was diagnosed with cancer as well.

0 (18m 50s):
We were trying to get something started. And one afternoon it was summertime and we were all getting ready to go to the beach. And the phone rang in Italy. Yeah. The phone rang and it was like the hospital. And they said that his brother had had a serious accident and was being Lifestart helicopter to the bologna hospital to get there right away. So we took all of our money basically and helped his family renovate a bathroom and a little room in his house that was handicap accessible. And then once things started to get better with his health, I got a call. It was my mother. And she said, I have cancer. And I said to my husband, I just can, I have to go back.

0 (19m 32s):
So he came with me.

1 (19m 34s):
Wow. All right. So you guys are back and forth, back and forth. And now back in Connecticut, again, your mom, presumably you don't know how, how long she has to live at that point.

0 (19m 48s):
She had multiple myeloma. So she was sick for about four years. So a lot of cancer going away, cancer coming back. I mean, it just tore me apart. It was terrible.

1 (19m 59s):
Did you guys go back and move in with her?

0 (20m 1s):
We did. We took care of her and started to kind of brainstorm what was our next move. And she really latched on to my husband. She loved him. It was like Carla, who I like, I don't, you know? And so they were always together and I started to do Italian lessons because we didn't have any money. And one of the women I taught, I became really close with. She was an older woman and she had just lost her son to brain cancer. And so we connected and she, she told me when I told her I was trying to help my mother with diet. And she said, you should go check out bread and circus in Providence. I was like, what's that?

1 (20m 39s):
You know, and bread and circus was a, a natural food store that we should just say eventually it was bought out by whole foods. But at the time it was, it was like in new England, Boston and I guess Providence. And it was like a, it's an amazing store. Yes,

0 (20m 52s):
It was. And, and, you know, at that time, my husband moves to America. You know, when he grew up the bakery where his parents bought bread was owned by Luciano, Pavarotti, his father, he still talks about how good these little French rolls were there. And he comes to the United States and it's when everything is becoming fake, you know? So we would go to the supermarket and buy a loaf of French bread. And he would just look at the ingredients and say, God, why can't they just make bread with flour and water? I mean, what is dough conditioner and all this other stuff? And I was like, yeah, you're right. You know, and one day we, we drive to bread and circus.

0 (21m 32s):
And I walked in there and I immediately went to the customer service and got, they had a little pamphlet with their financial statement. And I was like, this is where the food needs to go. I mean, America needs to be natural. It doesn't have to be, you know, hippie natural, but we can't keep eating all this, these additives. And so that's really what I wanted to do. And I was like, this is it. I'm getting into this industry. And, you know, naturally we gravitated toward the pasta aisle. And at the time I think whole wheat pasta was basically like, if you wanted to be healthy, you ate holy pasta.

1 (22m 9s):
Like that was what people gravitated towards. The whole wheat pasta was healthier.

0 (22m 13s):
Yeah. Gluten-free came away later, but they thought, you know, and so we bought some holy pasta, I think to bowls was the number of Rowan brand. And when I tasted it, I was like, oh my God, we can do so much. We get it right. We can do so much better than this. Yeah.

1 (22m 29s):
But Carla, like you were, I'm say this with all due respect, you were like, you know, barely out of college with no money and like no resources. How are you going to get into a place like bread and circus?

0 (22m 43s):
Well, first of all, I have to say that my father was always incredibly proud of me. And he made me feel like I could do anything in life. So I grew up with this confidence, like I could do anything. My husband isn't really like that. You know, it was, it was me. And second of all, my husband really, really missed his hometown. I mean, moving to Connecticut was tough for him. So to make him feel better, sometimes we used to drive to new Haven where they had a new stand that sold Italian newspapers and magazines, and he would load up and

1 (23m 17s):
It was an international news stand. Yes.

0 (23m 19s):
And so we opened the magazine and there was an advertisement for an organic brand of pasta and olive oil and tomatoes and things like that. So we called his father and said, goat in Italy, you have to right. Who is the co-packer? So we said, go to the store and figure out where, where they make this.

1 (23m 41s):
It was just an advertisement. But how did you, what was it about the ad that struck as interesting?

0 (23m 46s):
I didn't even know that there were people in Europe making organic foods.

1 (23m 51s):
Okay. It was organic. I got you. It was organic pasta. And you thought, oh, this is interesting. Maybe, maybe we should check this out.

0 (23m 57s):
Yeah. So we had his father go, he bought a bottle of olive oil. He gave us the address and we made up a fax and lied that we were a food distributor and, and that we wanted to sell the product.

1 (24m 11s):
So you, you send a fax to this company and you say, Hey, we want to, we want to distribute this in the U S and they were like, sure, no due diligence or nothing. They were just like, yeah. Okay, fine.

0 (24m 24s):
Yeah. And they, they said that they had just developed this brand called bio nature. And they were thrilled to sell in the United States. And then we became friends with them after afterwards.

1 (24m 34s):
And you were going to just get all this, this raw material and then package it under your own brand and label.

0 (24m 40s):
Now they packaged everything under their brand. They package.

1 (24m 43s):
Yeah. How much did you order?

0 (24m 45s):
Our first order? I believe it was about $20,000. It was a 20 foot container.

1 (24m 53s):
Wow. How did you pay for it? Cause you guys, you and Rudolph had no money.

0 (24m 57s):
We had no money, but my brother had saved a lot of money working as a bricklayer. And he was just tired of his life. And I said, if you, I have an idea. If you loan me some money, you can have a third of the company. And eventually when we make enough money, I can hire you and you can manage our warehouse. He

1 (25m 18s):
Was, your brother was a bricklayer. Just like your dad. He was just saving his money.

0 (25m 23s):
He saved every penny. He still saves every penny. I don't think he turns his heat on, in his house. He's very fruitful. Yeah. How,

1 (25m 29s):
How much did your brother loan you?

0 (25m 32s):
My brother loaned me $85,000,

1 (25m 34s):
Which was his life savings. I have to imagine almost,

0 (25m 37s):
Almost all of it. Yeah. And yeah, we took $65,000 mortgage on my parents' house.

1 (25m 45s):
That's a lot of risks. I mean, you took a mortgage out on the house. That basically was the only asset you guys had. Right? Yeah. But I never,

0 (25m 55s):
I never really thought I would lose the money. I was, I was just, this is gonna work. And I know, I never thought I wouldn't succeed. I thought I could do. I thought, I think I can do anything.

1 (26m 5s):
And it's awesome. All right. So that was the money just for the, this new business, this importing business that was going to sell organic pastas and sauces in the U S so you make the order and the shipment presumably arrives a couple weeks or months later, and you've got tens of thousands of dollars with a product, by the way, where did you, did you go and pick it up at like, I dunno, mystic

2 (26m 32s):
Seaport, where does it arrive? Now? We re we, we

0 (26m 35s):
Rented a warehouse and a little warehouse. It was actually in an old grain mill near my home and the owner, the building, my landlord. He just really liked Rodolfo. And I, so I can remember when the first distributor came to pick up the product, we loaded the truck and he said, okay, where's the bill of lading. And I'm like, bill of lading. What's a bill of lading. So I ran to the landlord and I'm like, Frank, what's the bill of lading. He said, I'll help you. I'll help you. I mean, we had to learn every, we didn't know anything.

1 (27m 5s):
How did you even, you have all this product coming. And then what did you guys do? Did you start to go around to grocery stores and say, Hey, we've got this pasta. Will you carry it? What did you, how did you even, because ordering the pasta from that company in the sauces is the easy part.

0 (27m 23s):
Yes. And my husband couldn't speak English and I am a terrible seller. So basically perfect combination. Yeah. So there was a gourmet shop in town and I kind of clicked with the manager there. She took some and I mean, eventually I figured out you need a broker and things like that.

1 (27m 43s):
And, and I guess you also presumably started to work with a small distributor there. Where were they placing your products? Well,

0 (27m 52s):
It was basically in the Northeast and this small, this distributor called associated buyers actually started selling our products to food co-ops. So there's like a national network of food cops. Then it was all independent, but the food co-ops really embraced this whole wheat pasta. And that's how we really got started.

1 (28m 14s):
So it was, it was whole wheat pasta. And what else, what were you, were you guys? I

0 (28m 18s):
Think we had some jellies, some juices, fruit, nectars jams, like sweet jellies. Yeah. Yeah. Olive oil

1 (28m 26s):
On all under this, this label. Bio nature. Yes. And at the time, was it you and Rodolfo and your brother living together?

0 (28m 37s):
Yes. And he would go to work and put money on the table cause we couldn't get a paycheck and I would cook for us.

1 (28m 45s):
So there's a three of you living in apartment and I mean, you were putting money, you are spending money to buy this product. Right. But you have to make money from the product. And where do you, was it hard to, was it easy? I don't. I, how does it work? Like you import the stuff. I mean, you buy something for a dollar, you sell it for a dollar 50, right? Pretty simple principle. But was that more or less what you were, what you were doing?

0 (29m 7s):
That's what we're trying to do. I mean, we also had to pay for trade shows and expenses. We submitted the bio nature brand for the fancy food show. I think it's called the SoFi award and we actually won as best new product line. Where's that? Where's that food show in New York. And so that's where all the money went. You know, it was like those added expenses,

1 (29m 34s):
But still, I mean, it's still hard to, I mean, anyone knows introducing a brand knows how hard it is, especially with no marketing budget to get people, to use it or to, to try it. I have to imagine, even, even in the first few years it was still a tiny number of people had even heard of it.

0 (29m 52s):
I think we managed to sell about $500,000 the first year. And at the end of the year, I was really behind in the QuickBooks and putting things into the computers, but it was the end of the year. So I had put all the bills and all the expenses. And I ran our first P and L and it was like negative 200

1 (30m 12s):
Because of the cost that you were the amount of money you were spending on buying product and also going to trade chosen and other expenses.

0 (30m 20s):
Yes. And it couldn't lose my brother's money. So I was in my office, this little office, we had, I put two chairs together. I laid down and I just said, please, I promise that I will be a good employer. I'll share my profits with my employees. I'll always do right by my customers. Just please help me not lose this money. Who are you talking to? Whatever higher power would listen to me

1 (30m 54s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Carla and Rodolfo built bio nature into a top organic brand and then almost lost control of the business and how that near disaster led to the launch of jovial, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

SnackMagic (31m 24s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, snack magic, a build your own snack box service, making it stress-free and easy for you to treat virtual event attendees clients or your global team to build their own snack box from over 500 snack and beverage options, whether it's one person or a thousand people send all your gifts in one simple email order and your recipients build their boxes online, snack magic makes it easy to boost team morale and say, thank you. Get 10% off with a code NPR and learn more@snackmagic.com.

Squarespace (31m 59s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor Squarespace. The easy to use website builder designed by world-class designers. Squarespace is all in one platform is dedicated to making it easy to establish an online presence with domains, marketing tools, analytics, and more go to squarespace.com/npr for a free trial. And when you're ready to launch use the offer code NPR to save 10% of your first purchase of a website or domain.

On Our Watch (32m 35s):
What happens to police officers who get caught stealing, lying, or with evidence each week we open up an internal affairs investigation that used to be secret to find out how well the police police themselves listened to on our watch a podcast from NPR and KQBD

1 (33m 1s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Ross. So it's the late 1990s and Carla and Rodolfo are trying to get bio natures, pastas, and jams, and all of oil into small food co-ops across the country. And they're also trying not to lose all their money in the process. And then a

0 (33m 23s):
Major organic food distributor called us and told us they wanted to carry your products. How did they find out about these food? Co-ops requested that they pick up the product.

3 (33m 34s):
Wow. Yeah. Wow.

0 (33m 37s):
And so basically, if you can get your product in enough retail stores, the retail stores can request that the distributor carries your product. And that's what happened to us. And once that distributor carried our products, a food broker called us and asked us if they could represent us. And then things just started to take off.

1 (33m 59s):
And the idea would be that people who are looking for more sort of whole grain wholesome pasta is, would, would just discover it on the shelves. Yeah. Yes.

0 (34m 7s):
And a lot of people started to buy the semolina pasta because we pressed it with bronze dyes. It was made in an old pasta. I mean, it was really good quality

1 (34m 15s):
Bronze and bronze dyes. That's what makes pasta have that, like those like microscopic ridges in them, right. That holds the sauce.

0 (34m 25s):
Yes. Otherwise it just slides the sauce will slide right off. Just slides off. Yes. And I organize my company in a way that we were able to market the product.

1 (34m 36s):
What did you do? How did you do tell me some of the things that you remember doing to market the product?

0 (34m 41s):
Well, basically when you start to sell the product, there's all of these, you know, sales and promotions that you have to do. And we were getting charged back so much money. It was becoming hard to make money.

1 (34m 54s):
And w when you say chargeback, you were having to pay the supermarkets, the money that you essentially were discounting to the customers, right? Yes. Yeah, yeah. That's right. That's actually how it works. Like when there's a discount at the supermarket, the supermarket's not giving you a discount. It's the, the brand. And then they still have to pay the supermarket, the full price that, that it's normally would retail for them.

0 (35m 15s):
And if you don't have a way to control that, they can just, it's just becomes unreasonable and it

1 (35m 20s):
Can destroy and can completely destroy a business.

0 (35m 22s):
Yes. Because you don't want to say no, but you have to sometimes, you know, you have to be in charge of how you're spending it.

1 (35m 29s):
So there were must have been times where you were selling the pastas for less than you were paying for them or around the same price.

0 (35m 37s):
It was tough. Let's just say it was tough.

1 (35m 40s):
So part of it was just discounts. And then what other kind of marketing were you doing? Well,

0 (35m 48s):
Too, believe it or not. I actually answered customer service emails for like five years and really connected with our customers. And I think, I don't know. I personally felt like it made a difference. You know, I would just, if we made a mistake, I would say, yeah, we made a mistake. I'm sorry. Or I would give them a glimpse of the education I had on food. And they were like, oh my God, this is the best customer service I've ever gotten. But how

1 (36m 15s):
Did, what explains the fact that people were finding out about it? I mean, it's one brand of pasta on a shelf of 40 brands of pasta. What explains the fact that people found out about it? I mean, you weren't needed, I'm assuming you weren't advertising on television or in magazines, you weren't on Oprah. What was it?

0 (36m 38s):
There is a large organic trade show in California called the natural products expo west and Nana famous. Yes. Yeah. And we had begged this manufacturer to make the first organic balsamic vinegar on the market. And we went to the trade show and we exhibited these products. And at a certain point, this guy came by and he was from spectrum organics. And he was the, he was the founder CEO. And he said, I'm going to send a friend of mine. You know, a guy that works at our company by to talk to you about this organic balsamic vinegar. So his president Neil came by and said, you know, we'd really like to partner with you on this product and sell it under the spectrum brand.

0 (37m 27s):
So he came to Italy and we visited the factory. And then what you mean

1 (37m 33s):
With them? You said, sure. We'll, we'll, we're happy to do with the, with the balsamic vinegar. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, sure. Yeah.

0 (37m 39s):
So he came to Italy and we rented this minivan. We just randomly drove around Italy and stopped wherever we felt like stopping. And his wife and him were kind of bickering in the car. So I said, Hey, let's switch places. So she sat in front with Rudolfo and they got along so well. And I sat next to him. And at a certain point, I turned to him and I said, Neil, I really need to find a sales guy. And he said, somebody called me the other day. I think he'd be perfect for you. Let me, let me get his name and I'll give it to you. So when I, when we got home to Connecticut, I called this guy and basically I sent him a package and our priceless, and I said, I really need help with these chargebacks.

0 (38m 24s):
What

1 (38m 24s):
Did you send him? You sent him pasta and what else?

0 (38m 27s):
We had tomatoes at that time and all well and everything. Right. And the next day I got a letter from him and he said, I love

1 (38m 35s):
Your, I want to work for you. Wow. He had

0 (38m 37s):
A lot of experience and he really helped us grow the brand. And so it took, I'm not sure how many years, but by nature became the number one organic selling pasta in the United States.

1 (38m 48s):
Let's just be clear about that for a sec. Sounds great. Sounds amazing. It's a huge achievement, but I have to imagine by the time it became the number one organic pasta brand in the U S let's say in the early two thousands, that's a tiny sliver of the pasta market, right? I mean, it's teeny tiny sliver. I've always been humble.

0 (39m 5s):
So I never was like, oh my God, I'm so great. You know, I'm the number one pasta. But right. The people in Italy, you know, the success really went to their heads and they were the total opposites of us.

1 (39m 18s):
They, they were excited about how well the product was doing in the U S it was doing better in the U S than it wasn't Italy, much better because in the U S this was something interesting, organic Italian pasta. Whereas in Italy, it was just pasta. Yes. But did, did it occur to you at that point? Like maybe, maybe we should be doing our own thing or were you just perfectly happy kind of being the bio nature outpost in the U S

0 (39m 45s):
I was trusting, and we actually didn't even have a contract, which is crazy. And at that point, things were getting a little, I noticed that these guys were, you know, they had brought on partner investors,

1 (39m 58s):
The Italian owners of the class,

0 (40m 0s):
And they opened a new factory and it was beautiful, but I was like, how are they going to pay for this thing? You know, I was sensing that there were signs that they were overstaying.

1 (40m 10s):
So what happened, I mean, did bio nature, let's just say they were, they were going to go out of business. That would obviously affect you guys because you will not have a product to sell in the U S

0 (40m 25s):
We would have lost everything. I mean, and I knew that, and at the same time, by our nature, weren't getting along with their partners. So they were interested in a distribution agreement, but also a licensing agreement that we could start if we wanted to, because they figured if things went bad with their partners, we could take control of the brand and they would get a royalty payment.

1 (40m 49s):
And were you guys at that point, because now we're, this is around, I think 2008 and the financial crisis is hitting. I mean, was your business doing really well? Were you guys financially secure and all those things? I think

0 (41m 4s):
Surviving, I mean, we were about maybe 15 million in sales and thanks for okay. But

1 (41m 11s):
You had, I mean, you weren't banking 15 million bucks a year.

0 (41m 15s):
No, no. You know, I have an accountant. Who's been my financial advisor from day one. And I walked in, I told him my story and he looked at me and he said, Carla, you're really bright. I think you're going to be successful, but you're going to have to accept that. You're not going to be able to take money out of this company. You're just going to have to keep reinvesting your profits every year. And that's what I did. So when this

1 (41m 40s):
Company by nature started to come apart and you guys very wisely, I mean, the green with them, that, that if, if it did fall apart, you would continue to have the license and pay them a royalty. That must've been really stressful because you're, you would invest it at this point

2 (41m 57s):
10 years more in this business.

0 (42m 1s):
Yes. It was hard time for my family. My kids were six and three, and my older daughter was always like, why do you have that face mom? Oh my, oh, just thinking about work, you know, or what are those bad people doing? You know, they didn't understand, but it was evident that we were in big trouble. And you,

1 (42m 20s):
At the time, even though you had a house in Connecticut, you decided that you wanted to move back to Italy and live in Italy. Right.

0 (42m 29s):
We just had finished a house, which I had bought by the skin of my teeth. And we packed up our bags and went to Italy because now we had to find people to make the products right away, because we were, the, there was no more factory.

2 (42m 44s):
So we went

0 (42m 45s):
There and found new factories and suddenly realized that the pricing that we had was very unfair. And so when we, when we went direct, we made a lot more money

1 (42m 58s):
Because of the price that they were selling it to. You was actually totally unfair. Totally unfair. So I guess at this point, Carla, I should explain kind of a complex situation that you kind of found herself in because from what I understand, bio nature, right? They were, they were having problems. They, some of the owners of bio nature made a deal with other, another group of Italian business owners to allow them to license their products in the U S basically trying to cut you guys out, even though you, you and Rodolfo had built up the brand in the U S and so you, you guys filed the lawsuit.

1 (43m 42s):
Yes. And I mean, anybody listening to this knows that a lawsuit is super stressful and, and takes a long time.

0 (43m 50s):
It took years, and it was very expensive. And I did actually hire a top lawyer because I didn't want to lose because I didn't even not want to lose because the licensing part was a no brainer. I wanted to prove that they had held us back and caused us to lose a lot of profits so that we could actually buy the brand

1 (44m 12s):
And to just buy them out. Because what was the point of promoting the brand in the U S and all the work you had done for the previous 12 years? If, if you didn't have a ownership, some ownership. Exactly. God, I cannot believe you worked with them without a contract for almost 10 years.

0 (44m 28s):
Anyone who's listening do not do that.

1 (44m 31s):
Yes. Right. Because you were, you were basically, I mean, they had a great deal. Right. And, and again, I mean, it sounds like it was, there was a friendship you'd met these people, you liked them, they liked you. And, and then you were promoting their, their bread. It's like, if I started a kombucha company called guys kombucha and I found some young French college student, I was like, yep. You guys go promote it. And I'll, you know, I'll sell it to you and you guys can get a cut of it in France. And then they just spend the next 10 years promoting guys kombucha in France. Like I've got a great brand in France. I mean, that's basically what they had said by our nature. Yeah. Like I said,

0 (45m 8s):
I had, no, I really had no idea what I was doing. And I didn't really have any qualifications to even ask. You know, I felt like I couldn't even ask for a contract in the beginning. And then by the time I didn't, it just, we were so busy working. I never really never really crossed my mind.

1 (45m 25s):
So, all right. So now you've got this lawsuit, which is super stressful and you have to run the company and you've got two kids and they're in school in Italy. How are you doing all that stuff?

0 (45m 38s):
It's a very difficult time in my life. And you know, just the children, you know, my daughter was like, where's my yellow house. Where are my toys? Yeah. And renting an apartment and just buying everything all over again. It was, it was tough.

1 (45m 54s):
So I imagine at this point you are dealing with a lawsuit. You're dealing with this stress of a potential competitor, distributing your brand in the U S and at this point you don't yet own the brand today. You do own it. But at that time you did not own the brand by nature. Right. Did you start to think I got to get some control over something, because there was a possibility that you would not win that lawsuit. And then by nature would be out of your head. Yeah.

0 (46m 24s):
We would talk about it all the time. Do we switch the brand out? You know, we didn't know what to do. Yeah. And one day I said, I'm going to start a new brand. I told everybody in our company and they said, you're crazy.

1 (46m 37s):
You'd already spent all this time building up the brand bio nature.

0 (46m 41s):
Yeah. But I said, I'm really the one who built the bio nature brand. I can do it again. And I learned a lot in my life. I think I was 40 when I started jovial and someone had said to me, oh, it's your 40th birthday. Think of what you want to accomplish. So I thought about it and I thought, you know, I want to do something that really is, comes from within

1 (47m 7s):
You come to the realization when you started jovial, or when you were about to start jovial, that, that you had to do this, that relying only on bio nature was to actually quite dangerous that in order to actually do something that was less dangerous, you almost saw almost like you had to start Jovi. W

0 (47m 27s):
I had to, I mean, I had no choice. I wasn't going to switch out the brand. It was just too weird. I mean, I had to start over and I really wanted to do something that I had created because I knew that I was a big part of the bio nature success. And even though those products, a few of the products were lined up before I got into it, I feel like I improved them later. And that I'm good at what I do.

1 (47m 54s):
So you're starting to think about a brand meantime, one of your kids has a serious, some serious health problems, right? It says, Julia, your older daughter, Julia mailed the starter. What's what's going on with her. Yeah.

0 (48m 7s):
She had food sensitivities since she was born. It just kept getting progressively worse to the point where she had a lot of symptoms and just looked very unwell

1 (48m 18s):
Was what was, I mean, if you don't mind me asking, what, what kind of symptoms?

0 (48m 22s):
None at all. She had stomach discomfort. She had swollen lymph nodes. She had huge tonsils. Her nose were plugged. She'd often get bronchitis. And then she developed asthma and then her hair started to fall out in clumps.

1 (48m 39s):
I mean, and this is, she was how old was she? She was seven. This started to happen with more frequency when you were in Italy.

0 (48m 47s):
Yes, because we got here and we were living with my mother-in-law and it was all, you know, bread, pasta. Yeah. And literally after two weeks she had a severe asthma attack. So

1 (48m 60s):
I'm assuming you went to the doctor to find out what's going on.

0 (49m 2s):
We did. They tested her for celiac disease because that's pretty prominent

1 (49m 7s):
In Italy. And he came back, came back negative. I did not know. Celiac is prominent in Italy.

0 (49m 13s):
Italy loves people with food and they regard celiac disease as a serious disease. So, you know, people are trained in restaurants, certified. They just have a complete respect. Like if you can't eat wheat, they feel bad for you. They don't feel like, oh yeah, sure.

1 (49m 30s):
You know? Wow. So she came back for, from a celiac test and she was negative. So that means that she was not allergic to gluten, but it didn't mean that gluten wasn't maybe connected to some of her health issues. Right.

0 (49m 43s):
There is a famous homeopathic doctor in my town. So we got her in there and he looked her over and he said, I believe she has gluten sensitivity. It's not celiac disease. But if she stops eating wheat, I think all of her symptoms will go away.

1 (50m 2s):
So you go on a gluten-free diet, right. You stop eating and let's be honest, gluten-free bread. I'm sure there's some great. And I'm know people are going to be listening and I'm going to start sending me loaves of gluten-free bread. But I haven't found one that is good as not gluten-free bread. Let's just be honest. It's not great. It's really hard. And so, but in the meantime, this is from, I understand this is like 2007, 2008. You come across a variety of wheat called iron corn. Yes. Did you come across iron core? Were you searching for like an alternative wheat to try for, for your daughter?

0 (50m 43s):
Well, you have to know that I'm a food manufacturer. So I educate myself in food. So when the doctor said she can't eat wheat, I immediately started to research wheat and I read about things that had happened to wheat and how it was hybridized. And then how in the 1940s, there was the green revolution where they were breeding it to increase yields and how they had dwarfed it with cobalt radiation. And I was like, oh my God, no wonder my daughter can digest

2 (51m 10s):
This wheat. And you're thinking what, maybe I can

1 (51m 14s):
Find wheat. That's not hybridized. Yeah. Maybe I

0 (51m 17s):
Can find the oldest wheat that there is. So I, my husband is really our research and development and I was like, find something please, because when I see somebody who's not, well, I don't believe it's their fault. I feel like it's, there's something wrong with what they're eating and you know, it became my daughter so that, so I w I was never going to stop until I figured out what to do. And I told my husband find the oldest wheat that there is in existence. And

1 (51m 48s):
Let's try it. When we come back in just a moment, how Carla helped bring iron corn out of the shadows and onto the shelves of stores and how she began to market jovial with one of the most labor intensive ideas you can think of inviting a bunch of people to a cooking retreat in Tuscany, stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

National Instruments - N.I (52m 17s):
The following message comes from NPR sponsor and I, with their next 100 series, celebrating the big thinkers and creative problem-solvers, who engineer ambitiously. And I is talking with experts who have taken their visions and made them a reality with lasting impact each week for a hundred weeks. And I is publishing a new article, video film, or media piece about technology and the pioneers shaping our future. Learn more about the next 100 at and i.com/perspectives.

Ford (52m 51s):
This message comes from NPR, sponsor Ford, introducing the Mustang Mach II. Here's the global brand director of electric vehicles. Jason Castro, Yoda on the challenge of creating an all electric SUV that drives like a Mustang. The normal challenge of making an SUV go fast is they have a higher center of gravity. The beauty of the battery electric vehicle platform is that all of the weight was down low on the floor because that's where the battery is housed. And that's where the electric motors are to learn more about the new all electric pony in the Mustang, stable go to ford.com.

Etrade (53m 23s):
This message comes from NPR. E-Trade a bald Eagle. Isn't bald, a shooting star. Isn't a star. And E-Trade, isn't just, re-trading, there's lots of ways to put your money to work with each trade, from saving for retirement, to starting to invest. And they have a team of financial professionals to give you support. So you can be confident your money is working hard for you to get started today. Visit E-Trade dot com slash NPR for more information E-Trade securities, LLC, member setback.

1 (53m 57s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's around 2009 and Carla and Rodolfo are talking about starting a new pasta brand. And they're also starting to learn about an ancient form of wheat called iron corn.

0 (54m 13s):
So we looked up the story of iron corn being found frozen in the stomach of artsy, the ice man, the frozen mummy that was found in the Alps. Yeah, there's a museum here. We immediately went to the museum with our kids, and there was a couple of grains that were frozen on his coat. That looked exactly like a wheat Berry from today. It was amazing. And we found an association in Northern Italy that after he had been discovered, they got grants from the European union to figure out everything they could on about iron corn and with a local farmer.

0 (54m 53s):
They started to replenish these iron corn seeds.

1 (54m 55s):
Wow. So, okay. A couple of questions. First of all, it sounds like a German name, iron corn.

0 (55m 1s):
It is, it means one grain because there's only one grain attached to the stock at a time. It looks different than regular

1 (55m 7s):
Wheat. So basically this wheat was thought to have been extinct and was resurrected.

0 (55m 15s):
There's a couple hundred acres, some in France, some in Germany, you know, Turkey where people still grow it.

1 (55m 22s):
Do you come across this grain? And what did you do? Did you, I mean, did, was it available? Could you just buy a bunch of it and millet into flour?

0 (55m 30s):
No. So we, well, basically we made an appointment with this researcher. We listened to the whole story, which was fascinating to me, the nutrition, the versatility, you know, it was just, I was like, oh my God. So at the end of the meeting, I said, I believe that I can sell this product in the United States. Can you give a seats?

1 (55m 50s):
But how did you know? I mean, even though it was less hybridized, you thought, wait, this might be, might be a way to get people who are not celiac, but still gluten sensitive to still enjoy wheat, because this is an heirloom pure non hybridized wheat. It's

0 (56m 6s):
More than heirloom. It's ancient the most ancient grain that there is. So nobody touched it it's pure, but I run my business by intuition. You know, my head said, go for it. Yeah.

1 (56m 17s):
So how did, how did you get your hands on it to start experimenting? Because you're a baker, you're a cook. Yeah.

0 (56m 23s):
So there, I found a little mill that had some in Northern Italy and I got some, and then I put Julia on the clinical trial. Basically she either eat a meal with and corn for lunch. And then in gluten-free we switched back and forth.

1 (56m 39s):
What were you making on corn? What I started

0 (56m 42s):
To make bread and, you know, cookies and whatever, like anything, everything. And was it

1 (56m 48s):
Harder to work? I mean, is iron corn flour, does it work the same way? Was it easy to kind of work with and turn it into a nice bread loaf?

0 (56m 56s):
It wasn't, my kids still talk about the first lifts were like bricks because basically it absorbs less water than wheat. So I would keep adding flour to make it feel like the texture of rego. Cause I already knew how to make sourdough. Yeah. And then when I would bake it, it wouldn't rise and it was terrible. And then this one week we went on vacation and I took the flour and the starter and there was nothing in this kitchen now we were in, so I mixed up the dough and it was really late and I was tired. And so I just decided to add more water. And then the next day I kind of plopped it in this pan and oh my God, the best bread came out of the oven. I was like, that's the trick? What DOE

1 (57m 36s):
Took to, to throw into the pot. I didn't add

0 (57m 39s):
As it's still way less water than a regular loaf of bread, but it was enough to, to get the bread to rise. Well, and you didn't need it basically. No, it was kinda like you

1 (57m 49s):
Need bread and no need bread. I got ya. And, and this flower was, I mean, it's still wheat bright, but it's different because what it was like it's higher in protein content.

0 (58m 0s):
It has a very weak gluten. So there are certain types of glutenins or proteins in all other kinds of wheat that I in corn does not have.

1 (58m 11s):
So like pizza made an in Naples as they use like double O flour. Like that has a very high gluten.

0 (58m 19s):
Yeah. It's chewy. That's where you get, right? Yeah. But you can still make Pete delicious pizza and everything with corn, you just have to learn how to do it.

1 (58m 29s):
And I'm going to be clear is not gluten-free we should make it is not gluten-free

0 (58m 33s):
You can't eat it if you have celiac disease.

1 (58m 35s):
Okay. So you start experimenting with this and you're making iron corn, everything like iron, corn, bread and pastas and pies and stuff like that for Julia. And what happens? Do her symptoms go away.

0 (58m 49s):
She started to feel better in about two months and then progressively better, took about two years for everything to go away.

1 (58m 58s):
So now you know that you, you have something that you want to develop into a brand, but who who's growing Encore? Where do you get it?

0 (59m 8s):
Well, so basically asked this researcher, if I could have seeds and he, he gave us the name of a farmer and he said, we don't sell seeds. But if this guy's willing to share with you, go for it. So everybody likes my husband. He drove to the, they became friends. The guy said, okay, I'll give you the seeds. And then that weekend we had a school end of the year dinner. We sat across from the sky. We started talking, he said he was a wheat farmer. And I was like, Hey, you're interested in trying something new. And he said, sure, I'm not making any money growing wheat. So it just

1 (59m 43s):
For a moment, just talk about a moment of luck here. It's a, an elementary school dinner. And the guy you're talking to is a wheat farmer. And you have to be, you haven't have a wheat problem that you need solved. And, and how often do we get to sit across the table from a wheat farmer who we randomly meet?

0 (1h 0m 0s):
It just fell into my lap. Yeah. And he wasn't only a weed farmer. He was like the best wheat farmer I've ever met because he was going to grow that wheat, no matter what I mean, we had no idea how many seeds you planted per acre. Like we didn't know anything. And I think we planted 50 acres the first year. And I love this farmer because he would come in Italy. You can pick your children up for lunch. It's elementary school. He would come in a gigantic tractor to pick up his daughter for school. And I would be like, there's my farmer. And he would just every once in a while. So you guys got to come to the farm because I've never seen anything. Like it it's like totally different. I dunno. I don't know if it's gonna make it.

0 (1h 0m 41s):
And it did. And we harvested it.

1 (1h 0m 45s):
And from what I understand, by the way, from, from reading about this, the yield is like a fifth of the normal yield for wheat. So like, you might have 50 acres of this, but like it's a fifth less than you would get from hybridized normal wheat that most of us

0 (1h 1m 0s):
It's nothing. And we've had to save the seeds every year. We started with this original variety, which will never change. So we've had to manage everything. It's, it's, it's a huge project.

2 (1h 1m 12s):
All right. Meantime, you

1 (1h 1m 15s):
Are starting, you decide to start a new brand called jovial. You're going to continue to distribute by a nature in the U S but you're going to start this new brand jovial and jovial was going to be built around iron corn and gluten-free pastas. Yes.

0 (1h 1m 32s):
A lot of advisors said don't do anything, but I, in corn, you're a year behind corn person. And I'm like, it's going to take years

2 (1h 1m 39s):
To get people to know what it is. Yeah.

0 (1h 1m 41s):
I can't do that. I need to come up with something else.

2 (1h 1m 45s):
Yeah. Yeah. So you, so you

1 (1h 1m 46s):
Started, when you started out with jovial, you didn't just start with the iron corn pasta, but you also had like black rice pasta, like full on gluten-free pastas.

0 (1h 1m 58s):
Yeah. I didn't want my daughter to be eating a ton of starch and gums for the rest of her life. I want it to just be flour. So I've always tried to make gluten-free foods without those added ingredients. So the pasta factory that makes our pasta actually started making gluten-free pasta in 1970, it was a no pasta for people with kidney disease and they tweaked the machine and they got in on the gluten free pasta really early. And they're really good at it. So I said, let's pull out all the stops. Browns dies, slow drying everything. And you know, who's going to do that for like, who really cares about gluten-free people.

0 (1h 2m 39s):
Well, I did. I wanted a good pasta. Yeah.

1 (1h 2m 41s):
You wanted the bronze because that's more expensive. Right? Cause the most pasta we in, in, in the U S even, probably even in Italy is just mass produced and it's not extruded through bronze dyes that, that leave those, that like nice textured pasta. If you want to buy it, you can go and buy it. This is more expensive.

0 (1h 3m 0s):
Yeah. They use tough one. So it's like a non-stick pan. It just slides right through.

1 (1h 3m 5s):
But you want a gluten-free pasta to have that, that texture to hold the sauce

0 (1h 3m 12s):
I wanted. The gluten-free pasta would be as close to regular pasta as I could possibly make

1 (1h 3m 18s):
It. And what did you start with? You started with, with rice brown rice. Brown rice. Okay. So with brown rice, yeah. They need

0 (1h 3m 24s):
The brown rice to get it a little bit more flavor to be closer to wheat flavor.

1 (1h 3m 29s):
Got it. Okay. So I think in 2010 jovial was born and now you've already had this distribution network because through bio nature. So I have to imagine it wasn't that hard to get, to get your products into whole foods and to other health food stores. Right. Did you, so did you, were you able to get the corn pasta and into whole foods pretty quickly?

0 (1h 3m 52s):
We did. They took it nationally and it was actually not too hard to get the products into distribution, but unfortunately they did not sell. They didn't sell people who didn't know the brand. And I was surprised by that. I was surprised because

1 (1h 4m 6s):
You thought consumers are like me. They're going to look at the labels. They're going to say there's high protein content. They're going to see it as a high fiber content. They're going to want to try this. But people are not like you, they don't do that in the grocery

0 (1h 4m 17s):
Store. They walk by things a couple of times before they pick it up. Yeah. I mean, I think Americans are, you know, they like they're faithful to their brand. So once you get them on your side, it's good, but they, that's hard to get them to stop buying whatever they're buying and try something new. So it did not do well. I think six months for iron corn to be off the shelf, but they kept the other product.

1 (1h 4m 41s):
What were the other, oh, the brown rice pasta. So they dropped iron corn pasta. And that must have been kind of a gut punch

0 (1h 4m 49s):
Was, but we also had a lot of people that were embracing the flour. They wanted to bake at home with something that they felt was pure. So it was this product that we were growing in a different way than our usual channels. So you

1 (1h 5m 4s):
Were selling iron, corn, flour, all purpose flour at whole foods. Now we were selling it direct, direct to consumers.

0 (1h 5m 11s):
And a lot of people just word started spreading.

1 (1h 5m 15s):
Meantime, you're getting traction with the and corn pasta at whole foods. Pretty soon after whole foods dropped you. From what I understand you, you decided to offer like cooking retreats in Tuscany, like for people to come to learn how to cook with iron corn flour, you started to like host people and teach them how to do this. Right? Yes. And the idea was that if you could just get people to see and to hear the story, then more people would know about it. And it would take off.

0 (1h 5m 48s):
Sometimes I would sit with marketing and I would tell them stories. And they were like, oh, if people could just hear this, they would buy our product. So I started to think about it and I said, I'm going to try this. So I think the first two times I had no idea how this would go. So I didn't, I wasn't going to teach the classes. I, I paid an influencer who was popular in gluten-free to come and do it, but she also promoted the trip. And that's how people came because they didn't really know us too. Well,

1 (1h 6m 15s):
This was a, this was a food blogger who was influential in the gluten-free world. And you said, Hey, come. And we want to show you what we do. Yes. She

0 (1h 6m 25s):
Was called gluten-free girl at the time. And basically we all live in the same big Villa, which is beautiful. And it's a few steps from the pasta factory. So I would invite, you know, important buyers or, you know, people also in the industry to come and take them on a tour of the pasta factory. Then we would have a class every other day, free time in between and after class, we would make a traditional Italian dinner that everybody loved. But when we first started, I worked so hard. I'd wake up at four o'clock in the morning to have breakfast ready by seven, because everything was fresh. I wouldn't sit down until midnight. I mean, I basically would sleep for four hours and this is like manual labor.

0 (1h 7m 8s):
You're like cooking. And, but we learned how to get better at it. And I just learned that I have, I feel like I have a gift for this type of teaching. I know a lot about food. So when we're in the cooking class, their eyes are just on me. You know, they'd love it. I'm just

1 (1h 7m 25s):
Wondering Carla, from a marketing perspective, I mean, you were really busy. You're running by nature. You're starting this new brand jovial and you need to get the word out about iron corn. Like it doesn't seem super efficient to start a food retreat and to spend your free time, which probably had almost none teaching just 20 people at a time had to cook with Encore. Doesn't seem like a particularly efficient way to market your product,

0 (1h 7m 54s):
But just think of all the people that would see that on social media and want to go, but not be able to go. And I've always wanted my business to be my own, you know, I want to do what I'm good at, like staying true to yourself as the best thing that you can do in a business. I don't, I don't copy people. I just, I just do what I feel like is important. It is, is true to me and that something that I have that's unique. And once I started doing the getaways, I would hear people talking about everything. I got to know the gluten-free consumer up close and personal and understand what was missing in their lives. And I also connected with them on a deep level. And I'm, I've had people come back six times.

1 (1h 8m 36s):
Yeah. It just, it's amazing to me that you decided to do this, which turned out to be smart because it was a way to get the word out about the food. But like, this is not, I mean, when you look at like a pure P and L right for your business, this is not a money generator. You can, you can go on these retreats now and they're, you know, they're not bargain basement cheap, but I can't imagine you guys are making really making money off of these.

0 (1h 9m 4s):
We try to break. Even my business has never been about money. If you looked at the margins on iron corn, they never would have happened unless I was crazy, but I always felt like, you know, that first promise, like I am going to honor my consumer. If I did that, the money would follow.

1 (1h 9m 23s):
When did you guys first be, I mean, you started this business with your, your brother as a, as a partner on 96 or something. When did you become profitable?

0 (1h 9m 34s):
I think we were profitable after the third year, not immensely profitable. And I think we had two years where we lost money, but yeah, we've run a tight ship. I mean, we had a very small warehouse that we rented for $3,000 a month for, until 2014. And we stretch that space. We outgrew that seven years before we moved out.

1 (1h 9m 58s):
I think that in maybe 2012 or 2013, I think America's test kitchen named your gluten-free pasta, the brown rice pasta, the best in, in the U S which I have to imagine just like was a huge boost for, for your business, for the, for the jovial brand.

0 (1h 10m 17s):
They actually did it a couple of years in a row and they marketed that a lot and it really did. It was a turning point for our pasta

1 (1h 10m 24s):
That really did the gluten-free pasta really begin to drive the jovial brand. Was that the engine that kind of helped to take off?

0 (1h 10m 32s):
Yes. And it totally does today too. Sorry. It's our best selling product.

1 (1h 10m 36s):
So as you started to gain more traction through the gluten-free pasta, did you start to see more traction through the, the iron corn pastas?

0 (1h 10m 44s):
Yeah, I think, I think we did. We introduced tomatoes, cracker and growing crackers cookies. And then, because I have this passion for products packed in glass, we also came up with beans. And last year we introduced a grain-free pasta, which has taken off. Like you can't even believe cassava pasta. Yes. Because I feel like if I can create a food that can make a difference in somebody's life and fill a void and do it well, then that's what I have to do. So grain-free was becoming popular and

2 (1h 11m 24s):
I felt like

0 (1h 11m 25s):
I could do this well with no added ingredients, nothing just cassava and water. And that product has taken off way faster than brown rice pasta. It's really, really doing well. So now

1 (1h 11m 37s):
The brand jovial, you're still based in Connecticut, right? It's its headquarters are in Connecticut.

0 (1h 11m 43s):
Yes. We have a warehouse and an office. Do you make all

1 (1h 11m 47s):
Of your things in it, all your products are made in Italy, most of your things or products are made in Italy, right?

0 (1h 11m 53s):
Everything is currently made in Italy, but we do have about five years of new products. And some of these products will have to be made in the United States because they're not products that we can make in Italy. So I'm very excited to, you know, I'll finally have a product that's made in the USA, which I'm proud of.

1 (1h 12m 12s):
We should mention, by the way, you did win that lawsuit eventually. And you did, were able to buy out the bio nature brand. And it is now yours. You own that brand. Yes. When did jovial kind of begin to become a bigger brand than bio nature? If it, if it is, it is when did you start to notice jovial kind of overshadowing by our nature as a brand 2018, 2019? Yes. You know, so many companies, we've so many businesses that we've had on the show with the founders. Some, some of the businesses are totally privately owned or, or, or founder owned. Some of them got to a point where they, they could not actually scale without outside money, like because a Walmart or a target said, we need, we need your product.

1 (1h 13m 1s):
And it meant that they had to like quadruple output and, and cashflow alone could not fund that or finance that, how would you deal with that?

0 (1h 13m 9s):
I don't spend money unless I have it. So if I want to do a project, I make sure that we make the money, that we need to cover it because you can choose what supermarkets or chains or whatever you, you present to. You don't have to say yes to everybody. That's how we do it. We have an order of priorities and work down that list. I don't need to double my sales. I don't need to sell 200. I mean, if I do, that's great, but it's got to happen in a manageable way. And when I hired our new sales guy, I told him, you know, you might be able to totally go over, you know, the sales goals that I'm going to give you, but I don't want to grow faster than that. I don't want to put myself in a position where I'd need to ask for money over

1 (1h 13m 51s):
The years. I mean, I have to imagine that you've been approached by people who want to invest and want to kind of scale this and make this into like the, you know, the Barilla pasta of organics and, you know, whatever. And is that attractive to you? Is there anything about, I mean, is that an interesting thought to turn jovial into like the Barilla organics? Absolutely

0 (1h 14m 13s):
Not. I mean, I have worked so hard. I can't even tell you to stay independently owned and I just want to keep continuing to be privately owned and be able to hand this down to my children.

1 (1h 14m 25s):
Yeah. What, what, what would happen? I mean, I've asked this question to Gary Erickson and Kate Crawford, the, the owners of cliff bar. Cause they own, they started it. They own it. And you know, I've asked him the similar question. What happens if your kids don't want to run this company one day?

0 (1h 14m 45s):
Well, we've talked about it recently actually. And I believe they do. They, they might not run it from day to day, but they cook are totally against selling our company. So I've kind of set up a management team last year because it got too hard for me. I couldn't do everything anymore. And I feel like we're growing the infrastructure and everything could run smoothly and they could live happily ever after. But here's my daughter developed. She actually developed a product that I think is really going to be successful. And we're, we're, we're trying to get it produced. So is

1 (1h 15m 25s):
It becoming a jar or does it come in a box? It's actually a bread product. Interesting. So maybe it comes in the freezer section,

2 (1h 15m 35s):
Maybe, maybe you'll like it. Yeah. So,

1 (1h 15m 40s):
And by the way, what, what role does Rudolfo play with the company? Now?

0 (1h 15m 44s):
He manages every factory except for the pasta factory. And he manages the farmers and he manages research and development. He's he also taught me a lot, you know, we've worked together from day one and he's a totally different personality than me. So there is this Italian side to the business. And if I was the only person here, we never would have succeeded because he's more, just very humble, sweet man. He's just nice and kind. And he has patience and he also had a different approach to running a business. Like when we first started to hire people, he couldn't believe that people had to pay for health insurance.

0 (1h 16m 31s):
So from day one, I've always paid a hundred percent of every employee's health insurance and covered every expense because we have this European kind of sensibility to things like that. So he tastes taught me a lot. I mean, he taught me a lot about food. He's kind of a behind the scenes, quiet person who really has made a difference.

1 (1h 16m 51s):
When you think about all of the struggle that you went through, you know, starting the <inaudible> place and mistake, and then shutting it down and going back and forth to Italy and then back to America and back to Italy and then, you know, and all that, just an incredible, I mean your father, your mother Rodolfo's brothers and, and then the lawsuits and the, I mean, just there, there's a lot of struggle there. I dunno. Does, when you think about that, do you think, yep. It's just, that's just part of the journey or do you think God, that's kind of crazy. I don't know how I made it through.

0 (1h 17m 30s):
I think, I think both, sometimes I think I've had a full life. I mean, I've lived every experience, not every experience, but I've lived a lot of experiences and sometimes my husband and I talk about it, like how did all this happen to us? But I think we've just, most people have tragedies. We've had a lot of them, but I think it's shaped our lives. And it's really made me more sensitive to helping others.

1 (1h 18m 4s):
When you think about your journey and what happened and where you are now, how much do you attribute that to your hard work and how much do you attribute that to your

0 (1h 18m 17s):
Well, I was lucky to get into the health food industry early, and I've definitely worked very, very hard, but I had had this very strong intuition or inner voice that has really guided me through and I've listened to it. And I think that has been important.

1 (1h 18m 44s):
That's Carla bar Luci co-founder of jovial foods on May 22nd, Carla passed away unexpectedly. After a brief illness, Carlos has been Rudolfo will continue in his role at jovial. And this month, their daughter, Julia, who was the inspiration for the brand will be officially joining jovial to help run the family business. Thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you're not yet a subscriber, please do subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us, our email address is H I B t@npr.org. And if you want to follow us on Twitter, we're at guy Ross or at how I built this.

1 (1h 19m 27s):
You can also find us on Instagram. That's at how I built this NPR or my personal account at guide dot Roz. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by rum, Tina or bluey. It was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Doris gales. Our audio engineer was Patrick Boyd. Our production staff includes Casey Herman, Rachel Faulkner James DeLuise, Julia Carney, Farrah safari, Liz Metzker, Janet Lou, John Lee and Annalee sober. Our intern is Harrison VJ choy. And Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Roz. And you've been listening to how I built this.

4 (1h 20m 13s):
This is NPR.

Capital One (1h 20m 18s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor capital one, offering checking and savings accounts with no fees or minimums and the banking app to check balances, deposit checks and transfer money. That's banking re-imagined what's in your wallet terms apply capital one in a member FDI C.