0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, UK G HR and workforce management solutions designed to make employees happy. When employees feel supported, businesses become more than a place of work. They become a work of art. UK G. Our purpose is people. Hey everyone, a quick thing before we start the show, how I built this as doing its annual survey to better understand our listeners and how you use podcasts. So please, please, please help us out by completing a short anonymous survey at npr.org/built survey. It's all one word, npr.org/built survey. We'd really appreciate your feedback. We really do need it.

0 (41s):
So again, npr.org/built survey, and thanks.

2 (51s):
We hired a top brand agency in New York city named Wolff Olins the branding project was led by a woman named Carol Costello. Ultimately, her team came up with a list of about a hundred names and kayak was actually our second choice.

0 (1m 5s):
All right, so you fight kayak and did anybody like get on there initially and say, where are the kayaks? Like, where's your kayak gear? Like, what are you doing?

2 (1m 16s):
We literally got hate mail from kayakers out different tigers. Yeah. Who said, this was terrible that we took this over and this is like a blight on the internet. You know, that someone would take over their precious hobby and use it for something dirty, like a travel site.

0 (1m 36s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz and on the show today, how it totally chance meeting in a Boston restaurant led Paul English to launch his fifth business kayak and how he and his partner grew it into a popular travel site, then sold it for nearly $2 billion. Starting a business is full of pain and frustration, no matter which path you take, there will always be an obstacle.

0 (2m 19s):
Something trying to prevent you from solving the problem. And then a new problem will crop up a supplier who can't fill your order until after Christmas, a letter from a state or local agency that hasn't received your permit application, even though you filed it months ago, a distributor who forgot to put your product on the store shelves, all of these things, and many more are usually reliable sources of high blood pressure, but there's a certain type of person who thrives on these challenges. Someone who is almost addicted to the stresses of starting again and again and again. And that person is a serial entrepreneur for them.

0 (3m 2s):
The money side of business is almost an afterthought. It's the process side that makes them feel alive. And we've seen that on this show and entrepreneurs like Richard Branson and mark Cuban, and Marsia Kilgore founders who every two or three years pretty much have to start a new business to stay fulfilled and energized. And all of this goes for Paul English as well. The co-founder of the travel website, kayak and seven other companies, plus three philanthropic organizations and several other side projects back in 2004. When Paul launched kayak along with Steve Hafner, he had already founded, or co-founded at least four successful companies.

0 (3m 46s):
And yes, the concept behind kayak, a clean and simple search engine for plane tickets and later hotels and car rentals, all of that was appealing to Paul at the time. But as you'll hear what really appealed to him was the sheer joy of looking at another empty whiteboard and filling it with the building blocks of yet another brand, which eight years after launch wound up selling to Priceline for $1.8 billion. And you might think that somebody with the incredible drive and instincts to build eight companies might come from an entrepreneurial background, but no, not really.

0 (4m 27s):
Paul grew up in a working class family in an Irish Catholic and Italian neighborhood, south of Boston. There were seven kids in his family and they all shared a cramped three bedroom house.

2 (4m 38s):
Yeah, the brothers, the four boys slept in the attic, which had no heat and no air conditioning. I mean, the worst part of it was we had one bathroom with nine people. And so we each had a 15 minute slot starting at like 5:00 AM or something. And if you missed your slot, you'd be going to high school smelly. So that was, that was tough. Getting up at 5:30 AM or whatever at the time was, but it was fine. Like we didn't know anything different and I never felt like my house was crowded. It's just that it is what it was. And that's how we grew up.

0 (5m 11s):
Well, what was your, what does your dad do for a living?

2 (5m 14s):
My dad was a pipe fitter. He worked for the same company for 49 years and he really ran the household. And probably all of us were like just a little bit afraid of him. Maybe, probably more so Dan and I and the others and my brother, Dan and I were the ones who acted out probably more than the others. Was he physically

0 (5m 30s):
Imposing?

2 (5m 31s):
It's interesting. I have this one story about my dad. He wasn't like a huge guy. He was probably six feet tall, probably a little bit thin as their member. And there's this one scene where I had gotten a fight with someone, the kid down the street, and his father came over to our house and banged on the door. I remember him bang, bang, bang. And my father opens the door and there's this huge guy. And he said, you're a son up my son and blah, blah, blah. And my father put his finger in the guy's chest and said, don't you ever bang on my door again? And somehow the way my father communicated to people, this guy melted. And I remember watching my dad do that and saying, how does he do that?

2 (6m 13s):
My dad had really good influencing skills. He was very charismatic and very confident

0 (6m 19s):
Your, your mom, I guess, was, was a teacher and a social worker. But from what I read, she spent like the first 10 years of your life, actually sick. Do you remember being aware of that and, and cognizant of her being ill?

2 (6m 35s):
Yeah. My mom had an illness called Messina gravis, which is a debilitating muscle disorder. And she spent much of the first 10 years of my life in bed, but my mom had a miraculous recovery back when I was about 10, that she was healed by a Catholic faith healer. And my mother was very religious. I'm not, if anything, I might consider myself Buddhist because I read a lot of Buddhism and I'm very interested in following a few Buddhist teachers, but I'm not sure that this priest healed her or her belief and the priest healed her. And I think there is this magical thing that can happen when someone really, really believes something they can, will it to happen and they can, will their brain to rewire.

2 (7m 23s):
And something happened to my mom that day and she started healing. It wasn't a night and day switch, but she started fighting the disease. And my mom even started jogging back before jogging was a thing. She started playing tennis. She became very strong at the end of her life. So I think the doctors told her she could never get rid of the disease, but somehow she fought it. And it seems like she won.

0 (7m 50s):
W what do you remember about your parents' marriage? What, what was it like?

2 (7m 54s):
It was difficult during the seventies and eighties at the end of their lives. And my father ended up passing away 2003. So it's been almost 20 years since both my parents passed away. But I'll tell you kind of a funny scene. Literally my mother's death bed with her seven children around her. This is kind of a sad thing to hear, but ended up, well, she looked around the room at each one of us, and I can't believe she said this, but she said all my life. I knew my marriage to your father was a mistake. However, I look around the room, I look at each one of you, and then she paused and she looked at each one of us and she said, I can see what each one of you got from him and what you got from me.

2 (8m 44s):
And I know now that my marriage was very successful. Wow. Yeah, they were very different people. My mom was an intellect. She grew up in a very difficult childhood and my dad was kind of happy, go lucky. He didn't go to college. He was very charming. He was a good storyteller, but there were very, very different. The last after my dad retired, I think they actually had a lot of nice times together. Did she go

0 (9m 9s):
To mass? Every Sunday? We did. We showed it.

2 (9m 13s):
She made us go. Were you an altar

0 (9m 15s):
Boy? I was.

2 (9m 17s):
Which my teachers, my teachers didn't believe me after I'd many times I get, you know, set up to go to detention after school, because I was a bit of a wise guy in school. I was bored and I would get in trouble. And many times it's I have to go to detention. I said, I can't, I'm an Altima. I have to go to church. And they wouldn't believe me. Yeah. The classroom was not a good place for me. I guess today you would say I had ADHD. Maybe I'm not quite sure, but I'm still amazed. I think about if there was an anthropologist from another culture who beamed down, you know, to my schools in Boston or really any school and saw that they kept 30 kids in desks for eight hours. It just seems inhuman. Like who came up with this idea to make kids sit in a chair at a desk for eight hours.

2 (10m 1s):
It just seems crazy. And I couldn't do it. I struggled with that. I did like performing intellectually. And so I worked really hard at music and science, things like that, but my grades were terrible. But,

0 (10m 15s):
But clearly, I mean, you were very intelligent because you wound up going to Boston Latin and for people who don't, who don't know what this is, I think it's like the oldest high school in the U S and there was an exam or may still be to get into it. And from what I've read about, you were like, one of the, you had like one of the highest admission scores to Boston, Latin of thousands of kids who took the

2 (10m 38s):
Yeah. The way I looked at it was I tested, well, I felt like I had this trick, that in classes I was fast on exams and I could guess things really quickly, but I don't know. I guess I would say I had a lot of diverse interests as a student. I won prizes in art and science and music and math. And as a very competitive kid, growing up with all those siblings at one house, I think it makes you both collaborative, but also competitive

0 (11m 8s):
Because you're competing for your parents' attention. Yeah. That's

2 (11m 11s):
Probably, I mean, I don't know if I was thinking about that explicitly as a kid, but that's probably true.

0 (11m 17s):
I mean, this is the late seventies, early eighties. Do you remember when you first got exposure to a computer because I'm assuming you couldn't afford to have one at home?

2 (11m 28s):
Well, to my surprise, Emma surprise my siblings. One year, my mother went out and bought a computer called a Commodore Vic 20. I think it was $300, which is a tremendous amount of money back then. And we were shocked that she would spend that money in the computer. And I still don't know why she bought it when she, she must've seen an ad somewhere and thought this could be a good way to entertain the kids. And I kind of selfishly it over and I learned everything I could. I learned how to code. I wrote software. I wrote a video game and that to me taught me like, whoa, there's way to make money programming. And that was pretty cool.

0 (12m 7s):
And I guess it was around this time that you actually built a, a video game, which would become like your very first company, I guess. Yeah.

2 (12m 17s):
I, so I called my little company speed games. It's funny to call it a company. Cause I don't think I was incorporated, but the game that I sold was called Cupid and it operated maybe a little bit like a Pac-Man, but there was a player that would race across the field. Cupid's arrows would shoot and you had to avoid the arrows. And then my most proud thing about the game was I designed all the music and sound effects and all the graphics. And I really put a lot of energy into what happened when Cupid's arrow would hit you. Like what happened to your shape? What the sound effect was.

0 (12m 51s):
So this game that you wrote Cupid, you, you managed to get the attention of a, I guess, a, a company called GBA, which you sold a license to, to them or something like that.

2 (13m 4s):
Yeah, the deal was, it was $25,000 up front and then a dollar revenue per game characteristic, which sounds really great. Especially for a teenager, the bad news is I licensed a game to them and they immediately went out of business. And then the question is, why didn't I then go contact every other game publisher to try to find someone else to license it. But like a lot of things I would jump from thing to thing. And I felt like I had mastered the game and then I was onto something else. I wasn't really motivated by money. The money was very cool as a teenager getting a big check, but I went on to the next thing.

0 (13m 38s):
Did they pay you? I mean, they went under, did you get all the 25?

2 (13m 43s):
No, they paid me 5,000 upfront, but then they immediately went out of business. They never even sent me the rest of the 25,000. So all I really made out of it was 5,000

0 (13m 52s):
In 1980 to

2 (13m 54s):
1980 or whatever it was, it was a lot of money.

0 (13m 56s):
The money it's a ton of money, especially for a high school kid. My God. So for college, you, you ended up going to the university of Massachusetts in Boston and I guess it became pretty clear why you were there, that you were going to pursue a career in computers probably as a programmer or something like that because you really, I think while you were in college, you already started to do some freelance work for like th th sort of the nascent computer industry that started grow in and around in, in the Boston area. In the early eighties.

2 (14m 26s):
I don't remember how I got my first job, but I worked mostly full-time during college. It took me five years to get my bachelor's degree and another two years to get my master's. But I did everything from, I worked for a mini computer company called data general in an operations research group. I worked for the U S air force writing software for spy planes. That was super cool. I worked for a medical device company writing device drivers software for blood machines. So I really tried to change it up and learn about different industries while I was studying for my undergraduate degree

0 (15m 3s):
In the midst of, of sort of the early part of your career. Cause I know one of the first things you did when you, when you had your degrees from UMass was you went to go work for a company called Interleaf, which want to ask you about in a sec, but you got married really young, like 25, 26,

2 (15m 19s):
And Jean and I met at age 18 as freshmen at UMass Boston. And we're married at age 25.

0 (15m 26s):
And I had kids a couple years in and we had,

2 (15m 31s):
Yeah, I have a son and a daughter, my daughter, Nicole, and my son is Michael. And they both live in Boston and they're super close to both the parents I'm divorced now for 15 years, but I'm very friendly with my ex. We live close to each other. We're still very supportive of each other and we're both pretty close to the kids.

0 (15m 48s):
All right. So you really, one of the first professional long-term jobs you had was with a company called Interleaf and I guess they were like an early content management software company. And you were a program there and you, you, you must've done pretty well because they eventually promoted you to a management role, right?

2 (16m 7s):
Yeah. I started as a programmer and I loved programming. I worked a million hours a week. I worked weekends, I worked late at night. I was there early in the morning. I would just become obsessed with programming, but it's true that after a couple of few years they talked me into management, which I was really perplexed by. And didn't like at first I ran engineering there at one point. And then my last year there, I actually ran product mansion and marketing, which is kind of a crazy story. The company lost a lot of money, one quarter and the board fired the CEO and appointed myself and another executive as an office of the president. We had to recover over, recruit another CEO. And so we recruited this guy to come in as CEO and in his first day he said to me, okay, we have 12 VPs, which is double what we should have for company of the size.

2 (16m 55s):
So I'm going to fire half the VPs tomorrow. I want you to run engineering in the business units cause I was running engineering at the time or I can have you run marketing. I said, I don't know anything about marketing. And he said, congratulations, you're a VP of marketing. And I mean props to this guy for shaking it up. And I didn't really know what marketing was, but I figured, okay, we had a direct sales force. I wanted to learn how to sell software because if I could design it and I could learn how people sold it, then maybe I could figure out what marketing was. And it was a really fun job for me.

0 (17m 26s):
This is a really heady time in Boston tech. I mean, I mean, DEC digital equipment, I think it was called one of the hottest and would become one of the hottest computer companies in the country. And there was a lot of software companies that don't exist anymore, including Interleaf right. I mean, I don't think in our leaf is around anymore, is it?

2 (17m 44s):
It's not, it's sold very successfully. I think it was a billion dollar exit to a company called broad vision, which is really hot during the beginning of the inner now or the beginning of the web, I should say.

0 (17m 56s):
Did you have any, any stock options that you

2 (17m 58s):
Had? I did. I did. I made, I made my first million when I was, I have to do the math, but I think I was 29 years old. Wow. But I remember after I had vested half my options, which is a million dollars, I then got convinced by a very gregarious recruiter in Boston to leave my big, fancy job at Interleaf to go work for some unknown internet company. So I walked away from half of my options and then worked really hard at this crazy startup that imploded a year later. And so I learned quickly how startups shouldn't run.

0 (18m 32s):
It's called net centric, I think. Right, exactly.

2 (18m 35s):
Yeah. We built software back then. This is back in like 1996, maybe 19 97, 19 96, 19 97. There was something called a point of presence, which is where all the internet companies connected users to the internet. It routed all the traffic from dial up modems to connect to other servers and, and businesses. And we built software for these points of presence. So you could route faxes through the internet. And we S the beginnings of doing phone calls over the internet.

0 (19m 5s):
So you go and work for this company called net centric, a startup, which wasn't going to be, you weren't going to stay there long, but I guess while you were there, you either met or you hired two guys who would, who would eventually become pivotal to your, the rest of your career? A guy named bill O'Donnell one guy named Paul Schwenk. Did you, you hired them as engineers. Did you meet them there?

2 (19m 26s):
I actually met them at Interleaf and below Donal, a below, as we called him and Paul shrank or shrink as we called him, turned out to be incredibly instrumental in my career. I've been incredibly lucky to work with those guys for decades. So when I went to net centric, I hired them as engineers. And then there's another guy that I hired that I had not met before named Jeff Ray go, who also turned to be instrumental to my career. Really those three guys, and a lot of being successful in tech is luck, right? And a lot of it is picking the right people to work with. And I felt lucky that I met these guys early on and we developed a close friendship and we worked together across several companies over decades and they help all of my companies be very successful.

0 (20m 14s):
So here's, I think kind of an interesting thing that was going on right on the surface, you were very successful. You had been promoted to an executive position at the previous company you're, you know, at a hot startup. And I think around this time in your late twenties, you presumably went to go see a doctor or a psychiatrist because you were suffering from things that maybe you couldn't fully understand depression and anxiety and, and sleeplessness. And also is that right? I mean, does that, what, what was going on in your, in your life?

2 (20m 51s):
Yeah, so age 25 was a big year for me. In one month I had four big life changes. So I got my master's degree. I started a new job. I got married in, I bought a house and I was working really hard full-time while I was going to grad school at night and then switched to a different company. And I was alternating between extreme depression and panic attacks where I couldn't leave my bedroom. And I remember just begging the sun to come out and just kept looking at the window cell for the first signs of light. And somehow when the sun came out, it would calm me down a little bit, but I would go between these depressive episodes, which lasted weeks or longer, and then manic episodes where I couldn't sleep and the mania or hypomania allow me to be creative, but I also, things would move so fast for me that I became detached from other people.

2 (21m 53s):
Like I was very irritable and I had this perception, which I learned later. It was just grandiosity with it. Everyone became too slow for me, but it just felt like I was separating from people at work in my marriage, with my friends. I had trouble communicating with other people. I mean,

0 (22m 13s):
A lot of young people first experience some types of mental illness in their twenties. There's some reason why it's maybe it's a combination of where you are in life and where you're, how your brain is developing and just this kind of perfect storm of things happening. How did you get to a point where you were, where you said I've got to go see a doctor?

2 (22m 36s):
I didn't really know what a psychiatrist was, but I knew I needed to see someone who could help balance me. And I went to see a psychiatrist at Newton-Wellesley hospital. They had died, knows me as bipolar. I had never heard of bipolar before, but it made me feel good because I thought, okay, if there's a name for it, maybe someone knows how to fix it. So they put me on lithium. And I remember I felt this is great. If something can balance me out a little bit, but I was also afraid of the drugs because I thought it would cut into my creativity

0 (23m 12s):
And did it well,

2 (23m 14s):
Put it this way. When I started taking lithium, one of my managers at Interleaf, a guy who was very close to pulled me aside one day and said, is everything okay for you? I said, yeah. He said, you seem like you're not yourself recently. Like, you don't have your energy. And I stopped taking the drugs after he said that, because I thought this is terrible. I can't lose my energy. I can't lose my creativity. But then I went through cycles for years of taking the drugs, not taking the drugs. It took me probably another 15 years of on drugs, off drugs, on drugs, off drugs, until I found something that worked well for me.

2 (23m 55s):
And I have not had a depressive, like a full-on depressive episode in 20 years now. So I'm hoping knock on wood that I've looked at with the meds and with other, with meditation and therapy has helped me with that.

0 (24m 10s):
All right. So I think you're in your mid thirties and you were at this internet startup net centric, and I think you stayed there for what, like a year or, or even maybe even less than that.

2 (24m 23s):
Yeah. My it's funny. My memory of my departure was that I was fired years. 20 years after that I met the founder, the CEO, again, it seemed to Shawna Sullivan. He's a wonderful guy, went on to become a very successful investor. And we had breakfast after not seeing each other for 20 years. So we talked about the fact that we had this fight and that I left. I don't remember the final words that happen, but we, we left over a big disagreement. I was hiring engineers at ridiculously low salaries. Like he really had this religion. He developed this cult of all of us were very cheap. We spent very little money on computers and office and everything else. We were cheap as we possibly could.

2 (25m 4s):
The sides were cheap and we're all going to become millionaires on stock. Meanwhile, the friends of my engineer colleagues were all making big money at other companies. And so we had this agreement that the first time we shipped a server and we got revenue from a major network partner, we would increase the salary of the engineer. It's I remember I had a printed out spreadsheet with their existing show. The new salary I had, the CFO literally signed it because I wasn't evidence that these are approved. And then I told the engineers, you're getting a raise and Sean and I got a huge fight over it. His memory was that I quit. My memory is that he fired me and I ended up leaving the company because of it.

0 (25m 43s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment, how Paul founded and then sold his first major company and then how a chance meeting and I, couple of gin and tonics led him to an even bigger business kayak stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR Support for this podcast and the following message come from. Klayvio the email and text marketing platform that puts creators in control. If you're the creator of an e-commerce brand, you need a platform that hustles as hard as you do.

0 (26m 23s):
Klayvio unlocks the power of your e-commerce data. So you can personalize and automate messages that keep customers coming back. Creators communicate with Claudio, get started for free@klaviyo.com slash NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, American business, future proofing. Your business has never been more important. That's why the Amex corporate program is here to help give you the customized support and solutions to thrive. Empower your workforce with a suite of solutions designed to help tackle your changing needs today and to help fortify your business tomorrow with powerful backing and trusted customer service, the Amex corporate program is here to help drive your business forward.

0 (27m 11s):
Learn more at www.americanexpress.com/corporate.

3 (27m 22s):
We live in a world, a country, and a moment in time where there's so much important news and it is constantly changing. That's why up first is here for you. It's NPRs daily morning news podcast. In about 10 minutes, you can start your day informed, listen to up first on the NPR one app or wherever you get your podcasts.

0 (27m 47s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's around 1998 and Paul English has just left his job at a tech startup. And he decides to launch his own business, Boston light software. It's kind of an early version of Shopify helping e-commerce companies set up their own websites. But of course, to do that, Paul has to find some money.

2 (28m 12s):
I spent my savings. I remember I was dipping into my 401k at one point and two of my friends put in a little bit of money, but we were a little company. We had 15 employees and it included my three star engineers, bill O'Donnell, Paul Schwenk, Jeff Rigo, and also my friend, Jim Giza and Carl Berry. That was sort of the core group that built Boston light. And back then, this was early, early days in e-commerce. I mean, Amazon existed and there were some big sites, but you know, your average store down the street didn't have a website yet.

0 (28m 48s):
E-commerce it would still be another decade before it really started to take off. This is 98 and this is right before the.com crash was where people like just racing to put up e-commerce sites

2 (29m 4s):
Mostly, but didn't get it. We did a lot of individual selling where I literally went store to store and people looked at us like we were crazy people. Like why would a little bookstore create their own website? Shouldn't make sense to them. It's like, that's not for us. That's our big companies, little companies don't have websites. And we learned that. I think it's 70% of small businesses in the us. A service-based business has not product based. And so then we did this pivot. We said, okay, instead of just focusing on selling products, we should focus on selling services and doing online invoicing and online payments. Even like your plumber could send you an email with the bill and you could pay that from the email securely.

2 (29m 45s):
So we built that.

0 (29m 46s):
I mean, I think within a year of launching Boston lights, software, you got an offer and then were acquired by Intuit. I mean, that's, that's really fast.

2 (29m 58s):
Yeah. I mean, th the big tech companies all had a voracious appetite for internet because the big companies saw what was happening. The internet was going to take over everything. Desktop software is going to die, and they all want to do business with us, which I thought this is great. Then when it turned out, as the more time we spent with them, they actually all wanted to acquire us. They just wanted the talent. They wanted the engineers. And I made the decision to go with Intuit because I liked the culture. I liked the values. I just thought it was a good group of people. And I'm glad I went there. Yeah.

0 (30m 30s):
I mean, you sold it. They bought it for 33 and a half million dollars a year. About a year after you launched it, which you basically signed a contract presumably, and worked there for a couple of years and became a, a manager leading up to an end. Were you, what kind of man? I mean, at this point, you'd already had some management experience in your previous jobs. You weren't very successful at it at Interleaf, as you admitted. So presumably you were starting to get a little better at it.

2 (30m 59s):
Yeah. I was reading books about it. It's funny. I don't read business books anymore. I rarely read business books because this is going to sound like a funny thing to say for someone who's created, a lot of companies is I don't actually like business. Yeah. I mean, to me creating a company, it's just the vehicle. We can get a bunch of really fun people together and design products,

0 (31m 21s):
Creative. Yeah. So

2 (31m 23s):
It's just the business side of it. Just a way I can get credit people together. The business just happens to be the way to do it.

0 (31m 29s):
So when you sold to Intuit, which I think most people know is the people behind TurboTax, right? Yep.

2 (31m 38s):
Weekend

0 (31m 39s):
Books when you made that sale. Right. I mean, look, this is 99. So you're, I don't know, almost, almost 40 right years old, late thirties. And you walked away with eight or 10 million bucks and there's taxes and all kinds of things. I have to assume changed your life. In some way

2 (32m 3s):
It did. It was actually uncomfortable for me to have that money. I actually, originally I had a part-time co-founder Carl, and the way we originally had the company was I had two thirds. He had a third, and then we started giving stock out to all the engineers. So I think on paper originally, I would have made 20 million, but when we didn't, we didn't expect to sell at that soon when we sold it that soon, I felt bad. The engineers didn't make enough money. So Carla and I canceled half our stock and just gave it to the engineers. So instead of making 20 million, I only made 10 million. But then I also wanted to figure out how to give away the money, because it almost felt unsafe for me to have all that money in the bank. I thought it might disappear one night.

2 (32m 43s):
So I started giving money away. And that began a journey where I spend a lot of hours a week on philanthropy starting in my late thirties.

0 (32m 55s):
You are still with Intuit. Cause then you stayed there till around 2002. I heard a crazy story that you were supposed to be on flight 11, the flight from, from Boston to LA, that that ended up crashing the world trade center on September 11th, 2001. But you had rebooked on a different flight that was cheaper.

2 (33m 17s):
Yeah. I don't tell that story often because I know people that actually died that day and I just had, you know, maybe I would have gotten on the wrong flight. I think flight 11 was, if I remember correctly, it was 1400 to $1,800. And it was a corporate travel department that Intuit had the book flight. So it wasn't my money, but I grew up frugal. And so I didn't want to spend that much of the company's money. So I found a flight through Manchester, New Hampshire that was $343 and had a layover, but I felt proud that I saved the company money. So I switched to that flight. The interesting thing is when I put my son to bed that night and my son was five years old, my mother had died just a few months prior. And as kids say the most amazing things, like just as the falling asleep and my son said he used to call my mother Mimi.

2 (34m 3s):
He said, Mimi took care of dad to make sure he didn't get on the wrong plane today. And then he fell asleep.

0 (34m 13s):
Wow. Yeah. And he had no idea what he, no,

2 (34m 21s):
No. Wow.

0 (34m 24s):
It's, it's so crazy. How things happen like that? I really makes you think about things like fate and why certain things happen to certain people.

2 (34m 36s):
Yeah. Hopefully what people come away with is to realize just the whole concept of impermanence and there's something actually beautiful about acknowledging impermanence. It actually frees you and it frees you to live in the present moment. So hopefully I'm fully present today because none of us know what our future is.

0 (34m 59s):
Yeah. So I guess in the, in the period after that, I mean, you were juggling a bunch of different things. You were working with your brother on a company that he had founded and you were doing some work advising nonprofits, but also I think your, your dad's health was, was deteriorating. And you started to spend a lot of time looking after him. Right?

2 (35m 27s):
I think the main thing during those years was my mom had died in 2009 one and literally on her death bed, as she was saying by to each of us, the thing she said to me was keep up the good work and take care of your father. The keep up the good work. Actually I read as I'm not done yet, I haven't won over. My parents had, I need to keep working. And then she said, take care of your dad. And my dad had Alzheimer's early stage Alzheimer's at that point. And when mom died, I started spending a lot of time with my dad and then ultimately left into it to as his condition worsened and became his primary caretaker for about a year, a year and a half. And I would feed him three times a day, bring him to all his doctor's appointments, try to entertain him.

2 (36m 11s):
And that was my main occupation during those years. Wow.

0 (36m 16s):
I think it was around around 2003 that w when you joined the BC firm, Greylock partners as their entrepreneur in residence, and, and presumably when you were doing that, you were looking around for your next big idea. And, and I guess this is when you, you meet this guy named Steve Hafner, who we'll get to in a sec, but who he is, but first, how did you meet Steve?

2 (36m 43s):
One of my mentors from Interleaf is a guy named Larry Bond. And he's a partner at general catalyst in Harvard square. And he had reached out to me to ask me to go look at a company for him. So I went to Cambridge to meet with a startup. And then as I was leaving, one of the other partners there had seen me and said, what are you doing here? I said, I'm looking at a company with Larry. And he said, there's a guy here. I want you to meet his name is Steve Hafner. He's one of the founders of orbits. And he wants to start in a company. Would you meet with him?

0 (37m 19s):
It's was a travel website. It is a travel website that he had started.

2 (37m 24s):
He was one of the co-founders of orbits. He ran marketing there.

0 (37m 27s):
That was a pretty big, big website. Did you know orbits?

2 (37m 30s):
Yeah. Back in 2000, this was the end of Tucson, those three at this point. And the big travel websites back then was Expedia, Orbitz, Travelocity, and Priceline. Those are the big four.

0 (37m 41s):
So you knew it Orbitz was upright and presume. You're like, oh yeah, let's meet the guy.

2 (37m 45s):
Yeah. And Steve had an idea. He was leading or it's after four years. And he was frustrated with orbits and he had an idea of a different way to travel, but he was looking for a CTO, a chief technical officer and this other partner at general catalyst thought, I dunno, Paul's a good tech guy, maybe Paul and Stephen go work together. So the partner introduced us, Steve and I went downstairs to legal seafoods in Harvard square for lunch. I think we each had a couple of gin and tonics, maybe, maybe no food. And he gave me the pitch and he basically said, I want to create a search engine for travel, a search engine that has a stuff from everyone else's website.

2 (38m 26s):
And I said, I think that's a brilliant idea. And we talked about it. He gave me his thoughts. I gave him some feedback. We went back and forth.

0 (38m 32s):
Wait, just to be clear. Cause orbits at the time and, and Expedia, they were selling tickets on their site. Presumably only with partners, partner airlines. Correct?

2 (38m 40s):
It's like they, they didn't have jet blue at that point. For example, they didn't have all the content. They had a limited set of hotels, a limited set of airlines. And Steve said, why don't we create a website that you can't buy anything? All it does a search, but it searches everyone,

0 (38m 54s):
Everything. Okay. I got you Southwest jet blue, whoever, right. Yeah. Right. And there was nothing like that out there.

2 (39m 2s):
Not at the time, there were kind of simultaneous with the creation of our company that was maybe four or five of the companies being created at about the same time who had a similar idea. So it was not a novel idea. The idea of saying Google's a search engine wise, their search engine just for travel. There were a few people thinking about that. But the funny thing about the meeting was I said, I liked the idea. I, he said he was looking for a CTO. I said, I'll find someone for you. I run a group in Boston called Boston CTO. It's like 20 chief technical officers. And I said, what are you paying? He said 4% and a buck, 50 like $150,000 a year

0 (39m 40s):
And 4%

2 (39m 41s):
Equity, 4% equity. I said, that sounds great. I definitely can find someone for that. He said, why don't you do it? And I laughed. And I said, no, I just sold my last company to, into it. I want to create my own company again. He said, what would it take to have you join me? As co-founder? I said, at a minimum 50, 50, just kind of joking. And he put his hand across the table. He said done. I thought, whoa. I like how bold this guy is.

0 (40m 5s):
So 4% equity to 50 50. And just like that

2 (40m 11s):
Handshake,

0 (40m 12s):
But he's even know you,

2 (40m 14s):
Steve and I, we each have a lot of weaknesses, but I will say probably the superpower that Steve and I have is, were really, really fast reads of people. And I could tell quickly that this guy was crazy bright and I liked how impulsive he was. And I thought this guy's an entrepreneur. He's a natural born entrepreneur.

0 (40m 36s):
It sounds like the gin and tonics talking. Yeah.

2 (40m 39s):
It might've been

0 (40m 42s):
What, what was it? I mean, this was not in your wheelhouse, a travel a consumer problem. Yeah. Not at all, but it appealed to you something about it appealed to you.

2 (40m 51s):
Yeah. I mean, so first of all, I love travel. I think I traveled about a hundred thousand miles a year pre pandemic. And the idea that I could be in charge of designing a new travel site and have ideas about how travel actually, what it should look like on the webpage. That was incredibly fun to me.

0 (41m 9s):
When you agreed to do this, presumably the first step was you had to raise money.

2 (41m 15s):
Well, interestingly, Steve and I went upstairs after having a cup, a couple of drinks

0 (41m 20s):
Back up to general catalyst. That's

2 (41m 22s):
Right. Yeah. And the partner, Joel Cutler said to Steve, how did it go? And Steve said, well, the good news is, Paul's my 50 50 partner. And we're each throwing a million dollars in tomorrow, which he neglected to mention that to me at the lunch. And then he said, the bad news is I'm tearing up that term sheet. Cause I'm worth a lot more. Now that I have a CTO and he was just, I think he was joking a little bit, but anyway, general callus put in 5 million, Steve put in a million, I put in a million and then we started kayak in the middle of the middle thing we did. Immediate thing we did was start recruiting.

0 (41m 58s):
Right. Sorry. So you raised some, you raised some money a little bit from you a little bit from Steve, some general catalyst. And do you dip into your team, those guys below Donald Paul Schwenk, Jeff Rigo, those guys that Jim Keizer had worked with you at your previous companies.

2 (42m 15s):
Yeah. So those are the first four phone calls I placed was to those four guys. And they all said, yes, they all said yes. And the interesting thing I'll tell it when negotiations with below. So he was an architect at Intuit because he, again, he and I worked together for decades. So he was at Boston light. We sold him into it. He became an architect into it. I'm guessing by memory. He was probably making 400 K a year into it. And I recruited him. I said, I'm starting the company. I want you to come work with me. And he said, what's the company. I said travel. And he said, how much would you pay me? I said, I'll pay you a hundred K plus 2% of the company. Yeah. And I remember thinking, is he really going to go for this a hundred K things?

2 (42m 58s):
He's probably making 400 K. He said, I'd love to work with you. And I have three questions. What what's gonna be doing? Travel, how much you pay me a hundred K and two and then 2%. And the third question was, where's the company located? I was fearing. I was about to lose them on the Saturday issue. So I said, you pick the location. So he chose the first office. It turned out to be a very good financial decision for him to get 2% of kayak.

0 (43m 20s):
And if the office was in Concord, Massachusetts, right.

2 (43m 22s):
The original office. So the first year was in Maynard, Massachusetts, which I was not happy about.

0 (43m 28s):
And meantime, Steve Hafner was going to work out of Norwalk, Connecticut. Is that, is that right?

2 (43m 34s):
Yeah. Where he lived. He lived. Yes. And we had the tech team in Mader than Concord mass for many, many years where kike still has an office. So tech was up here just outside of Boston. And the commercial team was in Connecticut.

0 (43m 47s):
How come you guys split it up in 2004? It wasn't like today there wasn't slack and zoom and all this stuff like that. That's, that's distributed remote workplace in 2000.

2 (43m 57s):
Yeah. I mean, Steve and I both had made money before and I wasn't going to move. He wasn't going to move. So we said, let's try it. And it worked out really well.

0 (44m 7s):
All right. So you guys have these two offices and you've got some working capital. What did you want your role to be? I mean, obviously, you know how to, you know, to build these things, you know, to code, you know, to run engineers were, but what about design where you focus on the actual user experience?

2 (44m 26s):
Yeah, I mean, going back to Interleaf, most of my work at Interleaf was on the user interface and that's what my obsession was. And even going back to my first program, I'd ever written the video game back when I was in high school, I focus on the user experience. I've always been interested in that. And so for the travel company, I wanted to build something that was unlike any other travel website. I want something that was cleaner and simpler and faster. The first day Steve and I met in Cambridge. I went home that night. I spent probably 10 minutes on Expedia just to see what the market leader looked like to remind myself. And I thought, this is not going to be hard to beat this because to me, Expedia was epileptic, seizure inducing.

2 (45m 9s):
And it was really terrible. There was so much animation and graphics and so much stuff going on the website, I felt we can build something dramatically simpler than that.

0 (45m 17s):
And by the way, the name kayak, what's up with that name. How did, it's just a weird name for travel website?

2 (45m 25s):
We hired a top brand agency in New York city named Wolff Olins and the project, the branding project was led by a woman named Carol Costello. Yeah. And Steve and I met with her weekly over maybe a six week process. What's the brand identity. What do we want people to think about when they hear the name of the company? What's life going to be like before our product. And then after he believes our product, I spent a lot of time talking to those things. Ultimately her team came up with a list of about a hundred names and we narrowed it down to five. The reason I liked kayak was I liked the letter. K it's a very valuable letter in branding. I liked it. It was a palindrome spelled the same backwards and forwards. I liked there was only five letters and it meant like freedom.

2 (46m 7s):
It's just like a great word. And it's very difficult in branding to take a word to mean, which means one thing and change it to mean something else. But if you're successful and you own that word, it's incredibly valuable.

0 (46m 23s):
What were some of the other names you thought of I'll go in

2 (46m 25s):
Reverse order. Number five was hive,

0 (46m 28s):
Not a bad name, like a hive where you can get the tickets and get all your stuff.

2 (46m 33s):
The bad thing about it was the beast thing.

0 (46m 35s):
Yeah. Yeah. You don't get stung in that hive. Cause in your whole vacation's ruined.

2 (46m 39s):
Yeah. Number four was rice because it's ubiquitous global and simple number three was cake. Cause who doesn't like,

0 (46m 48s):
I like cake, but not for my travel. I don't want cake on my travel

2 (46m 51s):
Kayak. Okay. And the first name, the one we really wanted, which we tried to buy and we could not buy the domain name was Lola.

0 (47m 2s):
Huh? Which would come back to 'em which would come back to be part of your life later on. Yes. All right. So you see, so you've bought kayak and did anybody say like get on there initially and say, where are the kayaks? Like, where's your kayak gear? Like, what are you doing?

2 (47m 20s):
You literally got hate mail from kayakers out from tigers. Yeah. Who said, this was terrible that we took this over and this is like a blight on the internet. You know, that someone would take over their precious hobby and use it for something dirty, like a travel site.

0 (47m 36s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Paul found out that the much resented name for his new business was becoming one of the more popular search terms on the internet, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, DocuSign every day, someone signs something that means everything millions of people use DocuSign to share and sign legal documents from purchasing a car to closing on a first home or adopting a pet into the family. DocuSign has helped facilitate those important moments in their customer's lives.

0 (48m 16s):
Learn how DocuSign e-signature can help be there for the next important moment in your life. Visit docusign.com today. DocuSign as real as it gets, this message comes from NPR sponsor, American express business. Future-proofing your business has never been more important. That's why the Amex corporate program is here to help give you the customized support and solutions to thrive. Empower your workforce with a suite of solutions designed to help tackle your changing needs today and to help fortify your business tomorrow with powerful backing and trusted customer service, the Amex corporate program is here to help drive your business forward.

0 (48m 58s):
Learn more at www.americanexpress.com/corporate. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2004 and Paul and Steve have just come up with $7 million, a small team of engineers and a name for their new travel website, kayak. And it isn't long before they put their first product out into the world.

2 (49m 29s):
So believe it or not, we released the first beta, which is limited software that we don't promote yet. But we had a functioning flight search on Cinco de Mayo, 2004.

0 (49m 42s):
And this is just for, for friends and family to test out. And how long before you, you made that public?

2 (49m 50s):
We made it public, I believe in October of 2004.

0 (49m 52s):
All right. Now you guys had some working capital because you got investment money, but you were, you were, you were like a, nobody in a, in a among giants like Priceline Expedia, orbits. How are you going to even get the word out about kayak?

2 (50m 9s):
Well, what I used to say on early tests of kayak is every company in the world only has 10, 10 smartest people. So Expedia only 10 of them are the 10 smartest. And even though we're much smaller, we have our 10 smartest people. They have that 10 smartest people. I think my team can out design them. And we were just, you know, it was a little bit of arrogance. Hopefully we had some humility as well. Like we knew we were small. We knew that known part of us, but we, Steve and I were both very aggressive recruiters and we thought we can recruit a really extraordinary first 10 person team.

0 (50m 47s):
The business model was going to be different because Expedia, you know, they would get a commission on the ticket sales. Your model was for every referral you made where a person booked a ticket that company or site or hotel would send you a commission, 50 cents a dollar. But how do you, how did it didn't you have to manually like make those, because if it was a search engine for the entire travel industry, did you have to individually call jet blue and Delta American and Hilton and Hyatt?

2 (51m 17s):
Yeah. It took us probably two years to get those deals. So originally kayak had no revenue and also we were scraping these websites without their permission. It's one of these things sort of ask for forgiveness, not permission. We're just moving as fast as we possibly could. So we just scraped websites. It took us about a year, year and a half till the software felt really good. And then we started growing rapidly. How did you go rapidly? Just from word of mouth. I mean, believe it or not. In the early years of kayak, it cost us about a dollar on average to buy someone, to come to our website from us, spending money on Google ad words or other websites we made on average 20 cents per user.

2 (51m 59s):
So we were losing 80 cents a transaction in large numbers. We were losing a lot of money very quickly, but if you build a really amazing website and you pay to have them come here, will they remember this word kayak? And the next time they'll buy travel, will they go directly to cock.com without having to go to Google first? Yeah. And it worked and people told their friends about it. And so it got to the point where 70% of the traffic on kayak was self-directed meaning someone typed cock.com in their browser. And as soon as that traffic grew from 0%, 10 to 20 to 30 to 40% more than the economic started working.

0 (52m 38s):
So basically you would take the data, presumably like you would take the data of people booking through kayak and go to the Delta. As the Americans, the Hilton hotels of Marriott says, look, we can show you how people are already going to your site through kayak. And that's how you would convince them to say, okay, fine. We'll pay you 50 cents or a dollar for every time that happens.

2 (52m 60s):
Yeah. And for the airlines originally, Kai was flight only. We didn't have anything except for flight, no hotels, no cars. And we did manage to get a really good deal with orbits early on, Steve, again was one of the founders there. Who's friends with the CEO. We were able to negotiate with orbits to say, when you see a result from American airlines, we give people the option, click here to go to aa.com to buy it, or click here, to go orbits, to buy it. And obits would pay us. We said, we're a little company. We're a new business model with search only you orbit should participate on this. We'll give you an exclusive, you, their only agency we're going to let on our site. And maybe we're little. Maybe we're going to grow fast, but you should get in on day one as the e-commerce behind kayak, which they did.

2 (53m 46s):
The nice thing is we then called American airlines. We said, we're selling your flights all day long, but with sung through orbits, wouldn't you rather sell them through aa.com. And we use orbits as a stocking Horace to get all the airlines to pay us directly. So we could send people directly to the airline sites. Wow.

0 (54m 3s):
Did you see orbits as a competitor? Well,

2 (54m 7s):
They were different flavors than us. They were a merchant, but we used to say search with us book with them. We didn't have customer support. If you're playing was late call the airline don't call us. We were just, we were literally just a thin search engine. We used on the backend, another search engine called ITA software, which later became Google flights. And my friends that I tell you used to make fun of kayak. That said kayak is a joke. It just sits on everyone. Else's technology. And all kayak is, is a thin UI layer. And my response that was exactly

0 (54m 39s):
You were the user interface on you were basically like a skin on top of a, a really sophisticated technology yes. That somebody else built.

2 (54m 50s):
But that that's where I want it to be. I want it to be the front end. And I thought that's where the innovation needed to happen.

0 (54m 56s):
I mean, that's, that's brilliant. So you didn't actually need to have a massive staff know how many people by 2006, 2007 were working at kayak.

2 (55m 6s):
I think by the time things started growing, we were maybe 50 or 60 people. The best people, like in terms of quantitative people, stat at kayak is when we took it public 2012, we only had 200 employees, which is pretty small for public company and we had 300 million in revenue. So it was one and a half million per employee. We were crazy profitable and fast growing because

0 (55m 31s):
He were so lean, very,

2 (55m 33s):
Very lean.

0 (55m 34s):
All right. So I guess three years in three and a half years in December, 2007, you raise two big fundraise, $200 million. Sequoia leads that round quite capital. And that means you can really get, you can now do things like acquire other companies and, you know, launch a big advertising campaign. When did you feel like you were now a player in the space? Was it, was it around the time you raised that money? That 200 million.

2 (56m 2s):
It was before that. I mean, there were several milestones for us the day, the number we looked at that I looked at most carefully as what percentage of our traffic was self-directed. And as that number started growing, my confidence started growing because I said, if people come back to us that they remember our name, they tell their friends about us, things of working. One of the biggest milestones, the history of kayak is when you went to Google and you type the letter, K, the first word that came up was kayak. I thought that was cool.

0 (56m 33s):
Well, what about your, what about your mental health? Where you, you, how are you doing at that time?

2 (56m 40s):
I think I, at that point I had pretty much controlled the depression. So I had little to no depression during kayak, but the manic episodes continued. I would go through waves of sleeping very little. I always have a, a sketchbook with colored pencils and sometimes I'd wake up at 4:00 AM and I'd draw pictures of what I want a car to look like, like for new feature. And I would email them to our head designer, Lincoln Jackson, and then we get a meeting. And so I remember once we took a drawing that I did it three or 4:00 AM. We had a meeting with myself, Lincoln and Jeff Rigo, who's our lead developer.

2 (57m 24s):
And then Lincoln cranked out a Photoshop version of what I'd done, but he pretty much ignored my drawing. He did something completely different, but it was inspired by my drawing. And then Jeff wrote the code and Jeff ignored Lincoln's Photoshop and did something that he thought was even better. And we just had this relationship of really rapid iteration where we'd each contribute ideas. And I remember during that time period, I felt completely manic. Things are moving very, very well.

0 (57m 49s):
I read there was a, there, there was sort of a joke that used to go around that you would send a lot of emails. Like, Hey, I have an idea because you're just an ideas machine and or, Hey, why don't you try this? And there was a joke among some of the, the team who were loyal to you, but, but there was a joke that they would ignore your emails and because they, they, they would just forget about it over time. And that when you found out about it, actually initially it hurts your feelings.

2 (58m 16s):
It did. I'm probably guilty of sending too much email, particularly when I'm in my creative or hypomanic states, I can be prolific on email. I mean, I can send hundreds of emails a day. And so my team was always like, whoa, it's like, we can't handle all these different things. Like, try this, try this, try this. And so sometimes there was this private joke that we're not going to do something unless Paul asks us to do it twice, unless the next day he still wants to do that thing. And I've heard this criticism of other entrepreneurs as well. So I don't think I'm unique in that, in that that I was wanting to push forward to multiple ideas, but I was both amused by it when I heard this, but also a little bit sad.

0 (58m 57s):
Yeah. Because basically it confirms that you are an ideas machine. You're a little bit manic and that's with that comes a lot of ideas and a prolific outpouring of ideas. But if every single idea was acted upon, it would be chaos.

2 (59m 11s):
Yeah, I think so. And I think it's fine for someone to have like nine terrible ideas. As long as the 10th one has really big failures. Okay. We built a lot of technology at cock that we throw away. We pursued some ideas, which turned out to be stupid ideas that we worked really hard at them. No one used it. We threw it away. So that happened many times at kayak.

0 (59m 35s):
Yeah. It's so interesting is that this insight that you had, because I think you, previous companies that you had started, I would, and correct me if I wrong. But I think that the backend technology was probably more complex than, than it was for kayak. That actually your insight was look, the technology is out there. We don't have to make it better. We just have to make the user experience.

2 (59m 57s):
That's right. It's interesting. When we created the company, Steve and I both thought if we make it big, the way people are going to know us is we're going to have all the content on one website. That's what we're going to be known for. It's not actually what we became known for the way people talked about kayak. Wasn't that, oh, that's a site that has all the content, which we were hoping they would say. But what they did say was, oh yeah, that's a site that's really fast. Or that's a site that's really clean. So I like that

0 (1h 0m 25s):
Because that's where you invested your money.

2 (1h 0m 27s):
Yeah. And it was a huge investment. Becoming fast is not easy, becoming simple as not easy, Scott Cook it until it used to say, it's very easy to build complicated software. And what it means is to build something simple, it takes a years.

0 (1h 0m 42s):
I mean, you are a, a backend programmer who essentially built a brand. You weren't building a new technology. You were building a brand.

2 (1h 0m 52s):
Yeah. When I think of the first 10 years of kayak, I think there were three things. Those three things came together. Really good user experience, a really good brand and really good commercial partnerships.

0 (1h 1m 2s):
Yeah. In July of 2012, kayak went public. I think it, it raised 1.2, $7 billion on the NASDAQ that they went public. And by the end of that year, it was announced that Priceline would acquire kayak for $1.8 billion, which basically kayak would be under Priceline's umbrella. I think it's because the trading name is bookings.com or something or booking

2 (1h 1m 32s):
Holdings, bookings holdings.

0 (1h 1m 34s):
So, you know, Priceline buys out kayak. And by the time I think it all was said and done the value of kayak was at 2.1 billion or something in the book that Tracy Kidder wrote about your life. He there's a scene where, you know, the news breaks inside of Kayak's headquarters. People are so excited. Somebody's passing around a bottle of $500 scotch. Cause everyone's like, we've got all this and all this money and you're sitting there at your like cubicle at your desk, just like quiet. I don't know what was going on in your head.

2 (1h 2m 9s):
It was a little overwhelming. I mean, my first thought was always how happy I was for the team. We had 200 employees over half of them became millionaires that day. It was great to see them celebrate the IPO is great to see them celebrate the acquisition. It was really an exciting time for people, as far as the fame that came along with it, that gave me anxiety. I'm an introvert by nature. I did not like being center of attention. There's certain advantages to it. Like it helps me raise money. It helps me hire people, but I'm a little bit uncomfortable with that. And when we started getting a lot of press after the IPO and after the acquisition, I started getting a lot of incoming requests and requests for money from, I mean, I had philanthropy, right?

2 (1h 2m 57s):
Yeah. Right. Not just philanthropy. I had someone show up at my house who asked me to pay her mortgage. A lot of people ask me to invest in their business. A lot of nonprofits, I hit me up and it was overwhelming because it's tough for me to say no, I've had to learn to say no, because I cannot afford to write checks to all the nonprofits who email every day, because I want to have a focus area. But just the amount of money that I made in the sale was a little overwhelming. And I kind of had this instinct of getting rid of it, like giving all of it away immediately, which I'm glad I didn't do that because I've been able to be more thoughtful about my giving over the years. And I've now started three nonprofits that are all doing well.

2 (1h 3m 39s):
So that would spend really meaningful to me. And hopefully we've helped a lot of people, but I definitely have never become really comfortable with the money part of it. Yeah.

0 (1h 3m 50s):
Basically in your mind, sounds like you knew that you were not going to continue to work for Priceline.

2 (1h 3m 55s):
The main thing I wanted there, it was unlike when I sold my little e-commerce company to Intuit, I wanted to work it into it. I wanted to build careers for myself and people and learn skills. But when I sold kayak to Priceline, I felt like I had a very senior team at kayak. I literally felt like they could run it without me. They didn't need me as much anymore. And I think I spent a year with Priceline transitioning and getting everyone set up for success. So I felt very good about it on the day that I left, that they were in a really, really good position and kayak continued to thrive.

0 (1h 4m 34s):
I read that, that you, that the CEO of precedent was not happy. When you told him that

2 (1h 4m 38s):
You were leaving, he

0 (1h 4m 39s):
Was not happy. Right. Cause they were buying you too. They were buying your brain. Yeah.

2 (1h 4m 43s):
I don't know what to say about that. He, part of it was probably the wealth thing I wanted to be in the shadows. After that. I didn't want to be public face at that point of this, you know, the sky with all this money I wanted to hide for.

0 (1h 4m 56s):
But also, I mean, this was the longest you'd worked on one business, 2004, 2002.

2 (1h 5m 1s):
Yeah. 10 years. It was, it was a total of 10 years. 2014. Yeah.

0 (1h 5m 6s):
We, we will not have time in the course of this episode to get to all the businesses you've done. Cause that would take a multi-part episodes like several multi-part part episodes. But there is one I want to on which is in the middle of kayak, you launched a new company, co-founded a new company called get human, which is still around. I think it's a database of customer service information. So like, if you want to find a human customer service rep, you could find their phone number the best time to call. And first of all, as somebody who does multiple things, also, I have a lot of appreciation for that, but it causes tension sometimes. And I have to imagine that it caused tension there where people were like, you know, Paul, like, we need you here, like focus on this.

0 (1h 5m 51s):
Or maybe Steve was like, Hey, you know, I, I mean, did it cause tension at times?

2 (1h 5m 56s):
I mean, get human became wildly popular. I created it in 2006. Yeah. And we got massive media the first year. Yeah. I got covered on every national network and magazine and et cetera. And sometimes they want to come into a photo shoot or an interview. I tried to schedule all of those to not happen at kickoff office. I was too embarrassed about this side project. It's not that I hit it. I shouldn't want to see people, me working on it. However, I don't think anyone would ever say that I was a slacker at kayak because I pushed really hard on design and engineering and performance.

2 (1h 6m 36s):
But yeah, I did have a couple of side projects. Do you still own it? Get human? Yes. It's a very, it's small company. Very, very profitable run by two of my friends in Boston, Christian Allen and Jeff wellbeing. And it's an amazing company. Wow.

0 (1h 6m 52s):
How does it make money

2 (1h 6m 53s):
Through advertising?

0 (1h 6m 56s):
Wow. All right. So you do that in the meantime, you still, then you step down from kayak and you start to do some teaching at MIT and Risley and a few other places at Harvard business school. I can't get to everything you've done because you've done so many things. But one of the things you, you, you then created in 2015 was Lola. You went and bought that site. This is a travel concierge app. First of all, I'm assuming this is geared towards businesses, right? Wasn't there like a non-compete with when Priceline bought it that wouldn't allow you to get into the travel business. Again,

2 (1h 7m 32s):
My non-compete ended. It was an 18 month non-compete it ended on July 14th, 2015. I incorporated Lola on July 15th, 2015. Nice. But I have to say Lola has evolved like when the pandemic hit a year and a half ago in business stopped like travel stopped. I mean, we did a major pivot to say, rather than selling travel software to CFOs saying, we'll reduce your costs of travel. We're going to sell software to CFOs that manages all the money their employees spend. So we call it, spend management budgets and spend management. Yeah. We basically manage every penny. The employee is spending, what are they spending on Google ad words, Amazon, AWS, or they're buying lunch for client or they're ordering supplies, the office, anything they spend.

2 (1h 8m 18s):
If they spend it using a Lola card, we actually issued cards like a visa card. If you use a Lola card and you just tag it at the time you swipe at the restaurant, you never have to feel expensive, whatever. And we guarantee to the CFO that your team will always be exactly on budget. No one will ever actually go about budget because the credit cards that we supply are tied to the budget of sales or marketing, whether your department is so it completely changes the way finance people

0 (1h 8m 47s):
Is Lola. Now your primary focus, would you say

2 (1h 8m 51s):
It is very much so. I mean, I work on Lola five days a week. I have it's a little crazy, but I'm running three non-profits and then I have two other small startups that I run on the weekends on

0 (1h 9m 1s):
His podcast discovery app called Moonbeam.

2 (1h 9m 4s):
Yeah.

0 (1h 9m 5s):
You have got a nonprofit called king Boston that focuses on like celebrating the work of Dr. King and his wife Coretta Scott King. Right in Boston. You do a lot of work in Haiti. Yeah. I mean, here we are coming out of the pandemic and you're what, late fifties.

2 (1h 9m 24s):
I'm 57. Okay.

0 (1h 9m 26s):
How many more businesses do you have in you?

2 (1h 9m 28s):
I mean, someday I will move on past Lola Lola's in my day job right now. I think for the rest of my life, rather than doing a VC backed company, I think what I might do is just have fun with these creative outputs and try to crank out like two to three or four companies a year, because the most fun for me in starting companies is like day one. But it's all a matter of, you have to have the discipline to say no, because it could be like too much stuff to work on. And you have to just be very choosy about the stuff you do work on. So like I have an incredible assistant Eliza and we color code my calendar.

2 (1h 10m 8s):
Everything has one of four colors. And every Monday and Friday, we look at my calendar two weeks in advance and we make sure there's a balance. So purple is Lola, which is that's the brand color for PR for Lola. And that's mostly Monday, Friday nine to five. Yellow is non-profit work, which is about eight hours a week. Green is self-improvement, which is going to the gym or going to therapy or going to my Buddhist class, which is doing Thursday nights. And then blue is everything else that a friends and family. And if I have a balance of those four colors, life feels really good to me.

0 (1h 10m 41s):
When you think about all the things you've achieved, right. And, and you know, the financial success, but really more importantly, the, just the innovations that you've been part of and the people that you've been able to work with and the teams you've been able to empower. How much of that do you attribute to your intelligence and hard work and how much do you chalk up to luck?

2 (1h 11m 2s):
I don't like to think of myself as intelligent. I will admit to being creative. I think my success leads to maybe three things. I do think work ethics, part of it, the frugality and effort. I think the creativity is a part of it. And then the third thing, which is probably the biggest thing is I love recruiting and I love being amazed by other creative people. And I put a lot of effort into that. So with each of my companies and organizations, they thrive only if I'm able to attract really great people to work on them.

0 (1h 11m 36s):
And where do you put a look on that scale?

2 (1h 11m 38s):
Kayak was tremendous luck. I mean, it started with luck. I mean, just by chance I happened to be in that office when Steve was there and then luck along the way of hiring certain people who really transformed the company. I don't know. Maybe it's maybe it's those four things, 25% of each

0 (1h 11m 59s):
One more thing I want to ask you about Paul for the ego. You have been an Uber driver, right? You signed up to be an Uber driver in your Tesla in Boston, right? Yes. Do you, do you still do that?

2 (1h 12m 12s):
I haven't done it since a pandemic, just because I was nervous about, you know, people in my car. But now that I think in Massachusetts now we have over 70% of people have vaccinated. I think when it gets up to 80, 85%, I'm going to start driving again.

0 (1h 12m 27s):
Tell me the Uber story. Why did you want to be an Uber driver?

2 (1h 12m 30s):
So the first reason I signed up was at Lola, we have 24 7 customer support and we it's really the front of Lola. So we want to have unbelievable customer service. But at the end of every interaction and Lola app, when you've talked with one of our service people, you get to rate them like on a scale of one to five, how well is the service they did for you. But before I inflicted that upon our customer service people, I wanted to show that, okay, I'm happy to get rated. I want to see what it feels like to get rated. Being an Uber driver was the easiest way to do that because you get real-time feedback and the driver app, you get feedback every day about how your rating is.

0 (1h 13m 6s):
Did any drunk kids ever barfing your Tesla?

2 (1h 13m 9s):
Thank God. No. I had a rule that when I would drive at night, as soon as I got the first drunk, I would stop driving. I didn't want to take that risk.

0 (1h 13m 18s):
Yeah. You know, and a good on a good Uber night. What are you pulling in?

2 (1h 13m 24s):
I think usually it's about $50 is what I make. Just going out for a couple hours. I think my, my biggest night I made a hundred dollars.

0 (1h 13m 32s):
Yes. That's Paul English, occasional Uber driver and founder, or co-founder of among other things. Kayak, lola.com, Moonbeam inter mute, get human speed games, Boston light software and the online Chinese chess site. <inaudible> dot com. Oh. And just in case he needs them. Paul owns more than 200 domain names, including a whole bunch of words. He just likes the sound of words that could one day inspire his next big idea. Whale tails are Zan, easy, mighty stay tuna Coakley, elephant games, bone wars.

0 (1h 14m 23s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you're not a subscriber to the podcast, please do subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can write to us@hibtatnpr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter, we're at how I built this or me at guy Roz. Our Instagram is at how I built this NPR and mine is at guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by Ferris safari and <inaudible> with music composed by Ramtin era blue. It was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Claire Marie Ashima. Our production staff includes Casey Herman, Rachel Faulkner Liz Medsker, JC Howard, James DeLuise and Julia Carney. Our intern is Harrison VJ Choi.

0 (1h 15m 5s):
Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Ross. And you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, UK G HR and workforce management solutions designed to make employees happy. When employees feel supported, businesses become more than a place of work. They become a work of art. UK G our purpose is people.