Black Stories. Black Truths. : NPR (1s):
This is my voice. It can tell you a lot about me, and I'm not changing it for anyone in NPRs, Black, Stories, Black Truths, you'll find a collection of NPR episodes centered on the black experience. Search N P R Black Stories Black Truths Wherever. you get podcasts.

Airbnb (23s):
Maybe. you stayed in an Airbnb before and thought to yourself, this actually seems pretty doable. Maybe, my place could be an Airbnb. It could be as simple as starting with a spare room or your whole place when you're away. You could be sitting on an Airbnb and not even know it. Maybe, your kid is heading off to college in the fall and you'll have an empty bedroom. You could Airbnb it and make some extra cash while they're away. Or, if you have a vacation plan for this summer, that could be a good time to Airbnb your entire place. Whether. you could use a little extra money to cover some bills or for something a little more fun, your home or spare room might be worth more than you think. Find out how much at Airbnb dot ca slash Host Running.

ZEN Insurance (1m 7s):
a new business can be stressful. And the last thing you need is to worry about unexpected accidents or lawsuits. So if you're an entrepreneur or startup owner, don't overlook the importance of liability insurance. It's a critical investment in the success and longevity of your business. Protect yourself, your assets and your reputation by securing the liability coverage for your specific needs. With a customized liability insurance policy, you can face challenges with confidence knowing that you have a safety net in place. Take the first step in safeguarding your business today. Go to ZEN Insurance dot com slash save 35 for a free business insurance quote. Get the low cost insurance protection you need from Canada's small business insurance experts.

3 (1m 57s):
We can't see tomorrow, but we can hear it. And it sounds like a wind farm Powering homes across the country. We are bridging to a sustainable energy future. Working today to ensure tomorrow is on Enbridge life takes energy.

2 (2m 13s):
Hey, before we start the show, I wanna share something I heard recently from actress Audra McDonald. It's about fear. Audra is one of the greatest living stage actress. She's won six Tony Awards. Six, and she told me that every new role she takes still scares her. And she explained why that fear is essential to her work. To hear my conversation with Audra, listen to my other podcast, the Great Creators. Just search for the great creators with Guy Raz, wherever you listen to podcasts. Or go to the great creators.com. And now onto today's show.

4 (2m 56s):
I will tell you something that bothers me is when a business person says, I love my business. That's absolute bullshit. You love your family, you can enjoy your business. But once that becomes a love affair, you lose your objectivity. I never love my business. I could enjoy it, but man, your business is an instrument to make you happy and you own it. It doesn't own you.

2 (3m 27s):
Welcome to How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz and on the show today how Paul Orla rented a Xerox machine for 1100 bucks a month and grew a single store into a global photocopy shop with an instantly recognizable name. Kinko's Kinko's played a pretty important role in my professional life. In high school, I used to race to the Kinko's in Northridge, California, sometimes at one or two in the morning to print out projects that were due just a few hours later in my English class in college, once again, I'd race to a Kinko's in the middle of the night, get a portfolio of my articles spiral bound and sent off to newspapers just in time to meet their application deadlines for internships.

2 (4m 27s):
When I applied to be a radio reporter in 2000, just minutes before the deadline, I raced to a Kinko's in Washington DC at four in the morning to get my resume and articles all printed out. Kinko's enabled me and probably millions of other people to put off projects, applications and presentations to the very last minute and still somehow make them look pretty good. For more than three decades, Kinko's copy shops were scattered all over the world. And the business started out with a single 100 square foot shop and a large Xerox machine across the street from the University of California in Santa Barbara.

2 (5m 9s):
This was in the early 1970s. And the idea came to Paul Orla because he saw a long line, a long line of people waiting to get photocopies at a shop in Los Angeles. And like many entrepreneurs before and after him, Paul thought to himself, if there's a long line that must be a business worth looking into. The beauty of Kinko's, and we'll get to why Paul called it Kinko's later in the show. But the beauty of it was that it required very little startup capital and Paul realized that he could capture a large share of the market by opening his shops near colleges and universities.

2 (5m 48s):
And 4 cents a copy added up. Eventually it turned Kinko's into a business that was acquired by FedEx for $2.4 billion. Paul grew up in Los Angeles in the 1950s. He comes from a family of Lebanese American entrepreneurs and as a kid, he knew he wanted to start a business as well. But at school he really struggled.

4 (6m 12s):
Typical report card was two C's, three D's and an F. And in sixth grade they never let me graduate on stage. They just put me on the junior high. In junior high they wrote a letter saying, well, you know, he's not really a junior high school graduate. He hasn't got enough credits or whatever. And the vice principal said to my mother, you know, Mrs. Orla, maybe one day if Paul can really apply himself, he could learn to lay carpet. And my mother came home and said, I think he can do more than that. So I'm a, I'm not a grade school or a junior high school graduate, but I have a high school wood shop degree. and I was able to graduate.

2 (6m 49s):
Yeah. Going back to your family, your dad had a textile, he, he made manufactured women's clothing. I think you had some uncles who had, who had liquor stores and and bars. Is that right?

4 (7m 0s):
Yes.

2 (7m 1s):
Yes. And so, so basically the idea from, sounds like from an early age the, the model that you saw around you was people starting their own businesses, not going to work for some other company. Is that, is that right?

4 (7m 15s):
Absolutely. My mother would say, honey, you know, you work for other people. You're only as good as yesterday's paycheck. There was no encouragement to work for other people.

2 (7m 25s):
It was always about start your own thing,

4 (7m 27s):
Have your own business.

2 (7m 29s):
Was that, when, do you remember, I mean, 'cause I know the, the eventually you started junior college and then eventually you got in, you transferred to U S C. Was that in your mind from the moment you started college that I'm gonna figure out a business to start? Or, or or not quite yet.

4 (7m 45s):
No. I knew I'd have my own business. You

2 (7m 47s):
Knew, I think

4 (7m 48s):
In raising children, you have one of two choices. They better be good at school, good accountant, lawyer, whatever do with profession or they better be good with money. And my parents encouraged me with money, skills saving, what to do with your money. and I think you, when raising children, you better have a child with one of those two skills, money skills or school skills.

2 (8m 13s):
So how did you, from, from what I understand, like by the time you got to college, you had saved a little bit of money, right? Like, but how did you, how did you save money? How did you make money by the time you got to college?

4 (8m 23s):
I had a vegetable stand and then back in those days, the farmers would send all their produce to a central market. And the big markets would go from say three in the morning to five at six in the morning to buy all their stuff. I would buy on the late market, the stuff that was left over the peaches, the canal, LOEs, the p I would buy that. I'd sell it at my vegetable stand.

2 (8m 49s):
And where was your vegetable stand?

4 (8m 51s):
I had a vacant lot in la. It was a great location. It was there for an example, there'd be, you know, a freeway goes and then there's a vacant lot and then I would have the stand right there. So, I had great visibility.

2 (9m 6s):
Right. Alright. So you are, I mean you're, you're sort of working your way through U Ss C. How was college for you when you got to U S C? Was it, I mean, I know that you were, you struggled in, in certain subjects in high school, but I guess you found it easier to work with numbers.

4 (9m 22s):
Yeah, I absolutely adored my finance classes. Marketing, I enjoyed organizational behavior. I didn't have to take notes. I was just absorbing everything. Yeah. Now for an example, a professor would say Subchapter s corporation, everybody else is frantically taking notes. I understood. I got the concept. It made so much sense. I didn't have to take notes on those kind of things. and I calculated, at sc I had so many Bs, you had to have an exact C average to graduate. My last 16 units were all D's. 'cause that's all I needed to graduate

2 (9m 56s):
D's.

4 (9m 56s):
Yeah. I didn't see any reason. My diploma looks almost the same as everybody else.

2 (10m 2s):
So as long as you get the diploma, it didn't matter what the grades were because the diploma looks the same.

4 (10m 6s):
D's get degrees. But I will tell you, I learned, I learned in school. Yeah. and I really did pay attention. and I enjoyed college. I never cut class, but I really did listen and I learned.

2 (10m 18s):
Yeah. Alright. So you graduate, you get your degree. But I guess while you are there, you notice something about, about copy machines. This is like 19 69, 19 70 and Xerox machines, right. Had been al already been around for what, 15, 20 years by that point. But people were making photocopies, photocopies kind of became more and more common, I guess, while you were at college. Oh

4 (10m 47s):
Yeah. This place called Magic Machine. It was right by sc. Yeah. They did Xerox copies for 3 cents a copy. And they were lines unbelievably long lines,

2 (10m 56s):
Lines to co photocopy books. Right. Because people needed to read the chapters or, or whatever it was.

4 (11m 2s):
Everything resumes to whatever, you could just sit there. People want to communicate. And it's a great way for people to communicate their ideas.

2 (11m 12s):
And this is in like 1969. And photocopy machines were like these giant things. And and it's, it took like a photograph. Like it was like, there was like a flash of light for every copy, right? Yes. At the time, yes. And then it would come out and it was not an amazing facsimile of, of what you were copying, but it was pretty good. I mean, it probably was revolutionary in 19, even 19 69, 19 70 people probably thought these were amazing machines.

4 (11m 40s):
They were, they were. And you could just see so many applications for it. I could just see it mushrooming.

2 (11m 48s):
And what did you think when you saw that? I mean, that, that immediately triggered an idea in your, your mind to open up your own copy machine shop?

4 (11m 57s):
Yes. If, if people are in line, that's a big sign of success. Hmm. And I, I was in the vegetable business overnight. My inventory rotted, my cucumbers, my corn and I looked at the Xerox machine and I thought, man, that that paper does not go obsolete. That inventory stays there for months and months at a time. and I, I I thought, I don't want to be in a business where I have to fight my inventory.

2 (12m 26s):
And what does a long line mean to you? When you see a long line?

4 (12m 29s):
Money,

2 (12m 30s):
Money. So you, you decide, all right, I'm gonna open up a shop, a photocopy shop. First of all, we didn't open it in la you opened it in Santa Barbara, which is an hour and a half north of la. Tell me why you picked Santa Barbara.

4 (12m 48s):
I had a girlfriend up here in Santa, Barbara, and I was up there and it just so happened that they didn't have a copy plate shop. and I liked the town. So I figured, well, if they're copying it, U Ss C, why wouldn't they copy in Santa Barbara? Now I didn't have to do it in elaborate business plan. It's, they're doing it here. They'll do it there. I mitigated my risk by the fact that students are similar in both campuses.

2 (13m 12s):
So, alright. I'm assuming that at that time, this is 1970, most students, if they photocopied anything, went to the school library to do it in the school libraries machine, right?

4 (13m 23s):
Yes. Anybody could get these Xerox machines. In fact, the campus had free labor. They got better contracts on their Xerox machine. So I'm competing not on a level plane, but I'm competing in an unlevel plane with the government and, and, and pure competition prices to determine why people buy So. I had all these things against me. I had to outfox the college campus in getting that business started.

2 (13m 50s):
How much was, do you remember how much the college was charging at the library for a copy?

4 (13m 54s):
5 cents.

2 (13m 55s):
5 cents. So you had to beat that or make it a better experience in order to make sure your business was gonna work?

4 (14m 2s):
Well, I I, I beat him because as my volume went up, my marginal cost went down that I could make a profit at 3 cents a copy.

2 (14m 11s):
Alright, so you decide to open up a location, a copy shop, you need to buy a copy machine. I have to imagine in 1970, that was not a small purchase. I mean, it was probably gonna be really expensive. You needed to sign a lease on a space. You need to, you know, you, so first of all, how did you get the money to, to, to do all this?

4 (14m 33s):
Well, I borrowed $5,000 from Bank of America with my dad's signature.

2 (14m 38s):
Wow. So the bank was willing to give a 22 year old kid with no experience, a $5,000 loan at that time with

4 (14m 46s):
My dad's signature. Yeah.

2 (14m 48s):
Co cosign. Yeah. Yeah. And the 5,000 was enough to buy what? Well,

4 (14m 53s):
Xerox in those days, rented you the machine.

2 (14m 55s):
Oh, you didn't buy

4 (14m 56s):
It. Didn't buy it. Okay. And they were, I'll tell you what really built that business, Xerox was so screwed up in their invoicing. It gave me an enormous amount of float. I wouldn't get a bill from a Xerox machine for say, 60 days, 90 days after it was installed. Wow. and I didn't have to put up any money to get it.

2 (15m 14s):
So you didn't have to put any money to get the machine. So you got the machine and then they would bill you a fee to, to basically, you know, rent it and then to maintain it. And then for the ink and toner and all that stuff.

4 (15m 27s):
Yep. I had to buy the toner and paper.

2 (15m 30s):
Do you remember how much it it cost to rent the machine? At the time

4 (15m 33s):
It was $1,100 a month. And the variable cost after that was one half a set. So for an example, if I did a hundred thousand copies by cost, be 1100 plus a half a cent or $500 for a hundred thousand copies, and I could sell it for 4 cents, that's $4,000. Plus I charged extra for colored paper and legal size. So my average sale was about four and a half cents.

2 (15m 58s):
Okay. 1100 a month. Wow. 1970. That's a lot of money to rent a copy machine. At that time, it was expensive,

4 (16m 7s):
But I could do 200,000 copies a month. And so that would be 9,000 in revenue and my cost would be 2000 a month. Say.

2 (16m 15s):
So you knew just doing the math, that you could make money off this immediately. That this could be profitable. So you, so you, you, you get this machine and Xerox doesn't even, you don't even need to put any money down. You just get the machine. They, you, you bring it in and you find a And how big was the space that you found?

4 (16m 32s):
It was the size of a lunch room. A hundred square feet.

2 (16m 36s):
A hundred square feet. So it was, that's enough room for a counter. It, a hundred square feet, tiny wow. Counter and the machine and maybe four or five people in there. And that's it. Not

4 (16m 48s):
Even that one worker, two workers,

2 (16m 50s):
But I mean customers, right? Four or five customers?

4 (16m 52s):
No, no customers came. I had a, they came outside. They never came inside the store. There was a window to the street. There was

2 (16m 59s):
A window. They would give you the document and you would copy it for them. Yes. And it was three or 4 cents a copy,

4 (17m 6s):
4 cents a copy.

2 (17m 7s):
And, and what did you call that for a shop?

4 (17m 10s):
Kinko's. My nickname was Kinko. 'cause of my kinky hair.

2 (17m 13s):
You had kinky hair.

4 (17m 16s):
Kinky red hair. And it's a great name for a business. Look at, you want strong consonants. Google, Xerox, Kodak,

2 (17m 26s):
Coca-Cola.

4 (17m 27s):
Coca-Cola. Yeah. So I. I wanted a business with a strong consonant. Once you heard the name Kinko's, you'd never forget it.

2 (17m 34s):
No. And and I mean, given that you were seeing every document pretty much handed to you that was being copied, you could, you knew it was being copied. What did students copy? Was it like other students' notes, for example? Was it pages from books? What, what kinds of things were they bringing into photocopy?

4 (17m 51s):
Interesting things. Like they're writing a term paper on Alger Hiss or they're wrote a paper on Richard Nixon and the war in Vietnam. Yeah. I remember xeroxing for students how to make Molotov cocktails. 'cause the anti-war movement was so strong, you can't believe what they would copy.

2 (18m 11s):
Alright, so you and and you were working in this shop, right? It was just you? Or did you have somebody else work with you? No,

4 (18m 16s):
No. I, I was still going to U S C finishing my fifth year of college.

2 (18m 20s):
So you were going back and forth?

4 (18m 22s):
Yeah, I worked Tuesdays and Thursday mornings.

2 (18m 24s):
And then who worked the other days

4 (18m 25s):
I had a lady named Holly Deley. She was great. And she ran it the other time.

2 (18m 30s):
And tell me what, what did, I mean, how did the store do? I mean, was it, you, you, you mentioned having seen lines outside this copy shop at near U S C. Were there lines outside Kinko's or was it just, was it busy or was it erratic? What do you remember?

4 (18m 48s):
Well, there was enough that I was able to, by then, I was my fifth year of school, I paid my tuition on my own. It was, and I supported myself that year. There was enough customers to support myself.

2 (19m 0s):
So how soon after you opened that shop, was it profitable? Was it pretty much from day one day? You

4 (19m 6s):
Understand if Xerox never billed you. I buy stationary, you know, notebooks and pens. Yeah. And the first day of school, I put my notebooks and pens on the sidewalk. I sold $2,000 a day worth of notebooks and pens. The first day of school, everybody needs a open, open comped. I did film processing, know, like a photo mat. They had cartridges.

2 (19m 27s):
Yeah. Oh, you did that too. All,

4 (19m 29s):
All three. Well, they're synergistic products. I actually cash flowed the very first month. I had more money in the bank account at the end of the month that I started with.

2 (19m 40s):
And, and so you had this shop and, and the shop was doing pretty well. And, and Paul, what was your, I mean, was was your vision for it that it would, that that would be your business. You would have this copy shop and, you know, make a pretty decent living and that would be your life.

4 (19m 58s):
No.

2 (19m 59s):
You, you had a bigger plan. I think

4 (20m 1s):
When you're four years old and you say, what's it gonna be like when you're an adult? You just kind of go through it. Yeah. I followed my mother's advice. She said, you know, honey, in your twenties, try everything in your thirties. Four, figure out what you do best forties, make a bunch of money for what you do best in your fifties. Try not to do too much. and I did follow her advice. I remember sitting there thinking, if I can't figure out how to get out of this job of running this store, the students are that are coming to me now are gonna say to their children, go see Paul. He did my copying in school.

2 (20m 36s):
Yeah.

4 (20m 37s):
And I kept thinking, I do not want that for my future just to sit in this copy shop.

2 (20m 44s):
When we come back in just a moment, Paul starts to grow Kinko's beyond that first location and how he learns that keeping your store open all night will bring in more customers during the day. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This.

MasterClass (21m 8s):
So this summer I finally decided to stop inadvertently killing the plants in my garden and really learn how to do gardening the right way. And helping me along that journey was Ron Finley on masterclass. Ron is one of the great gardeners of our time. And in his class you will learn everything from the basics to the fundamentals of building a home garden and more. With Masterclass, you can learn from the world's best minds anytime, anywhere and at your own pace. Annual memberships start at $10 a month and you get Unlimited access to every instructor. Thousands of online lessons, exclusive content insights, and much more. There are over 180 classes to pick from everything from the Art of Negotiation with Chris Voss to singing and producing with Alicia Keys, with new classes added every month. The Ron Finley class, for example, teaches you how to grow your own food and keep your plants alive, letting you find beauty and freedom and gardening no matter the size of your space. And I've loved how easy it is to fit the lessons into my day. Even if I only watch for 10 minutes before bed. Get Unlimited access to every class. And right now as a How I Built This listener, you can get 15% off when you go to masterclass.com/built. That's masterclass.com/built for 15% off an annual membership masterclass.com/built.

Squarespace (22m 22s):
I talk with so many business leaders who use Squarespace as their all in one platform for building their brand and engaging customers online. Squarespace lets you easily create a dynamic website and sell anything your products and services and even content you create. Squarespace makes it really easy to get started with best in class website templates for all types of businesses that can be customized to fit your specific needs. Squarespace also provides the tools you need to run your business smoothly, including inventory management, a simple checkout process, and secure payments. Whatever you sell, Squarespace has merchandising features to make your products look their best online. And with Squarespace email campaigns, you can build a community of email subscribers and customers. Start with an email template and customize it by applying your own brand ingredients like colors and logo. And once you send built-in analytics, measure your email's impact, check out squarespace.com/built for a free trial. And when you're ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

2 (23m 40s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's the early 1970s and Paul Orla is starting to get restless. His first Kinko's in the Santa Barbara area is a big success, but he's not satisfied with having just one store.

4 (23m 57s):
And I kept looking and I'd say, well there's two AV on drug stores, there's two Chevron gas stations. Somebody figured out how to go from one to two. And after I was in business three months, I hired a manager. So I was totally free to start conceptualizing how to do other things.

2 (24m 17s):
Yeah.

4 (24m 18s):
So then we did a, I did a store in Irvine, California. It was a garbage room of a restaurant, was about 80 square feet.

2 (24m 25s):
This was in, this is like within a year I think, or a year or you, you opened your second location. Yeah,

4 (24m 29s):
About a year. Yeah. Yep.

2 (24m 31s):
Okay.

4 (24m 31s):
Then when we went to Cal State Fullerton, then I went to Cal Poly San Luis Obispo and I gradually just hit all the college campuses.

2 (24m 38s):
Alright, so tell me, how did you, going from one to two, right? It requires more money, more cash. Did you have the cash simply through cashflow to open the second business? Or did you have to take another loan out

4 (24m 52s):
Every summer? You don't realize when you're working around college campuses, students aren't there very often. Right. The summer vacation. So every summer I was broken. I had to arrange lines of credit. Yeah. But you have to also remember Xerox was so screwed up in their billing that I'd never get an invoice. So I could open a store from the day one, I would be cash flowing. I got to bank two weeks for the payroll. I got to bank my paper bill for 30 days. From day one, I would actually cash flow in a new location.

2 (25m 21s):
Wow. Alright. So, so, but from what I understand, Paul, after you opened that second location, which was in, in Irvine, just south of la I think you ran into some serious problems, I think because you, you had decided to, to branch out into like offset printing, like commercial printing, sort of like, like making posters and, and menus and and stuff like that.

4 (25m 43s):
Yes. What happened was, I bought, you know, offset printing equipment and cameras and I figured and I, I, I bought a blueprinting machine and that business, I didn't know what the hell I was doing. I didn't know how to run the printing presses. The printing press would break. I'd call the printing press repair person. He would say, no, it's not the printing press, it's the camera. I'd call the camera guy. He would say, it's not the camera, it's the ammonia from the blueprinting machine. It's screwing up the plates for the printing press. This business, I didn't know what the hell I was doing. I have no mechanical ability whatsoever. And it was bleeding me dry.

2 (26m 24s):
Yeah.

4 (26m 25s):
So So I was fortunate enough around 1973 to sell the print shop and focus on the copy shops.

2 (26m 31s):
So you, so it sounds like that, that it made you realize you really needed to focus on the core product offering or service, which was photocopies.

4 (26m 42s):
Yes. It's sort of like when you go sailing and you notice you don't have any wind, but the guy over there has all the wind. But all my competitors were doing printing. And incidentally they did copying So I wanted to join their strategy, which was really wrong. I should have stayed with copying and not done the printing. And So I think sometimes we spend our time on the hardest thing, which was the print shop where the easy money, the low hanging fruit was in the copy shops.

2 (27m 13s):
But a good lesson to learn early in your career. Right?

4 (27m 17s):
Yes.

2 (27m 17s):
And, and as you really started to expand the business on college campuses, I guess one of the things you started to do was, was work with professors to essentially to photocopy chapters from textbooks. And then you would sell that instead of making the students buy the whole book.

4 (27m 38s):
Yeah, I like to wander. So I was wandering in the reserve book room at the university in the reserve book room. In those days, the professor would say, I'm gonna give you an exam, I'd like you to read this. I it's too expensive, I'll put it on reserve for you. So when do you think the students went to the reserve book room the night before the test? Right. So I put out a flyer saying, from now on, professor leave things on file with Kinko's as well as a reserve book room. Well these professors went crazy for the program. I'll give you an example to jump forward, say at Ohio State, we were doing 6% of the textbook sales by photocopying these professors love the program, they could teach with original material, et cetera.

4 (28m 23s):
That program really built our business on the college campuses.

2 (28m 28s):
So let, let's talk about expanding the stores. You, you sort of, you get the second location and then the third location and those you own. and you could kind of manage and oversee the employees, but at a certain point you really started to, to expand much faster. and I want to, I want to talk to you a little bit about this model because you did not franchise Kinko's locations. I mean certainly it first started in la the LA area, San Fernando Valley, and then you went into the Pacific Northwest. But it wasn't a franchise model. It was a different kind of model to explain how you got people to manage and co-own the shops but not be franchisees.

4 (29m 14s):
Well, a lesson I had learned with employees is I had gone to the Irvine store at 1130 in the afternoon and it just wasn't open. You can't rely on minimum wage people to have motivation. And So I always figured, if I take it up partner, the fact that they have equity in that individual location would make a big difference in the outcome. Which is true. So if I had a good store, say in downtown la, I took my cousin Denny and as a partner, and he was there. He did a great job and ran the store. So, I started with partners with equity in those individual locations.

2 (29m 50s):
You started with equity because you figured if they were just employees of mine, they don't have any stake in the success of this shop.

4 (30m 1s):
Absolutely. and I in the company owned stores, we also had profit sharing. I believed in profit sharing. I'm gonna digress or change a little bit. I own a bowling alley up here. And So, I was insisting in the o as the owner, I want profit sharing in that bowling alley. So I just went in there and I announced profit sharing that next month our sales went up 7%. Profit sharing does pay off So. I had profit sharing in every one of our locations.

2 (30m 30s):
Okay, so you, so, so this model that you, that you created was not a franchise model, it was a model where basically the, you, you would find somebody who wanted to operate the store, the Kinko's location in another city and, and they would own and also finance it and you would have a stake in it. How did that work?

4 (30m 50s):
I see I started with my partner Brad Kraus up in northern California. He put up $2,500, I put up $2,500 and would start a store. He was in charge of the store and my responsibility was the bookkeeping in the back office, the reconcile the bank statement, doing the general ledger. And so that's how I expanded. I'd find people I liked and how I could determine how I liked them is if they had acquired the ability to save some money. And so if they could write a check for $2,500, I had a feeling they were good business people.

2 (31m 27s):
But why didn't you just do a franchise model, which, which would've required almost no cash on your part?

4 (31m 33s):
Well, I didn't like the model. Franchisees and franchisors are two people flipping each other off all the time. In other words, if I, if I told a franchisee to do something, they would say, well he's not, his motivation isn't cured. He just wants more 6% from the top. I like the idea of sharing in the bottom line with the people.

2 (31m 53s):
Paul, between 1970, when you opened that first shop in is Vista in 1980. But in that 10 year period you expanded to 80 stores across the United States, Kinko stores. So each one of those stores, I know that that, that some of them were fully outright owned by you, but some of them were owned by these partners. How did you find them? How did you identify? I mean this is, you know, today you can go online and find, there's hundreds of franchise opportunities. They're advertising everywhere. You just go on the internet. How did people find you or how did you find people to expand the business across the us?

4 (32m 32s):
Well, the people working in the stores knew how much money I was taking in. Yeah. And so they would approach me about going into business. Like Jim Warren a good example. He was a great guy. My very first partners, he would take a Volkswagen van and drive around the country signing leases. Finally, Jimmy decided to take the south, the Jorge, Alabama, South Carolina area. So we became partners.

2 (32m 59s):
And, and tell me when somebody came to you, Paul, I mean this sounds, and I'm not criticizing you, I'm just, I'm fascinated by this, it sounds really casual and almost haphazard. Like it was these informal agreements in which you entrusted the brand, the name Kinko's to somebody somewhere in America to run it. and you kept a small piece of it, but there was no corporate structure. Is that right? Is that, I mean, it just kind of sounds a little kind of fly by night.

4 (33m 34s):
You're right, it was fly by night. It was haphazard.

2 (33m 38s):
But, but how did you control the brand when you were, you know, it was just 80 stores by 1980. How did you control the brand?

4 (33m 49s):
I didn't really do a good job of that. and I didn't realize I had a brand. But I'll tell you the key to a field-based organization with partnerships and is the bank statement, the fact that I was reconciling the bank statement under my auspices. I was in charge of the payroll for the locations I was in charge of. Ultimately we became charge of all their accounts receivable. You only do three things in business. And it's really simple. Motivate your workers, understand your customers, and balance your checkbook. The best definition of management is management is to remove obstacles. and I wanted every obstacle for my partners and those, those store managers.

4 (34m 33s):
So they could be loving the customer. So, I took, I tried to take every impediment away from the easy flow of that relationship.

2 (34m 42s):
So, so basically these were investor operators, right? Essentially you'd find people who were willing to put up half the cash or more you would get in. Typically, what percentage ownership would you get of each Kinko's location? I

4 (34m 56s):
Put up generally 60% of the money. They would put up 40% of the money. I could easily go to the corporation, say in Virginia. And if I didn't like the partner, I'd have a special shareholders meeting and fire the manager. Right. So, I did have control. and you have to remember, just like myself, I'm in line seeing how much money was being made. I have all my workers know how much money I'm taking in all my customers see the customers in line and it's easy to get a copy machine. What baffled me is how, why I didn't have more competition because

2 (35m 30s):
It was like, it was like printing money. Yeah. I mean you knew that the cost of renting the machine was X dollars and if you charged 4 cents a copy, you knew that within a couple of days you could cover the cost of renting the machine. And then the rest of the month it was just gravy.

4 (35m 47s):
Yes.

2 (35m 48s):
So essentially you, you were, as you expanded through the seventies, you were doing all of the accounting for every single one of these locations and doing payroll. I can't imagine you were doing this all yourself, Paul.

4 (36m 4s):
No, no, no. I, I gotta be honest, I, there's not too many things I really did for myself. My motto has always been anybody else can do it better. And in my case they can. I did. I supervised, yeah. Every job in that business I had at one time. But I knew how to get out of, most people will brag about how hard they work this, that and the other. What I think hard work is what keeps you up all night long when you're worrying. That's hard work.

2 (36m 28s):
You were good at finding other people who could do the jobs. You were good at identifying talent and then it would free you up to do other things or maybe less work.

4 (36m 38s):
Yes. And in my entire career, if I went to my office four straight days and I'm talking, when I go to an office, I'd have a nice breakfast, I'd be in there and I'd leave at four o'clock in the afternoon. If I went four straight days by the fourth day, I'm nervous. So I'm, my hands are shaking, I'm nervous. I don't have the temperament to be in an office and do all that or take interruptions. Yeah. A funny thing happened along the way. I had seven stores and a manager called me up and he said, you know Paul, I gotta bounce check in the mail, what do I do? and I thought, what do you mean, what do you do? You go after the guy read the check and I thought, now who's stupid?

4 (37m 18s):
Me or him? I shouldn't be available for those kind of phone calls. Yeah. And So I became inaccessible and there better be a damn good reason for somebody to call me. and I noticed that the phone, I couldn't get anything accomplished by being so available for phone calls.

2 (37m 33s):
You did not have an open door policy. Never. Which some people say my door is always open and that, that there's a badge of honor.

4 (37m 38s):
No, my, there better be a reason for you to come in and interrupt me. Yeah.

2 (37m 43s):
From, from what I understand, from what I've read about you, there were some challenges with partners. I mean, of course there are gonna be challenges with partners who are running the stores. They have a vision for what they want their location to be. What was, I mean, tell me about some of these challenges that you had

4 (38m 4s):
In 1980. I had a business that anybody could come and compete with me on any of my workers, any of my customers, et cetera. I had to motivate, say the person at Fort Collins, Colorado to want to go to work every day and do a good job. And everybody understands the meaning of the work. The meaning of the work is there is say a lost little girl in Spokane, Washington. The family went to the police office first and they came to us second to do the posters. Those are powerful connections that you're contributing to. You're helping somebody get a job, somebody communicate an idea.

4 (38m 45s):
I saw that relationship was so perfect. All I had to do is get the help out of the way of that relationship. Was it easy to motivate people if you realize it was a self-motivated business They enjoyed and they got fulfillment from their customers. When I noticed that it was easy for me to get back away from that business. Secondly, I had to keep our people loyal. and I had a real pro. I recognized loyalty was a real problem for me.

2 (39m 17s):
Why? Why was loyalty a problem? Because

4 (39m 19s):
It was too easy to go across the street and compete with me. It was just too easy.

2 (39m 23s):
You know? In other words, it didn't make sense for people to partner with you when they could just get their own Xerox machine and open their own shop easily.

4 (39m 31s):
Yes.

2 (39m 31s):
And And was that happening?

4 (39m 33s):
Yes, all the time. I had a guy in Lincoln, Nebraska, he went down to Florida, started opening his own stores. I had a woman in Virginia that went down to Florida once again and opened their own shops.

2 (39m 43s):
And this was at a point where Kinko's, you had 80 locations, but it still wasn't the ubiquitous brand it would eventually become No,

4 (39m 51s):
It wasn't.

2 (39m 52s):
So it was, it was vulnerable to competition. Yeah,

4 (39m 55s):
That's exactly the problem I had. Yeah. The reason I didn't choose franchise in is if they viewed me as a parasite from the top, they would easily go across the street and do it. Right. But if I shared in the profits and they, they got a good salary, they had a car, we had a pension plan for the partners.

2 (40m 15s):
Basically, as long as you kept them happy, you could keep 'em loyal.

4 (40m 19s):
Yeah. And remove the obstacles. Yeah. And then as we enlarged, as we got the trademark bigger and bigger, they understood the value of the trademark. But in this evolution, the company color blue, making that decision was the first move we had towards centralization

2 (40m 40s):
Blue. Like walls inside Like painted blue. Yeah,

4 (40m 43s):
Blue. The logo and blue.

2 (40m 46s):
Yep.

4 (40m 47s):
At that point we, we did go towards standardization and for them to give up the independent power, say in Texas a and m for being green and whatever color they were to go to company. But color blue, I had a real battle with the field to get the company color blue. Hmm. But some of them wouldn't do what we wanted him to do, let's say. Yeah. We said get his, I, I'd say, you know, this binding machine really works. I had a guy in Colorado that if I, if I said to get these machines, he would never buy the machine. He would just so reluctant to do anything new where the guy Brad in northern California, I tell 'em to buy a machine hit by 20 of them. So I had to manage 'em differently. One, I'd have to pull back the other one I'd have to push.

4 (41m 30s):
and you, in your arsenal of leadership, you have the velvet glove and the steel fist and I had to use the steel fist sometimes. Maybe I did it too much. Well,

2 (41m 39s):
Well how what? I mean, but if you use the steel fist, wouldn't you risk that person just saying, screw this guy Paul, I'm gonna go start my own competitive shop.

4 (41m 48s):
Yeah, I did. I did. But at that point, Kinko's was getting a cache and there was some value to the trademark.

2 (41m 56s):
Yeah. When did that start? I mean, 1980, you got, you got 80 stores, so you're, you know, but but still like, there are large parts of America that never heard of Kinko's. So at, at what point did you start to really, you know, what was the shift? I, because I guess I remembered Kinko's when I was in high school, and this is in the nineties. I remember Kinko's as the place you go to at, at midnight when you had a, an assignment through the next day and you knew Kinko's was gonna be open. It was 24 hours and it was like, oh my God, I could go to Kinko's and just get this like report bound for school the next day.

2 (42m 36s):
So was that, 'cause it wasn't 24 hours from the beginning, right?

4 (42m 41s):
Yes. A major, major organizational transformation was 24 hours. Hmm.

2 (42m 47s):
When did that happen?

4 (42m 49s):
81, 82.

2 (42m 51s):
Okay.

4 (42m 51s):
We had a big battle with the field in this one. and I talked to this guy. He owned these convenience markets called Sheet's Market in Pennsylvania. Sheets, sheets. They were like seven elevens. Oh,

2 (43m 3s):
They're huge. Yeah.

4 (43m 5s):
He said something that they would close their convenience market from midnight to six in the morning. 'cause they would only do $30 in business. Yep. Yeah. During the daytime they would do $6,000 in business. He said, for some strange reason, my daytime business dropped 50% when we closed from midnight to six in the morning.

2 (43m 26s):
He said they were 24 hours, then they shut from 12 to six. But as a result of that, their daytime business shut went down

4 (43m 34s):
50%. and I go to sleep. Two days later I wake up like a bat outta hell and I go, what did he tell me? If you go 24 hours a day, your daytime business doubles. Which is absolutely correct.

2 (43m 45s):
Wow. Can you explain why?

4 (43m 48s):
Because people can always rely on you. Hmm. So, I went back to the organization and I tried to get people to go 24 hours. What do you think? They said,

2 (43m 58s):
No way. No way. Not going 24 hours. You want me to pay somebody for, you know, those hours where I'm closed.

4 (44m 5s):
And they were saying, I can't work 24 hours a day. Yeah,

2 (44m 9s):
Right. Of course not.

4 (44m 10s):
So I'm pressing. It takes me about a year. I finally get a guy outta Chicago. He tried it and he got up in a meeting and said, this 24 hour thing works. His daytime business doubled. It's just kicked ass. But

2 (44m 23s):
What, what explains that? I know you said it's a reliability, but is that it? It's just people just, it, it just sends a signal to the brain that this place is reliable. They're

4 (44m 32s):
Always there.

2 (44m 33s):
Wow.

4 (44m 33s):
Let's say somebody came in at eight o'clock at night and they're closing at nine and the person doesn't wanna work on a job after nine That work. I didn't get that job. But by opening 24 hours a day, they could rely on it. Us doing it all night long for 'em. And people were generally in my business, our customers were angry subconsciously at themselves for not doing their own work. Yesterday.

2 (45m 0s):
Yeah. How many late nights did I have at a Kinko's in high school and college? 'cause you wait till the last minute and it's midnight and my mom's mad at me like, you should have done this last week. I'm gonna ground you. But there's Kinkos and it's open and I. It's depressing. 'cause there's no cars, no people out. You're in the Kinkos. But it's open. It's there.

4 (45m 21s):
Absolutely. And our daytime business doubled. It was a very successful endeavor to do.

2 (45m 28s):
Okay. So, so the 24 hour Kinko's really kind of changed the game here and now Kinko's is really the, the, the local owners are starting to see their business growing. But I, I guess, you know, at the same time there we're still problems with the core business, right? I mean, more competitors shrinking margins. So there were, there was pressure on the business starting in the mid 1980s.

4 (45m 57s):
Yeah. I'm always fantasizing what my competition will do to me. So we have these office superstores. The OfficeMax is the Office Depots and I kept thinking they're gonna get HIBT and open a copy shop 24 hours a day.

2 (46m 11s):
Yeah. And this is already in the like, sort of the late eighties, but that you start to see those places. Okay.

4 (46m 15s):
I'm starting to see 'em. and I kept thinking, well they have a strategic advantage 'cause they got the stationary, which I don't. And the laser printer was coming after me. I could see it coming after me at left field.

2 (46m 27s):
The laser printer. How was that a threat?

4 (46m 30s):
Well, why would you ever go to a, why would you take a piece of paper and take it to a copier when it could just come out the end of the laser printer? Well, but

2 (46m 37s):
It still was more expensive and the toner was expensive and the mid eighties, a laser printer was really expensive. But

4 (46m 43s):
Let's say you wanted to put a little bit of red on your document. A little bit of blue. Yeah. It would cost you a dollar a copy for our color copies. Right. I saw that. Laser pinner is the biggest threat to my business

2 (46m 56s):
When we come back in just a moment. Yet another threat to Kinko's, a major copyright lawsuit. And Paul explains why you should never fall in love with your own business. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This

ZipRecruiter (47m 16s):
Hiring is challenging. If you're an entrepreneur growing your business, you know that it's hard to select the right candidates. And with everything you have to do to keep things running, it's even harder to devote enough time to the hiring process. That's why you want a partner who gets it. ZipRecruiter. ZipRecruiter knows how tough it is right now, but they figured out solutions for the problems you're facing. See for yourself right now, you can try them for free at ZipRecruiter dot com slash built. ZipRecruiter is ready to help you tackle your recruiting challenges. It's smart technology finds great matches for your job postings sooner, letting you hire A S A P so you can get back to the bigger picture growing your business. And to reach more of the right people. ZipRecruiter posts your job to more than a hundred job sites. Team up with a hiring partner who understands what you need. ZipRecruiter. Four out of five employers who post on ZipRecruiter get a quality candidate within the first day. Just go to this exclusive web address to try ZipRecruiter for free. ZipRecruiter dot com slash built. Again, that's ZipRecruiter dot com slash B ut ZipRecruiter the smartest way to hire.

TD Insurance (48m 27s):
When you've had a vehicle accident, there are often uncertainties and what ifs that come next. What if I had turned left instead of right back there? What if I Checked that mere twice? What If I just stayed in bed? What ifs are natural? What's next is a visit to a TD Insurance Auto Center TDD insurance customers get the benefit of a one-stop auto claim shop for advice, repairs and rentals. And a TD insurance claims advisor who will be with you every step of the way, taking The uncertainty out of your auto claim and repairs. Learn more about TD Insurance Auto centers@tdinsurance.com.

2 (49m 5s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's the late 1980s and Paul has grown Kinkos from a single store near Santa Barbara into a nationwide chain. But he's still uneasy about the future and he's worried about competition from Office Depot and things like the laser printer.

4 (49m 26s):
I kept thinking, why do you need to take a piece of paper to a copier? It can collate for you better. The laser printer or the, I could put spot color on it. What do they need us for?

2 (49m 38s):
Tell me a little bit about that insecurity. 'cause I'm thinking, wait a minute, this guy's got this business. It's Kinko's, it's the eighties. You're, I mean, you expanded from zero to 80 through the, through the seventies in the eighties. You go from 80 in 1980 to 480 in 1990. I'm thinking this guy's a genius. He's figured out away to expand a business with very little money down high margins. In the meantime, you, you're telling me I was incredibly insecure and constantly self-doubting. Tell me, tell me about that. About what was going on in your head. Well,

4 (50m 17s):
What I saw relatives. I had a uncle, he had his own business and lost it. And he basically lost his will to live. So. I took it very seriously. And with my background, I didn't have that many accolades. So I never was able to take myself seriously. and I really still to this day, don't take myself seriously. I mean here I had a headquarters with five, 600 people. I had 30,000 workers. And everybody thinks, well 'cause he's big, I'm sure that that's gonna be a safe job. Yeah. I'm the only one there thinking, I don't think we got a future. I'm really insecure here.

2 (50m 55s):
Wow.

4 (50m 55s):
But that's what employees are. Employees like the sense of security of somebody else. I'm the owner. You're an owner of a business. It isn't your job to be cocky and arrogant. You gotta know every little weakness and pitfalls in that business. And I'll tell you something that bothers me is when a business person says, I love my business. That's absolute bullshit. You love your family, you can enjoy your business. But once that becomes a love affair, you lose your objectivity. I never loved my business. I could enjoy it, but man, your business is an instrument to make you happy and you own it. It doesn't own you. And So I had a real detached few of that business.

2 (51m 38s):
Yeah, I appreciate that.

4 (51m 39s):
Well everybody, well

2 (51m 41s):
There are, there are people who are just supremely confident in their abilities. You know, you've run across those kinds of people,

4 (51m 48s):
The arrogant people. Yeah. I realize there are arrogant people and I believe that there's an arrogance of education. I was always with the normal people. You look at the student, they go to their special little reading group, they go to their special math group. They're always separated from people like me, the wood shot majors. And they always look at me like in school, like, well, they're stupid, they're not like me. They go to their elitist universities or go to their elitist colleges and there's an arrogance in that, an arrogance in education that they don't trust the average person. Yeah. Well I was always with the average person and I always felt they were smarter than the executives.

2 (52m 29s):
But, but that Paul, that chip on your shoulder is what fueled your success, what you just said right now, that chip on your shoulder, which can, can be a, an Achilles heel too, but it can be a strength, it can be a source of energy that drove you.

4 (52m 45s):
Yes, it did, it did. Well, it drove me. I liked money and it was a good game. Hmm. I, I used to tell people I worked with, you know, I didn't get married until I was 36 years old. And I'd go to my mother's house and she'd say, you know, honey, when are you gonna get married? When are you gonna get married? When are you gonna have your children? And I'd say, you know, mom, I'm tired of you asking me when I'm gonna get married. So she said, okay Paul, I'll never ask you when you're gonna get married, but when I look at you, you'll know what I'm thinking.

2 (53m 17s):
I love that.

4 (53m 18s):
And I told everybody that story and I'm saying I'm into it for the money. I'm not a xeroxing monk. I don't even like to read this is a moneymaking enterprise. But we did have people that I had to con reconvince 'em. It's a, it's a, it's about making money here. And my very best stores had the most happy workers, most satisfied customers. They were the most profitable.

2 (53m 44s):
Yeah. At, at the time. You also, I mean a lot of stuff's going on in your life. I mean, you got married and I think, you know, within a couple years of your marriage, your, you had this horrible tragedy with your first child who I think died at seven months or something. Is your son Ryan? Yes. Yes. Tell me how, I mean, he had a, I guess a congenital heart defect. And, and as a, as a baby, he, he, he passed seven months. Man. That, I mean, how did you compartment, how did you run the business and deal with that? Tell me about that time in your life.

4 (54m 22s):
Oh, it was just hard. He was a real special little boy and you know, my dad had a good quote. You know, when somebody loses someone they love, he would say, just because other people go through it doesn't make it easier. It's a miserable time and you just gonna have to go through your own period of hell. Yeah. And the saddest part of losing a loved one is you have to comfort the people that are there to comfort you. Yeah. and I have to actually comfort them and say, well, I'm okay. I'm okay. And that was the part that hurt the most. And what we did, which was really stupid, is we had a private funeral and what's good about a funeral is everybody's there at once sharing the grief.

4 (55m 10s):
Yeah. What I had to do was I had to go through it one on one with just about every human being I met and I had to comfort them, which is the best thing about a funeral is you get it all over with all the sadness and you can go on with your relationships. Hmm. Well I, the coolest thing I've ever been called is dad.

2 (55m 29s):
Yeah, agree. Yeah. You've got two kids, right? Yeah,

4 (55m 34s):
Two Mason and Keenan. and I'm lucky enough to go to the, this weekend to my son's baby shower.

2 (55m 41s):
Oh, amazing. And then

4 (55m 42s):
The other one's gonna get married and he's gonna have a engagement party. So I got two in one month.

2 (55m 49s):
Amazing. Alright, so let me go back to the, to the eighties or the late eighties just for a moment. I mean, you are, you're dealing with, with the laser preneur threat, you're dealing with, you know, with more competition. And then in 1989 you get hit with a lawsuit. Some of the, the big textbook publishers wind up suing Kinko's over this program that you had that where, where you would photocopy parts of textbooks and then college students would buy them. Right. Instead of buying the book. And the publishers were saying, this is copyright infringement. and I mean you, you fought that lawsuit, but ultimately you lost, you had to pay like, like $2 million to settle.

4 (56m 30s):
Yeah. And, and the congress tried to codify what you can and can't copy. And in 1974, copyright law and in the law they said it's a de minimis portion of the book. So we had all these professors signing that they were in compliance with that and we got annihilated. Hmm. But at that time, we were noticing that the commercial locations, the one, you know, in the middle of town were taking off. And more and more technology was coming in our direction. So I almost outgrew that publishing program.

2 (57m 4s):
In other words, you're saying that, that that lawsuit and what happened as a result of it, essentially killed your business with a significant number of college students, but as a result, it kind of forced you to pay attention to the other Yes. Customers coming in the non-students. Yeah.

4 (57m 21s):
And repositioning to the commercial locations with good parking.

2 (57m 26s):
Wow. In meantime, it seems like Kinko's was a self, it was like a self-multiplying cellular organism. Like it was just growing and growing. But there were, I mean you get through this kind of this, this, this rocky period and this lawsuit you shift away from students and I think really in the nineties, Kinko starts to become more of a, like a, your office away from the office. It was like, you could come, you could use a pc, you could log onto a o l here, you could do your graphic design here. Like where did that idea come from to shift Kinko's towards like being your, your sort of office on the road?

4 (58m 6s):
It just transformed ourselves into having computer workstations. And we called it your branch office. But what always frustrated me about Kinko's is we were an operating company that sold, and I wanted to transform us to a selling company that operated. and you also have to remember at this time, I'm dealing with people that are 45 and 50.

2 (58m 30s):
You're talking about the owners, the co-owners. The

4 (58m 32s):
Owners, yeah. Executives. Yeah. And what's, there's new technology that's obsoleting in what we used to think about the world. They're just coming after us. Yeah. Also, when you're dealing with people that are in 45 and 50, they got a foot in and a foot out.

2 (58m 47s):
Yeah.

4 (58m 47s):
So I was dealing with that.

2 (58m 49s):
Meantime, you, you also made a decision around, I I think around this time in the, in sort of the mid to late eighties to bring on, let's say more of a professional kind of leader to help you. A guy named John Davis who was a U Ss C professor. Why did you feel like you needed help? Or where did you need help?

4 (59m 10s):
We had to change the philosophy as a, of the company that John Davis helped create. And as you could tell, with the business with not a lot of formal agreements, various partners, a lot of independent thinking, I had to get buy-in to the central organization. We were talking to people that were very good with things. We needed them to reorient themselves to managing people. We needed well-rounded leaders. and I needed to develop a company philosophy. Hmm. Our first sentence in the philosophy is we, our primary objectives to take care of the customer, but some of our customers are so outlandishly rude.

4 (59m 51s):
We had to have a mechanism in our values to fire our customer. So we added in the second paragraph, the coworkers of the foundation of our success. So a manager in contemplating firing a customer could look at the first sentence and the second sentence and weigh the ambiguity of how to handle that.

2 (1h 0m 11s):
And this was John's charge to basically create these, these structures. These doc philosophies. Philosophies. Yeah. Yeah. Alright. So 1996, by that year you had 851 locations in every single state and four foreign countries, or 20,000 people employed. You owned a hundred stores outright. And then you had a stake in pretty much every, every other one. But you knew already then you were looking for an out, you were looking for some type of exit. Yes. So you, you found an investment firm that, that they would buy a 30% stake in Kinko's.

2 (1h 0m 51s):
They paid $200 million according to Bloomberg. And they essentially make some changes. I mean, un understandably, they're now, you know, in control. They rolled the partnerships into a single corporate entity. So they, they're looking at Kinko's and they're like, this is a mess. It's too disorganized. How did you feel about some of that? I mean, were you optimistic about some of those changes? 'cause it seems like it made sense.

4 (1h 1m 13s):
Yes, it made sense and they took control. But I, I basically took six months off when I came back. Yeah. I I think when you sell your business, they shouldn't keep the founder on. No. It's sort of like cut, cutting the tail off an inch at a time. And everybody who was unhappy came to me. and I didn't have any influence or power to do anything about it.

2 (1h 1m 35s):
They, and they kept you on like as a consultant?

4 (1h 1m 37s):
No, I as chairman of the board.

2 (1h 1m 40s):
Okay. Y your, your because of conflicts with them got to a point where you just, you, you, you left or you, I guess you parted ways and I guess in the end you came to an agreement, they bought out the rest of your shares in 2002 and that was it. You were out of the picture.

4 (1h 1m 57s):
Yes.

2 (1h 1m 57s):
Done with Kinko's. It was not your business. You had no stake in it anymore. None. About 18 months later they sell it to FedEx.

4 (1h 2m 8s):
Yeah.

2 (1h 2m 9s):
For about two and a half billion dollars. Were, when you found out about that sale, were you angry? Were you, I mean, no, because I have to assume that, that you would've made a little bit more money had you had, had they not Right. Bought you out in 2002.

4 (1h 2m 26s):
I was happy for the company. 'cause when I had the business, our customer service was something I was so proud of. Yeah. Our customer service went under their auspices wasn't as good. and I was really, I was just as happy to get FedEx so they could have their customer service there.

2 (1h 2m 47s):
Paul, I mean, you were now, you know, in your fifties at this point, in the early two thousands freed of this or divested, right. And wealthy. And what did you, I mean, were you happy? Were you like, ah, I don't have to go to an office anymore. I don't have to work anymore. 'cause sometimes I talk to founders and they actually get depressed. They feel like they don't have a sense of purpose anymore. Like they're, they don't have anywhere to go and they're not busy. And did you, how did you feel?

4 (1h 3m 18s):
Elated and liberated?

2 (1h 3m 20s):
Yeah.

4 (1h 3m 20s):
I have two, you know, you have two children. One child has to be entertained by others and the other one can entertain themselves. I've always been the kind of person that can entertain myself. Yeah. So I found a new purpose in my life. I, I teach in school. I teach at Loyola. Now at U S C, I love the philanthropy we're doing. I believe what Andrew Carnegie said is correct. He who dies with wealth dies in sin. I'm doing a pretty good job of giving all my money away.

2 (1h 3m 49s):
What did you decide to do with your money?

4 (1h 3m 52s):
Everything goes to children. What I'm real proud of is orthodonture.

2 (1h 3m 57s):
Huh?

4 (1h 3m 57s):
If you're a Title one child, you have a pathway to orthodonture. We fixed over the years, maybe 20, 30,000 orthodontists. I I believe that society gets a compounded rate of return from a good smile. Yeah. Self-esteem. Better college graduation. I'm convinced of it. If my legacy would be that every child has a happy smile, every child knows enough about nutrition to eat nutritiously. That would really delight me.

2 (1h 4m 31s):
Paul, when you, when you think about this, you know, your life story. I mean, you, you know, I, I appreciate the kind of self-deprecating part of you. I think that's very refreshing and, and, and lovely. But, but you built an incredibly successful business. You know, you were not the best student. You were not the star. But, but then you went on to build this very successful business that had a pretty significant cultural impact. I mean, anybody, you know, over the age of 30, let's say 35, probably knows Kinko's used Kinko's. I remember 2008, I rushed to a Kinko's on deadline applying for a job to be the Host of Weekend.

2 (1h 5m 12s):
All things considered at NPR when I still worked there and I put together a spiral bound proposal of what I wanted to do to the show. I mean, I got that job 'cause I made that presentation, you know, and you know, you did that. You enabled that. And so when you think about your story, what you've done, what you built, where you are now, how much, how much of that do you, do you attribute to the grind, the hard work you put in? And how much do you think has to do with just getting lucky?

4 (1h 5m 40s):
Oh, more luck. Luck has a lot more to do with life than we might think. And it also followed my strong suit, which was, I, I can't sit still. I'm extremely restless. That went to my strong suit and it goes to my out outlook of life. Dan Frederickson had a quote for me once that I really liked. No one goes to work to do a bad job. People go to work to do a good job. It's up to you as an owner to want that. I told you about our customers and our workers' relationship and how fulfilling that was. So I attribute a lot of what I have to luck to a business that went to my strong suit and my outlook of life.

4 (1h 6m 23s):
I think people are basically honorable and decent and trustworthy, and the world is a wonderful place to live in. And you're not gonna make money with a sinister view of humanity.

2 (1h 6m 36s):
That's Paul Orla, founder of Kinko's. By the way, you can actually visit that first Kinko's location. There's a plaque outside the building at 6 5 2 1 Parle Road in Isla Vista, California. It's no longer a copy shop. And the place has changed hands a lot since the 1970s. At one time it was a beer and burger joint called Mc Burley's. And then a bunch of different restaurants. Espresso Roma, the spot on the side, dirties Barbecue, the South Coast Deli. And just recently opened a new place called Social Eats. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast apps.

2 (1h 7m 18s):
You never miss a new episode of the show and it's totally free. This episode was produced by Chris Masini, with music composed by Rum Arablouei. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Catherine Cipher. Our audio engineer was James Willetts. Our production staff also includes Alex Chung, Casey Herman, Elaine Coates, Carla Estevez, John Isabella, Liz Metzger, Sam Paulson, JC Howard, Carrie Thompson, and Ramel Wood. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey Prime members. You can listen to How I Built This early and ad free on Amazon Music.

2 (1h 7m 59s):
Download the Amazon Music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Wondery (American Scandal Feed Drop) (1h 8m 21s):
Hi, I'm Lindsey Graham, the Host of Wondery podcast, American scandal. We bring to life some of the biggest controversies in US history events that have shaped who we are as a country and that continue to define the American experience. American scandal tells Marquess stories about American politics like the break-in at the Watergate Hotel, an event that led to the downfall of a president and raised questions about the future of American democracy. We go behind the scenes looking at devastating financial crimes like the fraud committed at Enron and Bernie Madoff's Ponzi scheme. And we tell stories of complicated public figures like Edward Snowden and Monica Lewinsky, people who found themselves thrust into the spotlight and who spurred debates about the future of the country. Follow American scandal. Wherever you get your podcasts, you can listen ad free on the Amazon, Music or Wonder App.