wondery Plus (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How I, Built This Early and ad free Right. now join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts.

The Indicator from Planet Money (10s):
Think of all the things you can do in 10 minutes or less. Scroll through social media. Check your bank balance. make a sandwich or learn about the surprising economics behind all these things. The Indicator for Plan of Money is a quick hit of insight into the economics of business work and everyday life. Every weekday in less than 10 minutes. Listen now to the Indicator podcast from NPR

1 (31s):
R

3 (34s):
We were not your typical kind of founders. I, I do think, especially for early stage investing, there is an element of pattern matching for investors and I was a, you know, a mompreneur and, and what's funny though is that being a mom actually made me uniquely qualified to start this business. But I would say my vehicle, a minivan was the only minivan in the parking lot of Sandhill Road. It was not easy.

0 (1m 16s):
Welcome to How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz and on the show today how home arts and crafts projects grew into a multimillion dollar business. When Sandra Olin launched KiwiCo now a top selling subscription box for kids Subscription boxes generate around $30 billion a year. That's globally. And by 2028 that number is expected to rise to around 73 billion. So not an insignificant amount of money.

0 (1m 57s):
The challenge though is there is a lot of competition for those dollars. Back around 2010 when subscription boxes were starting to get attention, brands like Birchbox, BarkBox and Blue Apron were the darlings of venture capital. The money fueled massive growth and massive expectations, which I should mention were not always achieved. Birchbox for example, which did samples of personal care products, was valued at half a billion dollars at its peak, but just 10 years on it sold to a private equity group for just $45 million. BarkBox, which sells pet supplies, went public at a $1.6 billion valuation.

0 (2m 43s):
But since 2020 it's lost about 90% of its value. And Blue Apron a meal kit brand was valued at $1.9 billion only to be bought out by a private equity group for around a hundred million dollars in September of 2023. But one company that's managed to weather the storm in the subscription box world is KiwiCo. And part of that has to do with what it makes and who its audience is. KiwiCo makes hands-on activities for kids around things like science and craft making. So for example, a kit that allows kids to make things like stomp rockets or solar powered cars or crafts that use pipe cleaners and Styrofoam balls and googly eyes.

0 (3m 29s):
Sandra Olin founded KiwiCo back in 2011 and the idea came from well being a mom herself who wanted more tactile and educational toys for her own kids. Sandra was actually on this show briefly back in September, 2020 in the thick of the pandemic when her supply could barely meet the demand. At the time, Cubi Co was inundated with orders from parents trying to keep their kids busy at home. And today KiwiCo is a leading subscription box for kids. Sandra grew up mostly in the Cincinnati area in the 1980s and nineties. Her parents immigrated to the US from Korea when she was a baby, so her dad could study for his PhD in physics.

3 (4m 16s):
When we immigrated to the US it was kind of the classic story of immigrating. My parents didn't have a lot of money. My dad was going to grad school, my mom sold her wedding ring when she moved to the us She had gone to a top university in Korea. She ended up being a seamstress for a bit when I was young. She ended up taking care of kids at our graduate student housing apartment. So she had four kids come for a couple bucks a day and essentially was doing childcare.

3 (4m 56s):
And later on she was the one who started our little family business. When I was in high school, we actually sold troll dolls in the mall at a kiosk. So it was a fad at the time. And so she actually took that on too.

0 (5m 15s):
The whole kiosk was just troll dolls.

3 (5m 17s):
Yeah, there were a lot of different

0 (5m 19s):
Kinds, but but like, I dunno, there troll of

3 (5m 21s):
Of troll dolls. There are little ones, there are bigger ones. They each had a theme, right? So a tennis troll doll might have a little tennis skirt and a tennis racket. Yeah, there was a Santa troll doll there. I I still to this day on my Christmas tree have a little Santa troll doll and a Mrs Clause.

0 (5m 42s):
So that this And was that, I mean, I mean it's a kiosk in the malls, you gotta pay some rent on it. But did they, did they do okay selling? I mean this is amazing 'cause your dad is like this sort of, you know, prestigious chemist and got, got his PhD and and then you also have a troll all side business. I love that.

3 (5m 59s):
Yeah, I mean it was, it was a fad. So I think that was a little bit problematic at some point. Fad spade. And so I remember when we had some excess inventory on the weekends, we would go to the flea market and we would sell the access inventory there on the weekends.

0 (6m 22s):
How long did that business last? It

3 (6m 23s):
Was about a, it was just a year or two.

0 (6m 25s):
And that was really your first experience in retail or in sales?

3 (6m 29s):
It was one of my first experiences in retail. I was, I had the good fortune of being able to name the business too. And so I, I ended up naming the like little kiosk wonderland and it was my first foray into children's products in a way.

0 (6m 46s):
I mean, I love it. You, you know, you can be really build a business out of anything. When you, when you eventually decided to go to college, you went to study chemical engineering just like, basically like your, like your dad I think,

3 (7m 0s):
Yeah. I had always really enjoyed science and math and when I got to college I was specifically interested in engineering fields that were a bit broader. So I dug into mechanical engineering and dug into chemical engineering. 'cause I thought that that would give me more options kind of coming outta school and figuring out what I wanted to do.

0 (7m 22s):
You went to Case Western Reserve and graduate with a degree in chemical engineering. And you are in, you were in Cleveland, but you went back to Cincinnati and, and worked at Procter and Gamble right outta school. Was your, did you think at the time your intention, like did you, did you imagine pursuing a career in, you know, at a place like p and g maybe becoming a lifer?

3 (7m 45s):
I went to p and g really thinking that one, the job that I was going to be doing was gonna be very interesting. So I was a products research engineer and essentially what you're doing is you're helping to develop new products and then you're working with marketing and brand and then you're working with customer. So you're creating products for those customers by really understanding more intimately kind of what the needs and what the desires are.

0 (8m 14s):
So I guess also at the time, it's not clear to me whether you were dating the person who had become your husband or you were already married. But I guess around sort of 1999 he was a, a medical student and, and his, he got, he got a residency in San Francisco. Were you guys married at the time or not? Not quite yet.

3 (8m 32s):
He had just got married, that's correct.

0 (8m 34s):
Oh wow. So you got married relatively young. I mean

3 (8m 37s):
Fortunately it worked out, applied to

0 (8m 38s):
Some of your peers. Yeah. And, and you met your husband in college. I've

3 (8m 43s):
Met my husband at Case and yeah, he matched for his residency in the Bay Area and so we ended up moving to the west coast and it was the first, first time that I had been to the West Coast. And it was an interesting experience going from Procter and Gamble then to the Bay area where it was the height of the first.com boom. So lots going on. Yeah, lots of small companies starting. And so I ended up securing a job at a small startup. So going from Proctor and Gamble to the small startup was a very, very, very different experience.

3 (9m 25s):
I remember asking, I was going to a conference and I was asking how do I get business cards? And they basically gave me some card stock and a printer right. And pointed to it and they're like, there you go. You get to design your business cards and print 'em out. So pretty different from, from being at p and g. And

0 (9m 42s):
By the way, what did they do?

3 (9m 43s):
They did online content management. Hmm.

0 (9m 47s):
Alright. So, so we're, and I know I'm gonna fast forward just, just for a moment here, but I know that o over the next several years, you, you were exposed to like a ton of different experiences. 'cause you, I think you went to work at, at another startup, you applied to business school and, and you went there, you got, you got your MB at Harvard and then you moved out west to work for, for PayPal and then eBay and all the while, I mean you were sort of working your way up to sort of more and more senior positions. So I guess by around 2008, 2009, you became the head of the fashion business at eBay.

3 (10m 22s):
That's right.

0 (10m 22s):
And, and, and so what did that mean? I mean, you were in, in charge, like what, what did you specifically do there?

3 (10m 29s):
Yeah, it was about a 2 billion dollar business and I was the general manager for the fashion business. So basically figuring out kind of the, the path and the strategy forward, what we're going to do to grow this business. And then I ended up hiring out the team and figuring out the different types of programmatic initiatives that we were gonna pursue in order to, to grow that business.

0 (10m 54s):
Alright. So you're at eBay and I, I guess also around that time or during that time you became a mom?

3 (11m 3s):
So I had my first child when I was at PayPal. And then I had my second child when I was at eBay. And at that time actually as I was thinking about leaving and had an, one of my classmates from business school who was an in venture capital reached out and said they had an idea around a fashion related startup. And given my background in fashion at eBay, it could be a really, really great opportunity for me to come on board, be a founding CEO, and pursue this nugget of an idea that they had. So as I left eBay, I actually looked at that pretty seriously.

3 (11m 48s):
Ended up looking at pulling together a founding team, pitching that business and then ultimately decided not to do it. But I think what that gave me is once I did actually start to make the decision to pursue KiwiCo as a business, I had this under my belt, this experience in basically pitching a startup in order to try to secure capital. And so that was actually really valuable experience.

0 (12m 16s):
Tell me a little bit more about the idea for that startup.

3 (12m 19s):
The idea behind the startup was basically to get feedback on your clothing, on your outfits, on your style. And so you would upload photos and then kind of get feedback. People could tell you what they thought of it, they could give you suggestions on how to accessorize it, et cetera. And so it was a very kind of social fashion getting advice and styling type of app with the thought that you could hopefully monetize off of those suggestions down the road.

0 (12m 56s):
Hmm. And, and meanwhile, you're no longer at this point at, at eBay and your kids are obviously still pretty young at the time. And I guess, I guess you start to realize that that not only do you wanna spend more time with them, but you wanna start doing more things with them at home like, like projects like arts and like arts and crafts and and things like that.

3 (13m 19s):
Yeah, the reason behind that is because I wanted them to basically exercise their creativity and feel like they could kind of be makers. And I think part of it came from the fact that when I was growing up, my mom, you know, she had a few kids who she took care of. And then for me, this is a very distinct memory, just kind of throughout my childhood, my mom is, she would kind of set up these different projects for us. So we would, okay, this dates me, but way back when my, you know, McDonald's used to have Styrofoam containers, so we would make like purses out of those.

3 (14m 1s):
We would do a bunch of origami, we would make potato prints and we would take food scraps and make, you know, sweet potato plants or or onion plants. So I remember these really fond memories of, of making and creating with my mom. She was kind of a MacGyver of sorts too. So I wanted this experience with my kids and for my kids.

0 (14m 26s):
Your mom looked after kids when you were growing up? Like, like a sort of a informal daycare?

3 (14m 31s):
Yeah, kind of like a childcare drop off situation. But she put a lot into it. Yeah,

0 (14m 40s):
You just, you know, you just triggered a memory of mine, which is when I was a kid, one of the coolest things my mom did was she, we would make these like televisions, we'd have a cardboard box and we'd, we'd cut two holes in the top corners and then we would insert paper towel tubes in them and paste. I don't know how we did it. Maybe we, we we pasted like paper on the paper towel tubes and we would draw scenes on on different and then you'd roll it on the top and you know, it would just slide and you'd have another image and it was, it was like magic.

3 (15m 15s):
Yeah, I mean absolutely. I think, I mean look at what you do now, right? Yeah. I just had really great memories of that. I really wanted my kids to have exposure to kind of that that hands-on making. I wanted them to feel kind of empowered to be able to create. And I started pulling together different materials and different ideas and I found that I was taking quite a bit of time and so I was like, okay, I need to amortize my time. I started to invite my friends, their kids over for play dates and they would make and create with my kids.

0 (15m 53s):
What were you making with them?

3 (15m 54s):
Yeah, I mean they were simple projects. We were creating different like Halloween luminaries, so basically using glue and tissue and then figuring out how it's the, that kind of, it interacted once you actually put a tea light in this, in this jar, that type of thing. We were doing a lot of kind of, you know, experimentation and, and chemistry kind of traditional ubble. So the whole cornstarch and water concoction

0 (16m 28s):
Made that many times. Yeah,

3 (16m 29s):
I mean it's a little messy but it's so much fun. And also just kind of setting up kind of trays with salt vinegar, oil and see what happens when you mix different things. Baking soda. Yeah, and one mom, I remember during one of these play dates came over was like, Sandra, you should start a business around this. And so then I started to think maybe there's something here

0 (17m 1s):
When we come back in just a moment. Sandra tests her idea in front of two very demanding audiences. A home garage full of kids and an office full of investors. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This.

NetSuite (17m 25s):
Your business was humming but now you're falling behind. Teams buried in manual work, taking forever to close the books. Getting one source of truth is like pulling teeth. If this is you, you should know these three numbers. 36,000, 25, 1 30 6,000. That's the number of businesses which have upgraded to NetSuite by Oracle 25 NetSuite turns 25 this year. That's 25 years of helping businesses do more with less close their books in days, not weeks. And drive down costs. One, because your business is one of a kind. So you get a customized solution for all of your KPIs in one efficient system with one source of truth, manage risk, get reliable forecasts and improve margins. Everything you need all in one place right now. Download NetSuite's popular KPI checklist designed to give you consistently excellent performance absolutely free at NetSuite dot com slash built. That's NetSuite dot com slash built to get your own KPI checklist NetSuite dot com slash built.

MasterClass (18m 44s):
If you know anything about me then you know I am generally the chef in my family. Not only has MasterClass helped me sharpen my cooking skills, but I've been learning a lot about the way food impacts our overall health and wellness. Recently I took a class with New York Times bestselling author Michael Pollen, who for years has been researching our food systems and the way humans eat. I learned a lot about how our human bodies interact with everyday foods and the kinds of foods that my family and I should eat to be as healthy as we can be. If you know someone who wants to learn something new or improve a skill, MasterClass would be a meaningful gift this season because with MasterClass you can learn from the best to become your best memberships. Start at $120 a year for Unlimited access to one-on-one classes with over 180 MasterClass instructors. Learn how to negotiate a raise with Chris Voss or manage your relationships with Esther Perel this holiday season. Give one annual membership and get one free at MasterClass dot com slash built. Right now you can get two memberships for the price of one at MasterClass dot com slash built MasterClass dot com slash built offer terms apply.

4 (20m 3s):
This is Thomas Silver from St. Petersburg, Florida. My favorite How I Built This has got to be Tate's Bake Shop. Kathleen King is quite an individual. She's every entrepreneur's dream. Her whole story of starting with a roadside stand and building a behemoth in the baking industry. Also her perseverance in times of almost complete failure, she rebuilt her business and continued even in rough times. Thank you so much for your show. It is awe-inspiring and keeps me motivated.

0 (20m 42s):
If you wanna share your favorite episode of How I Built This record a short voice memo on your phone telling us your name, where you're from, what your favorite episode is, and why a lot like the voice memo you just heard. And email it to us at HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com and we'll share your favorites right here in the ad breaks in future episodes. And thanks so much. We love you guys. You are the best. And now back to the show. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's around 2010 and Sandra's crafts projects for kids are getting so popular that she's thinking of turning them into a business.

3 (21m 25s):
I talked it over with my husband because certainly if we're gonna, if I was gonna pursue this as a potential business, there would be implications for our family, for our income. And then I started to ask kind of trusted advisors friends. And so I started to get feedback around it and it seemed like there was a there there and then would do focus groups in my living room. And it was really important to me that I didn't do focus groups just with my close friends, but really try to bring in friends of friends, people who I didn't know to get feedback.

0 (22m 5s):
And And was it just you initially?

3 (22m 8s):
It was me initially and then ended up bringing on board a co-founder who was a bit more technical, had been in product management. And then I also brought on a technical co-founder, somebody who had been actually a founder of PayPal, was the first engineer at YouTube. And so at first there were kind of the three of us

0 (22m 34s):
And this, this is, I mean, what was the pitch to them? Like how did you describe what you wanted to do at that

3 (22m 41s):
Point? So essentially what we wanted to do is we wanted to design and deliver hands-on projects to kids through a direct to consumer kind of e-commerce experience.

0 (22m 54s):
So before we sort of dive deep into the, the beginnings of how you were gonna make this work, tell me about the name was Kiwi, just like the fruit, like you like kiwi

3 (23m 8s):
Actually it's, it's the animal, not the fruit. I really like the idea of an animal and so the original name was Kiwi Crate. My husband and I had gone to New Zealand actually before we had kids, but we had brought back a stuffed kiwi bird which my kids had adopted and kind of went on adventures with them. And I think there was something attractive also about the idea of alliteration with the crate too. And so we landed on, on Kiwi crate

0 (23m 38s):
And this was around the time, I mean 2011 when you had subscription boxes starting to really not necessarily take off but, but I mean Birchbox, which was one of the earlier ones I think launched in 2010. And were you looking at things like Birchbox and thinking this is gonna be huge, this model is gonna be huge?

3 (24m 1s):
I mean we certainly looked at Birchbox once we settle in on a model ourselves, but really we were trying to start with kind of the customer need along with what it was that we were delivering first. And so we, we really like the idea of these boxes kind of being centered around different themes. So with materials and inspiration. So if you wanna learn about colors, there's two or three hands-on activities about colors. If you wanna learn about, you know, farms, there's two or three or if you wanna learn about birds, there's two or three of these projects. And then the other part of it is that we're thinking about it as a program. You know, part of what we do is incredibly kind of fun and and delightful, but part of it is about learning too.

3 (24m 48s):
And so the idea of subscription, the idea of something coming every month and having a child's name on it was really worked well for us.

0 (24m 59s):
Alright, so now, I mean you have this pretty experienced founding team and by the way, were your co-founders also al also women or

3 (25m 8s):
One woman and one male.

0 (25m 10s):
So strong team, but we're definitely working on something, you know, i I mean counter not counterintuitive, but certainly different, right? Especially where you were, 'cause you were based in Silicon Valley where everybody was starting apps and social media networks and here you were trying to create a consumer products company. That was like a hard good,

3 (25m 33s):
I think we were pretty fortunate at the time that e-commerce companies were getting funded. And to your point, there were subscription e-commerce companies that were getting funded at the time. So we were able to get our foot in the door. I think we also had a network too. I think the experience that we collectively had at PayPal at eBay, one of the co-founders had been at Yahoo before we had a network. So we were really, really lucky in that we were able to at least secure meetings with potential investors and we knew that it was important to get some capital because it was a pretty capital intensive business because we were dealing with a physical product and we knew we had to buy the inventory upfront and then ship out to customers.

3 (26m 27s):
But it was not easy. It was, we had a lot of meetings and we were not your typical kind of founders. I, I do think especially for early stage investing, there is an element of pattern matching for investors and there is a little bit of a lens where I was a, you know, a mompreneur and, and what's funny though is that being a mom actually made me uniquely qualified to, to run and to to start this business. But I would say my vehicle a minivan was the only minivan in the parking lots of, of Sandhill Road.

3 (27m 12s):
And so it was hard. I mean I think we did, I don't know, somewhere between 30 to to 40 different meetings with different folks. And even though they could see it or they would ask their wives what they thought of the concept, we weren't necessarily kind of securing the funding until we got to some folks who did actually see the potential and the promise around the, the idea. But we were kind of through a lot of kind of pounding the pavement, we were able to secure our seed round of financing and we closed that in the summer of 2011.

0 (28m 4s):
Let's talk about the idea itself. How did you come up with what those early boxes were going to be, for example?

3 (28m 11s):
So we did a ton of kind of testing with kids and so we started off 2011 was spent mostly in my garage. And so we would have kids kind of descend on the garage and we would put different projects and different materials in front of them. Yeah, we would see what would work for them. I mean it ranged from materials not working because maybe clay was not malleable enough for small hands to projects being just being too complicated. And so we learned a ton through iteration and then we landed on kind of the first three crates or the first three boxes that we wanted to send out. And then we started to source against those.

0 (28m 53s):
Tell me specifically what you were, what, what you were thinking of. I mean, you would give kids clay or you know, glue and construction paper, but what but the, that wasn't what the box would be. I have to assume the box of instructions on creating a specific project, right? That was the idea.

3 (29m 11s):
Right. So we would provide materials and we would provide the instructions. So the very first crate that we sent out was centered around color. And so what we included in this crate was first kind of a, a frame or a mat for a picture along with contact paper and a bunch of different kind of pieces and, and colors of squares of tissue paper. And so they're able to make creations and then put that up against the light and see how the tissue paper squares actually interacted with each other in terms of color mixing. Another project that we had was a little tote bag, so a canvas tote bag.

3 (29m 52s):
You would take the tissue paper squares and actually wet them and dye your tote bag. And again, what you would do is you'd have this amazing creation as well as a lesson in color mixing too, because we knew the consumer or the parent would not necessarily buy into the idea of here's a pot of yellow paint and here's a pot of red paint and then you mix those to make orange because that was a typical way of learning color mixing. We had to go at it at with a unique angle.

0 (30m 22s):
And so initially you didn't, I mean you weren't, in order to put these boxes together, you didn't have to go to like overseas factories to precut anything. I mean you could just go, go to like Michael's and get, I mean not literally you could just go somewhere like that or, or go to a, a wholesaler and just in the US and just get the supplies you needed and then you could just fill the boxes yourselves.

3 (30m 45s):
That's exactly right. In the beginning we knew that we did not have the, the volume to be able to go out to suppliers and so we were literally sourcing each individual item and sourcing that domestically to start. And again, that was a challenge for us because you could not put something together where somebody could look at it and be like, oh, I could just go to a, a Michael's to pick that up. So we needed to make sure that we were providing kind of that unique lens, additional content and giving something that, something that the people would be, you know, willing to buy.

0 (31m 26s):
Alright, so you get some funding by, you know, by the sort of fall of 2011. And, and when were you planning to, to launch?

3 (31m 39s):
We launched in October of 2011. It started right off the bat as a subscription product. We were launching essentially saying that you get a new experience and new box every month. And we were gearing it for kids ages, kind of three to seven initially. So we had kind of a lineup of boxes ready to go, but at the time, the way that our model actually worked is that everybody was getting the same box in a given month. So it was important for us to kind of order up to try to deplete that inventory in that month and then order up again because we needed to have a certain amount of scale and volume in order to make the economics of the box actually work.

3 (32m 25s):
And obviously we were trying to make sure that we were getting rid of inventory as well.

0 (32m 31s):
As you kind of began the process to launch, how did you, I mean, how did you kind of spread the word? Did you just initially tell your friends to go on and order it or, or how, how, how did you Yeah, how'd you do

3 (32m 44s):
It? So before we launched, we actually tried to start to build up an email base of people who might be interested. So we had gone out to the Baker Fair in San Mateo and the Maker Fair attracts a lot of people. So I think tens of thousands of people and these are all people who are interested in engineering and making and in creating. And so we had a booth there and then we would get their email addresses. So we did that. We went to arts and wine festivals. We were like in downtown Palo Alto collecting email addresses as well. And those were, I would say, some of the key ways.

3 (33m 27s):
And then we started doing some online advertising, but in the beginning it really did not work that well. 'cause people weren't looking for kids' subscription boxes Yeah. Or even necessarily science projects online at that point.

0 (33m 43s):
So at, as you kind of launched the company and, and you know, in your first kind of year, I have to imagine it was slow, it was slow going,

3 (33m 53s):
It was slow, but we saw some decent traction in the very beginning actually. And so after we launched our Q4 numbers came back pretty good, kind of relative to what we thought. And what ended up happening is that we had a number of, of potential investors reach out to us and we decided to do a preemptive series a raise. And it was debated at the time, like, should we do this or should we wait and potentially try to go for a higher evaluation? And I remember that one of our executives who had gone to the Stanford Business School, she's, she was basically like, hey, one of the lessons that I learned in one of my cases in business school was when dinner is served you eat.

3 (34m 40s):
And so we ended up saying, okay, we have the opportunity to raise this capital right now, we should go ahead and do it. And so we went ahead and we raised that series A and that was for $5 million,

0 (34m 52s):
Which is, which is great obviously. But I, I think still, I mean as you mentioned, the business was growing slowly at this point and maybe even too slowly. And from what I've gathered, I mean I I know was early days, but you guys were, were worried that things weren't moving quickly enough, right?

3 (35m 10s):
Yeah. So I think again, we were getting some traction, but when you kind of took a look at it from the lens of what we were hoping for, kind of our aspirations as well as the fact that we had taken venture financing and their expectations on certain milestones and growth, we just weren't there. Yeah, we had hit on some product market fit, but not to the level that we really needed to make this a really standout, viable, healthy growing business. And so we knew that we either needed to pivot hard into something new or add on other areas of business in order to get the business to where we wanted it to be.

0 (35m 54s):
When don't we come back in just a moment, has Sandra repositions the business and why it's hard selling to kids because the real customers are their parents? Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

Shopify (36m 11s):
Shopify's already taken the cash register online helping millions sell billions around the world. But did you know that Shopify can do the same thing at your retail store? Give your point of sale system a serious upgrade with Shopify. With Shopify, you get a powerhouse selling partner that effortlessly unites your in-person and online sales into one source of truth. Track every sale across your business in one place and know exactly what's in stock. Plus Shopify's award-winning help is there to support your success every step of the way. Do retail right with Shopify. Sign up for a $1 per month trial period at shopify.com/built all lowercase. Go to shopify.com/built to take your retail business to the next level today, shopify.com/built.

Wow In The World (37m 11s):
As the host and creator of How I Built This, I get the opportunity to share inspiring stories about companies creating amazing innovations. What you might not know is that I also co-host another podcast also about innovation, but designed for the curious kids in your life on wow in the world. My co-host, Mindy Thomas and I dive into scientific innovations that wow both kids and their grownups. Like about how a shade of white paint could help fight climate change or how spider silk could be a key component to reducing plastic consumption. Invite the curious kids in your life to experience the wows of innovation and new technologies with wow in the world. The number one podcast for curious kids and their grownups. Listen to wow in the world early and ad free Right now on Wondery Plus.

0 (38m 10s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's around 2014 and Sandra hasn't quite figured out the right market fit for her kiwi crates. So with money running out, she makes a risky decision to expand.

3 (38m 26s):
So in May, 2014, we decided to launch three new lines. So we launched two lines for older kids, tinker Crate and Doodle Crate Center around science and engineering and around art and design. And then align for, for younger kids. So kind of preschool age with Qurate. And then we made Kiwi crate all about early elementary school age kids. And the idea was, okay, if things were to work out, we would double down on one of those lines come holiday of 2014. So we launched in October of 2014, all three lines they started to sell out. So we were scrambling, we were sourcing domestically and a team that was set up for one line.

3 (39m 12s):
All of a sudden it was stretched across now four lines. But we ended up in a place kind of a a, we had a good problem at that point, which is okay, we knew we wanted to double down on all three lines.

0 (39m 28s):
Yeah, and I, I read that sort of by summer maybe of 2014, you were down to a couple more months of runway before the money would run out.

3 (39m 39s):
Yeah, so it, when we launched the three new lines, so kind of that October timeframe, we weren't in completely dire straits because we knew with the holidays, since we are a pre-day seasonal business, we would see an influx of cash. But we were counting, we were really counting on that. And the other thing that was going on is we had decided to fundraise like we needed capital. And so I was out on the road I would say 75, 80% of the time trying to close an extension to our Series A and that was a pretty tough time to be raising that money. Yeah. And then fortunately we were able to close the extension to the series A in January of 2015.

3 (40m 24s):
So we tacked on a little worth of $2 million. So we were really fortunate the subscriptions that we saw acquired over those first three months across those lines was 10 x what we had seen for Kiwi crate originally. And also, kind of to put this in perspective, in 2015 after we made the shift and we launched these three additional alliance, we ended up shipping out our 1000000th crate. But then over the next four years we shipped out more than 20 million crates. So this ended up working out really well for us.

0 (41m 6s):
So what, what happened in, you know, when you launched those pro, how did you launch those products? What was the way that you reached people where, you know, you actually started to sell these boxes out? Yeah, I mean

3 (41m 18s):
At that point, again, we were lucky in that we had a community of, of folks who knew about Kiwi crate at the time. What was interesting about that particular launch is that it really paved the path for us to get to a place of being profitable. So if you look at that launch at the end of 2014 and you look at our first month of profitability in 2016, there's kind of this direct line from that. So that happened and then come to find out, right, that we were able to make our unit economics work better. So the majority of us households have more than one child.

3 (41m 59s):
And because now we had an expanded offering, we saw a number of shipments going out with more than one crate and we positioned shipping as free for the consumer, but obviously shipping is not free to us. And so the fact that we were able to then amortize shipping by sending out multiple crates to a given household was really important and ended up really helping us out from a profitability standpoint too,

0 (42m 26s):
At, at that point. Right. How did you find a place to, to make all this? I mean, what did you, did you have them made in Asia? Because we, we obviously we've done a lot of consumer products on the show and you know, if you're gonna make a solo stove, you find a factory in China, or if you're gonna make apparel and they're factories that do these things. But I, I can't imagine there, I mean there that many factories that were making what you were looking to be, you know, what you were looking for them to make.

3 (42m 51s):
So it was definitely a evolution in the very beginning. We were sourcing everything domestically. We actually had decided to run our operations internally. So the first two offices that we had were office and warehouse connected to one another because we wanted to be very nimble. Oh wow. We wanted to learn.

0 (43m 9s):
So you had people doing all the fulfillment on site.

3 (43m 13s):
Yeah. And so we were learning a lot as we were going. And so we would source domestically, we would kit internally and then we would take those kind of components and then put them into bigger boxes in order to ship out. So imagine if we had a set of pipe cleaners, those pipe cleaner cleaners would have to go into a package and then that package of pipe cleaners would be combined with a set of beads and some glue or whatever else and then be put into a bigger crate. So all of that happened internally at first. And then as we started to scale, we were able to source individual materials and components increasingly overseas. And then we got to a point where we were able to source everything overseas and then also kit everything overseas.

3 (43m 59s):
So what ended up getting boated over was the crate itself. So the box is what ended up getting voted over. So you can also imagine kind of the evolution of our warehouse too. A lot of bits and pieces to something that looked a lot more organized.

0 (44m 13s):
Yeah. So I mean as, as the, and and this is really a turning point for the business. I mean this really, I guess, would lead you guys to start to hit profitability around 2016. That's

3 (44m 24s):
Right. It really was a very, very important inflection point for the business. And we had always been a disciplined kind of organization. And so the fact that we were able to hit on something that actually resonated with the market and then to be able to raise that amount of capital, we were on a road where we basically ended up in a position where we didn't have to raise any more money. And so I think for a company like ours, it's pretty unusual to have only raised a little bit over $10 million in equity financing, but we got to a place where we could be self-sustaining.

0 (45m 7s):
Yeah. So the company continued to grow. And it, it's interesting 'cause you're not marketing to children 'cause they're not your customers. They're, I mean, they're not buying your products, it's their parents, grandparents or, you know, family members gifting products or whatever. So I, I have to assume that, you know, when kids, when things are marketed to kids, it's just like, here's a toy or here's here's cereal or whatever it might be. But I think with a product like this, there has to be an implied added like sort of value add. It's not just like, buy this thing and you have a cool shirt. It's like, buy this thing and your kid will be smarter. Was that kind of the underlying message in, in the marketing campaigns?

3 (45m 52s):
I think we tested a lot of different types of marketing messages, but most of what we were trying to get across is this idea of a new discovery or a new adventure, a new experience. And I think, you know, as parents we're trying to make sure that our kids are kind of ready for the future. So let's say that they were playing with a rocket in a crate about space, so they're launching this rocket and then what we would do is we would overlay an illustration of kind of an astronaut on top of it, right? Or we would have a crate where a kid would be creating a xylophone and learning about sound and how is it that sound waves are traveling and that type of thing.

3 (46m 36s):
And so we would showcase the kid kind of playing this xylophone, but then around them we would create kind of an illustration of them being a sound engineer upright. Yeah. And so kind of like really conveying the idea of, you know, this is opening up your kids' imagination and possibilities and who knows what they can do down the road.

0 (46m 55s):
I'm, I'm curious, did parents respond to that? I mean, I, I always, my instinct is, is to think, yeah, they do, but then there's all this data around, you know, sort of, I don't know, companies that are buy one, give one away to somebody poor or, you know, have these sort of transparency standards. And, and, and ultimately all the data shows consumers don't care. They just want a good price ultimately on a consumer product. Did you have like, feedback from your campaigns that parents were responding to this idea that their kids could get smarter or could get, you know, could be inspired to in order to, to do more creative things? Or, or, or did that not really matter?

3 (47m 36s):
Yeah, I mean, I think parents do care and I think that the best evidence that of that is through how the company has done, you know, we've, we've shipped out over 50 million crates at this point because that message actually does resonate. Yeah. You know, there's another kind of anecdote that I would say about, about parents these days. Like, I think that they really want their kids to grow up to be productive citizens and they worry about the state of the world. There are a lot of things that, that we're grappling with. And even when you ask kids, 'cause we have done this, we say to kids like, what are you worried about?

3 (48m 16s):
And they realize there are a lot of challenges too, right? They're like, ah, like global warming or gender inequality, you know, oceanic conservation. I mean, these are kids who are like 7, 8, 9, 10. We ask them. And so what you can do at this point is really like try to get them to think like innovators, to encourage kids to think about the possibilities and feel like they can actually make a difference that they have agency and the ability to create change.

0 (48m 51s):
Yeah. So let's talk about kids and technology, right? Essentially what you offer is analog, which I love. I love that it's tactile. It, you know, requires kids to use their hands to build something, whether it's like a solar powered robot or a pencil sharpener or you know, a desk lamp. They have to build it. It's, but the, the battle between, like, like as a parent myself as you know, I'm a parent and our listeners know the battle to get my kids to do tactile things is, is challenging because I'm fighting against digital things.

0 (49m 33s):
And that's, that's no joke. I mean, I wonder whether you see any kind of challenge, you know, you, you're seeing the challenges with respect to what you offer and what kids want

3 (49m 48s):
In general. I think like we have a bar when it comes to the experiences that we design, the expectation is that it is incredibly fun so that when the crate arrives at the doorstep or in the mailbox every month, it's something that a child really wants to tear into. And that is a really high bar, especially given everything else that they could engage in. And in fact, there's a study where they had kids actually try to do something digitally first and then replicate that in the physical world. And they had a really hard time doing it. But the kids who started with the physical world first and then take it digitally, they were able to actually do it.

3 (50m 34s):
So there's absolutely something about the materiality and hopefully we're able to maintain a kid's kind of interest by making sure that the experience that we provide are really fun and delightful. So that is a challenge that we have, but it's a challenge that we've been grappling with for a while now and we're kind of up for that.

0 (50m 54s):
How do you imagine the sort of the future of KiwiCo? I mean, you've now been in business for over a decade and, and obviously have done well. I mean, is this a, in the future, a publicly traded company? Is it acquired by a bigger company? What do you think?

3 (51m 18s):
I think what I'm posed with that question, I think more about kind of wanting to become a household brand. I really admire companies like Allego for example, and what they've been able to do with the brick. And there are so many different ways in which they're serving kids and and families. And so I, I kind of think about it from that perspective. Like, I feel like of course I take my fiduciary responsibility very seriously. I want a great exit for everybody involved, but the thing that I wanna focus on most is building that brand.

0 (51m 52s):
When you think Sandra about the journey that you've taken starting this company in 2011 and where, where we are now, you know, 12 years later, how much of, of the success of, of the brand do you attribute to, to the work and the strategy? And how much do you think just has to do with the luck of, of, I don't know, the industry that, you know, the, the, the timing? Like what do, what do you think?

3 (52m 17s):
Yeah, certainly when I think about the, the cards that I've been dealt, I consider myself to be very, very lucky in many ways. But I also think that sometimes luck implies a level of like passivity or, or kind of chance. And I'm a big believer in the notion of making things happen versus things happening to me. You can be really active in creating your luck and that luck kind of creates opportunities and then there's a ton of hard work that actually goes into chasing down those opportunities. So I would say a combination of both.

0 (53m 3s):
That's Sandra Olin founder and CEO of KiwiCo, by the way. While their crates are mostly designed for kids, they do have some activities for teens and even adults. You can make your own ukulele an articulated desk lamp, an electric pencil sharpener, and one that sounds especially promising your own vortex lab. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And as always, it's free. This episode was produced by Kerry Thompson with music composed by Runte Arablouei. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Carla Estevez.

0 (53m 46s):
Our audio engineers were Robert Rodriguez and Josephine Neni. Our production staff also includes Casey Herman, Alex Chung, Chris Masini, Carla Esteve, JC Howard, Sam Paulson, John Isabella, Catherine Cipher, and Malia Aguello. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. If you like How I Built This, you can listen early and ad free Right now by joining Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts. Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon Music. Before you go, tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.