Amazon Music (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this Early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

1 (9s):
When you leave home, can you ever really go back? Soccer legend, Leo Macy and I both left Argentina As kids.

2 (17s):
You know, you're that piece of a puzzle that doesn't fit anywhere

1 (20s):
To so many immigrants is a way to reconnect.

NPR and Fudo Studios (23s):
Listen to the last Cop in the embedded podcast feed to hear the latest collaboration from NPR and Fudo Studios.

0 (30s):
Hey there, it's guy here. And I wanna wish all of you a very happy New Year. And if you happen to be spending a bit of extra time with family and friends this holiday season, you will definitely relate to this episode from the archives. It's the story of Joel Clark and Kodiak Cakes, and almost every member of Joel's immediate family had something to do with the brand. His mom came up with the recipe, his brother started the company. Even his dad worked for him for a while. Anyway, it's a crate story about family and food with a fair amount of failure and recovery baked in. It first ran about two years ago, and I think you'll love this one.

4 (1m 12s):
So I put together a promotion at Safeway, okay? And we were gonna offer a dollar off, right? Hmm. And suddenly I got a call one day from my distributor rep and he's like, Joel, he's like, look, some, some mistake happened and your promotion got doubled in the system and it was, it showed $2 off on the shelf. Well, that's a huge discount. That was a deep, deep discount. So he is like, so I, I turned it off before it got worse and I was like, oh man, you gotta be kidding me. This is another near death experience that we're gonna be going through. And I, when I found out, you know, the bill was 50 grand man, I was like, what am I gonna do?

0 (1m 57s):
Welcome to How I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealist, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Ross, and on the show today how Joel Clark ran into every roadblock you can think of on his way to building Kodiak Cakes, a pancake mix based on his mom's recipe that he grew into a 200 million brand. There are crucial moments in the lifespan of a business that almost every entrepreneur encounters moments.

0 (2m 41s):
When you face a hard decision. When does your side hustle become your main hustle? What's the right moment to make a pivot in your business model? Or when is it time to give up? Learn from your mistakes and start over. This last question is probably the hardest because in many cases it makes sense to cut your losses and move on. If Mark Constantine hadn't shut down his failing mail order cosmetics company, he probably wouldn't have started Lush. If Topo Oana didn't give up on his failing e-commerce site, selling backyard grills, he might never have built Calendly, which got valued at over a billion dollars.

0 (3m 26s):
And if Stewart Butterfield had stuck with his money losing video game concept glitch, slack may never have become a business. But then there is Joel Clark, co-founder of Kodiak Cakes. The brand is best known for its pancake mix. And for more than 15 years, Joel struggled to make his business sustainable. Sometimes, as you will hear, to the point of Folley, at one critical juncture, he launched a second business selling cookies just to keep Kodiak cakes alive. But when the cookie store failed, it almost took Kodiak cakes down with it. In 2007, Joel thought he could fund the business by investing in a piece of real estate, but months later, the real estate market collapsed.

0 (4m 14s):
He tried to kickstart sales by launching a product promotion, but it ended up costing him thousands of dollars and to help pay the bills. He even took a job running a home healthcare company for a while. To be perfectly blunt, Joel had every reason to give up during a 15 year long streak of failures and struggle. And yet something kept pulling him back. He really believed that his whole grain pancake mix could really take off. And the thing is, his hunch was correct because today Kodiak Cakes is one of the best selling pancake mixes in America.

0 (4m 54s):
And the company is approaching $200 million in annual revenue. And the thing that got him there, yes, perseverance and yes, luck, but also protein, specifically kodiak's protein power cakes that happened to enter the scene just as a high protein diet craze was sweeping the country. And it all started as a simple pancake mix created by Joel's mom. Joel grew up in Salt Lake City in the 1970s. He was the youngest of five kids. His dad taught religious classes for the church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, better known as the Mormon Church. And his mom took care of the house where she made sure there was never any junk food lying around.

4 (5m 41s):
I remember my friends would come over to our house and it was always like, let's look for food. You know, you're always, that's what you do when you're growing up. Well, you go to my house and you open up the fridge and it's full of lettuce and vegetables. And my sister used to say, everything we eat is green and brown. So I always loved going to my friend's houses cuz they always had all that stuff, you

0 (6m 2s):
Know, you could open up their pantry and they had like gummy bears and oh man, jelly things and Doritos. Doritos. I was at Oreos, I got my friend's houses. They had like pantries full of junk. I go back to my house, we had like wheat germ. I was there. Same house.

4 (6m 16s):
Yes. Oh, that's funny, man.

0 (6m 19s):
So what kind of things would your, would your mom make you eat

4 (6m 22s):
Every night? We had a salad every night and I remember her saying, you know, you should eat a yellow vegetable every day. So we had a lot of carrots or squash and things like that. And then she baked a lot of bread, like whole wheat bread. We had a wheat grinder in the garage. We didn't have a lot of white flour and white sugar, so, you know, everything we ate was clean and whole and real. And I, I remember her kind of saying that like, it's about eating real food.

0 (6m 46s):
Hmm. I guess her whole wheat pancakes were like a family kind of favorite and then so good that what other people would ask for them when they would come over.

4 (6m 58s):
Yeah. We, well, we loved the whole wheat pancake recipe, so, you know, I have fond memories of waking up to the smell of that. Like, that was an exciting morning. It's like, oh yes, mom's making pancakes. And they were really good. She'd beat the egg whites, like in a, you know, separate those, beat them up so they're nice and fluffy white, fold those into the batter. And it really was a great breakfast. I mean, that was an awesome meal. All whole, whole wheat freshly ground.

0 (7m 23s):
She would grind the wheat for her pancake mix.

4 (7m 26s):
Yeah. We had a wheat grinder in the garage and that thing was turned on a lot. It was pretty loud, you could hear it, you know,

0 (7m 32s):
You just buy like un milled grains of wheat and then Yeah. Make flour. Yeah.

4 (7m 37s):
You just, yep. The, the whole wheat throw it in the grinder and it would churn out. This freshly ground flour is awesome. And so, yeah, our friends would come over once in a while and have those, I remember like my brother's friend having breakfast with us a couple times, and I mean, I think it was, some of the neighbors probably asked, I also think it was my mom kind of feeling like there's a need out there for more real food products made with whole grains and there's probably an opportunity to sell this, this recipe as a mix.

0 (8m 7s):
So she was making this pancake mix and decided, hey, I maybe I'll like package this up and try to sell it door to door.

4 (8m 14s):
Right? She would shop at natural food stores looking for real ingredients, real food, you know, raw sugar, things like that. And the mainstream supermarkets really just didn't have a lot of options. You know, the, the whole grains were, they were out there, but they just weren't that common. And so, you know, I think that's how she, why she thought of that this would be a good niche. But I, I think she also thought there's probably an maybe she could make some extra money doing it. Hmm. Because money was tight for us growing up. It was very tight.

0 (8m 43s):
So she basically said, look, I'll package this up, and how would she sell it?

4 (8m 48s):
So she started packaging these things up and I think the initial plan was, Hey, let's try selling these to neighbors and see how it works. See if people like it.

0 (8m 57s):
And what'd she call it, by the way?

4 (8m 59s):
That's a good question. I don't know if we even had a name for

0 (9m 2s):
It. Yeah, what's your mom's name?

4 (9m 3s):
Her name's Penny. Her

0 (9m 5s):
Name's Penny. She, she didn't call 'em penny cakes. Yeah. What

4 (9m 9s):
She, she

0 (9m 10s):
Was blessed with a name like Penny to, to, to be used in marketing and advertising and she didn't use her own name.

4 (9m 16s):
Seriously? Yeah. Penny cakes, man. God, we should have done that.

0 (9m 20s):
So, so you're she's going, she's putting them on like brown paper bags. Like lunch bags.

4 (9m 24s):
Totally. So she packed all these brown paper lunch sacks on the counter with the freshly ground wheat dried milk, and you know, the other ingredients, salt baking powder, stuff like that. And then she hand wrote on these bags, like my mom has the most incredible handwriting, and she literally hand wrote on every bag Wow. How to make it.

0 (9m 44s):
She hand wrote every single bag, the, the construction. Wow. Yep. All right. So you got all these bags.

4 (9m 50s):
Yeah. So she came to me and she said, Hey. And I remember her kind of, you know, doing this project, and I don't remember how it, how it sort of came about that I was going to do it. I just remember like, we were having this conversation, it's like, Hey, you, you know, do you want to go sell these? So we, we loaded up this, I had this old red wagon, we put all these bags in there and I went out and started knocking doors in the neighborhood and asking people if they wanted to buy or buy the pancake mix.

0 (10m 19s):
And by the way, how much, do you remember how much you sold these bags for?

4 (10m 22s):
You know, I wanna say $5. Hmm. But that sounds a little expensive for 1982, you know,

0 (10m 29s):
But for hand milled wheat, that's pretty great. Yeah, true. And, and so you, this is 1982. How old were you at the time?

4 (10m 35s):
I was eight. You

0 (10m 36s):
Were eight. So and so I'm imagining you pulling a red wagon full of pancake mix. And did the neighbors buy them?

4 (10m 45s):
They totally did. I remember I knocked on, so we lived in a cul-de-sac and I went around to all the neighbors in the cul-de-sac and I, and I think everybody bought one, you know, I mean, I'm this eight year old kid Right. And I was actually pretty outgoing as a kid. Like, that didn't bother me at all. Yeah. And so, you know, I remember doing that and then going around to some of the other neighbors outside of our street, and I ended up selling all the bags that we had.

0 (11m 6s):
Hmm. Alright. So now there's a, a viable business. And so does this become like a family affair at this point?

4 (11m 13s):
No. So, you know, what happened was, so we, you know, we sold all the mixes in the wagon. Yep. But then we didn't keep going with it, you know, we kind of just let it die out and, and, and didn't keep pursuing it at that

0 (11m 24s):
Time. And that was it. That was the end. Yeah.

4 (11m 26s):
Okay. That

0 (11m 27s):
Was it. All right. So you go on, start your life, get through school. And did you do a mission when you were 18?

4 (11m 35s):
Yeah, I did. I left when I was 19, just like a month after my birthday. Yep. And yeah, I did. I went to Australia.

0 (11m 42s):
Wow. That's pretty great.

4 (11m 44s):
I was stoked about that. Yeah. That was, I was like, perfect. Right. Yeah. Go foreign. Didn't have to learn a language.

0 (11m 49s):
And you know, we, we've talked about this on the show a little bit, and I, I love this example. People who listen to the show know about this young Mormons who go on missions, I think are very well prepared to become entrepreneurs because you're knocking on a thousand doors a week, and 900 of them are just like slamming in your face and you still have to be polite, right? Yeah,

4 (12m 7s):
You do. It's so hard. It's one of the hardest things I've ever done in my life. You know? I mean, yeah. You're just doing that over and over and trying to talk to people, trying to get somebody to listen to you and you get all this rejection. Yeah. Sometimes people are nice, but, and most of the time people are nice, but you, every now and then you get someone who is, who's just upset and they're just like, man, get outta here. And, you know, it's, it happens.

0 (12m 33s):
And, and how long did you spend in Australia? Was it two year mission? Yeah,

4 (12m 36s):
It was two years.

0 (12m 37s):
All right. So you, you come back from your mission, you go to college at the University of Utah. Yeah. And then I, I guess while you're in college, your, your older brother John is like, Hey, I'm gonna, I'm gonna start a, a business selling pancake mix based on mom's pancake recipe.

4 (12m 54s):
That's exactly what happened. It was, is actually, he started thinking about this while I was still on my mission. And so he started talking to my mom about how he wanted to start a business. And my mom was the one who kind of planted the idea of, you know, Hey John, why don't you take the pancake recipe and make a real product and start a business on that.

0 (13m 13s):
And just out of curiosity, what was the value proposition here? Was there, I mean, there was Aunt Jemima and there's plenty of pancake mixed bisque and whatever, you know, out there. Yeah. What was this, this was different because it was whole grain pancake mix and that that wasn't really out there.

4 (13m 28s):
Well, yeah, I mean, so the way John thought about it was he thought he didn't think there were enough really great whole grain options out there. Right. Which is true, the pancake category really didn't have much in it in the way of healthy items. But he also thought, look, if I can get a product that tastes awesome, that's number one, that is healthier, number two. And then convenience was the other thing he was really going for. So he, he wanted a product that was just add water. And he felt like if he could get all three in one, then, then he really accomplished something.

0 (13m 59s):
Hmm. And did you say, did you kind of reach out to him and say, Hey, I want, I wanna join you?

4 (14m 4s):
Well, the, the timing of this was so perfect because I was getting off of my mission in October of 1995. And so I, I went and stayed with, with John and his wife temporarily until I could figure out what I was going to do. And so, right then that's when John was about ready to go out and start selling this pancake mix that he had been working on, you know, while I was gone. And so timing, that was great. And John said, Hey, Joel, do you wanna, do you wanna help me? And he wanted to kind of, you know, obviously evolve it from where we did it out of the red wagon. Yeah. Make a real product, create a brand, and then go start selling this in stores.

0 (14m 38s):
And how, how did he have any capital to do this? I mean, he, I guess he was a bit older than you at that point. He was probably in his late twenties. Exactly. But how did he have any cash to even start this up?

4 (14m 49s):
It was incredibly tight. So John was about 28 when he started this. And as he got ready to, to really start putting money into it, I helped him find a truck. He was able to flip. So I used to flip old trucks and make money on him. And I still do it, actually. It's pretty fun.

0 (15m 5s):
You just buy a truck and fix it up.

4 (15m 7s):
Yeah. Buy an old truck, fix it up, sell it, and make money on it. Huh. And I, I did that all, I mean, I did that all through college and, and you know, I paid for my mission that way, most of my mission that way. And Wow. What I would do is, look, this is really funny. I would go around, I'd drive around neighborhoods, I'd see an old truck on the side of the house and I'd, I'd walk up to the door and go, Hey, do you wanna sell your truck? And man, I had so many people say, yeah, actually we're not driving that truck anymore. And often you'd find him in really good conditions. So they would just need, like, you know, a detail being cleaned up, maybe a little bit of paint touch up or, you know. Yeah. So usually minor things. So, you know, I found this truck for John, and John drove it around for a while, and then he, he sold it and he made 1400 bucks.

4 (15m 51s):
And so he was kinda like, look, I think I can actually start my business on this

0 (15m 56s):
On $1,400,

4 (15m 57s):
On 1400 bucks. Yeah.

0 (15m 59s):
Wow. So you are in college, he's starting this thing up and you wanna be involved with it. What do you do?

4 (16m 8s):
So I had time. And so John was ready to go. He was ready to, he had found a little producer in Salt Lake City to produce the first kind of run of, of Kodiak

0 (16m 18s):
Cakes. And by the way, was he calling them that by that point?

4 (16m 22s):
Yeah, actually by then he had, he had created the brand, created the first product.

0 (16m 27s):
And how did he come up with that name? Well,

4 (16m 30s):
The way John approached it was what he really wanted something that was rustic, that was, you know, wholesome, that had a bit of a western rugged feel to it. Hmm. And so, you know, he, he and my older brother, Tim, my oldest brother, Tim, they were talking about it one day and kind of just brainstorming ideas. And Tim said to John, he's like, Hey John, what about bear cakes? And we grew up kind of hearing stories from our dad who lived in Alaska when he was in his early twenties on a survey crew. And he tells these stories about Kodiak Bears and that evolved into Kodiak cakes. Huh.

0 (17m 4s):
What did the package look like?

4 (17m 6s):
So it looked pretty similar to what it looks like today. The logo hasn't changed a lot. It has a big bear on the front brown craft look, you know. But what was different about it then is that it was in a paper bag, like a printed craft paper bag. Mm. And it was like sewn across the top, you know, to, to seal it

0 (17m 24s):
Off. Oh yeah. The bag was sewn. Right. So you had to like cut it off or take the, the string out.

4 (17m 30s):
Exactly. Take the string out,

0 (17m 31s):
By the way, that logo, if, if anyone listening can picture right, there's that bear growling and it says Kodiak cakes. It's got like a, it's sort of a maroon, rust colored circle around it with wheat. And basically what it looks like today was what it, what he made in 1995.

4 (17m 47s):
Yeah. I mean, it's, we've, we, there've been just some subtle changes over time, but I mean, the bear hasn't changed at all, for example. Huh.

0 (17m 55s):
So tell me, what, how did you guys, as you kind of started up this business, where did you go to, to, I mean, would you just go door to door to little

4 (18m 4s):
Shops?

0 (18m 5s):
That's,

4 (18m 5s):
Yeah.

0 (18m 6s):
Yeah,

4 (18m 6s):
That's basically exactly what I did. So John, John had a full-time job still. So we had this product ready to go, which we stored in his basement. We made this little makeshift warehouse down there.

0 (18m 16s):
Right. So this was his side hustle. You were a student. Yeah. And where were you going to try and get people to carry your pancake mix?

4 (18m 23s):
Yeah, so I remember the first day John went to work and I was gonna go out by myself. Yeah. So I, I started downtown Salt Lake, and I started going into hotel gift shops. And, and I remember thinking, man, I have, we have no idea how to sell a product. I'm just gonna walk in and start talking to people. Right? Yeah. And so I, I started going to these hotel gift shops and people were like, Hey, that's actually really cool. You know, leave me a sample here and I'll talk to my manager about it. Right. And so we, you know, we'd get a business card so we could follow up or whatever. So I started there, and then just a few, like I remember I went into a, a flower shop in Salt Lake that had gifts and a furniture store that had gifts. And so that was kind of my first day out was right in Salt Lake.

4 (19m 4s):
Huh.

0 (19m 5s):
You know, this is just this like, just going back to your mission, you're, you're right.

4 (19m 11s):
Yes. That's so true. That's really funny because man, I, yeah, I, I was fresh home. I mean, I had been home a month, I was ready to go like that. That did not phase me at all. Right, yeah. Walking into these stores.

0 (19m 21s):
Yeah. And so you start with just like hotel gift shops and small gift shops here and there and, and, and mainly in Salt Lake, or did you, did you venture out of Salt Lake?

4 (19m 31s):
Yeah, so the first day, or you know, maybe a couple days I was in Salt Lake. And then on December 1st, 1995, John and I took a trip to Jackson, Wyoming. We left at like 4:00 AM four or 5:00 AM we got in his car. And I remember he had this, he had this Mazda 6 26 and, and it would hold exactly 19 cases of Kodiak cakes. And, and, and the cases were big. I mean, they were 30 pound cases back then. Yeah. Wow. And so, you know, we're putting like almost 600 pounds of product in his car.

0 (20m 2s):
By the way, a Mazda 6 26 was a sedan.

4 (20m 5s):
It was a sedan, yeah. A

0 (20m 7s):
Outta truck.

4 (20m 7s):
Okay. Yeah. So load that thing up with all this, all this pancake mix. And, you know, so John and I, we get up there and we both just kinda went out and started walking into all these gift shops in Jackson, Wyoming selling pancake mix. So by the end of the day, we sold all 19 cases of product into, all into these gift shops. And so, you know, we were like, yeah, that was a, that was a successful day.

0 (20m 30s):
So you would go in with a bag of pancake mix, cuz normally you'd go, like, you'd think that, you know, you, you have a sample, right? Like if you were selling soap or cosmetics, but you've got a bag of pancake mix, but you didn't have like, prepared pancakes. You, you weren't able to say like, Hey, try this pancake. Right. It was just a, it was a bag of mix.

4 (20m 48s):
That's exactly, yeah. We, we, we couldn't make it right then. And, but what happened is these people looked at it and they're like, this is the coolest packaging. Oh man, this will work great in here.

0 (20m 57s):
But even then, I mean, for every 30 customers or 50 customers in a gift shop, 40 of them are really there to buy breath mins or cigarettes or, you know, whatever they might buy. Totally. Yeah. Maybe one out of 50 would buy the Kodiak cakes. Yeah. So, so I mean, how were you gonna get any attention for it?

4 (21m 17s):
Yeah, I mean, honestly that was tough. I mean, we, you know, we, we did, we picked up a few more. We went to Sun Valley Idaho the next weekend and did the same thing. And I think we ended up picking up about maybe 50 gift shops in the first, you know, few weeks. So we're kinda like, okay, cool. We got 50 gift shops. And, and then I think that was really one of the hardest things was gift shops. You don't sell a lot. I mean, just what you were saying, you, you don't sell a, a lot in a gift shop.

0 (21m 39s):
Yeah. And, and by the way, when, when they were placed in gift shops, how did that work? Would, would the gift shops just pay you when they sold the bag?

4 (21m 47s):
No, they would, they would buy the case. So they would luckily pay us. So they'd, you know, they'd say, I'll take a case or two, and then they'd, you know, we'd give 'em 30 day terms or whatever, and then they'd, they'd pay us.

0 (21m 56s):
Right. And they were selling, do you remember how much they were trying to sell? Or they would sell the bag for, they'd retail it for,

4 (22m 2s):
I think that we sold those bags into the stores for 2 99, and then they would sell, they'd double it. They'd basically try to put a 50% margin on there and try to get 5 99 out of it.

0 (22m 13s):
Right, right. And, and in general, did you have any feedback from those stores about how sales were doing?

4 (22m 19s):
Actually yes. People loved it. I mean, people loved the product and for a gift shop it was doing well. And, and I think that the best feedback we started to get were that people started to write letters in. And, and that was just incredible. I mean, we, we started getting letters in one day. John got this letter from Tom Bette, the guy that does, he's a spokesman for Motel six. And he, he lived in Alaska and he wrote the coolest letter. And, you know, he had sent a picture of him and his girlfriend in their cabin up in Alaska making pancakes on this cast iron griddle. It was so cool. But, but these letters started to come in and people would say, Hey, this is the best pancake mix I've ever had. Wow. You know, how do I get more?

0 (22m 57s):
But I mean, clearly, you know, you guys are not becoming millionaires. Right,

4 (23m 3s):
Right.

0 (23m 4s):
Through the occasional gift shops and ski towns. And, and, and I guess after a certain amount of time, I mean the, the stress of running the business becomes kind of overwhelming for your brother.

4 (23m 16s):
Yeah. So I mean, after a couple years it was just, it was becoming, yeah, he was spending so much time at it and he was working full-time and he had a little baby and he wanted to go back to graduate school to pursue an MBA and just to, you know, keep building his career. And this was taking so long. And one day he was, you know, he was in his basement just kind of thinking about how much he had put into this. And, you know, we talked about 1400 bucks from a truck. He flipped and then he took, he scraped together everything else that he had from some retirement in, and some savings and some, you know, smaller contributions from family members. And, and it, it ended up in the 20 thousands.

4 (23m 57s):
I can't remember exactly how much he had spent, but, you know, it was everything he had. And for a 28, 29 year old person is like, so one day he's down there and he just had a breakdown and he just was in tears, you know, and he's just sitting there going, man, what did I do? Why did I waste so much time doing this? And he, he had all these boxes of pancake mixed still down there in that little makeshift warehouse in his basement. And he picked up a bunch of boxes and he just threw 'em against the wall, you know, and they just exploded. And he, he really did, he just had a breakdown. It was just hard because he started, you know, the culmination of that, just realizing that, you know, I can't keep going with this. I've put so much time and so much everything I had. And, and, and he worked on it almost every night for years, you know, three Yeah.

4 (24m 40s):
Plus years on this thing. And so, you know, that, that's when he kind of realized I've, I've gotta just shut it down or, you know, find another path for it. He actually tried to sell it, that didn't work. And so, you know, that's when he came to me and said, Hey Joel, do you want, do you wanna keep going with this thing?

0 (24m 55s):
Huh? Did you immediately say, yes, I want, I wanna take it over. Yeah, I'll, I'll, I'll run it.

4 (25m 1s):
Yeah. It was immediate for me. It's probably, it's funny when you're that age, you don't always think through the long term implications as well as you should. And sometimes that's good, right. Because if you do, then maybe you don't take risks Right. As much as, as you would. But yeah, I mean, when he, when he talked to me about it, I was like, absolutely, I'd love to do it. And I had a real entrepreneurial mindset. I mean, I really did want to do something, start a business someday. I, I just, I didn't know what it was gonna be then. Yeah. I kind of thought, you know, I'm gonna go to school, I'll maybe, I'll probably take a job for a while and then maybe I'll look at what to do. And little did I know that it was gonna be pancakes at, you know, 23 years old.

0 (25m 42s):
And do you remember what kind of revenue you guys did in that first year?

4 (25m 46s):
You know, in the first year, I don't recall. It was because it was November and December, but one, what I do remember is, so, you know, when I took it over later in two, in 1997, the revenue that year was $29,000 total

0 (26m 1s):
Revenue for the year.

4 (26m 2s):
For the year. Yep. And so we were selling just these, you know, this limited number of stores that aren't moving a whole lot of units per week. Cuz you know, people would, they would get it on vacation. Right? Right. And then they'd go home and they couldn't get it. But yet we, we could see that people really loved the product. And so it was like, man, if we could just figure out how to hang in here on this long enough and how to get some distribution going, this could work.

0 (26m 28s):
So how did that, I mean, and it's your brother, right? So it's Yeah. You know, in the family. But did, did you know, I've talked to co-founders, did you guys sit down and kind of formally divide it up? Did he say, well look, you know, I started it so I still own 70% and you know, you're gonna get 30%. Or was it just, just kind of like, here you go. And it was very informal.

4 (26m 46s):
It was actually informal, but you Well, it was, it was informal that way. But you know what, we did what we did to actually formalize it, we actually made a little contract and John literally sold me the business for a dollar. So, so he basically gave it to me. Hmm. And I think, you know, I think in his mind it was like, I'm gonna shut this thing down. Yeah. So what the heck, give it to Joel, see if he can do anything with it. And, and at the time it was, it was, I was running it as a sole proprietorship, which means we hadn't even incorporated the business. So, you know, it was in, not until about 1999 that I actually incorporated the business and then I went back to John and I gave him half the shares back.

0 (27m 29s):
Hmm. All right. So you, you become, this is sole proprietorship, and by the way, you're making the pancake mix yourself or do you have somebody make it for you?

4 (27m 37s):
We actually, no. We did have somebody making it for us in Salt Lake City

0 (27m 40s):
To, they had the recipe, your recipe, and they would make it for you. Right. And same thing, were you like hustling on weekends and, and cuz you were a student, right?

4 (27m 51s):
Yeah, I was gonna school, I was working a part-time job and I mean, for me, I wasn't, you know, I wasn't married. I, I, I had a pretty, I had time. I, you know, I didn't have as many obligations and so I started to drum up more gift shops and, and, and just, you know, try to get as many accounts as I could and, and then started to think about, okay, how do we, you know, how do we get this into grocery stores? Right. So yeah, I would work, I would work at nights on this thing every day.

0 (28m 18s):
This is the late nineties. Did you think that this had legs, that this could be something really huge? Or did you think, did you think, well, it's my side hustle, but I'm gonna probably pursue something a little bit more stable?

4 (28m 32s):
So, yeah. Do you know what's interesting is when I first took it over, I thought, I mean, seriously, I was like, I'm gonna make this thing go. Hmm. Now, you know, but what happened was, like, it was, it became, the reality check hit pretty hard, pretty fast as I got into it. And I started to realize that, holy cow, this is actually gonna be a while. This is going to be

0 (28m 55s):
Hard. Yeah. And what were your, I mean, besides obviously money, what were the other limitations that you were facing at that point?

4 (29m 2s):
Yeah, yeah, right. Money is, was huge. We had no capital to put into this thing. But, you know, I think the other real limitation was I was 23 years old. Yeah. With no experience. Like, I had zero experience. The only thing I really had was a lot of enthusiasm, you know, and some confidence, which is, which is good. But man, I, I knew nothing about how to get a food product off the ground, you know, nothing.

0 (29m 25s):
While you were, I mean, running this as a sole proprietorship and then as a small business and still just you in the early two thousands. Right? Right. How were you actually earning a living if, if your revenue was still fairly low?

4 (29m 40s):
So I right out, out, well during my senior year at the University of Utah, I took a job working for a management consulting firm. It was right downtown Salt Lake. And after I graduated, they wanted me to take a full-time job there. And I told 'em, I said, look, how about if I work 30 hours a week? And then that way I'll still have time for my little, my little side hustle, the pancake business. And so they were good with it. So I worked there to make money. And then, you know, on the side I was flipping cars to try to make extra money,

0 (30m 9s):
Buying cars, detailing 'em, fixing 'em up. And that's how you'd make money. Yeah.

4 (30m 14s):
That saved our bacon, man. Cause I was married at the time. I got married fairly young. Yeah. You, Utah Standard. It's probably average. I got married just before I turned 24.

0 (30m 24s):
And, and did you, were you telling people, like, would you talk about this to people? You would say, yeah, I got this pancake mixed business going, like at the, at your job and with friends, were you talking to everybody about it or were you, were you kind of quiet about it?

4 (30m 38s):
You know, I was never like, I would talk about it just if people would ask. But yeah, I talked about it. It was, it was fun and I'd bring it up. Hmm. You know, and I wasn't shy about trying to go and get publicity either. I mean, I really did try hard to go and get

0 (30m 51s):
Publicity and you just couldn't.

4 (30m 53s):
No, I actually did. I actually had some pretty good success with it. I remember somebody one day said, Hey Joel, you could probably go get a newspaper article on this. And this is like 1998, right? Yeah, 19 98, 19 99. The Internet's out there, but, but not a lot. So I, I'm, I'm like, okay, I'll see if I can get a newspaper article. So I remember I called up thee news one day and I got

0 (31m 13s):
This, it's a main paper in Salt Lake,

4 (31m 15s):
Right? Newspaper. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. News big newspaper. I call, I got the, the food editor on the phone and I just started telling her my, my story in, in our story about this pancake mix. And she said, oh, that sounds really cool. I, I may wanna do a story on you. Can you send me a press release? And I go, my, I'm like, what's a press release lit? I literally said that to her and she goes, just type it up, just type up the story, you know, kind of what you talked about. And sent it to me. So I did. And then, you know, she called me up and she's like, Hey, we're gonna run a story on you. We're gonna send a, a photographer out. And they, you know, I was at work this one morning that the story hit, she told me it was gonna hit. And I, I can't remember if what day of the week it was, but she told me in advance, Hey, we're gonna run the story.

4 (31m 59s):
It's gonna hit, you know, Tuesday or whatever. And so I'm sitting there at work and all of a sudden I get this phone call from Dan's grocery store on Foothill Drive in Salt Lake. And, and, and the, the, the grocery manager calls me. She's like, Joel, you gotta get over here. We sold out your pancake mix by by 10:00 AM Wow. And we need more. And I'm like, oh my gosh, you gotta be kidding me. I didn't even think about like, getting more product in the store. I had no idea what this newspaper article would do. And so I told my boss, I'm like, I gotta go. You know? So I, I left work and I, I went home and I grabbed, cause I was delivering the pancake mix into these five grocery stores, these five Dan's grocery stores, among everything else I was doing. But that was, so they called me up and I, I, I went in and I, I reloaded the shelf and I, and she's like, I'll take like 10 cases.

4 (32m 44s):
And I'm like, oh, oh, okay. You know, usually I'd go in and take one case a week or less, you know, every other week.

0 (32m 50s):
And Dan's was your biggest distributor at that point

4 (32m 53s):
In Salt Lake? It was. We, we had, my brother John had gotten the product into QFC grocery stores up in Seattle prior to me taking it over. So they were our biggest.

0 (33m 3s):
Alright. So it is 2000. And cuz you, you were, you had not taken any outside investment at this point. I mean, may, may maybe were not able to attract outside investment at this point cuz you were so small. Right. But I guess a friend of the family gave you like a check for $13,000. What's the story about that around

4 (33m 25s):
That? So yeah, this guy, his name's Gary Beaner, a neighbor of my parents loved Kodiak Cakes. You know, he'd buy it at Dan's down the road and he, he would, he started talking to us and he's like, Hey, I love this pancake mix. This is awesome. You need investment money. And, you know, John and I, we would talk, I was running it, but we would talk all the time and, and I remember thinking, yeah, it would be really nice to get a little bit of capital to, you know, try to do some, do some advertising, try to do some marketing, and just try to help kind of kickstart this little business. And so Gary, John and I, we all started talking and, and Gary said, all right guys, I'll put 35,000 bucks in for, I can't remember, it was like 18% of the business or something like that.

4 (34m 7s):
He's like, look, let's start with 13,000 and then when you need more, you know, we can, we can give you the rest of the money. Huh. So I, I went to Gary's house one night to pick up a check, you know, so I knocked on his door, we chatted for a little bit and he wrote me a check for $13,000. And man, I walked, I had never seen that much money. Like, I walked outta there. I'm like, I was probably, what was I, 24? Something like that. 25. I walked out of his house just going scared. Like, oh man, I've, I've gotta get this guy's money back. I've gotta do it.

0 (34m 41s):
When we come back in just a moment, Joel starts making cookies to sell more pancakes and nearly loses everything after a failed promotion. Put some $50,000 in the hole. Stay with us. I'm Guy Ross, and you're listening to How I Built This.

ClickUp (35m 9s):
If you manage a team of more than 10 people, listen up. This is going to be a game changer for your team's ability to get stuff done and will make you look like a rockstar to your boss, clients and colleagues. Imagine how much more your team could accomplish together with an extra day of work each week. That's how much time you'll save with Click up the one app to replace them all. Click Up is a collaborative work hub that brings together everything organizations, managers, and teams need to do better, work faster, all in one place. I work with a big team and so I really know the importance of streamlining communication to create an efficient workspace. Help your team of 10 plus be more efficient and productive with Click Up Use Code Built to get 15% off click ups, massive unlimited plan for a year. Meaning you can start reclaiming your time for under $5 a month. Sign up today@clickup.com and use Code Built. Take your productivity to the next level with Click up today.

Wondery (36m 16s):
Hey, I'm Mike Corey, the host of Wondery podcast. Against the Odds in our next season, three Mask Men hijack a school bus full of children in the sleepy farm town of Chowchilla, California. They bury the children and their bus driver deep underground planning to hold them for Ransom local police and the FBI martialist search effort. But the trail quickly runs dry as the air supply for the trapped children dwindles a pair of unlikely heroes emerges. Follow against the Odds wherever you get your podcasts, you can listen ad free on the Amazon Music or Wondery app.

0 (37m 2s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz, so it's the early two thousands. And Joel Clark has brought in his very first investment in Kodiak Cakes, a check for $13,000, and he's starting to gain some traction getting his pancake mix into stores in and around Salt Lake City.

4 (37m 23s):
I managed to get it into Smith's grocery stores around here. That was 70 stores. And then the distributor for these Dan stores took it in. And then we got some Albertson's stores. So I think I, I was able to get it into maybe around 150 grocery stores during that year. The revenue was around, we, I got it up to about $150,000 in total revenue.

0 (37m 45s):
And it was one product. It was Pancake Mix. That was it.

4 (37m 48s):
Correct. One sku, like one product. Yeah.

0 (37m 51s):
And, and I read that around this time you actually like decided to go attend business school in, in the UK at Oxford and you got someone to, to keep the business going in Salt Lake while you were gone. Yeah. And then what, like, you, you just came back to Utah and, and and picked up where you left off?

4 (38m 9s):
I did, yeah. I came back to Salt Lake and I actually went back to, I went back to the consulting company.

0 (38m 15s):
Oh, well, so you went back to doing consulting because it was a steady income right. But still working on Kodiak and Yeah, I was,

4 (38m 23s):
Yeah, I

0 (38m 24s):
Was, I guess around this time it's like 2003, you start to think about jumping into Kodiak full-time and, and just doing it. Just focusing on that business.

4 (38m 34s):
Yeah, I really wanted to, and so like, after I got back from school, so I got, I got home in the fall of 2002 and I went back to the consulting firm for about ano almost two years. Just, you know, over a year and a half. And while I did that, my brother-in-law ran it part-time out of my in-laws basement. So I'd help him and we'd work on it at night together and he, he kept it going during the day. So in 2004 I had been working on sales, you know, kind of part-time and I'd been working with Safeway and I sent some samples out to this buyer. Her name was Donna Sullivan. She called me and she's like, Hey Joel, we're gonna bring your pancake mix in to 1200 stores. I was about to like, fall outta my chair.

0 (39m 14s):
Wait, let me just get this straight. Yeah. How did you, how did you pitch your product to Safeway? Did you just kind of blind cold call them and Yeah,

4 (39m 22s):
That's exactly right. So I would cold call buyers. Yeah. I'd just get on the phone, I'd, I'd call the headquarters office and say, Hey, who's the buyer for pancake mixes or whatever. And I just sent her samples. I don't even know if I spoke to her initially or if I just left a voicemail and sent samples. Then when she called me and told me she wanted to bring it in, I had never even met with her. And usually you need to meet with these people.

0 (39m 46s):
Yeah. And I'm just curious, I mean, when you send some, like we've done lots of products like Tate's cookies or Angie's Boom chick pop. When you send a sample of that, all the person has to do is open the bag and eat it. Yeah. With you, with your product. Like somebody has to take that to a kitchen, add water and make pancakes. Like that's not, and they must get hundreds of pitches every week, people sending them all kinds of things. I'm just surprised that they actually made them and tried them.

4 (40m 15s):
Totally. The odds are kind of piled up against you, right. When you have, no one knows who you are, you have no track record. What we had going for us was great packaging that was so unique and, you know, finally Donna calls me and says, Hey Joel, we're gonna bring this into 1200 stores. And I'm like, but we've never met. Do you want me to come down and and meet you? She's like, no, we're beyond that. We're good. We're gonna, we're gonna move ahead.

0 (40m 40s):
So that right then, I mean you're gonna be in 1200 Safeway stores. This is real. Yeah. So I'm assuming this is when you decide, okay, I gotta, I gotta focus on this full-time.

4 (40m 51s):
Yeah. So when that happened, I'm like, okay, I think I can live on this. So, you know, but, but you know, keep in mind it's one skew. Right. And so it sounded like awesome. Yeah. But, but I, I really didn't know. I didn't have a great feel for how much I was gonna sell

0 (41m 4s):
And what kind of order, how much, what was the amount of money that they were gonna spend on this?

4 (41m 9s):
It was probably in the realm of 20, 25,000

0 (41m 11s):
Bucks. You know, something like that. You're thinking 1200 Safeway stores, you're in a millionaire. No, no. Yeah. This is like a 20, $30,000 order. Yeah, because you're still, I mean even, I mean, you're not sure that this business is going to make it at this point, right? Yeah. Like, like at this time you were still like, flipping cars and, and you started to flip houses and then I read like, yeah, around this time you actually started like a whole new business, like a, a cookie company. What, what, what was the cookie company?

4 (41m 40s):
So it was called Ben's Cookies. And it was a, it's a, it's a company that exists in England. It's a great business, great product. And my wife and I were regular customers when we were in graduate school over there. And so one day I sat at a coffee shop with the owner before I was leaving grad school to come home and I said, Hey, I'd love to start one of these in Utah.

0 (42m 2s):
So you started a branch like a, a brick and mortar Ben's cookies shop in Utah? I

4 (42m 7s):
Did. We opened up two of them.

0 (42m 8s):
And you put all the money behind it?

4 (42m 11s):
No, I put some, I didn't have a lot, so I borrowed the rest. I had a little bit left on my student loan to go and so I took the rest of my student loan and put it towards it. And then my partner put the rest, he, he lent the business the rest of the capital to get started.

0 (42m 26s):
Ben, your partner?

4 (42m 27s):
His name's Chris. Oh,

0 (42m 29s):
Chris. Why was it called Ben's?

4 (42m 31s):
It was the original founder who started, her son's name was Ben. Ben. So she named it after

0 (42m 36s):
Him. I'm looking at their website now. Yum. Ginger, dark chocolate, lemon orange and milk chocolate cookies. Wow. Looks so good.

4 (42m 43s):
They are awesome. Awesome cookies.

0 (42m 46s):
And how does it do? How'd it do?

4 (42m 48s):
So yeah, we ended up opening one in Orum, which is about 45 minutes south of Salt Lake and then one in Salt Lake and the one in Orum just, it just didn't do well. We had to shut it after a year and a half. And then the one in Salt Lake did better. I mean we, we, we kept that going for about 10 years. But, but it was hard. I mean it was, that was another side hustle that I had added. I was spread thin and I was trying to do Kodiak cakes. Yeah. And when I first opened that store, I was still working in the consulting world. So that was just, I bit off a ton just trying to do too much.

0 (43m 21s):
Wow. I have to imagine you lost some money from that venture.

4 (43m 26s):
I did. It was super painful. Yeah. And my partner lost a lot more than I did. So it was, yeah, it was painful for, for both of us.

0 (43m 35s):
And this plan was to bring you more income for your family, right? But it wasn't working. I read that at one point you went to a bankruptcy lawyer to, to explore your options.

4 (43m 46s):
Yeah, I did. So what happened in, in 2007, let me back up just a bit. So in 2004 my dad joined me out of retirement. He was 65 years old and he's like, Hey Joel, I'll help you. Let's do this

0 (43m 59s):
Together. And this is your dad with a PhD in education? Yeah. And I've been teaching religious studies for the church. So not a whole lot of business experience.

4 (44m 7s):
Not a lot. I mean, what's cool about my dad though, he always had a little, he had a side hustle all those years cuz he just, he didn't make a lot of money from teaching so Right. That my dad and I had managed to, to build revenue up to around 800,000. So we had some pretty good

0 (44m 22s):
Sounds great

4 (44m 22s):
Success over those years. Right. And 800,000 is still pretty small, but 2007 was a hard year. I mean, I think what happened was, I actually tried to sell the business in early 2007. Hmm. It didn't work. Gas prices went through the roof in 2007. Egg white prices went crazy. Wheat prices went up. So I was just, we were getting squeezed and our margins were getting, you know, just getting hurt. And so when it, we were getting squeezed. I remember this phone call on Valentine's Day from our producer and he goes, the guys that were manufacturing Kodiak cakes and he's like, Joel, are you sitting down? I got some bad news. He's like, we have to raise your price by 11.5% today.

4 (45m 3s):
And, and I I I was just floored. I was like, oh, you gotta be kidding me. It's another, I don't know how I'm gonna make it. And, and so, you know, I, it was Valentine's Day so I didn't tell my wife. We went to dinner that night and I, I didn't want to tell her because I didn't want to like wreck the night cuz I was so stirred up and, and just Yeah. Concerned about it. And I, I I, I decided that I had to quit Kodiak Kicks and in early 2008 I took a job and left Kodiak Cakes and I licensed the brand over to another small business to kind of manage for me and to pay me a royalty

0 (45m 39s):
Because you couldn't find a buyer somewhere to buy you out.

4 (45m 42s):
Yeah. I couldn't find anybody to buy it. And so this, this royalty deal looked great on paper. It was like, okay, I don't have to sell it and somebody else can manage it, pay a royalty and I can go get a job and make more money. I just wasn't making it. I wasn't making enough money.

0 (45m 55s):
Wow. You were like 33, 34 at this point. Yeah. Had kids already. Yeah,

4 (45m 60s):
I had three kids by then in 2008.

0 (46m 2s):
And probably not a whole lot of savings,

4 (46m 4s):
Like nothing, you know, just kind of squeaking by trying to make it and it was hard. So, you know, I took, I took that job.

0 (46m 11s):
Yeah. What was the job you took?

4 (46m 13s):
So I went and ran a home healthcare agency in Salt Lake and I had found this company, they were looking for somebody to come in and help, you know, run the business. And so I took

0 (46m 23s):
It in meantime you licensed the, the brand Kodiak Cakes to some other manufacturer and did you make any money off that?

4 (46m 32s):
A little bit. You know, I was making like five. It was, I think we did like a 5% royalty. Right. And so yeah, there was a little bit of extra income there, which really helped. And so, cuz the thing that I did, the other thing that really contributed to this whole thing in 2007 was I was being the distracted entrepreneur a little bit. I bought and sold a couple homes, made some money, and then we put all the money we made onto a lot. We bought a lot like a building lot. Oh.

0 (46m 55s):
And so in 2007

4 (46m 57s):
Yeah, near the end of 2007,

0 (46m 59s):
Bad time. Oh,

4 (47m 0s):
You could not have picked a worse time. Yeah. And we thought we got a great deal in this lot that we could maybe flip it. Well, not long after that, the market just tanked and we were stuck with this lot. Oh. That over, you know, over the next couple years I just started to get eaten alive, you know, financially from that. But then what happened was the, the, it just this licensing agreement that we had put together, it just wasn't working. The, the company that we were, you know, that was managing the brand Kodiak cakes, they had other things to do and, you know, it wasn't a massive focus and, you know, a couple mistakes were made and the revenue started to really dip. Pricing mistakes went through. We lost some accounts.

4 (47m 41s):
Hmm. And it wasn't just, it wasn't completely their fault. I mean, there were some, you know, innocent mistakes that happened, but it did create kind of a, we lost some, we lost significant revenue. I think we lost about 25% of the revenue.

0 (47m 54s):
So you, you felt like they were mismanaging the the brand.

4 (47m 57s):
Yeah. There was some mismanagement.

0 (47m 59s):
And, and so you had the right to withdraw the contract, the licensing deal and take it back over.

4 (48m 5s):
That's right.

0 (48m 6s):
But so here's my question. I mean, you, you had financial problems. I mean, you had this lot that you were saddled with. You had just the cookie business that wasn't really working. You were, you know, in debt. I mean, you had no savings. Finally get this job paying you pretty well as a CEO of a healthcare agency.

4 (48m 26s):
Yep.

0 (48m 27s):
And you decide to leave that and go back to Kodiak cakes. I mean, that, that's pretty risky. What, I mean, weren't you worried about your financial situation?

4 (48m 38s):
I was so worried I, I was incredibly worried. But what, what, you know, what happened is I just, you know, I talked to my wife and I just thought, you know, I've already spent 11 years on this thing. Like, you know, what's the worst thing that can happen? And, and I started to go there and I started to think, well, maybe I go bankrupt. Well, if that's the worst, I'm not gonna die. And, and here's the other thing, guy that was really weighing on my mind was I was 34 years old. Like, those are really prime career building years. And, and I, not only was I walking into more financial risk, but I was walking away a big opportunity cost to really building my career.

4 (49m 19s):
And I, and that was a fear for me because I remember thinking, man, if I go into this pancake gig and it doesn't work, what do I have to show for myself? You know, I, I didn't, I wasn't in consulting long enough to, to really gain a skill that could command a great income. And I wasn't CEO of this home healthcare business long enough to become a great ceo. And so, right. I was worried about that. That that was, that was hard.

0 (49m 44s):
So you come back to the company and this is what, 2008, 2009,

4 (49m 52s):
2008? Yeah. Into 2008.

0 (49m 54s):
So financial crisis, like the, you know, the economy's tanking, and I guess pretty soon after you rejoined you, you actually made a decision that cost the business 50,000 bucks. Is that true?

4 (50m 8s):
Yeah. Correct. Man, you dug deep guy,

0 (50m 12s):
What did you do?

4 (50m 13s):
Seriously? I made a, I made, it was kind of an innocent mistake, but what happened was, so I decided to exercise my right and take it back. And I put together a promotion at Safeway. It was going to be a be a dollar off. It was like a, they had a Christmas display, okay. And they put these unique products on these tables out in front of the store. And so Kodiak Cakes was going to be on there and we were gonna offer a dollar off. Right? So, well, what happened was somehow that promotion got doubled in the system and it was, it showed $2 off on the shelf. Well, that's a huge discount. That was a deep, deep discount. And so consumers were, people were buying it like crazy.

4 (50m 53s):
And, and suddenly I got a call one day from my distributor rep, and he's like, Joel, he's like, look, some mistake happened and your promotion got doubled in the system and it's been $2 and, and we're selling it. So he is like, so I, I turned it off before it got worse and I was like, oh man, you gotta be kidding me. You know? I'm like, oh crap. This is another near death experience that we're gonna be going through. And I, when I found out, you know, the bill was 50 grand, man, I was like, what am I gonna do?

0 (51m 24s):
You did sell a lot of pancake mix probably though.

4 (51m 26s):
We did, we sold a ton. So, yeah. So the silver lining,

0 (51m 30s):
She gave away a ton, I should say.

4 (51m 32s):
We did. So I, so my dad came down, he was, he would, I had gotten a teeny tiny one room office downtown Salt Lake, and I just said to my dad, I said, dad, I told him what happened, and I said, look, I've got this $50,000 problem, man. I, I sobbed in that office, man. My dad was in there. Come, I'm getting teary now just thinking about it, but, but it was just, God, it was just, I thought about just all the years I had put into this thing, and, and still it was just barely getting bye. You know? I had just quit my job, man. I'm sorry guy. I'm just like, no, it's all right. You know, my dad's in there and I just gave him a, he gave me a huge hug and you know, we just, we sat there for a couple minutes and, and it was hard cuz I thought, am I going to, I guess I'm done, you know, for, you know, I, I, I thought that that was a possibility.

4 (52m 25s):
And, you know, my dad and I talked and he, you know, we were talking about it. He's like, look, Joel, let's just, I've got a, I've got a home equity line on my house and you know, I'll go get you 50 grand. Wow. And my dad was not a rich guy, you know, he, he had been careful. My parents were really careful with their money for all those years. And so, you know, they, their house was paid off. And so he is like, he's like, look, let's just, let's do it. I'm gonna, I'm gonna go to the bank. I'll get you a check and let's make it work. Let's work through it. And so he did, he wrote me a check for 50 grand, and we made it, you know, I, I put it in the bank. I kept going. I paid him back, you know, six months later, whatever.

4 (53m 8s):
And we kept working it through. And I think, you know, it was, you know, a lot of near death experiences over these years, you know, and that was a, that was a big one.

0 (53m 16s):
Joel, did your wife ever say to you, maybe we should just like peck this in. It's too risky.

4 (53m 25s):
She should have, but you know, it's funny. She never did. I mean, to her credit man, I mean, she was great. So, so she was always just steady, consistent cheerleader. And, and I think, man, that made all the difference because I think, you know, it's really funny. It's like, you know, I was listening to one of your other episodes and Andy Dunn from Bonobos said it, man, he said it better than I could have. He said, companies don't die because the companies fail. They die because the entrepreneur gives up. And I remember thinking that, I remember thinking, if I can just figure out how to give this business enough time, I think it'll work.

4 (54m 6s):
But it's, but it's the practical element of can you give it enough time?

0 (54m 13s):
When we come back in just a moment, Joel puts in the time, makes his first hire, gets a big order from Target, and suddenly has to scramble to fulfill it. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz, and you're listening to How I built this. Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz, so it's 2009. And Kodiak Cakes has launched three more products, a brownie mix, cookie mix, and a second pancake mix.

0 (54m 55s):
But then Joel loses his best and only employee.

4 (55m 2s):
My dad was by this time about 70, and he's like, look, I need to, I need to retire Joel. And I'm like, yeah, you should dad. And so I, I needed somebody to help me. And, you know, I didn't have the money to pay for some super experienced person. So I went up to the University of Utah career services department where you could like put, you could post job postings there. And so I posted a job up there, and I think I called it like marketing manager or something like that. I talked about, Hey, come join a small entrepreneurial business and have an entrepreneurial experience, something like that, and help me build the business.

0 (55m 36s):
All right. So you put this ad up and this guy Cameron Smith responds, and what did you hire him to do?

4 (55m 44s):
So when I taught, he came into our little one room office and he was wearing a suit and a tie, and I was probably wearing jeans. And I just thought, man, this kid's sharp. We just, I mean, we just connected. I really liked him. I thought, man, he's a good person. He seemed to have a ton of energy and drive, and I thought he seems like the perfect fit. So I immediately kind of put him in charge of some sales, and I, I gave him this list of small gift shops that we had sold to in the past. And I'm like, Hey, call these guys and see if you can sell some product by the case to these little gift shops. Well, Cameron, he thinks ahead and, and, and he, by the way, is exactly what I needed because I needed that.

4 (56m 29s):
I needed somebody to come in and bring a spark of new energy. Yeah. So he, he started really thinking about, look, you know, I can do more. Can I start calling grocery stores? And I'm like, yeah. So he started putting together this list of like, the top grocery stores in America, and he started thinking really strategically about it, like at a really young age. And I started going, man, this guy's great.

0 (56m 51s):
He was like, you when you just got back from your mission. Fearless.

4 (56m 55s):
Totally right. Fearless and blinders. Yeah. He didn't see the obstacles. Yeah. If he saw him, he didn't care.

0 (57m 1s):
So did he have any success getting into bigger grocery stores?

4 (57m 6s):
Oh, he, he really did. So one day we had a, we were at a trade show and I got the buyer's name for Target, and Cameron reached out and got an appointment, and he's like, Hey, it's gonna be this day in November, I think this was around 2011, something like that. 2011, 2012,

0 (57m 24s):
An appointment for Target in Minneapolis

4 (57m 26s):
Yes. Headquarter appointment. And we're like, oh man, way to go. I mean, this was a big deal

0 (57m 32s):
To go pitch Kodiak cakes to their buyers.

4 (57m 34s):
Yeah.

0 (57m 35s):
And did you guys go hop on a, a plane together?

4 (57m 38s):
Well, I couldn't go. And so, you know, he, he set the time and I'm like, man, I can't go. I can't remember what I had. I had, usually I would've dropped everything to go. Yeah. But there was, I cannot remember what I had, but I, I couldn't make it. So I'm like, just, just, just go on your own. You'll be fine. You know? So, so he went into the meeting, her name was Anne Place dead, and the way Cameron describes it, he's walked in there and he actually made pancakes for her. And he said, you know, he was pretty nervous. And he's like, you know, he's like, man, the spatula was kind of shaking as I cooked pancakes for her. And so he, so he let her, you know, he gave her some pancakes to try and, and she liked it. And so she decided to bring it in to, you know, test it out into 40 stores.

4 (58m 19s):
Wow. He locked up a tester on at Target. That was a, we were, we were stoked.

0 (58m 23s):
And so what, how long before they put in an order? Like a real

4 (58m 27s):
Order? So, okay, so after the 40 store test, it was probably within a few months, we got a new buyer named Tommy Greenberg. Tommy called us up and he is like, guys, I'm gonna take your two product. We had two pancake mixes in the stores. He's like, I'm gonna take 'em in chain-wide nationwide. We're like, you gotta be kidding me. He's like, yep, let's go. He's like, just remember, you know, just remember I was on the desk when this happened. And so, so we're like, so we're like, all right, let's go. And so I remember we were, they started ordering by the case, and a lot of this was even ups. We weren't even shipping pallets out. So Cameron and I would go into the warehouse of our, we had a contract manufacturer.

4 (59m 7s):
Yep. But they, you know, they, they were busy. So we would go in often and pack up cases together and get 'em all ready to ship. We did a ton of that. And it started to work. It actually started to really work.

0 (59m 19s):
How were you financing that? I mean, when, when big companies like Target put in orders, it can cost hundreds of thousands of dollars and they won't pay you for another 60 days. Yeah. You need that cash to make the product. How were you able to have that? How'd you have that money?

4 (59m 34s):
I was scared. So we got this po it was $260,000 po.

0 (59m 39s):
That's a big purchase order. Yeah.

4 (59m 41s):
Massive. I mean, we'd never seen anything like it. And, and at the time, we had to prepay for our inventory. So it, it was really, I didn't have the money. We, we did not have the money to do it. So, so what I did is I called my dad and I said, Hey dad, I need to borrow money again. You know? And, and I said, but I, I think, I think we're gonna be really good for, this is a lot of money. So, you know, we talked about it and my dad was like, you know, I think this is good because this is going against a purchase order from Target. Yeah. So I'm gonna do it, Joel. So he went down at the bank, he got a check on his home equity line. Wow. So he had to borrow the money, and he showed back up to my office with a check for 260,000 bucks.

4 (1h 0m 21s):
Wow.

0 (1h 0m 22s):
That was the turning point

4 (1h 0m 24s):
That, that was a huge, huge turning point.

0 (1h 0m 27s):
And were you still manufacturing at that small plant in Salt Lake?

4 (1h 0m 32s):
It wasn't the small, small plant from the very beginning. It was a different plant by now. It was bigger. So they had, they had a lot more capacity by now. Right.

0 (1h 0m 41s):
And by the way, around this time, do you remember what your annual sales were at that point?

4 (1h 0m 47s):
So we were doing 2012, we were doing around three and a half.

0 (1h 0m 53s):
So that target order really was transformational.

4 (1h 0m 56s):
Yeah. It was a

0 (1h 0m 57s):
Huge three and a half million dollars. I mean, but, so, but three and a half million dollars, most of that it's revenue. You're, you know, you're not, that's not going in your pocket.

4 (1h 1m 4s):
Right. And we were talking about this very thing. We were like, okay, we, we need a bump. We have gotta get some real marketing. Yeah. And so Cameron comes to me one day, he is like, look, he's like, I'm gonna try to get us on Shark Tank. I'm like, all right, go to town, man. I've never even seen the show.

0 (1h 1m 21s):
He, he thought, he thought, let's go on Shark Tank, because presumably he liked the show, but also maybe to get some, some outside investment.

4 (1h 1m 29s):
Yeah. Yeah. We had been talking on and off about, yeah, when are we gonna raise capital? We're at some point we're going to need some, some money to, to help us to grow. So we, you know, we were talking about that. So all he did was he went to the website one day, this is January of 2013. He goes to the website, he sends an email. Literally, I have still never seen the email. I don't even know what he said. Like, it wasn't even a casting call or anything. It was just like, he goes to the website, sends an email, and I forgot, we forgot about it. We didn't even talk about it again, you know, until they actually reached back out to him in March and said, Hey. Hmm. If we think your story's interesting.

0 (1h 2m 8s):
This is of 2013.

4 (1h 2m 9s):
Yeah. March, 2013. Yeah. So they, we started working with producers, and then it was about June of 2013, where we went out and filmed the episode.

0 (1h 2m 20s):
And so you film it in June and, and and when, by the way, when was it, when did it air?

4 (1h 2m 25s):
It didn't air until April of 2014.

0 (1h 2m 28s):
So almost a year later it airs. Yeah. It's Mr. Wonderful and Mark Cuban and Barbara and all, they're all there, right? Yeah.

4 (1h 2m 37s):
And right after we did kind of our opening one minute spiel or 32nd spiel or whatever, then Cameron went over and cooked, actually cooked pancakes for them, and then we passed them out.

0 (1h 2m 48s):
And what were you looking for? What was, what were you hoping for in terms of investment?

4 (1h 2m 53s):
So we went on the show trying to get, we were pitching for $500,000 for 10% of the business.

0 (1h 3m 1s):
Pretty good deal.

4 (1h 3m 3s):
We thought it was,

0 (1h 3m 4s):
And any of them bite.

4 (1h 3m 7s):
So the first offer was Kevin. So Kevin says, I'll give you, I'll give you that 500 grand, but I want half the business.

0 (1h 3m 16s):
Unbelievable.

4 (1h 3m 18s):
I know.

0 (1h 3m 19s):
Insane. Okay.

4 (1h 3m 21s):
So let me think about that. Like, we're valuing the business at 5 million bucks. Right. You know, then, but he wanted to value it at a million bucks. Oh my God. So then Robert goes, well, I'll, you know, I'll do it. I'll do the 500 grand, but I'll do it for 35% of the business. God. And so, so what what's funny is like, immediately I had this, like, we're, we're done. Let's get outta here. Right. Hopefully we'll still get the publicity. Yep. So I'm kinda like starting to wrap it up. I'm like, yeah, well, you know, it's not gonna work. Thanks guys or whatever. Camera goes, should we counter? I'm like, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Good, good point. You know, so he's like, got more presence of mind than I have. And I'm like, oh, that's a great point. So we should do that.

4 (1h 4m 1s):
So, you know, we countered at, I think we went up to 15% that we would give them for, you know, for the money. Yep. Anyway, we just weren't close. So we ended up just walking off.

0 (1h 4m 12s):
Were you sad about that? Did you feel like, like this was a failure?

4 (1h 4m 16s):
No, it's funny. I actually, I actually felt fine about it. I mean, I think if they would've gotten really close to where we wanted to be, I, I, I would've taken the deal. Yeah. And, and also I think it helped that we didn't have to have the capital. Right. I mean, we were growing pretty well, I think. Right? We were like, look, if we can get the right partner for a pretty decent valuation, let's take it. But since they were so far, it's like, well, we don't have to have it today. Let's move on and we'll look again for, with, with somebody else.

0 (1h 4m 44s):
So what, did you have any plan at that point? I mean, you don't have the Shark Tank money, so what do you, what, what do you do? Do you go looking for money elsewhere? Or do you just kind of put it on ice for a while?

4 (1h 4m 56s):
We put it on ice for a while, but right after the show, our demand went crazy.

0 (1h 5m 4s):
Oh, really? Because of the publicity? Oh,

4 (1h 5m 6s):
Gosh.

0 (1h 5m 6s):
Yeah. Yeah. What

4 (1h 5m 7s):
Happened? I mean, it just cranked it. So like people, and particularly at Target, and I think is because Target was mentioned on the show, and so people went to Target and they just cleared the shelves. Wow. And so we struggled. We struggled for a couple months just to keep up with it. Wow. And so we were like, well, look, let's let, let's let this settle out. Like let, let's wait. We're, we're, we're selling a lot right now. Let's just kind of get ahead of this. Let's not worry about trying to raise money right now, and we'll get back to it later.

0 (1h 5m 35s):
So 2014, presumably that was a banner year for you?

4 (1h 5m 40s):
Oh, man. It, it was, that was an inflection year. It really was. There was one more thing we did that really just contributed this. So the Shark Tank thing hit, but then two months later, so Shark Tank hits April, 2014. Yeah. In June of 2014, we launched Power Cakes. Power Cakes is our high protein pancake mix. So the first time we'd ever put protein in a product, and that hits the shelves at Target and just takes

0 (1h 6m 7s):
Off. And, and this is basically you're adding whey protein powder to your mix, more or less, right? Yep. First of all, it seems like a no-brainer. Now you're like, oh, no-brainer. Add protein to, to, to breakfast pancakes. But that was a really innovative concept. How, where did that come from?

4 (1h 6m 24s):
So I remember one day, I mean, really, it was just, I was home one morning and I was looking at this vanilla protein powder that we had, and we, we, I was trying to incorporate more protein into my diet, and we were making, we were adding protein to our smoothies in the morning at home and stuff like that. And one day I'm just looking at this vanilla protein powder going, I wonder how that is in a pancake. I wonder if it's good. So I made it right there, and, and I, I was like, and it was great. I was like, huh. And this is awesome. I think this could actually be a product.

0 (1h 6m 52s):
It was that simple.

4 (1h 6m 53s):
It really was. But in terms of the concept, it was totally that simple. But, but after we, and so what we did is we came up with the name Power Cakes, and then we went ahead and trademarked that. And it did great. I mean, it really right outta the gate, it, it started selling really, really well.

0 (1h 7m 10s):
And did you, did you know, you were kind of riding this wave, this like CrossFit, you know, high protein diet wave that, did you know that you were kind of riding that wave yet?

4 (1h 7m 19s):
No, I'll be honest, we didn't know that it was gonna be this big. I mean, we were watching, Cameron was watching protein trends on Google, like Google search trends and just kind of seeing, you know, seeing the searches go up and up and, and more people interested in protein. But we weren't really sure how big it could be. And we were also kind of living in the dark. We didn't have a lot of data, like, you know, we didn't have a lot of store level data to really watch trends. Yeah. And so we were kind of just making some assumptions, but yeah. At the time, we, we didn't know how big it would be.

0 (1h 7m 48s):
All right. So you're growing and presumably you, and, and, and I think you even start to expand out right? Beyond, beyond these powders. Like I think you would start to do frozen waffles and muffin mixes and, and, and more products,

4 (1h 8m 1s):
Right? Right. Yeah. We started to, we, we really started to go into more categories and, and where we felt like our brand could do well,

0 (1h 8m 10s):
I have to assume at this point, after Shark Tank, after the protein, power cakes, after the, you know, the other products in, in the other categories, you start to get investment firms, private equity firms knocking on your door.

4 (1h 8m 22s):
Oh, yeah. Oh, totally. Yeah. We were a lot of people's friends. All of a sudden

0 (1h 8m 26s):
You, you're, you're like knocking on doors and people are slamming 'em in your face for 20 years, and all of a sudden now everyone wants to be your friend.

4 (1h 8m 33s):
Totally.

0 (1h 8m 34s):
So I'm assuming you, you started to look at some of these offers and you did eventually decide to take outside money in 2016 from a group. What was the thinking behind that? Did you, did you feel like we need to take this money to, to really scale?

4 (1h 8m 46s):
Yeah. We were growing really, really fast. And so it's not like we were outta money. You know, we were, we were actually making money, but we started to look at this business really growing and started to think, man, we need some resources. We need some, I kind of, you know, even personally, I felt like I need somebody to share the risk. I, my house was still on the line, for example, for, you know, for a business loan. Yeah. You know, like every little bump, you know, kind of starts to rattle your cage and you're like, you know, you're feeling about, you're feeling like the business is so vulnerable for all these years and, and, and just my mind shifted. Yeah. And man, I was just like, I've got to unload this so I can not be so worried about the business, but, you know, start to become a better leader.

4 (1h 9m 31s):
And so, you know, we, we, we felt like, let's go find somebody that has some real experience in the space and let's get a partner. Honestly, that was incredibly healthy to do that.

0 (1h 9m 43s):
I think by 2018, you were like the top pancake seller at Target. Like you were bigger than Aunt Jemima and Bisque at Target. You were like the fourth biggest pancake mixed brand in the country by 2018.

4 (1h 9m 56s):
Right. We were blown away. I mean, we were, our numbers at Target were incredible. And so we, you know, we took that story out to the rest of the market and we started to gain distribution and really started to make an impact into the category.

0 (1h 10m 11s):
So, so 2019 for many companies, record year, I mean, for most companies around how I built this. Yeah. And then 2020, for a lot of companies, especially non-food items, this has been a disastrous year. Oh, totally. Right. And what about for you? I mean, people are not going to Walmart and Target and Costco as much. There's more purchasing from Amazon. People are walking through the aisles of stores. They're not meandering. They're going in and out. Yeah. Have you guys taken a hit?

4 (1h 10m 43s):
Well, you know, we've, we've actually been pretty fortunate now, you know, because as people eat away from home, like restaurants less right? People are at home more eating at home more so, yeah. The grocery stores have, have been, you know, up, so the pancake mix category has grown a lot. I mean, we've seen a big boom in that space.

0 (1h 11m 1s):
People making pancakes at home.

4 (1h 11m 3s):
Exactly. Yeah. You know, you have more time. It's fun. Like, usually it's a weekend thing, right? It's like, yep. A heavy user of Pancake Mix is, in the past, been maybe, you know, three, four times a month. Month, yeah. On average, you know, but now it's like, it can be a couple times a week.

0 (1h 11m 21s):
Not that long ago, like 10 years ago, you were teetering really? Nine years ago. I mean, you, your dad like bailed you out with that 50 grand. Yeah. You know? Yeah. I think, you know, you're projected to do a hundred million in revenue, or maybe you did last year. That's pretty crazy.

4 (1h 11m 41s):
It, it's insane.

0 (1h 11m 42s):
And you're projecting 200 million in revenue this year, right?

4 (1h 11m 45s):
Yeah. We should go over that this year. Wow. It's incredible. Like, I mean, it really is incredible. And I think about, I think about that time, yeah. Going from, I mean, it took us 16 years to hit a million dollars in revenue, right? It's like, come on, man. Like, I look at, I'm like, what the heck, what the crap was I doing, man? Yeah. Like, like that. Those were some really hard years. And it's like, man, you, you should have been able to grow quicker than that. Then you look at the context, it's like no capital, no money to put in no expertise, and it just like going to school, like the distractions and all that stuff. But it's like we finally got there, and then over the last 10 years-ish, it's like that. Now we're gonna break what we should go past 200 million this year.

4 (1h 12m 27s):
I mean, it's, it's incredible. And I think it's like, as we've kind of talked about this journey, it's like, there's so many different phases. And I mean, even though it was hard, I almost gave up a lot. I I tried to sell the business a couple times and we almost, it almost just died a couple times. I mean, I'm actually grateful for all that. Yeah. I am. I mean, those things are so hard to go through while you're going through them, but you get, you make it through and then you're stronger, you're smarter, and then you really, you're more

0 (1h 12m 55s):
Cautious. Yeah. I mean, it's, it's almost like the, the success is sweeter. It's a cliche, but it is because Yeah. Of the pain.

4 (1h 13m 4s):
You're not kidding. I mean, it, it totally is because I think if it, you know, if it would've come easy, I just, ah, I don't know. I mean, it, I I wouldn't have appreciate it quite as much, you

0 (1h 13m 14s):
Know? Yeah. When you think about this, this just unbelievable journey, right? I mean, close to bankrupt a little more than 10 years ago. Yeah. Yeah. Probably never really sure whether you'd be financially secure, and you are, I mean, this business has made you, and presumably your family and Cameron financially secure for life based on your mom's pancake recipe. Yeah. Do you think that this happened because of, of your hard work? Or do you attribute more of it to luck?

4 (1h 13m 47s):
Man, you know, what I say sometimes is, people always say that fish don't just jump in your boat, but you know what? I actually believe they do. But, but here's the thing. You gotta be out fishing for that to happen, right? And so I think it's both, it, it's such a combination of both. It's like we have had some lucky breaks. I, I'd have to attribute some of this to luck. Definitely.

0 (1h 14m 12s):
Yeah. Well, you got really lucky that nobody wanted to buy you.

4 (1h 14m 15s):
Yeah, totally. It's funny you say that because it's like, you don't think about those closed doors as luck sometimes, do you? I mean, you think about those as,

0 (1h 14m 25s):
Oh, crap failures or disasters or Yeah,

4 (1h 14m 27s):
Yeah. Another failure. Like, oh my gosh. And you go home and you're like, okay, what do I do now to keep going?

0 (1h 14m 35s):
This business can, is gonna continue, presumably continue to grow. You know, you're in your mid forties, you can do a bunch of other things. You can sell your shares and walk away and start something new you can stay on. I mean, what do you think I, do you think you wanna be in, in the Kodiak Cakes business in 10, 15 years?

4 (1h 14m 56s):
That's a good, that's a great question. I mean, this has been, look, it's been my life, right? I mean, it's, I've put everything into this my whole career. But, you know, am I the guy that runs Kodiak Cakes at 500 million, a billion? I don't know. I mean, I just, I don't know, how long do I ride this? I mean it, but I, you know, I've got, I've got quite a bit of gas in the tank for a while. So yeah, it's still really fun. I love the people I work with, and I, I love this brand.

0 (1h 15m 25s):
That's Joel Clark, co-founder of Kodiak Cakes. And I know we just heard Joel say he wasn't sure if he'd be running the company in 10 or 15 years. Well, as it happened last year, Kodiak Cakes was acquired by a private equity firm, and Joel stepped down as ceo, but he and Cameron are still on the board of directors. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you enjoyed it, please spread the word. Tell someone about how I built this or post about it on social media. And if you wanna contact the team, our email address is h ibt id.wondery.com. You can follow us on Twitter. We're at How I built this, and I'm at Guy Roz and on Instagram.

0 (1h 16m 5s):
We're at How I Built This, and I'm at Guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by Routine era Bluey. It was edited by Niva Grant with research help from Gareth Gales. Our production staff also includes Casey Herman Lane Coates, John Isabella, Liz Metzger, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung, Chris Sini, Carla Estevez, and Sam Paulson. Our intern is Susanna Brown. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This.

0 (1h 16m 50s):
Hey, prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and add free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon Music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear@wonderyshop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.