wondery Plus (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How I, Built This Early, and ad free Right. now join Wondery. Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts.

Indeed (10s):
What's better than finding quality candidates? Finding them fast. With Indeed. you can attract talent interview candidates and hire all in one place. As soon as you sponsor a post on Indeed, you get a short list of quality candidates whose CVS match your job description. Boom, just like that. So. start hiring now with a 100 pound sponsored job credit for your job. Post at Indeed dot com slash how I built Offer good for a limited time claim your 100 pound credit now at Indeed dot com slash how I built Just. go to Indeed dot com slash how I built and support this show by saying you heard about it on this podcast. Indeed dot com slash how IBU terms and conditions apply Need to hire you need indeed.

Pipedrive (58s):
This episode is brought to you by Pipedrive, the easy and effective CRM for closing more deals and to drive small business growth. With Pipedrive, you can track your sales pipeline, manage leads, and automate your entire sales process in one central place so you can focus on selling. Plus Pipedrive is easy to use, it's fully customizable for your needs and produces visual reports for your business. To unlock even more sales success, sign up today and get a special 30 day free trial Right now at pipedrive.com with the code built terms and conditions for the discount apply

0 (1m 41s):
Hey. everyone You know every time I run into a How, I, Built This fan, the first thing they wanna do is tell me about their favorite episode, which is so awesome. So now I wanna share your favorite episode with the millions of people who listen to this show episodes they might not have heard or might wanna hear again. So here's what I want you to do. Grab your smartphone and record a short memo short, like less than 30 seconds. And, tell us your name, where you live, and which episode is your favorite and why you loved it. So for example, I might say, Hey, it's Guy Raz here in San Francisco. and my favorite episode of the show is the one about Hamdi, Lakay and Chobani.

0 (2m 21s):
because I learned so much about how to just push through and nothing seems to be working out And, it gave me a whole new perspective on being resilient. So that's it. Something like that. You know, and by the way, that's not my favorite episode. I love them all equally. Anyway, once you're done with the recording email or message it to us at HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com and we'll share your favorites right here in the ad breaks in future episodes. Thanks so much. You guys are the best.

2 (2m 55s):
You know you everyone knows that guy or you've read about that guy that just he can't get out of his own way and he just entrepreneurs till he dies. Yeah. And he never hits anything big and

0 (3m 5s):
And you had that in your mind, you thought, am I gonna be that guy?

2 (3m 8s):
Yeah. I mean, there's times that, but You know the responsibilities. I've got four kids and a wife and I'm sitting there with one truck thinking, can I scale this? Yeah. But You know I was having a great time. My kids thought I was the greatest 'cause I'm driving an ice cream truck.

0 (3m 28s):
Welcome to How I Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz and on the show today how Tony Lamb went from a door to door vacuum salesman to founding Kona Ice, a franchise empire of shaved ice trucks that now number more than 1500 across North America. If you've listened to the show long enough, you'll know that we've had some brands and products that started in places that didn't really seem to match. for example, famous Dave's Barbecue, Dave Anderson started his barbecue empire in a remote part of Northern Wisconsin.

0 (4m 16s):
I mean, I don't know about you, but when I think smoked brisket or baby back ribs, I just don't think Hayward, Wisconsin. But somehow it worked. Same with Uni Pizza ovens. This brand has transformed home pizza making, and yet the ovens were invented by a man from Finland who now lives in Scotland. And let's be honest, when you think of a great Neapolitan pie, you imagine the warm son of Naples, not mid-afternoon darkness in Edinburgh. Now, today's story is about a guy named Tony Lamb, who lives in Kentucky, the home of Hawaiian shaved Ice. Okay, I'm kidding. Hawaii, of course, is the home of Hawaiian shaved ice, that fluffy, snowy cup of ice drowning in colorful, fruity syrup.

0 (5m 4s):
Tony Lamb figured out how to turn it into a huge business, a business called Kona Ice. It now has more than 1500 shaved ice trucks across the us, Canada, and Mexico. The brand generates over $400 million in annual revenue, and it was started by a guy who, for much of his adult life, sold vacuum cleaners. Now, if there's one secret, one thing that every successful entrepreneur has in common, it's the ability to hear the word no and just keep plowing ahead. And that in a nutshell is what it takes to sell vacuum cleaners and Hawaiian style shaved ice in Kentucky.

0 (5m 46s):
Tony Lamb was born in the late 1960s. He grew up in Parkersburg, West Virginia, youngest of four kids. Tony actually shares a birthday with his dad, Tom. And growing up he watched and learned a lot about entrepreneurship and sales from his dad, who also sold vacuum cleaners for a brand called Rainbow. In fact, Tony describes his dad as quote, the greatest vacuum cleaner salesman to ever put on a pair of alligator shoes.

2 (6m 15s):
My dad just got this bigger than life personality and I had the weirdest perspective ever growing up because my dad did very well selling vacuum cleaners and he drove nice cars. We had a nice house, and then I had buddies who their dads were doctors or lawyers and they didn't live as nice as we were living. And and they're like, what does your dad do for a living? I was like, he sells vacuum cleaners. So my perspective was You know, okay, on the hierarchy of of life, you've got vacuum cleaner sales and then doctors and then lawyers and bankers. So I always aspired to be a vacuum cleaner salesman. 'cause I I thought that was the road to Mercedes and You know quality of life.

0 (6m 58s):
Tell me about, like, he was going door to door selling them like to, like were these for industrial use? Were they for home use? What kind of vacuum cleaners? No,

2 (7m 7s):
It's the rainbow vacuum cleaner. So it's, it's an in-home door to door. We, they use referrals more so than they go door to door. So if someone buys a rainbow, they'll send you to four of their friends so they can get a free shampooer. Hmm. And he started out, You know when I was little, I think he was a regional or a, a district salesperson or whatever. So, Hmm. But then as I got older, he promoted up to the company and, and when I was in high school, he was the president of Rex Air, which is the company that produces them. And they're, they're sold in 80 countries around the world and it's, it's still a thriving business. So.

0 (7m 40s):
Alright. So you kind of growing up with just what, kinda watching your dad do this and become quite successful in this business, and I guess you also kind of had a knack for, for selling. 'cause in high school, you, you did sales jobs, right? Like you worked, I think you worked at the gap at at a certain point

2 (7m 57s):
I did. I'm always surprised when people know details of my life. Yes. I worked at The Gap was my first W two job. I detailed cars for a long time and then I wanted to get a real job and I took this job at the Gap for $3 and 35 cents an hour, which was minimum wage at the time. Yeah. But the lesson that I pulled from the Gap, and I'll never forget this, was I was at the Gap and they said, Hey, they're announced this big Christmas contest and whoever sells the most. And I'm like, well, I'm, I'm gonna kill everybody. And I come in and my schedule has been cut and I'm, I'm scheduled for like 20 hours this week, and Charlie McKay is scheduled for You know 36 hours. I'm like, how am I supposed to beat 'em?

2 (8m 38s):
And so I'm asking the manager and she says, well, I'm trying to give, make it even because you sell more. And I'm like, well, how is that fair? And I remember going home to my dad and I'm fussing around and and he said, Tony, listen, when you work for somebody, they're always gonna tell you when to work, how to work, and basically establish your worth as a, as a person. Yeah. And I'm like, wow, that's You know, very, very sobering as a sophomore in high school. But, but it stuck. And I, I thought, yeah, you're right. So eventually I just moved back into detailing cars and I had a, had a pretty good little car detailing business for the rest of my high school career.

0 (9m 18s):
Tell me, what, what was it about sales that, that You know, what was it about your personality that made you good at sales? Are you just somebody who can talk to anybody?

2 (9m 28s):
I, I think that was it guy. I, I I, I think ego is checked at the door when you're, when you're in sales. I, I have no inhibitions and I say that and I, I don't say it boastfully, I say it almost apologetically and the fact that I'm not an extremely attractive gentleman. So, and, but when I was asking You know girls to go out, I was never offended when they would say no. And I would just go to the, onto the next one. 'cause it's a, it's a numbers game. Just like

0 (9m 53s):
It's numbers game. Yeah.

2 (9m 54s):
Just like vacuum winter sales.

0 (9m 56s):
So, okay. So, so when it's time for you to go to college, I guess you, you go to the University of Kentucky and you study marketing and I guess, I guess to earn some money during that time, you're also selling rainbow vacuum cleaners like your dad, right? Right. But what you're, you're also thinking like after graduation that you'll interview for like a, an office job, like a You know professional job working under fluorescent lights.

2 (10m 23s):
Yeah. I, I was a fairly good student at uk. I got the grades and the big job interview that came on campus was a pharmaceutical rep, Merck Pharmaceuticals. And everyone in my little peer group was talking about it and they said, Lamb You know you should do this because you've got all the sales experience, you've got enough chemistry background, You know. So I go, I, I You know get a suit, I go to the interview, I sit down with the guy and man, I'm going to town. 'cause I sold vacuums all the way through college and I was actually pretty good at it. Hmm. So I'm in there telling this pharmaceutical rep that You know a good salesperson, da da dah, dah dah. And, and we're having this conversation, it's going good. And he said, man, I'm really excited about this interview. And I said, I am too. He goes, you got any questions for me?

2 (11m 3s):
And I said, yeah, how much do I make? And he said, I'll, I'll never forget this. He said, $36,000 a year and a company car. And I said, what kind of car? What kind of car? 'cause my God, it better be a Ferrari 'cause I make 36,000 in a summer selling vacuum cleaners. He goes, well, because you have to transport a lot of You know samples and things. It's usually a minivan. And I'm like, for the love of God, man, I look like this. I can't drive a minivan. I I'll never get married.

0 (11m 36s):
Oh man. Alright. So I, I guess you walk out of that interview and decide to stick with selling vacuum cleaners after college. I mean, you're, you're good at it and, and you were making good money. Tell, tell me about what you would do. Like, like sell me a vacuum cleaner. Right. I'm in, let's say I'm in the market to buy one, right? And I, and I'm, I'm looking at this brand and at that brand and, and then you come to my house.

2 (11m 58s):
Oh God, nobody's looking to buy a vacuum cleaner. It's just, that's, that's the whole thing. So you knock on the door, you've got an appointment because Mary Smith has bought a rainbow. So she gives four of her unwilling friends names. And so you call their friends and say, Hey Judy, I was wondering if I could schedule a time to come in and show you and John of the rainbow. I'll be quick about it. I'll do it fast. You guys get a, a little three day, two night vacation package timeshare presentation. We didn't say that part, but get a little three day, two night vacation pays for your hotel accommodations. So let's schedule a time. And she's like, my husband's never gonna go for this. I know, but, but tell him I'm, I'm fun.

2 (12m 38s):
It'll be a good time. I'm never gonna pressure you guys. I just wanna show it. Get the credit and I'll be outta your hair. Alright. And lord forbid the husband answers the door 'cause he's pissed at me immediately and they all start announcing we are not buying. And I'm laughing, having a good time. I come in and just, and I just try to disarm 'em a little bit. But guy, there's so many nuances of, of selling and I'll, I'll give you some fun Yeah. Fun things. If at some point you can figure out whether the guy's got a hobby or not. So let's just say, and I'm always looking in the cars in the garage when I come in and say, man, you guys got a beautiful garage. Why don't you show me your garage and he'll take me out. And if I see a set of pinging golf clubs Yeah.

2 (13m 20s):
Or a John Deere riding lawnmower. And probably most wives don't realize that a set of ping golf clubs cost $1,500. Yeah. And, but I will announce that at some point if I'm not getting the sale and the guy who just like sits back and smiles real big and I'm like, You know John, if this was a set of golf clubs or that John Deere riding lower, you and I could talk about this all night, but it's not, this is a product that's gonna make Judy's job a lot easier in the house. And all we really need to know is if if she wanted it, would you help her get it? And I think she wants it. So the question comes down to would you help her get it? And, and of course you would. So what's your middle initial

0 (13m 59s):
Wow.

2 (13m 60s):
Because you just ask for their middle initial, you pull out the sales receipt and you put your head down. And if you get T or s you've got the sale. But you gotta do your, you gotta do the presentation. Right. You gotta bring him all the way through the journey. Wow. There was this, there was an old Zig Ziglar and I and Guy, God help me if I don't quote Zig Ziglar a thousand times a day. But my dad, I I, the joke was that I think he put Zig Ziglar tapes in my crib when growing up. 'cause I, I can talk like Zig Ziglar and I can refer, recite most of his stuff. But his, his great line was timid salesman have skinny kids.

2 (14m 41s):
Hmm. And, and so I wasn't gonna be timid. I was gonna ask for the order. Wow. That's how I married my wife 31 years ago is I asked, I I didn't assume I just asked for the order.

0 (14m 55s):
Wow. So one of the things that I, that I've noticed in all the hundreds of interviews I've done on the show is that when I talked to people who started out in sales, the thing that sales really helped them to learn was how to, how to move past No. Right? Yeah. Like for a lot of people they hear no. And that's it. That's, that's the end of the road. Right. But, but then if you can figure out how to hear no and understand that that's just the beginning of the road.

2 (15m 24s):
Well, it's all on how you interpret. No, and and the way I was always taught, or the way I believe is the answer is no. Based on the information that I have Right now. So the no is not going to change by you pressuring me. The no only changes if you give me more information. So, okay. Why would you not purchase the, well, it's just too much. You can buy a $200 vacuum cleaner at Walmart, or I can buy a $1,500 vacuum cleaner from you. Well, let's break that down. Let me go ahead and do a 15 year cost study. So these vacuum cleaners that you buy from Walmart are gonna break down every three or four years. You gotta buy bags, you're not getting the job done.

2 (16m 4s):
Or you can spend 1500, you've got a product that'll last 15 years, but most importantly, you're gonna get the job done. So let's make it to the point where it's just an obvious Yes. And you'd feel almost stupid saying no before you get there.

0 (16m 20s):
Alright. So meantime, early in your career, you're, you are selling vacuums and you help me understand, I mean you, you were a rep for the Rainbow systems, but you had your own team. It was, it was sort of like a real estate agent that eventually when they become good, they they build their own team around them. Is that how it works? Yeah.

2 (16m 39s):
You basically, you you, I was in Lexington after I graduated. I stayed there for a year and then I moved to Northern Kentucky and I started my own office and very magically, I mean, I, I don't wanna take too much credit for it, but we built a, one of the largest offices in the region within a year. Wow. So yeah, I mean I'm, again, I'm 23, 24 years old. I'm making You know 10, $20,000 a month. Yeah. And I ended up with six offices. This is by the time I was 25, I had 300 salespeople. I was running a multimillion dollar business at 25 selling vacuum cleaners and started door to door.

2 (17m 20s):
I guess when I say it like this and I'm having this revelation, I'm like, Hey, that's not too bad. Amazing.

0 (17m 26s):
Yeah. So, alright. So you grow this, this regional office to quite a big business. And I guess what around sort of the early two thousands you decide to, to retire? I mean, was that, was that what happened?

2 (17m 42s):
It was, I, I, my dad had stepped down from the company. I thought he was treated very poorly. They rewrote the history of Rainbow. Mm. And my dad, who I feel like was responsible for a massive part of this growth, all the programs we running, they were my dad's ideas. Mm. And he got like two paragraphs in the, in the history of Rex Air. Hmm. And I was like, You know I'm done. You know, I'll go do something else. Little did I know how much money I was making in comparison to the real world. And, but I did, I got very discouraged. I didn't like the new management coming in.

2 (18m 24s):
I, I You know, I got a couple other opportunities and I just started slowly disassembling the organization. I would start selling the offices off to the managers and, and it slowly just You know all went away.

0 (18m 36s):
It's interesting because earlier you talked about how You know, sort of checking you out the door is a really important quality in being a salesperson. I think it, it really is. And just in life, right. In general. But it sounds like in this case it did kind of challenge your ego or, or your family's, it doesn't sound like the same Tony Lamb that You know that didn't really care what people thought about him. Listen,

2 (19m 1s):
Nothing will build an ego like You know success in in that. And and again, I will freely admit You know you get a little big for your britches. I was very young and I was winning all the contests. Yeah. And I was, they fly you to Hawaii, they go on all these trips and yeah, you get a little, you get a little bit too big for your britches. And then, like I said, and I was like, You know what? I'm gonna quit this business. And my wife said, are you sure? Because we are, we are living pretty good and we get these trips every six months that we go on that are fabulous. And so she wasn't a fan, but I, I just thought I had some other options out there that turned out not to be as You know wonderful as Rainbow was.

2 (19m 43s):
So

0 (19m 44s):
At this point, from what I understand, you start to do some, some consulting work. Like I guess there was a friend of yours that you were helping out this guy Ed Yeah, ed Reynolds. That's

2 (19m 54s):
It, that's exactly right.

0 (19m 55s):
And, and I guess he had, ed had this struggling furniture company in Louisville. And what was it exactly? Did, did he have just one furniture store or was it several?

2 (20m 4s):
It was, he had several, but the, what we did in Louisville transpired into his whole, all of his furniture shops.

0 (20m 11s):
Got it. Okay.

2 (20m 12s):
And so we turned it around and, and fairly quickly it got going pretty good. But then they were taking those, those, how did you do it? He had finance people running a sales operation. Yeah. And so you really needed salespeople and you needed some marketing. And I was, I'll tell you this real quick. I didn't have a marketing budget. So I, I would come up with these yard signs. Now remember it's buy here, pay here furniture. So it's not,

0 (20m 39s):
What does that mean?

2 (20m 40s):
So you, it's not bank financing. So you come in and you want a couch and you put up You know $200 down. Oh, I see. And you pay them $50 a month till the couch is paid off. So

0 (20m 50s):
Pay And they and they charge you some interest.

2 (20m 52s):
Oh yeah. Charge you interest. And they make the profit on the, on the couch. So yard signs and I produced like a thousand yard signs, buy here, pay here furniture You know no credit checks, blah, blah. And I started putting them all over Louisville Kentucky like,

0 (21m 5s):
Like signs of people when they're running for office. Like those kinds of yards.

2 (21m 9s):
Exactly. Okay. There's 18 by 24 signs. I put 'em at every intersection. Business started going up, the city of Louisville calls the furniture store and said, we're getting ready to fine you for all these signs. You can't put signs up. And I'm like, I, we paid some high school kids to do it. I'm so sorry. We will get 'em down. He goes, so a week later they call back 'cause there's more signs now. 'cause You know. And and he goes, we're gonna find you a thousand dollars a day. Well we were making probably $5,000 a day. And I was like, I'll take the fine You know,

0 (21m 39s):
I, I read that, that at a certain point you bought billboard trucks on eBay.

2 (21m 44s):
I will give you credit guy, you have certainly done your research. I could not get billboard space in Louisville where I wanted it. And I'm on eBay, I'm looking You know, trying to do maybe temporary billboard or signage or something. And I came across the Billboard truck and, and I thought, huh. And I bought a billboard truck and I, and then it became its own business on the side. Oh, you

0 (22m 5s):
Would, you would rent the truck out or you would basically rent the billboard out on the truck and have somebody drive it around. Yeah.

2 (22m 11s):
You you go get a retired guy and say, Hey, go get stuck in traffic. And it's, it's brilliant. Slow down. You're going too fast. I ended up with a bunch of those trucks and that was, that's kind of a segue into Kona Ice because the billboard truck business was turned into a really nice side. But my wife still loves the billboard truck business because it saved us You know it was, those were leaner times in the, in the Lamb family.

0 (22m 39s):
Why, why were they leaner times? I mean, you sold your vacuum business to your managers and it was a good business. So I have to assume that you did pretty well outta that.

2 (22m 47s):
Well, if they would've kept going, I would've done really well. But You know they slowly, they're gonna pay me a hundred dollars over for the sales for the next five years. Right. But You know, then they started shutting down because they didn't have the all the skill sets to keep running it. So I got about probably a third of what I was expecting and You know all the other little things that happened in life. You're like, oh, well that didn't work out well. Okay. That didn't work out. I

0 (23m 9s):
Did you when, I mean the, the billboard truck idea is a great idea, right? Because it's, it is almost like, not quite, but almost like a passive income business, which is correct. You know, as you say, you, you find some people who wanna pay for the bill. And, and by the way, how much would it cost to, to place an ad on a billboard on the truck per week? Or how did you price it? Yeah, you

2 (23m 29s):
Wanna charge. 'cause you've got inherently you've got gasoline and labor. So you've got a couple hundred bucks a day in expenses. So you're gonna need to get 500 to $700 a day You know for it to, to to be profitable. So, so I started selling the, each individual side of the truck because the truck holds, looks like a big TP or whatever. And hold has two sides to it. So I started, what I would do is I went to the, all the casinos in Cincinnati and I, because they were the biggest media buyers at the time. Hmm. What happens in casinos when they come to towns, You know after a while they stop buying all the ads, the revenues go down and, and this thing kind of petered out. But then Kona had started up,

0 (24m 7s):
I I wanna ask you about Kona in just just a minute, but before that I, I mean, were you looking for the next thing like that? Like an anchor that would be that thing for you?

2 (24m 18s):
Yeah. I mean, what I hated about Rainbow was the lack of residual. Truly you have to sell another vacuum cleaner every single day. I had buddies that were in insurance and they worked their butts off for a couple years, then coast for the next 20. And I'm like, You know, I want some of that. Yeah. And so what was so fabulous about the ad truck was the 500, $600 a day. But it was, you're at the mercy of the ad media buyer. You're at the mercy of You know how much can I generate? I ended up with You know multiple billboard trucks, but it was all on me. You know, how much can I sell? But I, I was always in the back of my head looking for, I wanna be able to sell something and make a little bit of money on it for the rest of my life.

2 (25m 2s):
Yeah,

0 (25m 3s):
But you didn't know what that was.

2 (25m 4s):
I did not know what that

0 (25m 5s):
Was. Yeah. Alright, so the idea for what would become Kona, Ice really started a few years before you launched it. So let, let's first talk, talk about the idea. I guess this is around 2004 and it's as simple as like a bad experience at an ice cream truck.

2 (25m 23s):
Yeah. The, the origin story, and, and this is true, no embellishment. I moved into a subdivision, we're in the backyard with my kids. We hear the music and my kids all look at each other and take off running to the front yard. And I, I remember it varies, varies distinctly. Hmm. My wife and I kind of jog behind them here around the corner comes a 72, 72 Chevy van Blue smoke rolling outta the back of it. And, and You know this funky music playing. And, and I was like, oh my gosh, it looks just like a child predator, You know, just, it's just screaming. And this guy sticks his head out the window and he's, he doesn't have a shirt on.

2 (26m 3s):
He's got a beautiful array of fresh prison tattoos. Okay, maybe I'm exaggerating that, but he was heavily tattooed. Yeah. So they got their popsicles and I'm paying the guy and they're opening up their freezer burnt icing crusted popsicles. And they are disappointed. However, I know for a fact if the guy would've turned around and come back, they would've had the experience all over again. But it ice cream truck, ice cream truck and, and So that became, that is the true origin of Kona Ice because I said, can you imagine if that truck would've been beautiful?

2 (26m 44s):
Yeah. Can you imagine if the product would've been good? And, and this is a almost a two week conversation that I just kept obsessing over where I'm sitting there and I'm like, what about if that truck would have been all glass on the side? And you could have looked in and it would've been a high school girl or a college girl driving it with You know, with a uniform on. And you could see what she was doing. And the products would've been You know fair and, and reasonable. And, and the experience would've been engaging. What would've happened.

0 (27m 12s):
And my, my assumption would be as you started to research this, you would quickly come to the conclusion that this was not a good business. Like ice cream consumption in the US for example, has dropped considerably from like the eighties to today. Correct. The ice cream truck business You know, depends on the price of gas and like the repairs. And there's just so much evidence to show. Certainly at 2004 when you were looking at that, that business was in decline. It was like getting a taxi medallion, You know in New York City, like that was not the business that you would naturally think, oh yeah, there's something you could do here with this.

2 (27m 46s):
Right. But let me tell you another story that kind of helped that. So when I sold off the Rainbow business, my personal secretary as her as her severance, I bought out a video store in Cincinnati 'cause they were dying. But I, we moved it to Warsaw Kentucky, which is a, a small town but rural and and country where they're still renting video tapes at the time.

0 (28m 10s):
Yep.

2 (28m 11s):
So I moved this video store down there and I, we, we get it all set up. She did a great job. I was there one time and customer came in and she was trying to turn it over into food and where she was selling ice cream and different things like that was a customer came in while I was there and she sold a shaved ice to him.

0 (28m 27s):
So she was doing shaved ice at her, her video store basically. Yeah. Okay.

2 (28m 32s):
And she put some flavoring on and the guy walked out and she made three bucks or four bucks or whatever the number was. And, and she said, I love that. And I said, why? And she goes, because I made, it's all profit.

0 (28m 41s):
It's just ice. It's just shaved frozen water.

2 (28m 43s):
Yeah. And she says, even if I buy the best flavoring that's out there, the most expensive flavoring, that's still wildly profitable. You know you make a milkshake, you sell for $3, you got a buck 50 in it. Yeah. He said, I sell shaved ice for $3. I've got You know 20 cents in it. And that's 10 cents for the cup.

0 (28m 59s):
Basically pure profit. Yeah.

2 (29m 0s):
It was pure. And, and again, being a serial entrepreneur, you only have to hear that that that one time once Yeah. You know bing my, my ears, my senses go up. Spidey senses start tingling. And I was like, huh.

0 (29m 13s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Tony builds a tropical themed truck for selling shaved ice and then changes out of his salesman suit and into a Hawaiian shirt. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This

Crucible Moments (29m 41s):
How I Built This is supported by Crucible Moments, a new podcast about the pivotal decisions that shape the journeys of some of the most important startups hosted by Sequoia's rule off both a Crucible Moments provides a peak into the journey of companies like Airbnb, PayPal 23, and Me and Nvidia, and the decisions that change their businesses forever. Like how PayPal formed from a merger of two enemies who had been trying to destroy each other, or how early days Airbnb rebuilt trust after a host's house was ransacked. These companies only matter today because of how they navigated these Crucible Moments. I just listened to a recent episode with HubSpot founders, Brian Halligan and Dharmesh Shaw and how they turned HubSpot into one of the most influential tech companies of our time. It's super interesting. Tune into Sequoia's new podcast series to discover how some of the most transformational companies of the modern era were built. Crucible Moments is out now and available everywhere you get your podcasts. And at Crucible Moments dot com go listen to Crucible Moments today.

Squarespace (30m 41s):
If you want a business, then Squarespace is your one stop shop for engaging with your customers and building your brand. With Squarespace, you can easily design a website that stands out from the competition and that's just scratching the surface. With Squarespace Video Studio, you can create pro-level videos effortlessly helping you tell your brand story, reach new customers, and drive sales. Squarespace also allows you to easily display posts from your business's social profiles on your website. With just a few clicks. You can automatically push website content to your social media channels so your followers can share it too. And Squarespace offers tons of analytics. So You know what's driving web traffic and sales and can adjust your marketing strategy accordingly. Check out Squarespace dot com for a free trial and when you're ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% of your first purchase of a website or domain.

0 (31m 45s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's around 2007 and Tony Lamb is leaning into a new business idea based on two recent experiences. The first a not so fun time buying ice cream for his kids off a truck. And the second watching someone make a very tidy profit from Shaved Ice. And then a third thing happens. The guy that Tony's been working with on the furniture stores, ed Reynolds, he happens to buy a Mr. Softy truck.

2 (32m 18s):
I actually thought he bought it just to sit at his house so he could eat it. But it You know. He ended up putting a guy in it, driving it around or whatever. And one time he said, You know, hey, the ice cream truck's not making money. What, what's your thoughts on on it? Making money? 'cause I had turned his furniture business around a little bit. And so you look at the ice cream truck and you're like, well it's complicated. It's expensive, it's, the product is too much. You've gotta have a mechanic and a salesman. Mm. It's gotta get down to a one person operation. Your food costs are too high. You've got way too much waste. You fill the entire ice cream machines up if you can't sell it all You know. Yeah. What about Shaved You know? And we just back and forth, back and forth and, and this became a, a very big conversation between us. Yeah. I'm working for 'em, my contracts are kind of coming to an end.

2 (32m 60s):
We were sitting at string town restaurant in Florence and he goes, Hey, we've talked about this till we're blue in the face. What do you think? And I said, I think I want to go do it.

0 (33m 10s):
You would pursue this, you would see if you could turn ice cream trucks into shaved ice trucks, basically.

2 (33m 17s):
Yep. And he goes, you wanna partner up? And I'm like, nah, I don't wanna partner. And he goes, I'll back it. And I was like, You know I do want a partner. I don't wanna spend the last of my family's savings. But yeah, your money.

0 (33m 31s):
And, and by the way, I guess I should mention the, the reason Ed Quebec you is that in addition to, to the furniture stores, I guess his primary business was that he owned a finance company. Right. And I I think he gave you like Yeah, exactly. Like half a million dollar line of credit to, to get things going. Yeah.

2 (33m 49s):
So

0 (33m 49s):
You were gonna pursue this and, and as somebody who grew up with a Snoopy snow comb machine, what was the difference between what you were gonna do and like, what were called snow cones that you would get at like county fairs?

2 (33m 60s):
It's all texture of ice. The, the snow cone. I mean, the way I picture it, my upbringing was you get it from a truck or you get it and then you either have to let it melt or you just take the chance of just ruining the roof of your mouth and possibly busting some teeth off

0 (34m 16s):
Because it was like a ball shape ice and you would put some syrup thrown on it.

2 (34m 21s):
Right. And you go at it like crazy then bite end up biting the bottom of the cone off and letting all the syrup drain out into your mouth. Taking

0 (34m 27s):
Me back to little league. Yeah.

2 (34m 29s):
Yeah.

0 (34m 30s):
Okay. So, so that's different. First of all, for people who've had shaved ice either in Hawaii or wherever, like these are specialized machines, it's like, it's almost like a vice, right? That, that you put a huge like round ice block in and then it, it twirls around like to get that really nice shave. But, but I have to imagine you had to spend some time like learning about that whole thing and like, what is it, where do you get these machines? How do you make it

2 (34m 58s):
100%? The the, if I would've had to rely on, I think it's a swan that that does the big block of ice. That like you're saying, a vice that forces it into an open razor blade that spins on a axis and and shaves it off, it produces a very fluffy product. I don't think I would've pursued all the way through because the, the speed of service is slow. The danger that the skill that you have to have, you can't just let an 18 year old go in there with a spinning razor blade. I mean, you're gonna have to train this person to be able to do that. And I didn't want that. I don't want to have something so proprietary that we just can't duplicate it on a large scale.

2 (35m 39s):
So I found an ice shaving machine. It, it produced very acceptable, not snow cone, very acceptable shaved ice on a very quick timeframe. You know in a couple seconds you have a cup full of pretty fluffy snow. Yeah.

0 (35m 55s):
So So here, we're, we're now talking about You know, we're, we're going back to 2006 where you really are jumping into this and you are starting to really figure out how to make this work. 'cause you, we weren't gonna, it wasn't gonna launch until 2007. But at that time, and even to some extent today, unless you go to Hawaii, there probably huge parts of the United States where people aren't that familiar with shave with like shaved ice. They don't Correct. I mean, You know it's not, it's, and certainly in 2006. So what made you think that that was going to be a winner?

2 (36m 29s):
The fact that I've never seen a kid turn down a sugary treat. I get a little grief for that too. 'cause I, I used to make this statement, Hey, it's not hard sales, we're selling sugar to kids and, and You know now that's the worst thing you can possibly say. You're an animal. I'm like, everything in moderation lighten up You know. But

0 (36m 48s):
You really thought that it was just a matter of time. Like, and I guess because the margins were better than selling popsicles or or ice cream. Yeah.

2 (36m 58s):
Because you could handle the, the, you're basically, you've got your own manufacturing in your truck. Yeah. Yeah. So,

0 (37m 5s):
Alright, so you start, let's talk about kind of like break down how you started to think about this. First of all, you wanted to remake the experience. So starting with the truck, how did you start to think about that?

2 (37m 19s):
Well, a lot of the ice cream trucks I saw You know people are hunched over running back and forth in the van, opening up freezers, passing out stuff. So you want the, you want it to be a comfortable experience for the operator. Yeah. And, and I, I started getting the visualization of, of what I wanted pretty early on. You look at an ice cream truck and it rolls through your neighborhood and you're like, oh my gosh. It just, it looks terrible and it looks disgusting. But your kids are screaming and you're trying to You know you lie to your kids and you say, well when it plays music You know that means it's out of ice cream and You know. So you lie to your kids about stuff like that. Let's get the presentation down to where you can't say no You know a truck drives through. It looks like Disney World and your kids are losing their mind.

2 (38m 1s):
You can't say no to that. I mean, what can you say no to on that?

0 (38m 5s):
Yeah. Alright. So you have this line of equity to start You know half a million dollars. You've gotta start with a truck. So You know you bought these off the shelf billboard trucks. Were you just gonna buy like an off the shelf like used ice cream truck and repurpose it?

2 (38m 22s):
No, I was, I was gonna go strict custom from the ground up.

0 (38m 25s):
I got it. So, so you and where did, where at that time could you source those from?

2 (38m 30s):
Well, I was sourcing my billboard trucks out of, I was having them built up around Elkhart, Indiana. Okay. Elkhart, Indiana is this Mecca in the United States for the RV industry. They built all RVs up

0 (38m 41s):
There. That's right. That's right. Yes.

2 (38m 43s):
And so there's so all kinds of fabricators up there. I went up there, I spent a couple days, I went around and visited several fabricators and introduced myself. Told 'em my idea. They probably, I was probably the fifth person that day that walked in and had a screwy idea. So I found a guy that I was really going to go with. He was very professional. He was a big operation. But then one guy was this very small operation, but he was, I really liked him. And so I actually, I called him to say, Hey, I'm not gonna go with you. I I'm always respectful when I get bids, I'm, Hey, I don't think I'm gonna go with you. And he said, why not? I said, well, You know, blah da da. I told him why. And he said, Tony, neither one of us are gonna make a lot of money if we only build a couple of these things.

2 (39m 23s):
He said, but if we get in there and figure it out, because you're gonna need somebody to, to go through the ups and downs in the beginning. But if we can figure this out, 'cause this is what I'm not, I don't wanna just build you a truck. I wanna get in business with you. And You know, I just loved that attitude. And, and his name's Tony Marchetti and You know doesn't have to sell me too hard. You know his name's Tony, my name's Tony. I'm like, is this God talking to me? You know. You know.

0 (39m 49s):
And did you have a design scheme for what you wanted to look like at that point or not? Not quite yet.

2 (39m 55s):
I, I did, I had a really close friend, Tony Guard,

0 (39m 58s):
Another Tony,

2 (39m 59s):
Another Tony. Wow. Lot of Tony. And he's a, he's an industrial designer. And then Tony was so talented, he was also able to kind of help me You know, map out the look of the outside of the truck. I want a tropical truck. I just don't want tropical colors. I want a scene on the truck. I want the escapism when someone comes up to that truck for 10 minutes, I want them to be on a tropical island.

0 (40m 20s):
So you wanted it like painted like, 'cause I mean I'm describing the truck today, but you wanted it like to look like the ocean and sort of the sand on the ocean. Correct. And almost like a painting on the side. It's got like You know a bamboo Hutt basically selling shave ice.

2 (40m 36s):
Yeah. Some palm trees, some little characters in the sun, You know in the sand for the kids to like, and, and then tropical music playing Calypso, music playing and You know, just these ideas just kept coming and you're just, but but it all again comes back to do you want this experience?

0 (40m 54s):
Alright, so you were working on this on the truck with Tony in Elkhart, Indiana. And I guess you also wanted it to have like a self-service part. Like when you go to a fast food place, you can fill up your soda yourself. Right. Which my kids unfortunately love too much. Right. As much as I prevent them from drinking all that soda. But you wanted a way for, I guess for kids to what? To, to flavor it themselves? Well,

2 (41m 21s):
If you start talking to kids about snow cones or even shaved ice in some way, yeah. You either you go to a Hutt or you buy a pre-made product and there's the complaints are, it's never enough, not enough syrup juice on it or it's not exactly the flavor combination that I, I wanted, blah, blah, blah, these different things. And so the idea was, hey, can you get the economics right to where you can turn it over to the customer to put as much syrup on as they want? But here's the moment that I had it. So I'm talking to Ed and he's got two Sonos that are hilarious and they're, I think they were nine years old at the time. And I said, I said, Hey boys, let me ask you a question. I said, A truck comes down the street, it's a shaved ice truck, snow cone truck or whatever, and it pulls up and they hand you a cup of, of fresh unflavored snow and you get to go to the side and put as much flavoring on as you want.

2 (42m 7s):
What's your reaction to that? And they both, I mean, you are giving me the keys to the magical S syrup. Yes. Gimme more of that. That was a moment that I thought, th this has to happen. So you got, you work on the economics, you, you figure out the flavoring and how you can dispense it in a way that it's not crippling financially. Where kids You know are putting You know, sticking their mouths under the spout and pulling them on. So you gotta design the Flavorwave to where the a kid's head, an eight year old's head won't fit in there.

0 (42m 38s):
This is the, this the, the, the dispensers are called Flavorwave and it's like 10 or whatever, I dunno how many flavors. But basically it's, the idea was you could take your own, you get the shave ice in the cup and then you could just put the flavors on whatever you wanted put on. Which is, as you say, I mean presumably before you, you had the prototype, you had to ask yourself, is this a good idea? Is, is this gonna get outta hand? Is this, is this gonna break? I mean, would it be better to just have like bottles, like ketchup bottles of right of syrup? I, I don't know.

2 (43m 10s):
Oh yeah. And the variations are legendary. I, the, the very first Flavorwave would fold out from the truck. Okay. So yeah, you, you picture this thing folding out from the truck and it's made out of aluminum. So in essence, guy, there was a two foot aluminum edged sickle, as I like to say, driving through neighborhoods. What could possibly go wrong with that? Then the next generation, we had a handle where you could close it from the inside, but no one closed. It So that then it would drain into the, and all the flavors, the excess flavors would drain. And well You know variation, variation, variation until let's work on in embedding this into the truck.

2 (43m 56s):
I hate to say stuff like that. 'cause then people realize how maybe unintelligent that, that I'm

0 (44m 3s):
Alright. So the other thing I'm wondering about is you had some savings, right? But you weren't financially secure for life like you needed. You still needed to work. Yeah. And this was a risk, I mean, you had some of your money in this and obviously you had an investor who believed in, in this idea. Did you have any doubts at all going into this that maybe this might not work? Or were you a hundred percent confident?

2 (44m 32s):
You know, I guess you would say progressively, I'm a hundred percent confident You know as the more meat you put on the bone, the more you realize this has got some legs. So the truck shows up, you start working the truck, the customer reaction was so good. You're like, okay, there's something magical here. We've gotta figure everything else out. But at the core it's working. I've got a winner here now just don't screw it up.

0 (44m 58s):
So this was, this is June of 2007 and the first trucks already

2 (45m 3s):
First truck period. First

0 (45m 4s):
Truck. And you were gonna be the first driver of this truck.

2 (45m 7s):
I was the only guy, I say employed, but I wasn't being paid. So I was the only guy in the, in the game.

0 (45m 15s):
So this is what you have to do as an entrepreneur. I mean, if you see the movie, the founder, like Ray Crock was in his fifties trying to sell ice cream machines, right? And getting the door slammed in his face. You had run a really successful business selling vacuum cleaners. You had 300 people working under you. You had a really very successful business. Here you are almost 40, making shaved ice and, and selling. Like, I don't, I was any part of you. Like, I used to oversee 300 people and now I'm like an ice cream man. I'm, I'm not saying, and I hope this doesn't sound condescending, I'm just trying to get into your head like,

2 (45m 54s):
Oh no, I listen. My buddies Hara You know kids loved me, but my buddies were harassing me in, they

0 (45m 60s):
Were heckling you.

2 (46m 0s):
Oh my gosh. I pulled into one of these cul-de-sacs and as soon as I turned down and I thought, oh, for the love of God, Jim lives at the end of this cul-de-sac. I go down to the end of the street and he comes out, I'm like, ah, gee, many Christmas. And he's like, Lamb, what are you doing? And I'm like, You know. He comes out and You know and he's just in a Armani suit and he's like, Liam, you used to drive a nice car and and wear a nice suit. What what's happened, brother is, is the economy just, and I'm like, Jim, this is a pretty, I mean, I'm wearing a Hawaiian shirt. This is not the worst thing in

0 (46m 35s):
The world. You were in a, in a tiki van with a painting of the ocean on it in a Hawaiian shirt, which is awesome. That is that you're living the life, but

2 (46m 46s):
You gotta explain it a lot. You gotta tell 'em how good it is. They don't see how good it is. But this is a good story actually, because why Jim and I are sitting there talking and probably 15, 20 kids come up. They're all buying Kona. I'm serving them out and You know, collected, I probably made 50, 60 bucks or whatever, just sitting there for, I dunno, 10 minutes. And he goes, well you didn't do bad here. And I'm like, You know, we're laughing or whatever. And I drive away. And of course it was a little bruising on the ego at that moment, but I thought tech on it You know. I'll just You know. But that You know that I'm sitting there with one truck thinking, can I scale this? Yeah. But You know the responsibilities. I've got four kids and a wife and You know you. Everyone knows that guy. Or you've read about that guy that just, he can't get out of his own way and he just entrepreneurs till he dies.

2 (47m 30s):
Yeah. And he never hits anything big. And

0 (47m 32s):
And you had that in your mind, you thought, am I gonna be that guy?

2 (47m 35s):
Yeah. I mean there's times that, but You know, I don't know, I just, I was having a great time. My kids thought I was the greatest 'cause I'm driving an ice cream truck.

0 (47m 45s):
And so when you started to drive around your neighborhood, you would just drive down streets and then as you would see kids run outta their homes, you would just pull up on the sidewalk and stop.

2 (47m 56s):
Yeah. I, it's, it's, it's, I I took this fellow out by the name of David Jones and we were, I was training him to be a driver. I think we had three or four trucks at the time. And we pulled into this cul-de-sac and I said, David, here's the trick. We gotta get those two kids right there off that porch. Drove around. I said, go real slow. I said, I said, ah, we're not getting them. I said, go, let's stop and go out and clean the Flavorwave. So we stopped the truck and we, this is early on because not everyone knew the Kona truck. So we, I went out and so these kids come wondering down off their front porch and they're like, Hey, what do you got there? I said, oh, this is shaved ice truck and dah, dah dah. And they, they come in, they, and then people start, 'cause I'm stopped. Music is playing, lights are flashing. Here comes some people, and I've got a picture of this somewhere in my phone because I remember getting back up on the hill and taking a little picture.

2 (48m 40s):
It was about 60 people gathered around the truck with lawn chairs. I mean, it looked like something out of Norman Rockwell. They're skipping ropes, they're drawing hopscotch on the ground with chalk. And and David remembers this and I I I, he said, you remember the time you, we got stopped in that cul-de-sac and it turned into a block party. And I was like, yeah,

0 (49m 1s):
I wonder when you, I mean, what did you have to make, what did that truck have to sell per day for it to be worthwhile? What was your goal

2 (49m 12s):
In Northern Kentucky? We have a 210 day season. I, I remember these numbers. And I was like, well, for inclement weather in blah blah, blah, you got about 180 days to sell. If you can make a thousand dollars a day, you make $180,000. You've got food costs and labor costs and operational costs, da da da. You can make, you can net well over a hundred thousand dollars. Even debt service meant to pay the truck off over a five year period of time, da da da da. So I remember calling Ed and I said, Hey, I've done the math and, and I think I can get the truck up to about $150,000 a year. And he's like, no way. And I'm like, yeah, I, I think I can. He said, well, that's you.

0 (49m 46s):
How many, by the way, how many hours a day would you have to work to hit a thousand bucks a day?

2 (49m 51s):
You really start making your money after school's in this, in the summer. You make money all day long, all the way till nighttime. As soon as school starts up, you really start making your money about three, three or three 30. Right. We were primarily neighborhood sales. That's what the, the business model was. And I was trying to get neighborhoods up to a thousand dollars a night. I got a couple neighborhoods up to a thousand dollars a night through some techniques that we were doing.

0 (50m 16s):
Techniques meaning what?

2 (50m 18s):
Well, you, you, you, it's all about consistency and it's about knowing. So I would, I would go to Crystal Lake subdivision, I would sign it all up in the morning. So Kona Ice is coming tonight. You

0 (50m 29s):
Put signs up in the neighborhood. Okay.

2 (50m 31s):
Oh yeah. Yard signs in the,

0 (50m 32s):
Just like the same playbook from the furniture shop.

2 (50m 35s):
Okay. I don't have, I don't have many ACEs up my sleeve brother. I keep going back to the well, so,

0 (50m 40s):
No, it's a good playbook. Yeah, yeah. Okay. Keep going. So,

2 (50m 42s):
So now as kids are going or leaving and parents are leaving, they see the big signs Kona's coming tonight. You make a little deal with the houses at the edge of the neighborhood. Hey, if you keep this sign up, You know I'll give your kids free Kona when I stop by. So the signs go up, you do the same path. So you're basically at the same house or the same street almost every once a week. Hmm. So I got this subdivision in Northern Kentucky to an easy thousand dollars a night. This is 2007, 2008 hits. Yeah. You, you remember what happened in 2008?

0 (51m 14s):
Massive financial crisis. Yes.

2 (51m 16s):
Yeah. My neighborhood sales start dropping precipitously. And during

0 (51m 19s):
The, the financial crisis, you saw sales drop, even though some people still spend money on like small pleasures like ice cream.

2 (51m 27s):
They do. And, but you and so it doesn't take much to drop your sales in a neighborhood. Yeah. I mean, you saw a lot of people not in homes. You know. You think, you think about You know there's more for sale signs, especially at that socioeconomic level of, of starter homes with a lot of kids. And You know if someone says, do you do good in in country clubs? I'm like, no, because the houses are too big, too far away from the road and the kids are in the basement. But yeah, you get a You know little starter homes or something where You know they're full of kids and the parents want them outside. You know, get outside. You're driving us all crazy. So that's where you do the best at. But those kids, there's not crazy amounts of disposable money floating around out there.

2 (52m 7s):
So yeah, we, we saw it tick down. Yeah. But we have these amazing margins in Kona. So we, we are responsible with the amazing margins because the

0 (52m 17s):
Margins, I mean, your costs were, were frozen water and syrup and obviously the cups and gas. But in general, like your overhead was quite low.

2 (52m 26s):
Oh yeah. Just crazy low.

0 (52m 28s):
And so how long did it take you before you hit profitability?

2 (52m 35s):
I paid the equity line off this in 2008. So I had ran it all the way up to about 400. Wow. Yeah.

0 (52m 41s):
How did you pay off a half a million dollar equity line in less than a year?

2 (52m 45s):
Well, we, we spent a lot of it buying the trucks and then we were able to sell the trucks and of course we were Oh, you

0 (52m 52s):
Sold it to other people. Correct.

2 (52m 54s):
Right. So,

0 (52m 55s):
Alright, let me go to this. Let, let's talk about selling the trucks, right? Because was that the idea that you would basically franchise this out to other people from the beginning?

2 (53m 5s):
I didn't know whether to franchise or license or just sell the truck as a commodity and You know, let people just do what they want. Yeah. Franchising's wonderful. 'cause it, it, it helps maintain the integrity of the brand.

0 (53m 19s):
It, it helps make sure that you can control the brand. You can control the brand rather than just licensing it or let, or just selling the trucks.

2 (53m 25s):
Yeah. So, so we decided to go down that road. It was expensive. We, You know, spent some more money. But

0 (53m 30s):
You and Ed decided to do this. And, and just to, to be clear, it's expensive because of what legal fees and registration fees? Yeah,

2 (53m 37s):
That's exactly what it is. It's writing the FDD is, I'll say $50,000 and then all the registrations in all the states, the attorneys that are involved and it, it's no easy task.

0 (53m 48s):
Yeah. So you decide to start small, presumably in Kentucky to sell some of these trucks. And how are you gonna structure that

2 (53m 60s):
Ridiculously The model out there was You know Mr. Softy would sell a truck for whatever, let's say back in the day they would sell a truck for $150,000, make a lot of money on their trucks, but then the royalty was $3,000 a year and you had to buy all the cones in the cups and stuff from them. And they, and they were marked up pretty substantially. So. that was kind of the model to go after or whatever. It's an all cash business. So what I really don't want to get involved in is, is

0 (54m 32s):
Percentages. Yeah. Of sales

2 (54m 34s):
Percentages. And I thought, let's just keep this all in the up and up. Let's charge a very minimal royalty. Yeah. And we'll sell the trucks as close to cost as we can. So we just get the trucks out there, let's just build the brand. And then just like Amazon, at some point we'll look around and say, Hey, do we have something that we can parlay on, so to speak? Yeah.

0 (54m 52s):
So you start out with a couple of franchisees driving their own trucks. This is in 2008, but it's also the financial crisis. So people still had to pay, I think, $15,000 for, for the franchise, which is nothing You know compared to other franchise opportunities and then, and then royalty fees. But they had to buy a truck and the truck was gonna cost them You know, a hundred plus thousand dollars given that we were in the middle of a financial crisis. Was it harder to attract franchisees?

2 (55m 24s):
Well, let me quote Forrest Gump when the hurricane hit by a battery and he said all the shrimping boats were all, all busted up. And he said after that shrimping was easy. Ed Reynolds owned a financial institution, a finance company. Yeah. And he was my partner. And so I had financing. Wow. So after that, shrimping was easy. So, so I could find somebody that I would approve and, and I liked to be in business with. And I'd say $15,000 down, Eagle Finance will finance the, the product for you. And again, I'm back and everything, so if the deal were to go bad, I get the truck back, then I'd have to resell it.

2 (56m 8s):
Yeah. But that was probably, if there's, if there's anything that just set us apart in the early days, is the fact that we had financing and nobody else did.

0 (56m 19s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment, how Tony grows. Kona Ice from a few trucks into 1500 and then lands on another idea which he thinks could be even bigger. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This.

Sonos (56m 43s):
Raise the bar of your entertainment with Sonos Beam, the compact smart soundbar for TV music and more Enjoy panoramic sound for shows, movies and games when the TV is on and stream music podcasts and more when it's off precision engineered than fine. Tuned by Oscar and Grammy winning producers Beam delivers crystal clear dialogue and powerful base. In fact, I have one in my house and it is absolutely amazing. It's like a cliche, but it sounds like you're there with the performers in the room. When you listen through it. The setup is practically plug and play. The Sonos app walks you through getting started step-by-step, including syncing your TV remote, connecting your music services, and adding a voice assistant. I did it myself. It took like, I don't know, five minutes. There's speech enhancement mode, which is perfect for when you're watching a movie and the characters are whispering or the action intensifies or there's night sound which can tone down loud effects when others at home are trying to work or sleep. Visit Sonos dot com to learn more and find gifts for every listener on your list.

0 (57m 57s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's around 2009. And with financial backing from his partner, ed Tony is able to move past the financial crisis and to start growing the business by franchising.

2 (58m 11s):
So we started getting contacted, I did a little bit of marketing, put it out there on the franchise portals, as they call 'em You know. Yeah. franchise.com and that,

0 (58m 20s):
Hey, this is available, these franchises are available. Okay.

2 (58m 23s):
Right. And the leads would come in and people would call and we'd talk through it. And I've got so many funny stories from franchisees that are doing unbelievably now, but they were some of the early adopters. And, and I'll tell you this one real quick. Mark from down in Georgia called me, he was outta work. 2008 or 2009, he got laid off and he decided he was gonna get into Kona and he sent us the $20,000 and then planned to come up to pick up his truck. And he tells the story, and I didn't necessarily know the story word for word, but he tells the story. He goes, I sent our last $20,000 and my wife, who's a school teacher, is just pounding me that you have been taken by a man on the internet, slick talking vacuum cleaner salesman on the internet.

2 (59m 15s):
And so he drives six hours from Atlanta to come up to Northern Kentucky, pulls into my warehouse, which was nothing to look at. It was a little tiny house with, with a couple garage doors on it. And I had some trucks parked out front. And he said, and I pull into the prestigious world headquarters of Kona Ice. And my wife looks over at me and says, I told you you got scammed. So, so he comes in, he gets, and he's nice as he can be. And, and we are who we say we are. And then Mark and his wife get in that truck and drive back to, to Georgia. And, and we talked almost every day. And he was, You know I did $300 a day, I did $350. And then he does, he did some festival or some event and he made a thousand dollars.

2 (59m 60s):
And so You know if you add those numbers up, he's doing $300 a day. He's working seven days a week. He, he makes $9,000 a month. He's got expenses of about $3,000 probably back then it's profitable. So he, he took off and Mark's still in the business today. He owns multiple franchises and his entire family is in the business. But that, that origin story of a, of a person coming up saying, I got scammed. Yeah. Is, is my favorite.

0 (1h 0m 30s):
And what was your criteria for accepting a franchise? I mean, I have to assume initially in the first couple years it was like You know you needed the business. So maybe the criteria was a little different. Or, or not. Like who were you looking for? I was

2 (1h 0m 42s):
Very discriminating in the early days. I would stick a mirror under their nose and if it fogged up and their check cleared, they had themselves a brand new coat coat, eye straw. No, I, I was looking for, and, and I'm, I'm real proud of this. I have talked to every single person that owns a Kona franchise. They cannot get into the Kona franchise business to this day unless we have a conversation. Hmm. I'm looking for someone that has that You know, I, nothing turns me off more than, than the ROI question. I was on a call I think this year and someone was, I'm looking at his application, the guy's got tons of money and, and I'm like, what, what are you, what are you wanting to get into Kona for?

2 (1h 1m 27s):
He said, well, I You know I sold a rental house. I was gonna put it in the market. I think the market's on the way down. I'm looking for a good rate of return. I thought I would invest in this. I got some friends that I can get to run it. I couldn't be out faster. There's no interest whatsoever for me to be in business with that guy. Yeah. When a husband and wife calls me or or whoever just a, a a they call and they say, we love our community. We've lived here for 10 years. Our kids have grown up here, we wanna give back or our kids are involved. Something along those, those kind of lines. I'm looking for someone that I want to be in business with. Hmm. And you gotta understand, a lot of my franchisees are first time business owners. So let's get QuickBooks set up.

2 (1h 2m 7s):
Here's your chart of accounts, let's get you an accountant, let's form your entity You. know these kind of things that we kind of handhold all the way through

0 (1h 2m 15s):
Tony. I wanna talk to you about money for a moment because obviously this is a business show and You know business is about creating something sustainable. And You know money is, doesn't necessarily have to be the end goal, but it it certainly is important. There's nothing wrong with making it nothing. And your business model is interesting to say the least, right? Because you have, the franchise fee is very low, the initial fee, the cost to buy the truck, it's a turnkey truck. You sell that and then it's about, I think $3,000 a year per per franchisee, right? Correct. So I guess per truck So for every truck they pay you 3000 a year. And so I have to imagine that a very small portion of your revenue actually comes from franchise fees.

2 (1h 2m 60s):
Right.

0 (1h 3m 1s):
Most of your money is coming from selling the trucks or selling the, the supplies to the franchisees.

2 (1h 3m 7s):
Yeah. Not even much in supplies. I mean at scale it is. I mean yeah, you sell 50 trucks, everyone's paying you $3,000, it's $150,000. They got five people working in the office, payroll's about four 50. Right. You know, you're like, I can't You know. They say franchise systems have to get to a hundred franchises to be before they can float. Yeah. And I'm at a hundred and I'm not even close to

0 (1h 3m 30s):
Floating. No. But

2 (1h 3m 31s):
You know. The the reality is this, we make enough money on You know we've gotten at scale and manufacturing scale to where we can make more money when we do sell the product. This year we sold 276 trucks basically. So that's the lion's share of the revenues that come into the, but we're at the point now you're making You know, I don't know, five, six, 7 million in royalty. But it's, it also, it makes us a good steward of the resources. Yeah. And it makes us very lean. But you add up the flavoring, you add up the, the truck sales, you add up the royalty, you add up the cups, you add up the this and, and yeah. We've got, we've got enough revenue. As long as you keep your expenses low

0 (1h 4m 11s):
And you don't even require the franchisees to report revenue at all. So you don't know how much each one is making necessarily.

2 (1h 4m 19s):
We can do the math if we want to You know you do the cup sales and the flavor sales Sure. And you work it backwards and then you realize how stupid you are because you're charging not enough royalty. So

0 (1h 4m 29s):
Yeah, I mean I read that like, just, I'm just jumping ahead for a sec. Like in 2023, the system-wide sales will be like 370 plus million dollars. Correct. That's not your revenue. That's what these entrepreneurs, these small business owners who are franchisees, this is what they're selling in, in shaved ice. Right. And you're only getting a portion of that, A small portion of that. Yeah.

2 (1h 4m 51s):
One or 2%.

0 (1h 4m 52s):
And so really, I mean the business model is in your view, like it works because they're incentivized to work hard. They're loyal to the brand and you guys are doing well enough.

2 (1h 5m 8s):
Yeah, we're doing well enough, but let me turn the tables on it. I was talking to a executive at a big franchise system and You know they've got probably 20 franchisees that pretty much run the company. You know, whatever those people say goes because they're the ones generating a lion's share of the profits for the company. And I don't have anybody doing that. So if a franchisee gets outta line or, and I say outta line just against the code or I don't need them. Right. It's not like You know, someone's gonna threaten, Hey, I'm gonna get out of the business. And I'm like, all right, go ahead. So there, there is that double side to that where I don't get too needy to a franchisee that's pumping in hundreds of thousands of dollars of revenue to the company

0 (1h 5m 52s):
Tony in, in terms of like getting the word out. Right. Like you talked about early on, You know you, you had the lawn sign approach, which is so smart. You know, Hey, Kona truck is coming this week. I remember first seeing a Kona truck in a, a pier in Sonoma County in California just driving around. I thought, oh, that's cool. That, that looks interesting. Right? So I imagine that you don't really need to spend that much money on advertising. 'cause the trucks are like your previous business, they're like moving billboards.

2 (1h 6m 22s):
It all comes together, doesn't it? Yeah. It's, it's, I've got 1800 billboard trucks driving around out. Yeah. And I always make this comment when a truck pulls up for the first time in a line of kids form on the side of that truck, every kid in his mind says, man, I want some of that. And every adult that sees the truck and the line of kids says, man, why didn't I think of that? Yeah. Because they do the, and I mean the testimonies from franchisees are like, I saw a line of kids, I did the math and here I am. And

0 (1h 6m 51s):
A huge part of the business is school events, right? Yeah. Essentially you go, you pull up at a school or a, or a, some kind of fundraiser and the franchisee is gonna make a lot of money, but they can also donate a portion of the money and still walk away having made money. Yeah.

2 (1h 7m 6s):
And it's, it's, and that's changed the industry tremendously. And as far as, Hey, listen, you're making a great margin. Let's figure out how to You know revenue share, give back and be communal about it.

0 (1h 7m 18s):
You guys had more than a thousand trucks and moved into a new office space in Florence Kentucky in 2019. Things are looking great. Then Covid hits 2020. Hmm. I mean, you are an events based business. Like that's, most of your business is doing these school events or charities or fundraisers or parties or whatever, office parties. That's over all of a sudden

2 (1h 7m 46s):
It was over in like three or four days. Listen, I don't wanna You know. There were people losing their lives. But there, there, the businesses were, I mean, this is traumatic I think, but we pivoted. What

0 (1h 8m 1s):
What did you do?

2 (1h 8m 2s):
I had a staff meeting, I'll never forget that at, at a staff meeting and brought everybody in and said, Hey, everybody's okay. We got, we got reserves. You, you're not gonna lose your job. You're not gonna lose a paycheck. Stop worrying. Our job here is to service and save the franchisees. Hmm. So let's get to work. And we had a very multi-pronged approach. I had some great people that just went after all the stimulus things that they could possibly get. The PPPs You know. Our franchisees were just not skilled at being able to go through and, and we were, we had a hotline and we had multiple people just, we went after all the financial institutions that have loaned money to Kona franchisees, they were all still looking to collect their payments.

2 (1h 8m 50s):
And so we went after for installments and deferments. Hmm. But the, probably the biggest thing that we did, it was able to develop a program called Herbicide Kona. And it was a, it was an ordering platform for mobile. And it was, it was very archaic, but it, it worked for us. So you

0 (1h 9m 7s):
Could go online, order it, and then the truck would pull up and hand it to you.

2 (1h 9m 11s):
Yeah. And You know, we, we developed our Flavorwave to it operated with the end of a spoon, not your finger. And we just went out it hard and the franchisees just came and board and, and ideas were flowing. I had guys working here, I think sometimes 20 hours a day, You know, talking franchisees through this fairly complicated software to, to teach everybody how to do it.

0 (1h 9m 37s):
When you came out of that and now you are fully out of that and growing, one of the things that you started to do really in the last two years, really in earnest and maybe even more recently, is a coffee business. Can you tell me a little bit about that business? This is, is this a, it's called traveling Toms, this a totally separate business? Or is it part of Kona Ice?

2 (1h 9m 59s):
Totally separate.

0 (1h 10m 0s):
Same, same concept though. A basically a mobile truck that, but does coffee and coffee drinks.

2 (1h 10m 6s):
Yeah. Mobile coffee cafe.

0 (1h 10m 8s):
So tell me where, where, what's going on, what's the status of it? Right now

2 (1h 10m 11s):
It is flourishing. This started on March 18th, 2020. I looked at my team that, that from that staff meeting I told you where I said, everybody's Okay, well you start having to reallocate people around. Well,

0 (1h 10m 24s):
You started the business in March of 2020, or the idea came to you in March of 2020?

2 (1h 10m 28s):
No, the idea has been with me for years. I have behind my desk was just, I don't know, 20 renderings, artist renderings of different coffee trucks, cafe trucks and things like that. Wow. So October of 2020, we rolled a prototype of a very elaborate coffee truck that hit the streets and just a couple of them. And they started doing really well. We put 'em in a couple other franchisees hands the following year in 2021, I think we sold 20, we sold 30 more in 2022. And then this year we've already got 90 sold. Wow. And we're only selling, we're only selling Kona franchisees. Right now.

0 (1h 11m 5s):
Right now. So you have to be a Kona franchisee to buy Tom's traveling. Yeah. When you look at the unit economics, do you see the coffee business eclipsing the shave ice business eventually? Yeah.

2 (1h 11m 18s):
I, I don't think I would've said that a year ago. Maybe not even six months ago, but some of the, some of the results that our coffee people are having are pretty spectacular.

0 (1h 11m 27s):
It's amazing because there's seems to be such a mass proliferation of good coffee. Like you can go to remote parts of the United States and find great coffee in Alaska or You know. Right. Well,

2 (1h 11m 39s):
That's what makes everything so hard about that, except for the fact that we're mobile and we'll go places where no one else will go. And I don't have the same economics. That truck doesn't have to do 1.6 million to service the debt and the 18 people that are working behind the counter. Yeah. It's just a different mousetrap

0 (1h 11m 58s):
And Right now you're only in a few states.

2 (1h 12m 0s):
No, we're, we're in probably, I think 13 states Right now. Right.

0 (1h 12m 5s):
And Tom is your dad, I should mention

2 (1h 12m 7s):
Tom is my dad.

0 (1h 12m 8s):
And he's the mascot too. It's his, it's his head, right? That's him. He

2 (1h 12m 13s):
Is,

0 (1h 12m 13s):
He is the orange sunglasses. Yeah.

2 (1h 12m 15s):
And the orange sunglasses.

0 (1h 12m 16s):
The orange glasses.

2 (1h 12m 18s):
He, it's been great.

0 (1h 12m 20s):
Tony, when you think about, like, You know this, this journey that you took, I mean, You know from being a, a very good salesman to, to kind of leaving that behind and kind of just trying to figure it out and then going into shaved ice. And now here you are in coffee and, and in all of the things that have happened, the growth of your business, I mean, you've got 1500 trucks just in Cone ice. $375 million in, in system-wide sales in 2023. That's a really great business that you started from You. know an idea. Yeah. Thank you. How much of, of where you are today do you, do you think has to do with just the hustle, the grind and your You know your talent as a salesperson?

0 (1h 13m 3s):
How much do you think has to do with, with luck?

2 (1h 13m 8s):
I, I, listen, there's a lot of smart people, a lot of people that work hard You know. So luck plays a huge role in it. You know. I, I don't know. I think I'm a good student of life. I pay attention. I see where the problems are. What's the solution to fix the problem? I wish this for my kids. I I, I admire this in other people is who's a good student of the game? Yeah. Or this good student of life. Yeah. I'm glad I was there. I'm glad my sleeves were rolled up. I'm glad, I'm glad I was working my butt off. But You know, I'm, I've been so lucky to get around great people and, and have a family that You know that has been involved and stuck with me. And You know I've been married 31 years and You know you're a serial entrepreneur.

2 (1h 13m 53s):
A 31 year marriage is probably my greatest accomplishment because the ups and downs of that is remarkable.

0 (1h 13m 60s):
That's Tony Lamb, founder of Kona Ice, by the way, kind of like the vacuum cleaner business back in the day. Kona Ice is very much a family affair. Tony's two older brothers work in the business as well as Tony's wife Susie and three of his children. And Tony's dad, Tom, he's not only the mascot for the new coffee truck business, he's also been working with Tony since the early days of Kona Ice. He gave himself a special title, the Founder of the Founder. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show.

0 (1h 14m 40s):
And as always, it's free. This episode was produced by Casey Herman, with music composed by Tine Arablouei. It was Edited by Neva Grant with research help from Katherine Cipher. Our audio engineers were Co Takasugi Chervin and Robert Rodriguez. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung, John Isabella, Chris Masini, Sam Paulson, Carla Estevez, and Malia Aguello. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This.

Wondery (1h 15m 18s):
If you like How I Built This, you can listen early and ad free Right now by joining Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts. Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon Music. Before you go, tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

BioFire (1h 15m 37s):
Hey, while we're taking a little break here, I wanted to tell you about an episode of How I. Built This we released a couple of weeks ago about the company BioFire. After looking into the data engineer and founder, Kai Klopfer discovered that two thirds of gun deaths in America are due to accidents and unauthorized use by children and teens. Now, his company, BioFire, has created the world's first handgun with an electronic firing system that unlocks instantaneously upon fingerprint or facial verification, and then most importantly, re locks once the user Lets go of it. The idea is by no means new. So in this episode, I spoke with Kai about what makes his technology so groundbreaking and a little bit about the evolving US gun market. You can find this episode by following How I Built This in your podcast app. And scrolling back a little bit to the episode, A Biometric Smart Gun with Kai Klopfer of BioFire, or by searching How I Built This BioFire, that's B-I-O-F-I-R-E, wherever you listen to podcasts.