0 (0s):
Support for this NPR podcast and the following message come from. Klayvio the email and text marketing platform built to keep customers coming back. Creators communicate with Klayvio get started for free at klaviyo.com/npr.

2 (18s):
I was at the show, there was a man and his name was skeets Hutchens ski

0 (24s):
<em></em> yes. It's like have a movie.

2 (28s):
So skeets comes up to my table and says, what are you doing? And I said, I'm waiting for someone to stop. And I'm going to want to show them the prototype of my new type of pocket knife. And skeet says you can't do that. The people walking by they're like zombies, they're in a daze. They don't see anything. You got to get up. You got to get out in the aisle, you got to grab them. You got to stop them. So I stood up when people walked by, I'd say you sir, have you seen my new pocket knife

0 (1m 6s):
From NPR? It's how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz. And on the show today, how Tim Leatherman tried to market his foldable knife for seven years before he finally made a sale and grew his company into a multi-million dollar brand Leatherman tool. Back in the early two thousands, I was a foreign correspondent for NPR and CNN. I covered the Iraq war, Afghanistan, Kosovo man, a few others. And the only reliable way to file my stories was three big bulky satellite phone, connected to a device called a road runner together.

0 (1m 54s):
They took up a suitcase. Every time I arrive to a new place, but city village and dusty outpost, I'd have to set up a mobile studio. I'd haul the sat phone up to the roof of the guest house or a motel, and then start to strip wires and screw and unscrew connections. I'd cut rope to hold things in place. And invariably, I needed a pair of pliers or a screwdriver flat and Phillips and a sharp knife, which meant that the one thing I always brought with me on every trip was a Leatherman wave. Now it may surprise you as it did me that the leather man has nothing to do with leather making.

0 (2m 36s):
I always figured it came out of a 19th century tannery in Montana or something. But in fact, it's a tool that first came onto the market in the 1980s. And it was invented by a man named Tim Leatherman today. Leatherman is a company that sells well over a hundred million dollars of pocket knives and tools each year, but it took Tim more than seven years of tinkering on his idea before he managed to sell one. And then on that day in that convention hall, he literally sold just one. Tim tried to sell his idea to knife companies who rejected it because they thought it was a tool. And then he went to toolmakers who didn't want it because they thought it was a knife.

0 (3m 21s):
And in the very early days, he didn't attract any investors either. But that means that today, Leatherman is still a family owned business based in the city where Tim was raised Portland, Oregon, his mom was a homemaker. His dad was a union carpenter. And Tim grew up in the two story house. His father had built. Tim was kind of a shy kid, a self-described nerd. And from an early age, he usually had a job, either mowing lawns or babysitting. Tim went on to study mechanical engineering at Oregon state in Corvallis. It was during the late 1960s, the height of the Vietnam war, but Tim wasn't drafted.

0 (4m 2s):
He was actually too skinny to join the army. So he spent his time focusing on other things

2 (4m 9s):
In college. I decided I wanted to be really good at something, and I wanted to be able to leave some evidence that I'd been there. And I decided that the way I wanted it to do it was to become really good in table tennis and to win the, the school championship and have my name on the, on the list of, of school champions. So I have put a lot of effort into trying to become good in table tennis. And during the summer a friend of mine and I, while we heard that there was a ping pong table in the basement of a dormitory for the students at Portland state.

2 (4m 50s):
So he and I went there and while we're playing, a group of students came down and one of them was the most beautiful girl I'd ever seen. And so I tried to play even better to try to impress her. And somehow I got the courage to approach her and talk to her a little bit and even got her phone number and her

0 (5m 11s):
Name was choke. Her

2 (5m 12s):
Name was Cho. And I was so worried that when I called her back and wanted to follow up with her, that I would mispronounce her name. And she'd never speak to me again.

0 (5m 24s):
And I'm imagining you were just terrified and nervous and you had butterflies in your stomach because you were a self-described socially awkward guy. Exactly. This took incredible courage for you to approach her.

2 (5m 38s):
Well, let's not go that far, but, but I was in, in college, I had three distinct lives. I had my academic life. I had my table tennis life and I had my foreign friends life. And so I was starting to come out of a, a little bit. I w it seems somehow I was better able to interact with my foreign friends than with, with my American prints.

0 (6m 6s):
So, so Cho was from Vietnam. Right. And, and I get, and I guess the two of you started dating and, and you got into a pretty serious relationship because after you graduated from college, you actually went to Vietnam to live with, with her and her family there. And to teach English, this was like 1972. I mean, the Vietnam war was still going on. I don't think the fall of Saigon would happen until like 1975. Tell me about living in Saigon in 1972, like as an American who was not part of the military, what, what was that like?

2 (6m 42s):
It was the best experience of my life. The most formative experience of my life, everything was new. Everything was different for me, everything was exciting in Saigon. There was chaos everywhere having to organize chaos everywhere. There was, there was plenty of evidence that there was military activity in our soldiers and Jeeps going through the streets and lots and lots of American infrastructure there. But for me, I went there, I, I paid my own way to get there. And I, once I got there, I tried to live more of a Vietnamese life.

0 (7m 21s):
And, and I remember just from, from being a reporter in places like Baghdad and hobble, there, there's always as kind of slight sense of paranoia that, you know, the rumors and, and it's going to be an attack coming or an explosion or something. Can, I mean, did you, do you remember that feeling because of Saigon was not? I mean, there were, there were attacks on, you know, on, on, on us backed forces on south Vietnamese forces there and on us soldiers. I mean, there were, this was a war.

2 (7m 52s):
Yes. But I was not, I wasn't didn't have any work experiences. I can move around Saigon very well. My mode of transportation initially was a bicycle and I would even drive right out into the countryside sometimes. And I didn't feel unsafe.

0 (8m 10s):
And did any of your friends say, wait a minute, you're going to Vietnam right now. What are you doing? Did anybody say you're not? Cause people, people had images of it from, from television, right? That there was a war zone.

2 (8m 21s):
I didn't consult with my friends. I, I was determined to go.

0 (8m 25s):
Right. All right. So you ended up spending three years in Vietnam, right?

2 (8m 30s):
Within a month after I arrived, Joe and I decided our, our love was real and we got married. She and I rented a room in a house of her family was in Saigon. So we had lots of contact with them. And I was initially an English teacher. And then I had some other jobs. I w I repaired helicopters. And then I got a job with an adoption agency to be their logistics person, to arrange for the supplies that we needed for the kids and arranging for the transport of their kids, when they're ready to be sent back to sent to America.

0 (9m 10s):
One of the things I read was that while you were there, you noticed how, how, just any, like kids, teenagers, kids, as young as 10, 11 were, were really handy. They could, they could fix motorcycles and scooters. And, and you were sort of embarrassed cause you didn't know how to do that.

2 (9m 28s):
Yes. That was a real awakening for me and Vietnam. I had a degree in mechanical engineering, but I really knew nothing practical and a colleague of mine. When I was teaching at the hospital one day we were sitting at lunch and somehow the subject of motor scooters came up and he said, the engine of a motor scooter, it's really pretty simple. You know? And I thought, if he thinks it's simple, there's something wrong with me. And there were these kids on the sidewalk, sidewalk, businesses who could repair motor scooters. And so, and it was pretty much from that moment that I became very understood in the way things worked and I'd buy clocks and take them apart and try to figure out how they worked.

2 (10m 15s):
And just anything, lots of things that I pick up and try to analyze and try to understand and try to repair.

0 (10m 23s):
And I guess one of your very first ideas or inventions really was something you made for those motor scooters that you were seeing everywhere.

2 (10m 32s):
Yes. And I noticed that all of the Japanese motorbikes had luggage racks on the back. Yeah. But none of the Vespas had luggage racks on the back. And I thought, aha. And market opportunity I'll create a luggage rack for a Vesper. And with the help of my brother-in-law, I was able to design one and, and make 100 of them. After I finished making my batch of a hundred, I was able to talk a shop into taking two of them on consignment. And I hired a girl to distribute leaflets on parked. Vespas when we left Vietnam, there were still a 97 in the bedroom of our house.

0 (11m 19s):
So he never sold them. No.

2 (11m 21s):
And it turned out that all that, the people who rode Vespas considered themselves a class above

0 (11m 30s):
A ha

2 (11m 31s):
And they all had homes and they had maids and their maids would go out and do the shopping and bring back the groceries and the live chickens and on the backs of their motor scooters.

0 (11m 45s):
Wow. So the Vesper was like the sort of upper-class luxury vehicle considered to be the luxury vehicle. And you would be caught dead hauling anything on the Vesper in Vietnam. So, so nobody wanted to buy Iraq. Exactly.

2 (11m 60s):
It was your mode of transport, but it was your you're driving a luxury vehicle and, and seen as such. Right. And I learned a lesson from that. I learned that when you're looking for customers, you need to also know the culture within which you're living and the attitudes of the people about the products that are for sale.

0 (12m 24s):
So interesting. Wow. All right. So I think, I think you guys were planning to stay in Vietnam for a while, but geopolitical forces actually died on the way because the war was ending, Saigon was about to fall. The Americans were withdrawing and I think you left Vietnam like just a few days before the fall of Saigon, right? I mean the 1975 that the north Vietnamese come in, I'm assuming that that was what prompted you to leave.

2 (12m 55s):
Yes. The country fell and on April 30th, 1975, we were able to get my wife and her family out on a, about 10 days before we still had some children at the, at the agency. I worked for the adoption and adoption agency that still hadn't been, we still hadn't been able to get out yet. And so about five days before I left and brought out and helped to bring out about our remaining 20 children or so

0 (13m 33s):
I wonder Tim, whether those scenes from Afghanistan brought back memories for you of your time in Vietnam, watching that.

2 (13m 45s):
Yes. I was a part of the airlift out of, out of Vietnam. I left on an airplane. I wasn't so late that I had to leave on a helicopter, but I did cut it a little bit close.

0 (13m 58s):
So that was it. That was, that was the end of your time in Vietnam. And you returned to Portland. Everybody went to Portland,

2 (14m 7s):
We got chose family to Portland. So now the project was to get them settled. And then showing, I said, now what, what do we do with the rest of our lives?

0 (14m 20s):
So this is around August of 1975 by August. The two of you decide from, from what I understand to, to travel to backpack and hitchhike in Europe, and maybe even beyond,

2 (14m 33s):
We wanted to experience other cultures. And in particular, the culture in Eastern Europe by now, we decided that maybe the best way to, for us to travel would be to have one car. And we heard that the easiest and best place to buy a car was in Amsterdam. So we headed there bought a $300 used car. It was a 600 D on 1969. If you can imagine a Volkswagen bug scaled down to two third size, this was our little Fiat

0 (15m 11s):
Beautiful car, by the way, just a beautiful Italian car, right? I mean, it's a tin box, but a beautiful car.

2 (15m 19s):
Our nickname for it was the little monster.

0 (15m 22s):
All right. So you decide to take this trip and how, by the way, how long was the entire trip to take?

2 (15m 27s):
Well, it ended up taking a 10 months,

0 (15m 30s):
10 months. I think you traveled through 17 countries in Europe and the middle east. Right? Right.

2 (15m 35s):
And on that trip, I was carrying a pocket knife, a multi-blade pocket knife, like, like a boy scout type knife. And I was using that for everything from adjusting, making a well from using the knife blade for slicing food, for dinner, to the can opener for opening cans and the screwdriver for turning screws. But there were often times when I needed a pair of pliers. So an example would be when the car had issues. I'd even Marcel when we stayed in cheap hotels and Penske owns and the hotel plumbing had issues.

0 (16m 12s):
Yeah. I bet. When you, what on your trip did the car have to assume the car broke down now and again? Yes. Could you get the parts for yes. If it's not running like in the middle of, I dunno, Bulgaria or something.

2 (16m 29s):
Well, Gary, I know that. Okay. All right. But yes, there were, there were parts you could get parts. One kind of humorous story is while we were in Bulgaria and driving down the highway, I noticed my wife was getting shorter. I looked across and she was getting shorter and I started, then I looked down and I realized that the support's holding her seat had corroded and her seat was falling through the car down towards the pavement. So Joe moved to the back seat and she was sitting back there. She was sort of like, I'm James, the chauffer up front and chosen back telling me what, where to go and when to turn.

2 (17m 9s):
And then when we got to out of Bulgaria and into Turkey, there was a kid on every corner that had an oxy-acetylene tank and we stopped at one of those. And he was able to weld their front seat back in and, and then show, move front again and make continued on.

0 (17m 25s):
So I don't know if this is apocryphal or not, but there were things that when you would do repairs to the car, you would take notes about the drawbacks or the deficiencies of the knife. You had almost as if you were thinking there needs to be a new knife. That just sounds so on the nose. Like precedent, is that true? Is that how it happened?

2 (17m 53s):
It was a, what are we going to do with the rest of our lives trip? And I, and during the trip, I was jotting down notes of any ideas I had. Right. And one of the ideas in essence said, add pliers to a pocket knife. Wow. And the, and the reason for that was for my own personal need, both to fix the car, but even more so to fix the bulky plumbing in the cheap hotels in Penske owns in which we stayed,

0 (18m 25s):
By the way, what were some of the other ideas that you jotted down?

2 (18m 27s):
Actually, some of them turned out to be things that other people did, but I did not. One of them was that postage should have some kind of a barcode or something on it. Some kind of a method by which if you want to send it somewhere, you would buy a decal that had the zip code on it. That was readable somehow so that the post office could process the mail more easily. Another idea was to congregate service shops within one shopping center, one mall and in particular like repair shops. So if you had particular small repair shops, so if you have a TV repair, a appliance repair watch repair, locksmith, congregate, all those into one place.

2 (19m 17s):
You said you've done some traveling around the world. And I'm sure you've been in places where they have these bizarres and within the bazaars there's sections where everyone, where the whole section of the bizarres everyone's selling cloth, and you think to yourself, why were they all being the same place? Why wouldn't, why wouldn't they go each be go in various places where only where there's less competition. Right? But when you think about it, it works really well. Because if you're in the market for cloth, you go to the place where there's the most selection.

0 (19m 50s):
Love it. The problem today. And I'm going to sound like a grumpy crotchety old man is nobody repairs anything anymore because the prices of products are so cheap. People just throw them away and buy a new one.

2 (20m 3s):
You'd be surprised. You'd be surprised how many people, if a Leatherman tool are still fixing things,

0 (20m 9s):
That's a shameless plug for the leather man. All right. So you end up back in Oregon in 1976, and you're flipping through your book of ideas and you decide the most viable idea. The one you want to pursue is this, this knife.

2 (20m 27s):
Exactly. It had the most realistic chance of actually being able to do something with it. And I asked my wife, could I build one? Just one, just for me. She said, how long will it take? And I said, maybe one month. So she said, okay. And so she went to work to support us. And I went to, at the time we were at my parents' house, I went into the basement, picked up the file. The Hacksan started trying to build what was in my mind out of,

0 (21m 2s):
But like, like scrap metal,

2 (21m 6s):
Scrap metal eyes was able to scrounge up.

0 (21m 10s):
And where were you doing this?

2 (21m 11s):
I was working in my brother-in-law's garage.

0 (21m 15s):
And what did that mean? Were you like where you bound? I mean, you weren't, you're not like a 19th century blacksmith where you're pounding metal, right? Or were you, is that who you doing? So many of the, some of that,

2 (21m 27s):
My initial prototypes, I was cannibalizing parts out of other tools, but then I was an end about tick, connect them and get it to design the way I want it to. I was cutting the piece of sheet metal of a Hacksaw or cutting them with 10 snips and folding them together by putting the metal in device and then putting the, bending it over the corner of the vice and tonic by pounding with a hammer, it was really pretty

0 (21m 56s):
Crude. So you were like a 19th century blacksmith?

2 (21m 59s):
Well, other than I didn't have fire and flames, I was kind of doing everything cold.

0 (22m 4s):
Okay, great. Okay. So you're really like, you're trying to make a prototype and you come up with a prototype and try to imagine, it looks like a pair of pliers, but in the pliers you had like some tools that would come out of the handles. What, what were the tools like knives and a file and bottle opener, that kind of thing. Yes.

2 (22m 21s):
And screwdrivers.

0 (22m 22s):
Right. And what did you do with it? Did you present it to, to, to, to friends, to your wife? Did you say this is it? I got it. I think this is it. This is the thing that's going to make me millions of dollars.

2 (22m 34s):
No, I quickly discarded it because even for me, it had shortcomings, which were,

0 (22m 41s):
What, what

2 (22m 42s):
I'll the first chart coming was that I had, I had a strict criteria in the length that it could be closed when you put it in your pocket, it added to be pocket knife length. Okay. Not beyond no, no longer than four inches. So by the time I had the pliers taking up about two inches, I only had about two inches of handle. Oh yeah. And I, and I couldn't get good leverage.

0 (23m 8s):
You realize that to make this work, it has to fold over. Yes. So how long did it take you to, to make that prototype?

2 (23m 16s):
About two more years.

0 (23m 19s):
So all told you start this in 1976 after, and you were only supposed to do this for a month, by the way. All

2 (23m 26s):
Right.

0 (23m 27s):
This is, it reminds me of James Dyson who invented the Dyson vacuum. Who's on our show five years ago, for five years, I think, or six years he worked on the vacuum. I think he had 4,000 or 5,000 prototypes of his vacuum. Cleaner people thought he was nuts. I mean, you were still a young man, but you're now in your kind of your early thirties, you are not running any money. You were working on this prototype, but you believe that this was going to be a business. You clearly believed it. Did anybody else? Do you remember anyone at the time saying, yeah, well maybe you should just get a job.

2 (24m 4s):
Well, I'm pretty sure people were looking, asking, sat me, but this was my day job. Every, every day I would go to my brother-in-law's garage, spend the whole day in the garage. And so I spent a lot of time in the library too. Right. When I was researching various aspects of materials or specifications on how good the tool should be

0 (24m 30s):
When you were, when you were kind of like working on the prototype, what were you imagining this would be used for? I mean, you knew that you needed something like this on your trip to Europe. Did you think this would be like a utility knife? Like, you know, like lots of people have Swiss army knives to just have them, even if they're not Pandy, they just have them. But did you think it would be that kind of person who would, who would want this?

2 (24m 52s):
Well, I thought that it would be anybody and everybody or anybody that carried a pocket knife would rather carry just to hold that I was creating because you not only got all the features of a pocket knife, you also got a pair of full-sized full strength pliers.

0 (25m 7s):
So this is what you're working on. And in the meantime, you know, it's a lonely pursuit, right? I mean, you're, you're doing this by yourself. And I don't know. I mean, you mean you didn't have like an office of people to get feedback from, did you do, did you, do you remember feeling lonely? Like, like, I dunno, you're all alone in the world working on this thing.

2 (25m 40s):
I do one, one time in particular, it was the Eve of my 30th birthday. And I'd been working on this for two years already. And I went to bed that night, thinking I have nothing to show for this two years of my life are wasted. The next morning I woke up and remembered. I have a goal. I want to build a tool that works for me. And if it works for me, I think other people are going to like it too. And so I went back to work and on, I went

0 (26m 21s):
When we come back and just a moment how Tim finally makes a sale, a single sale of a single knife, but still gets turned down by dozens and dozens of mail or a catalogs stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this Support for this NPR podcast. And the following message come from bubble.io, a no-code platform that enables you to build launch and scale real ideas and products without investing thousands of dollars on engineers or wasting time trying to code it yourself, join over 1 million builders and use bubbles drag and drop tool to develop and launch custom interactive multi-user web apps in hours go to bubble.io/npr.

0 (27m 13s):
And the first 500 listeners will get their first month free on any of bubbles paid plans.

3 (27m 22s):
This season of the StoryCorps podcast from NPR stories about people who defied the odds.

4 (27m 27s):
I was a colored boy for South Carolina, got to become an astronaut, but Ron was the one who didn't accept societal norms as being his norm.

3 (27m 36s):
Our new season drops December 7th, listen on the NPR one app@npr.org or wherever you get your podcasts.

0 (27m 49s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 1978 and Tim Leatherman has been grinding away on a prototype for a folding multipurpose tool. And his plan is to patent it, sell it to a big knife company and make lots of money. And,

2 (28m 7s):
And they would pay me about $1 million and I would sit back and live happily ever after

0 (28m 14s):
You would just count your gold coins in your vault of gold for the rest of your life. So the idea was, Hey, I'll make a prototype, it'll have a patent. And then I'll sell the technology to another knife company. And I believe the knife company was Gerber, which is also based in Portland. They make great knives and you actually approach them in 1978 or nine and, and said, Hey, check out what I've built. What do you remember about that meeting?

2 (28m 43s):
I approached a Gerber. I called them and said, I have a new kind of pocket knife. I'd like to show you. I said, sure, come on in. They agreed to borrow my prototype and do an evaluation of it and get back to me after a couple of weeks, they, I hadn't heard from them and I was getting really anxious. So I called them and they said, sorry, we decided to not take this on. It's not a knife. It's a tool.

0 (29m 13s):
Okay. What's wrong with being a tool? They said,

2 (29m 15s):
We're in the knife business. And this is a tool. It's not something that we're interested in getting into did part of

0 (29m 23s):
You say, okay, well maybe I'll approach tool companies and see if they want

2 (29m 26s):
It. I'm a little more stubborn than that. I said, well, there's other knife companies. So I'll approach them. So I did. I ultimately, I think I contacted every knife company. There was in the U S and the U S even, even Victorinox in Switzerland.

0 (29m 40s):
Wow. And you, you ha and at that, this is pre email. You're you're writing letters and mailing them.

2 (29m 46s):
Yes. I would send them a letter and all of the answers were the same, sorry. We're we're not interested. And then I finally got the message and said, okay, if the night companies are injured, aren't interested. I'll go to the tool companies. Yeah. And when I wrote to them, the answers back was, sorry, this is not a tool. It's a gadget and gadgets don't sell.

0 (30m 11s):
What tool companies do you remember going to all the big ones

2 (30m 13s):
Like Stanley black and Decker.

0 (30m 16s):
Wow. I mean, I mean, you, you you're, you're now talking about, you know, three, four years in, this is not a vote of confidence. This is not a, this would not instill confidence in most people. And I would say most people at this point would say, I got to move on

2 (30m 33s):
And I wasn't too much different. My wife and I had a conversation and we decided it was time that I get a, a real job. I looked through the want ads. And I saw found one that said, wanted salesmen welding products and was offered a job. And I accepted it. W w

0 (30m 57s):
The company you worked for was called eutectic I think, right? The welding supply companies

2 (31m 1s):
There, their headquarters was in Switzerland. It was actually a perfect job for me in a lot of ways. It was, it was, I was calling on businesses where they could, they had equipment and they had processes that could be used in the manufacturer, my tool. So I would show them my prototype. And, and it was, that was also a way of getting rapport with my perspective customers. Okay.

0 (31m 24s):
Oh, so you, so while you were representing eutectic selling supplies, you could also talk to these customers about the buy, your passion, which was this pocket knife that you were inventing. Yes.

2 (31m 38s):
If you try to sell stuff to people that get their antenna up, if you ask them for advice, they're plenty willing to talk to you.

0 (31m 46s):
Alright, by this point in the early eighties, I believe I read you'd already received more than a hundred, maybe more than 200, either rejections or no replies from a knife companies and tool companies, but you still thought you were still holding onto this dream, even though you'd already had about 200 or more rejections or, or no replies.

2 (32m 11s):
Yes. I still had the goal still had the dream still persevering.

0 (32m 15s):
How did you think that it was gonna work if no one was confirming that idea?

2 (32m 22s):
There's a fine line between persistence and failure to accept reality. And I was determined to try to go on too long before giving up too soon.

0 (32m 40s):
And I have to assume he probably didn't have to invest too much money because it was like scrap metal and print there's costs for the patent. Imagining you probably had put a couple of several thousand dollars into developing this thing, or maybe more out of it. I actually, I don't know.

2 (32m 56s):
I believe the patent cost about $1,400. And I probably put in maybe $5,000 in purchasing various types of

0 (33m 7s):
Equipment and, and the time and

2 (33m 9s):
Put in a lot of time, I w I was ready. I had felt I had more time than money. And about seven years after starting the project first, going into the garage, I was about to give up.

0 (33m 22s):
But what changed that? Why, why, what happened that made you not give up

2 (33m 26s):
A friend of mine from university days named Steve Berliner had been following my, let's not say progress, but lack of progress all this time. And he stepped in and said, let's be partners. There's still a few things you haven't tried. And he stepped in and offered to, offered, to become partners, to try to see if we could get it

0 (33m 50s):
On the market. And Steve was a friend from college. Yes.

2 (33m 53s):
We were fellow table tennis players, and Steve's father had a manufacturing business. And Steve, so Steve grew up with that environment. Steve's education in university was on the business side.

0 (34m 8s):
So he was, he was kind of like a, a perfect match. And when he approached you and said, Hey, let's start a business. This is actually amazing. You had started this prototype in 1976. Steve approaches you in 1982. You had not yet incorporated the business. You did not have a business.

2 (34m 24s):
No, Steve and I did agree to become partners. It was a 75% knee and 25% Steve. And so then they, we were smart enough to recognize that before our starting to manufacture the tool, we should get an order for enough tools to justify going into business. I think

0 (34m 46s):
Read that that in 1983. So there'll be, what seven years after you started on work on this product you finally sold at all?

2 (34m 59s):
Yes. My very first sale was by going to a knife show. I had a table and I had an exhibit on my table called the evolution of an invention, or I had compiled the prototypes that I had created over the, by then seven year period that illustrated my progress or lack of progress and trying to reach to the tool that would be marketable.

0 (35m 29s):
Did you get a light on, did you get a bunch of people coming up to the, to the table and inquiring and asking you questions? And no,

2 (35m 37s):
I was at the show. People were walking by and no one was stopping.

0 (35m 43s):
Sorry. I would have stopped. I would have stopped for you, Tim. I promise.

2 (35m 49s):
Well, by the, after I tell you my story, you might, you might agree that you might not have stopped. And the reason is, is that down at the end of the aisle, there was a man selling magnesium Firestarters and being at the end of the aisle, he would get up on a podium. So he was up a little higher than everyone else. And he created this well honed sales pitch that he would, that kind you'd use it to buy a Barker at a country fair. And he would go through his dog and pony show with sparks flying and him starting fires and drawing a big crowd. And every once in a while, he would take a break. And to this day, I don't know why, but it came up to my table and his name was skeets Hawkins.

0 (36m 31s):
Skeets Houghton's yes. Only a guy named <em></em> is selling magnesium. Firestarters it's like, you have a movie. Okay, you're going.

2 (36m 41s):
So, so skeets comes up to my table and says, what are you doing? And I said, I'm, I'm sitting here waiting for someone to stop. And I'm going to want to show them the prototype of my new type of pocket knife. And skeet says, you can't do that. The people walking by the aisle, they're like zombies, they're in a daze. They don't see anything. And you got to get up, you got to get out in the aisle, you got to grab them, you got to talk to him, you got to stop him. And so I went back and I sat down and I started looking at the people, walking down the aisle and skis was right.

2 (37m 23s):
They weren't, they weren't absorbing what they were seeing. Yeah, it's true. They were like zombies. Yeah. So I've thought to myself, well, I'm at a nice show. Why are people here? They want to see new knives. What do you have, Tim? So I stood up when people walked by, I'd say, you sir, have you seen my new pocket knife? And they'd shake their head and turn around and look, what, who was that? What was that? And they would, I'd actually be able to talk to them a little bit.

0 (37m 51s):
Hmm. And I read that, I guess, I guess some guy walked by and, and offered to buy a knife from you. Who, who, who was he?

2 (37m 59s):
He was a German immigrant. He had moved to San Francisco and he had started a auto repair business, repairing a high-end German automobiles. His name was a Wolf Schultz, Totten patch. And he agreed to pay $175

0 (38m 17s):
To buy your knife, to buy

2 (38m 19s):
A knife. I would, that I would go back and make in my garage for him and emailed me a check. And that was my very first sale

0 (38m 29s):
Wolf. Got the first Leatherman ever. He could, he could take a picture of that and sell that as an NFT. All right. So you finally sell a knife to Wolf.

2 (38m 43s):
Bye. Now, Steve and I were already partners. We thought that if we could make and sell 4,000 tools in our first year, we could pay back our cash investment, but wouldn't pay ourselves anything for our time. So Steve and I were looking for someone to order 2000 of the 4,000 and we thought, who could that be? And our first thought was the U S army. They said, we approached them. I said, no, our next thought was at and T the telephone company before it broke up, it had tens of thousands of people repairing telephones. And I said, no.

2 (39m 25s):
And then we thought mail order catalogs. So we found a list of 280 different mail order catalogs. We got zero responses from 279 catalogs.

0 (39m 42s):
Yeah.

2 (39m 43s):
But the 280th catalog was in Seattle. And it was close enough to call and ask for an appointment to come up and show, show them our tool in person.

0 (39m 53s):
This was a catalog company, I think, called early winters.

2 (39m 57s):
Okay. So we drove to Seattle, showed him the prototype and I said, Hmm, it looks good. Yeah. How much? And have to admit, I hadn't really thought yet. So I thought quickly, and I said, your price $40. And they said, that means we have to sell it for 80. Sorry. Don't think anyone would pay $80 for this, but early winners did us a big, big favor, instead of saying, go away. Don't let the door hit you on your way out. They said, how could you make the tool less complex, less expensive? I said, okay.

2 (40m 38s):
So Steve and I got back in the car, drove back to Portland. He went back into my garage and about six months later, I came out with a new prototype. We showed it to them. They said, they said, we like this, how much I said your price, $24. I said, that's fine. Yeah. My hopes are rising. So I said, so you're ready to order 2000. And they said, no, we don't think we could possibly sell that many.

0 (41m 9s):
Wow. So, I mean, now you're talking about what, this is 19, 19 83. Yes. Because both of you are still doing your day jobs. Yes. So no orders,

2 (41m 22s):
No order from her new winters,

0 (41m 24s):
None of these catalogs. And what catalogs was, I mean, Sears was probably still, you know, Neiman Marcus and Dave,

2 (41m 31s):
Our LL bean sharper

0 (41m 34s):
Image, sharper image, sharper image. They weren't interested

2 (41m 38s):
Well. So once early winter said, sorry, we don't think we can sell 2000 Steve. And I then took a picture of this latest prototype, wrote a cover letter, nailed it to the remaining 279 catalogs. Do you want to see this prototype?

0 (41m 56s):
Oh, because you had this, this new prototype, you just reached out to the exact same catalogs as before.

2 (42m 2s):
Yes. And this time we got one response, it was from a company called Cabela's

0 (42m 9s):
Cabela's, which I think is owned by bass pro shops today. Today.

2 (42m 13s):
Yes. It's on good grass pro shops. Okay. And one day in late may of 19 83, 8 years after I had first thought of the concept, I got a letter at my business address, which was really my home address. I opened it up and inside was a purchase order for $12,000. Wow. For 500 tools.

0 (42m 38s):
Wow. Do you, do you remember, I mean, I would've cried.

2 (42m 43s):
You can't believe how happy I was. I was climbing the walls. I called Steve. He was so happy. And then we both settled down and realized, well, this is only 500 tools. We wanted 2000. Yeah.

0 (43m 0s):
But still

2 (43m 2s):
Pretty right. Finally, after eight years an

0 (43m 5s):
Sale. And presumably this is may of, of 1983, presumably they have, how much time did you have to make 500 tools?

2 (43m 14s):
Order came in late may of 1983. And they wanted a delivery date in late December of 1983.

0 (43m 22s):
Okay. That seems reasonable. But who is going to make 500 tools? Just, just you and Steve?

2 (43m 28s):
Well, we were very lucky and that Steve's father had a metalworking business and Steve's father agreed to let us move the equipment. I had accumulated my garage into his shop and he let us use his machines and his employees on a subcontract basis.

0 (43m 48s):
Right. How long did it take to make one, one knife, one pocket knife, like several hours.

2 (43m 53s):
Well, if you think of the labor hours, those days, labor like pretty good wages and manufacturing jobs were like $5 an hour. So, you know, we had two, two or three hours of labor on every tool. Wow.

0 (44m 7s):
You were a move in calling it a pocket knife up until this point. But I think in 1983, once you got that order, or maybe around the time we got the order, you, you gave it an official name. You call it the pocket survival tool. Which, which, from what I read was a very well considered decision. Like you thought about a bunch of different possible names for it.

2 (44m 30s):
Yes. And we were I'm sup we're surprisingly astute at considering markets and marketing and who our customer could be. And we finally settled on knife enthusiasts as one category. And back in those days, there are people who are building bomb shelters because they thought the Soviet union was going to drop the big one on us. I

0 (44m 58s):
Remember those days. So yeah. So

2 (45m 1s):
We quite consciously added the term survival in our tool to lift the thought that maybe that would trigger a response from them. Well, as it turned out during that seven month period, when we were building the tools for Cabelas and then anyone else we could convince to buy them early winter is called and said anything happening. We said, yes, we're in production. I said, put us down for 250 tools. Oh. Also for delivery in late December, 1983.

0 (45m 35s):
That's great. So now you're closing in on the thousand tools, right? And by the way you were in the daytime, you were a salesperson selling welding equipment. And then any free time you had, you were rushing to the metal shop and making these tools, these personal stories.

2 (45m 53s):
During that period, I was basically totally neglecting my sales job. I was pretty much spending all the time and Steve's dad's shop

0 (46m 1s):
Just trying to turn out. You were one of the, I mean, it was as an assembly line, you were on the assembly line. I was

2 (46m 8s):
Personally checking every tool. My name was on every tool and I wanted each one to be perfect.

0 (46m 16s):
All right. So 1983, you're getting these orders in and it's December approaches and, and, and what's going on? Are you gonna, are you gonna have enough product to send, send to Cabelas and to early winters

2 (46m 29s):
Late December arrived much more quickly than we thought. About two days after Christmas, we got a call from early winters, asked our tools, our 250 tools. Where are they? We need them really badly because they've all been sold.

0 (46m 46s):
Oh, they actually had it in their catalog. At that point,

2 (46m 50s):
I'll get them printed and released and they already had 250 orders. Woo.

0 (46m 56s):
You are so lucky that you did not do business in the Amazon prime two day delivery

2 (47m 1s):
Era.

0 (47m 3s):
You would have been wiped out. And everyone's like, what? I just ordered this two hours ago where

2 (47m 7s):
And visit. Yes. We were lucky that in those days, people had a little bit more tolerance for how long it took to ship an order. But, but the catalogs didn't have very little tolerance. They wanted their product in stock. And when they got an order, they wanted to be able to ship immediately. So they weren't too happy. But they said the 250 had been sold. Here's an order for 500 more. Wow. And a week after that, they called and said, the 500 are gone. Here's an order for seven 50.

0 (47m 37s):
And just a bunch of one point something. Yeah. This is the same company, early winters who were supportive, who said, Hey, try to make it cheaper. But at the same time, they were also skeptical that they could, whether they could even sell 250 of these things, right.

2 (47m 51s):
Two weeks later, they called back and said, the order's now 1000 tools. And then it turned out that the catalogs were all monitoring each other. And if they got a sensor, it was a hot product. And they all wanted on board. Of course,

0 (48m 7s):
Of course.

2 (48m 9s):
Then we started getting calls from all these catalogs that had turned us down before, or hadn't even responded. They were

0 (48m 16s):
Saying, oh, this said, we want this ad to call

2 (48m 18s):
Up and say, Hey, we understand you have a new product. Would you mind sending us a sample? I love it. And Steve and I are rather than saying you idiots we've sent you a letter. You said, no, you could've had an exclusive, you didn't even reply. No, no, no. We didn't say that. We said yes. Sure. We'll be happy to send you a sample.

0 (48m 40s):
When we come back in just a moment, how a few samples morph into many, many sales for Leatherman, but how September 11th sends business back into an unexpected slump, stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this. This message comes from NPR sponsor DocuSign. When you're running a small business, you want to maximize every minute and every dollar that's where DocuSign can help DocuSign can give you the freedom to complete your business agreements anywhere in real time and get signed versions back in minutes.

0 (49m 20s):
It's that simple visit docusign.com today to learn more about how DocuSign can help add valuable time back into your day. This message comes from NPR sponsor Edmonds. The Edmund's homepage has car rankings compiled by their review. Editors from their shoppers can pick top ranked vehicles and do a side-by-side comparison by clicking on the compare box, car shopping can be overwhelming. Admins is here to help visit E D M U N D s.com and click on Edmund's best car rankings to research and compare vehicles Edmonds. We drive it like it is.

0 (50m 4s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's 1983. And after years in the wilderness, Tim Leatherman's multipurpose tool is finally finding a market with mail order catalogs and sales. They start to grow like mad.

2 (50m 23s):
Yes, it was. It was by then. It was quite evident that there was a market for this tool when we're able to go from 200 tools to in 1983 to 1 million tools in 1993. Wow. Those were really exciting years with growth rates of 50% per year compounded.

0 (50m 43s):
How, how were your profit margins? I mean cost you $24 or you were, you were selling them for $24, I guess, but I imagine they were not cheap to make. I imagine your margins were kind of pretty thin or am I wrong?

2 (50m 56s):
And that first partial year, we did manage to sell 200 tools and we had revenues of $6,000. And with that money, we were able to start launching, launched the business and eventually be able to make and sell some tools in that first year of 30,000 tools of sales, we had about $680,000 of revenue and actually made a few

0 (51m 22s):
Dollars. You made a profit. Yeah. Here's why, here's the wonder. I mean, now all of a sudden you are scaling fast. You go from 200 and year one full year one, you go to 30,000, then 70,000, then you're doubling 160,000 by 1986. Yes. You were funding the growth and the scaling of this purely through the cashflow

2 (51m 49s):
Almost entirely. After about three years, we finally found a young banker who shouldn't have been willing to talk to us, but, but dead. And it was welling. It's our, that our balance sheet was strong and, and agreed to give us a, a line of credit.

0 (52m 8s):
All right. Here's a question. One of the things that, that you did, I think it was 19, 19 96. So this is like, you know, it's about 13 years in, you build a very big facility in Portland to manufacture the product. And I think to this day they are assembled in Portland, right? Every pretty much every Leatherman product.

2 (52m 33s):
Yes, we do all this empty ourselves. And the vast majority of the manufacturing ourselves in our own factory in Portland, Oregon.

0 (52m 42s):
How, I mean, I know that cause some of the components you import, right? Some of the components that you use in the knife are made in Europe and maybe even in Asia, but how, why was it so important to make them in the U S I mean, I think I know why, but it meant that they were going to always be more expensive. I mean, your wife was from Vietnam. You, you, you had some, probably some contexts there and it would have been a bit, much cheaper to make them in Asia. Why did you decide to continue to make them in Portland?

2 (53m 12s):
I was born in Portland. I was raised in Portland. The jobs created were created in Portland and among the things I'm most proud of in the whole Leatherman journey is that I've created all these jobs and that they were not a cannibalization of the world's supply. There were in addition to the world supply because this was a whole new product category that added jobs that didn't take away from companies that were selling other things. So when it's one of my everlasting goals is to keep, do everything I possibly can to keep these jobs here in Portland, Oregon.

0 (53m 53s):
Hm. I know Tim that at, at one point there was a lawsuit, a class action lawsuit against Leatherman because your tools were stamped made in the USA, even though some of the component parts are actually made in Europe or, or elsewhere, but most of it was assembled and made in the U S including most of the components. Anyway, I know there was, it was based on an obscure law. This lawsuit, it was, it was a complicated, legal back and forth, but, but the upshot was, or the, the, the outcome was that you ended up taking, made in the USA off of your products.

2 (54m 32s):
Yes, has, as a result, we were required to label our tools, a proper label, and our tools could be made in the USA of us and foreign components and assembled in the USA. They actually, that lawsuit, it could have spurred us to say to the heck of it, we'll just go all the way and make our tool abroad. But the opposite happened at its burden into being more resolute and seeking more domestic suppliers and adding even more F U S content into our tool so that we can, and most of our tools, now we can label them as made in USA.

0 (55m 13s):
Leatherman is not cheap, right? You can get a knockoff, you can get another knife that is a knockoff that's made in, in China or in a, in a cheaper country. How do you, how do you make sure that that people are, you know, are aren't going to those alternatives?

2 (55m 38s):
Yes, it's true that you can buy a knockoff of our tool or made in China for $10. Whereas a, a Leatherman tool might be $100. We used to fight the knockoffs. We used to file lawsuits against the importers and the retailers that were selling the knockoffs really wasn't possible to go after the manufacturers in China. And we were quite successful in those lawsuits for quite a few years. And of course our labor costs are higher here in Portland, but we do have some advantages. We, we, we sweat the details. I think it was Mr. Sears, Sears and Roebuck long ago said quality is remembered long after price is forgotten.

0 (56m 24s):
I mean, I, I know that that, that lots of people have, have stories of, of, of the Leatherman, right? Cause it's one of those things that you bring with you for, for the, you know, for, for the eventuality, when something will go wrong and you need to fix it,

2 (56m 41s):
Right. We get testimonials of the Leatherman tool saving lives. We get testimonials from other men tools, from a couple of soldiers who have said the Leatherman tool has stopped. The bullet we've received testimonials of other men tool and used as a surgical instrument, saving a life in, in emergency we've have many testimonials of a Leatherman tool being used to rescue someone out of a burning vehicle or another one out of a fallen helicopter. There's a many, many, many different markets that where everyone finds the leather material to be of great value.

0 (57m 26s):
You were really just every year growing, growing, growing, growing. And I think, you know, around 1999, your sales reached over a hundred and a hundred million dollars. You're a private company. So you don't reveal your numbers, but that was reported at the time. And then next three, four years, sales dropped 20, 30%. What, what was going on? What happened? What happened around 19 99, 9 11 Oh 2000 1, 9 11 and nine 11 had a huge impact on sales. Yes. Because people couldn't travel with them in their pen bags. Yes. Yes.

2 (58m 3s):
We're still carrying him when they got to the airport and they, as to use the euphemism that the TSA was using is they were voluntarily abandoned,

0 (58m 14s):
Which meant that people had to leave them at the airport, these 50, $70 knives.

2 (58m 19s):
Right. Well, we thought that the people that lost her tool would, would go out and buy another one, buy another one. So I wouldn't hurt business at all, but it turned out that maybe they, some of them did buy another one, but then they stopped wearing it because they were afraid that if they went to the airport again, that they would forgotten, you still have it and they'd lose it again.

0 (58m 39s):
Right. Cause it comes with the, it comes with the leather, a leather holster that you put, you could put your belt in through.

2 (58m 45s):
So then they stopped carrying them. They stopped using them. Other people didn't see them using it. And we lost that word of mouth advertising. That was so valuable to us.

0 (58m 56s):
So, all right. So, so really people are not buying them and, and, and you, and you had to get to do a laughs in 2002, I think. Right? I mean, I mean, your sales were, I dropped off considerably to the point where you actually had to let people go

2 (59m 12s):
One of the down points of my leather mud journey. That was really, really hard,

0 (59m 19s):
But she had no choice.

2 (59m 20s):
Really. We had no choice. It was, you have to, it's better to have most employees employed rather than have no employees employed. Yeah.

0 (59m 30s):
How did the company turn around from that low point? What was it? Just, just the economy bounce back or was there, was it a more methodical, like new product line, new strategic

2 (59m 43s):
Approach? All we bounced around in that low nine figure revenue number for quite a few years. And the last few years, we've, we've been able to introduce some new products. We've been able to take a little bit better control of the market. And after the pandemic hit, we thought there we'll never sell another tool. We did make a few adjustments. Then a few months later, a couple of months later, we started getting orders again. And by the end of 2020, we had had our third best year in our history. Wow, wow. And this year we project we'll have our, our best revenue you're ever in our history.

0 (1h 0m 27s):
Wow. You stayed on as CEO until 2005. When you decided to step down, I guess, and kind of change your role at the company and become the chairman of the board. Were you just at that point burnout where you kind of done with the day-to-day?

2 (1h 0m 51s):
I think by that point, I was a bit tired. I earlier on, I had set my criteria for my leadership of the company, two criteria, one that the job remained fun. And the other that I be an asset, not a hindrance and all those many years from two at 19, from the garage, even from 19, but from 1983 to 2005, the job was fun. But near the end, it was fun most days, but not every day. And also when I would go home at night and Joe had asked me, what did you do today?

2 (1h 1m 32s):
So often my answer was I processed paper and there was one other factor. But at that point I was 57 years old in calendar years. But in terms of all the hours, I'd put in all the, all those previous years, I was 67 years old and work years. And I thought I had earned the right to be able to cut back a little bit.

0 (1h 1m 59s):
Wow. I read that in, in 2019 X, you heard you in an interview, you said you were making about 8,000 tools a day. Yes. Are you making more now? Yes.

2 (1h 2m 9s):
So

0 (1h 2m 10s):
That, are you selling about

2 (1h 2m 11s):
8,002 million tools a year is now closer to 3 million tools a year.

0 (1h 2m 16s):
Wow. I know you don't reveal your, your revenue, but it's not hard to do the math. I mean, it's yeah.

2 (1h 2m 23s):
I've, I've admitted. I'm quite ready willingly to met because it's pretty well publicized that we're in the very low at nine figures of revenue. I'm quite proud that about 30% of those sales are export sales and for an American company, a 30% of sales being entered internationalist is pretty good.

0 (1h 2m 44s):
So Tim, when you think about the journey you've gone on, right? You know, this, this is this kind of crazy story, man. We're toiling away on this thing that nobody wanted. And you're kinda like, you know, you had every reason to question why you were doing this. And everybody had a reason to question why you're doing this because it was not, it was not rational. This was not selling. You are not making a product. People seem to want because you weren't getting confirmation from the market. And yet you persisted and it's a hundred plus million dollar company today. How much of, of, of this story do you think has to do with just your hard work and persistence and smarts and how much do you think has to do with luck?

2 (1h 3m 29s):
I think that it's around 10% luck and about 90% plot I've persevered. I've worked hard. I've had great people working with me. Obviously I'm privileged to be born into a life of privilege in the United States and growing up in a middle-class house called I've spent so many places in the world where life is not nearly as good as I've had. It. There've been things where in life, where I've beaten the odds, the fact that a Leatherman tool became successful products that are patented.

2 (1h 4m 13s):
I've read that only about 5% of her, less of products that are patented get on the market. So I feel like I've been a lucky person. I've never bought a lottery ticket because I feel like I've already beaten the odds. It's not going to happen again.

0 (1h 4m 32s):
That's Tim Leatherman, founder, owner, and chairman of the board at Leatherman Tobruk. These days, Tim describes himself as a very engaged part-time employee, but he's also spent the past few years becoming quite an accomplished pickleball player. In fact, in 2019, Tim won the national silver medal in doubles in his age group.

2 (1h 4m 53s):
But that silver metal was in an ancient age category, had a middling skill level.

0 (1h 4m 59s):
Oh, you're just being modest. It was the 70 plus division. That's still national pickle ball championship.

2 (1h 5m 6s):
It's actually led to a new entrepreneurial spark in me. Oh, really? I've come up with a product that I think mini pickleball players will love

0 (1h 5m 17s):
Pickleball multi-purpose tool. No, it's,

2 (1h 5m 20s):
I'm not at Liberty to disclose it internally.

0 (1h 5m 23s):
I'm thinking you could combine like a port man, two of the Leatherman and a pickleball paddle, like a Chinese fan that folds, and then you unfold it and then like the Leatherman, but then you've got the pickleball paddle.

2 (1h 5m 37s):
Good job of trying to scuff out what it is.

0 (1h 5m 43s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week, please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded. If you want to contact us. Our email address is H ibt@npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this in mine is at guy Roz. Our Instagram account is at how I built this NPR and mine is at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by Carrie Thompson with music composed by Ramtin Arab Louie. It was edited by Neeva grant with research help Catherine cipher. Our production staff also includes Casey Herman, Liz Metzger, Ferris safari, JC Howard, Elaine coats, and Julia Carney. Our intern is Margaret Serino.

0 (1h 6m 23s):
Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Roz, and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.