wondery Plus (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How I, Built This Early, and ad free Right. now join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts.

NPR Life Kit (10s):
Whether you've got a small goal for 2024, or you wanna change your life in a more monumental way, head over to the Life Kit podcast. We've got 50 potential New Year's resolutions for you, and we will help you pick out the right one with our handy resolution planner. Take, your goals off hold by heading over to npr dot org slash life kit Or. by searching life kit Wherever, you get your podcasts

Audible (34s):
Get closer to the best. you With Audible. You can enjoy all your audio entertainment in one app. You'll always find the best of what you love or something new to Discover. I recently listened to Mark Hyman's Blood Sugar Solution, which completely changed how I think about what I eat, when I eat it, and how metabolic health is connected to a long life And. as an Audible member, you can choose one title a month to keep from their entire catalog, including the latest bestsellers and new releases. New members can try Audible free for 30 days. Visit Audible dot com slash built or text built to 5 0 0 5 0 0. That's audible.com/built or text built to 5 0 0 5 0 0 To. try audible free for 30 days audible.com/built.

Apple (1m 26s):
Reboot your credit card with Apple Card. It gives you Unlimited, daily cashback that can earn 4.35% annual percentage yield when you open a savings account, a high yield low effort way to grow your money with no fees. Apply for Apple Card now in the wallet app on iPhone to start earning and growing your daily cash with savings. Today. Apple card subject to credit approval savings is available to Apple card owner, subject to eligibility, savings accounts by Goldman Sachs. Bank, USA member FTIC. Terms apply.

3 (2m 1s):
So you're talking about a quarter million dollars just to do the bare minimum run of a canned product. So I'm like, okay, I don't have anywhere near that kind of cash and there's nobody who's gonna write me a check for the idea at that time. Whoa. I wanna put water in a can and call it Liquid Death. They're like, that's the dumbest idea ever. No retailer will carry it. You know, this might be a lot harder than I thought it was gonna be.

0 (2m 30s):
Welcome to How I Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz and on the show today how Mike Cesario turns store bought water upside down by putting it in aluminum cans and calling it Liquid Death. You've probably heard the adage, there's no such thing as a saturated market, which I don't know, is that really true? Have you visited the energy bar aisle at the supermarket lately?

0 (3m 12s):
There must be hundreds of brands, but still, it is true that a smart approach can break through in even the most crowded aisle. And if you don't believe me, well, today's story is just for you because today's story is about water, bottled water, and that market is huge worth over $300 billion globally. In the US alone, there are more than 80 different brands, so many that it would seem almost foolish to try and break into that market. But a little over seven years ago, one foolish entrepreneur decided to do just that.

0 (3m 54s):
He had no experience in water, but what Mike Cesario did have was very good instincts and almost two decades of experience in advertising. And Mike knew that if he tried something so utterly weird, so totally outlandish, it might just work seven years on the brand he built. Liquid Death sells more than a hundred million dollars of water a year. And what is Liquid Death? Well, it's just water. But what makes it so weird so different is how it's packaged. First off, it's in a tall Boy Can that at first glance looks like malt liquor or an energy drink.

0 (4m 39s):
It's got a grizzly looking skull on the front with a gothic horror movie font that spells out Liquid Death. A name that you have to admit is kind of unforgettable, which is just what Mike Crio intended for years, Mike worked on creative ad campaigns for different clients. He loved putting edgy humor into his pitches, but he was often frustrated by clients who didn't get the joke. So he decided to make his own ad campaign. In fact. Before Liquid Death was an actual product, it was just an ad, which Mike posted on Facebook as a test, A test to see if people would wanna buy an aluminum can of water called Liquid Death.

0 (5m 23s):
And as it turned out, they did. Mike grew up in the 1980s and nineties in Delaware and Pennsylvania. His parents divorced when he was young. His dad worked for various companies, and his mom was a respiratory therapist. And from a pretty early age, Mike was into two things, skateboarding and punk music.

3 (5m 44s):
Kind of went down the punk rabbit hole, got a guitar, started playing music, started playing in a band with some of my friends that I skateboarded with in like eighth grade. And then that kind of defined me as a teenager going through high school school. Like I played in a band and I skateboarded and I, yeah. And I was in always into creative. Like I did art drawing, all of that since I was like really young as well. So

0 (6m 7s):
What, what were you drawing? I

3 (6m 9s):
Drew a lot of cartoony stuff. Like when I was probably 10 years old, my older cousin Eric gave me his whole like, collection of mad magazines, like some as early as like late seventies mad magazines all the way up through the eighties. And I just thought that was the coolest thing I'd ever seen. So that kind of like comedy is what drove my creativity and how I drew stuff. Like funny cartoons, funny scenarios. Yeah. Little bite-sized things that felt like Mad Magazine.

0 (6m 41s):
Yeah. I guess after you, you finished high school, you, you sort of bounced around for a couple of years and and, and played in a couple of bands. And for, from what I understand, you were tr you were sort of trying to decide whether to, to get into music full time or or to go to college. But, but eventually, I you did leave home, you left the East Coast and decided to go study graphic design in California in in Pasadena, right?

3 (7m 8s):
Yeah. And it was, it was not because I didn't love music as much. It was more, 'cause I've realized the reality of a band is four or five people and you need everybody to be on the same page. Like I was all in. But I kind of knew, I didn't feel confident that everybody else was. Yeah. And then once I was in art center, that's when I, all, my first time probably in my life, I was fully focused on one thing. I'm like, I'm done with the music thing. I've been burned too many times. That way I know that I can't just go get a job and design I need, I need to get great at this. This is where I really gotta get my life together. And I focused a hundred percent on design and advertising and, you know, was getting straight A's and was at the top of my class.

3 (7m 49s):
And yeah, that's when I then went, went into

0 (7m 52s):
Advertising. And I guess one of your, maybe your first job out out of there was working for a a, a pretty sort of, well-known agency, Crispin Porter Bogusky. Yep. Tell, and and this is like, tell me, I mean, I don't, for people who don't know, know, advertising, they're like a, a pretty well-known, was it sort of a particularly creative agency, right?

3 (8m 15s):
Yeah. They did a lot of funny, disruptive marketing that resonated far more with me than like the graphic design world. That's like measuring pixels and designing to a grid and all this very meticulous stuff. You know, I was always into the more, oh, let's make stuff that's funny and clever. But you know, I think people will tell you like a year at Crispin at that period is like five years anywhere else. Because again, it was like, you know, people called it a sweat shop. Like, it really burned me out after a year. I mean, doing that where, I mean, I think there was a period for three months. I didn't have a single day off. So it was after a year I kind of was starting to look at some other spots.

3 (8m 58s):
And of course, because I had a year of Crispin under my belt, there were some other agencies willing to pay me a lot more money than I was making as a junior, you know, creative.

0 (9m 6s):
So you would a after that, that, I think you went to another agency in Seattle after that, and you would spend the next sort of seven years, at least eight years kind of bouncing around different agencies living in the Bay Area and Seattle. But I wanna, I wanna kind of ask you about this time 'cause around 2009 Yep. Where you got invited to, to see the Vans Warped tour and, and, and I mean, presumably you did, like, this is, this is your jam and these are like punk bands, vans warp, tour skater culture. So, and, and, and I don't, you know, I don't know if it was apocryphal, but it, it seems like that was a moment that would in some ways kind of a slightly foreshadow what what we're obviously gonna eventually talk about later on.

0 (9m 55s):
But tell me about, about the Van's Warp Tours lands in Denver.

3 (9m 60s):
Yeah. Denver. Yep. And when they were coming through on the Warp Tour to Denver, like, I, you know, they hit me up, Hey Mike, we're gonna be in a Denver, you should come out to the show. So I came out, they gave me, you know, wristband passes. Like I was hanging out back on the, on the, on the, their tour bus with, with where they have like this kind of city of tour buses for the war tour where they all park and people were just sitting out in lawn chairs back there, bands like, you know, drinking, playing games, that kinda stuff. So just hanging out with them there. And yeah, I saw they had these, you know, they were all drinking these cans of Monster Energy, but really small on the bottom of the can it said Tour Water. And they were like, yeah, 'cause I thought they were drinking energy drinks.

3 (10m 42s):
And they're like, no, no, no. Like this is water. Like the Energy drinks sponsor. You know, they don't want us drinking any other products besides Monster on stage. And like, clearly people aren't gonna drink energy drinks all day in the hot sun. And so they said, so the, the brand had to create water for the bands that looked just like their product that they wanted to

0 (11m 3s):
Promote. Oh, wow. So it wasn't like they were, they were opening up Monster Energy, pouring it out and refilling it with water. It was literally water, but it just had Monster energy on it.

3 (11m 11s):
Yeah. They were never pouring it out. Like Monster had to create this for the bands.

0 (11m 16s):
But, but the, the point is, is that like the, the image was of these like punk rockers who actually were probably healthy and like living a vegan lifestyle on stage with Monster Energy, which is just packed with sugar and more sugar. And that's not what they were drinking. They were actually drinking water outta those monster energy cans.

3 (11m 36s):
E exactly. And it's like, ah, that's kinda weird. But,

0 (11m 40s):
But this was not, to be clear, this was not like an aha light bulb moment. This was just an observation that you had of these guys drinking water out of Monster Energy and you just kind of filed it in the back of your head. It wasn't like, I'm going to change the world tomorrow. Exactly.

3 (11m 54s):
Yeah. I mean, I was so into brand and marketing and I mean deep, deep, deep in the weeds, especially like when you're working for such a top agency like Crispin, it's like everybody eats sleeps and breathes like advertising and marketing and everyone knows what's the new campaign and what's been done before and what hasn't. Like Yeah. I would that, that was my career. So I was hyper tuned into all the nuance of brand and marketing.

0 (12m 18s):
Mike, I I'm curious about the kinds of ad campaigns you, you did during this period. Like, like what your personal style was. Yep. 'cause I, at one point, I know you were living in San Francisco and, and you're working for an ad company there, and I guess your clients didn't always appreciate your sort of peculiar sense of humor. So what kinds of suggestions, like, do you remember making a suggestion that that didn't get made? That you were like, God, this is so good.

3 (12m 46s):
Yeah, there was one, it, it was funny. What's funny is it didn't get made and then whatever it was, 10 years later, I finally made the idea myself for Liquid Death. And it's one of our most successful things that we've done. There was a golf club company, Callaway, and they released this golf club called the Diablo. Literally had devil horns on it and flames. And we were trying to come up with, you know,

0 (13m 17s):
A campaign around it. Yeah,

3 (13m 18s):
Yeah. A campaign or just like, you know, 'cause Golf world, it's sort of like, they would joke like the marketing is so stale and unchanged. We're literally,

0 (13m 27s):
She knows and she knows in polo shirts.

3 (13m 29s):
Yeah. And literally as you just say, four yards longer. Like that's the campaign. That's fair. Okay. It's four yards longer. Yeah. Show a pro, show the club. That's, that's, that's golf marketing. And one of the ideas I had, I'm like, okay, well it's this, you know, whatever it is, $400 golf club with Devil horns on it, it's called the Diablo. And I said, what if we ran a magazine ad that was like a contract where if you ripped out this ad that this ad that sold your soul to Callaway, you would get like the first, whatever it was, the first 20 people to do it, would actually get a free Diablo club.

3 (14m 12s):
And I'm like, think about it, like how much press attention will that get? How many people will talk about that for free that is not going to talk about an ad with a golfer that says four yards longer on it?

0 (14m 25s):
Yeah. So it would be the ad in a magazine. Like a golf magazine.

3 (14m 27s):
Yeah, like a golf magazine. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Right. And I thought that was, I just thought it, I'm like, man, this is gold. How do you not do this? Like it's, I mean, and my boss wouldn't even present it to the client. He's like, we're not even showing the client this, Mike. Mm. I'm like, Ugh, all right. Fine. Right. But yeah, it, it was those kinds of things. And you know, we also were working at that time on the airline, Virgin America, when that was kind of a new hot airline and we were their agency and, you know, I presented like all different kinds of, I think, kind of cool ideas. But you know, again, they just ended up only wanting to show the client just like very straightforward, like semi clever headline Yeah.

3 (15m 11s):
On a billboard and, you know, not anything too disruptive. So yeah, it, it, it was very frustrating to, to just really not be able to kind of, I guess, hone into what the, you know, what I felt like my creative potential was. Yeah. And then that's when I started thinking, I kind of was at this crossroads of, man, I'm, I'm deep in it. Yeah. So I literally had the thought, okay, if I have to depend on clients to buy the ideas that I think are, are, are the smart things to do, or I have to depend on my boss to be willing to, to passing those through, to passing this through that I'm like, the only way, my only solution is I need to create my own product.

3 (15m 52s):
Yeah. That I control what the marketing is for. That's the only way. So then I really started thinking about, okay, if, if I'm gonna create my own product, like what would it be?

0 (16m 2s):
Yeah. It's almost like, it's almost like you were saying to yourself, I don't really care what the brand is. I just wanna do cool ads. And that's like, and so the, the product doesn't matter. It's just, I can't sell these ads to clients, so I gotta make something myself and just, it'll, it'll be like an outlet for me to make cool ads. So what were you thinking about? Like what kinds of products could you sell around, you know, like, yeah,

3 (16m 25s):
So I was actually really inspired by this guy. He was a creative advertising agency owner in Philadelphia named Steve Steve Grass. And he had this agency called Quaker City Mercantile. And they actually helped create and launch two of the most successful spirits brand launches of like, at that time, like almost the last couple decades. Which

0 (16m 54s):
Was, what were they?

3 (16m 55s):
Hendricks gin. Oh

0 (16m 56s):
Yeah, sure.

3 (16m 57s):
And Sailor Jerry Rum.

0 (16m 58s):
Rum. Okay. Yep.

3 (16m 59s):
So he was kind of like a punk, sort of like a punk rock sort of guy that, you know, ran this agency in Philadelphia for years. They had partnered with this big liquor conglomerate called William Grant and Sons that was based in Scotland. And they asked them to help launch a gin brand. And they were like, Hey, as a Scott, a Scottish company, it's really unique that we would ever launch a gin. You know, worse, everyone sees us as scotch. So they helped them, they kind of helped them create the, this entire Hendricks gin brand, which

0 (17m 29s):
Was groundbreaking. 'cause groundbreaking. That was everywhere. All of a sudden everybody was drinking Hendricks gin and they were talking about botanicals and like all, you know. Right. I remember. And

3 (17m 38s):
At the time I was just very surrounded in the spirits industry. Like at the time I was dating someone who was like a, you know, mixologist bartender

0 (17m 48s):
In San Francisco. In

3 (17m 49s):
San Francisco. Yeah. Like, I was really into whiskey and bourbon and trying all these different unique things. And my brother was a bartender at the time. So I just felt like I am more connected to this world and probably know more about it than the average person. I think that was my sort of, you know, litmus test for like what kind of product to make, you know? Yeah. So yeah, when I thought, okay, it's gonna be liquor, and literally I just started looking and doing my homework. But yeah, the one kind of category that I thought that I couldn't find one cool brand in really was brandy. And I was like, you go to the liquor store and you look on the shelf, the brandy section, and there was literally dust on some of the bottles.

3 (18m 34s):
And I started, I was like, so then I bought some brandy and was tasting it and I was like, oh, wow, this actually tastes a lot like bourbon. Just a little bit sweeter. Why is this such a dead category yet a very similar tasting spirit is like the hottest thing there is right now. Clearly that is a brand and marketing problem that needs to be solved. So then I started kind of developing a brandy brand. That's always the funniest thing to say, a brandy brand that felt more like a whiskey brand, you know, because I felt, hey, people understand the, like the, the, the design and branding aesthetic of whiskey and they associate it with a flavor profile.

3 (19m 16s):
How do we bring more of that to brandy? Because it is, it really is closer to that kind of profile. People thought brandy was like ultra sweet liqueur, but it's not at all. Yeah. Or

0 (19m 27s):
So when you say we, it was, it

3 (19m 29s):
Was who? It was me really. It was me. Yeah. I created this brand that was packaged and marketed more like an Americana whiskey. Yeah. And

0 (19m 37s):
What was it called? Western

3 (19m 38s):
Grace. Yeah. So yeah, we kind of created this thing, it felt like a whiskey, but it was, it was a American brandy and I found a distillery in Ukiah, California.

0 (19m 49s):
Sure. Yeah.

3 (19m 50s):
And yeah. And these guys have been making some of the best brandy in the world for like 20 years.

0 (19m 56s):
They were making wine there.

3 (19m 58s):
No, they were making brandy. These guys were,

0 (19m 60s):
They were making brandy. Okay.

3 (20m 1s):
Yeah. Yeah. They had made like this craft brandy, you know, and I think when they saw this marketing, young marketing guy who was passionate and excited about the category and had this cool idea on, on how to market it and brand it, I think they got excited about it and they were like, yeah, you know, we'll, yeah. You know, we're down to kind of make it for you.

0 (20m 19s):
Alright. So you, you find this distillery north of San Francisco. And, and then to get more help from what I, from what I read, you did something really smart, which is you reached out to the folks from that, that ad agency, Quaker City Mercantile, that, that you just talked about, that helped launch Hendricks gin. Yep. And, and I guess you connect with the creative director who used to work there and, and some other people and, and they actually agreed to partner with you to, to help you launch this brandy and, and I guess you moved back east to where they were based, which is Philadelphia to kind of work with them. Is is that right?

3 (20m 58s):
Yeah, so I moved back to Philly. We, we started figuring out the details of, you know, working with this distillery, how much they wanted to charge us, how much we were gonna create. And that was really like, we were just gonna create a really small amount, like, I wanna say like the first batch of this stuff was maybe like 15 grand or something like that. It was like not many cases. Like, I don't know, 60 cases or something like that. And then literally it was, you know, the, these guys, I mean, they were creative directors and like VP level account people at agencies. So they had probably pretty high paying jobs. Like they were homeowners. Like they kind of had their own independent money where I did not, like, I'm still paying student loans.

3 (21m 40s):
I have like, nothing in my bank account. So they were able to kind of put up like a little bit to kind of help it going. Like, I had, you know, I basically asked my dad, like, Hey, I got this thing. I think they lent me like five grand, like, just so I could like put in a little bit also. And we got like the first production going where we went through all the legal head, you know, of like dealing, like getting an actual, you know, through the red tape of having an alcohol brand. And we got it into a warehouse in Philadelphia. Yeah. What I realized then was with, with alcohol, so much of it isn't marketing. It's like this, getting it into like, the cool craft cocktail bars and getting bartenders on board and doing tastings.

3 (22m 24s):
Like it wasn't really at that level about you didn't have the money for like, brand marketing. It was just like, okay, you just gotta get this in the right people's hands. And they're basically like, yeah, we're not gonna have any money to do real marketing for a while, and it's social media and you, you know, you can't market alcohol to anyone under 21. So you have to be careful about what you can put on social. And, and then after two years, I had just butt heads with the, the two folks that I had started it with. You know, we just weren't on the same page about so many. You had a so many different things, different, totally different vision. And then they kept the brand going for a while. And it wasn't until, I think it was two summers ago during Covid, that they officially sort of shut the, the company down.

0 (23m 12s):
Right. And so you never made any money off that? No,

3 (23m 14s):
No. Didn't make any off that

0 (23m 16s):
It, I mean, you probably were spending a lot of your time just on like, the mundane, you know, logistics of just getting it distributed even.

3 (23m 27s):
Oh yeah. It was such a headache. I mean, the legal paperwork, background checks, like, it, it really was such a, a, a nightmare. And that was part of the reason where when I was thinking of my next thing, I'm like, okay, whatever it's gonna be is there's gonna be almost no regulations, like no complicated ingredients or manufacturing processes. Like, it needs to be very simple because that stuff just, Hmm. It, it's, yeah, it, it, it was really difficult.

0 (23m 55s):
Hmm. Were you, did you feel like, I don't know, like you failed? I mean, did you feel bad? Did you feel like, God, I pour all the last two years into this thing that I really thought was gonna be the thing and now I'm like back to square one working, looking for agency work again?

3 (24m 9s):
I mean, it was, yeah. I mean, it really was a tough time for me. Like, it was like, you know, I worked at one agency that wasn't great, and then I got fired from that agency because they kind of, I think they realized my head just wasn't in it. And I was literally just like phoning it in. So it's like, I'm fired from a really crappy agency or what I thought was a crappy agency at the time. And I just had this whole, like, what does it all mean? Like, where, you know, where what am I gonna do with my life? I have no interesting work in my portfolio. There is no cool agency that's gonna really hire me.

0 (24m 41s):
But eventually you do get hired by an agency that was, I guess, based in, in Chattanooga in Tennessee, it's called Human, human Ought, like Astronaut Human Ought. Yep. And, and you wind up doing an ad there, which kind of turns your career around, which I've seen, you can still see it on YouTube. The client was of the dairy company Organic valet. And you, you make this video for them. It's actually so funny. It's so good. I, I didn't know about it until I, I did research on this for this interview, but was like a parody of, of protein drinks and they were trying to market a protein drink. Can you, can you tell me the story about that?

0 (25m 21s):
Like the idea that you came up with?

3 (25m 23s):
Yeah, so protein shakes in culture were so associated with like, muscle Bound growth, right.

0 (25m 33s):
Guys who were jacked. Yeah.

3 (25m 35s):
Yeah. You tell anyone, you know, and that's the whole culture that they were gonna be launching into. So yeah, we had this idea, oh, you know, if all these bros keep drinking all these chemical laden protein shakes, like how long are they gonna be around? And they might become extinct. And then like, you might miss Bros if that happens. So that was kind of the seed of the idea that we then turned into this. Like, you know, it's, it's sort of a format that's been done a million times. Yeah. Like the parody PSA

0 (26m 5s):
And it's a, it's just a video of a bunch of guys, like, you know, pumping iron at the gym, no body fat, just, you know, muscles and then drinking these really sugary, you know, or whatever chemically protein shakes, you know, the premise is that they were gonna die. Yeah.

3 (26m 21s):
Right. Yeah,

0 (26m 21s):
Yeah. Drinking these drinks.

5 (26m 23s):
But our bros are in serious danger every day. Millions of bros drink protein shakes in order to get jacked, yoked totally swollen, but most bros are unaware of the scary chemicals and artificial ingredients inside these shakes. If Bross keep pounding this stuff at this rate, we could face a total bro colony collapse.

0 (26m 45s):
And, and what did, what did they think? I mean, were, were they at all reluctant about this idea? Were they, were they like, oh, I don't know. It's a little edgy.

3 (26m 53s):
So I think they, they liked it at first, and then once we had the final cut of the video, and then they started, you know, sharing the video with some of their, you know, family farmers because it was like a, a, you know, it's a company as a co-op, so it's like Yeah. You know, partially owned by the farmers, so they run the stuff by the farmers, and of course that was the wrong thing to do because these guys just totally didn't get it. And they literally almost didn't run it,

0 (27m 22s):
But they were nervous. They

3 (27m 23s):
Were nervous. Yeah. So then we launched it, it goes totally viral. Everyone loves it. And then, you know, organic Valley's calling us guys. We need bros at trade shows. We need bros everywhere. We need more bros. What's the second bro video we're gonna do?

0 (27m 37s):
Yeah. I mean, it's, it, I mean, you look at it and you think this is a no brainer, it's gonna go viral, but obviously it's, it's impossible to know. But it, it looks like an SNL skit. It's just so funny. Yes.

3 (27m 48s):
Yeah, it was, I mean, for, for not much, they got millions and millions of dollars worth of, you know, eyeballs out of it. Yeah.

0 (27m 56s):
So that was, I mean, it sounds like, you know, that was a, a, a sort of an important turning point. I wonder whether when you, when you went to this agency, human or not, right? Yeah. This is around 2014, you know, did you think that your time as an entrepreneur was over? That you had tried this Brandy brand and it didn't work out, and maybe you should just keep, you know, and, and now you're getting some momentum in this agency, and did you think, okay, this, this, this, this is, this is good. I'm good. This is gonna work.

3 (28m 23s):
Yeah. I, I felt like I had found my lane again. You know, like I was making stuff that I was actually proud of. Then that started bringing in more people, you know, more companies coming to us for that like viral YouTube video, you know, especially from the health food space. So that kind of became like our specialty. We started doing it for, you know, other brands.

0 (28m 45s):
Meantime, this is now like 8 0 6, 7 years after that Van's Warp Tour show where you saw people Yeah. Like these rockers pounding water out of Monster Energy cans. That idea was kind of in the back of your mind, but you weren't admittedly thinking of this as a brand. But I guess what, around this time, around 2015, this idea comes back to you not, I think, not initially as something you wanted to make, but like, as part of an ad campaign for, for a client, right?

3 (29m 15s):
Yeah. So at OT we had the opportunity to pitch ideas to this company called, I think they're called the Center for Science and Public Health.

0 (29m 26s):
Yeah.

3 (29m 27s):
And they wanted to do a commercial that really like, brought to attention like the, the dangers or unhealthy elements of soda. And I think it was called The Real Bears. And you know how Coca-Cola, like they're icons, polar bears? Polar bear. Polar bear. Yeah. So you couldn't say Coca-Cola, you couldn't disparage a brand, but they just had this little cute cartoon where they had polar bears that were drinking soda, and it was like, kind of real happy, like, you know, go lucky. But then it's like they start getting diabetes and then they get their arms amputated.

3 (30m 7s):
Then they, they said, Hey guys, we wanna do something like this, but now we wanna call out the dangers of energy drinks. 'cause that was such a big thing,

0 (30m 15s):
The dangers, because they're just packed with sugar

3 (30m 17s):
And caffeine

0 (30m 18s):
And caffeine. Yeah. Yeah.

3 (30m 20s):
And the thing that we landed on was that, and that kind of came from, you know, some of my experience, you know, from the Warp Tour, which was the reality is, you know, these guys are, use all these a you know, ex, you know, action sports athletes to market this stuff. It seems like they're drinking this stuff. But the reality was it was all bullshit. Like, yeah, these guys are actual athletes. Like yeah, they have trainers. They will, they will not be drinking this much caffeine and sugar. Like, they take their stuff very seriously. So, you know, we, you know, we, we came up with like a couple different ideas and like, you know, the idea that I had, and I think partially because I had just come off of like an entrepreneurial thing of creating a product.

3 (31m 2s):
So my brain first goes to, oh, what if we created a water brand that looked like an energy drink? And it was all about making fun of the fact that this is what these guys actually drink. Mm. So maybe we do like a funny video. Yeah. That almost feels like, it's like, I don't know, like a commercial or something for this ridiculous product where I think, you know, we were saying something like a hundred percent water, 0% bullshit. Like, that was like the line. Yeah.

0 (31m 31s):
Yeah. And, and what do they say? What did they think about the idea of, of doing a, a, you know, a spoof

3 (31m 37s):
Ad like that? Yeah. So I wasn't there to actually present the idea. It was like our boss had presented the idea and, you know, they just, they had zero interest in creating a real product. They're like, no guys, like, we don't want to create anything like that. Like, we'd literally just want a funny video, like the Real Bears thing, but for energy drinks. Yeah.

0 (31m 55s):
But

3 (31m 55s):
I just knew there was something there. I'm like, regardless of these guys were gonna do this. Like, I think I stumbled onto something really interesting here, and I kind of just kept it in the back of my head. And like, I started just flipping that entrepreneurial switch again. 'cause I finally found something that got me excited that I thought I saw white space there again.

0 (32m 15s):
How, how do you, how do you remember that happening? I mean, it was an idea you'd first encountered this kind of weirdly in 2009, then you pitch it as a spoof product. But then how do you make the leap in your mind to, to be like, wait a minute, no, maybe this, this is a real product. Like maybe there is something I can do here.

3 (32m 34s):
Well, I think I was already in the, what's my next entrepreneurial mindset? Constantly. And I started just really doing, you know, my, when I kind of focus on something, I just go into this like, deep dive of homework. Like where I just become obsessed. Where I'm like, okay, let me research the, you know, the bottled water market. Let me research. What

0 (32m 54s):
Would you find out? I mean, I mean, this is like 2015. Yeah. What I mean, there's a lot of water brands on the market a ton. I mean, you go to the aisles of, of Safeway at that point now. I mean, still there's everything. I mean, from Vos to Fiji, to Mountain Spring to Avion and Per and Poland Spring, and you know, there's a lot of brands.

3 (33m 18s):
Yeah. And, and I think a lot of brands that are all very much the same and not fun or interesting. You know, when you compare it to something like Monster or Red Bull or, you know, bud Light, or like these, you know, brands that are associated with hilarious commercials, exciting packaging, you know, youth culture, like all of that kinda stuff. There was nothing like that in water.

0 (33m 43s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Mike comes up with the brand name and a logo that do not evoke spring water In fact, think poison. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

LinkedIn (34m 3s):
As a business to business marketer, your needs are unique. B2B buying cycles are long and your customers face incredibly complex decisions. Isn't it? Time you had a marketing platform built specifically for you? LinkedIn ads empowers marketers with solutions for you and your customers. LinkedIn ads allow you to build the right relationships, drive results, and reach your customers in a respectful environment you'll have direct access to and build relationships with decision makers. A billion members, 180 million senior level executives, and 10 million C-level executives. 79% of B2B content marketers said LinkedIn produces the best results for paid media. And so many of the brands on How, I, Built This, use LinkedIn to reach customers every single day. Make B2B marketing everything it can be and get a $100 credit on your next campaign. Go to linkedin.com/built this to claim your credit. That's linkedin.com/built. This terms and conditions apply.

NETSUITE by Oracle (35m 9s):
Your business gets to a certain size, and the cracks start to emerge. Things you used to do in a day are taking a week. You have too many manual processes, you don't have one source of truth. If this is you, you should know these three numbers. 37,000 25, 1 30 7,000. That's the number of businesses which have upgraded to NetSuite by Oracle 25 NetSuite turns 25 this year. That's 25 years of helping businesses do more with less close their books in days, not weeks. And drive down costs. One, because your business is one of a kind. So you get a customized solution for all of your KPIs in one efficient system with one source of truth, manage risk, get reliable forecasts and improve margins. Everything you need to grow all in one place. Right now, download NetSuite's popular KPI checklist designed to give you consistently excellent performance absolutely free at NetSuite dot com slash built. That's NetSuite dot com slash built to get your own KPI checklist NetSuite dot com slash built.

6 (36m 24s):
Hi guy, this is Steven Council. I'm in a small workshop in Queenstown, New Zealand, where I listen to How I Built This. Perhaps that's why I relate so well to my favorite episode. Burton snowboards with Jake Carpenter because he was in a small workshop by himself as well. I admired how he was open about his loneliness. He showed his emotional vulnerability and he was so modest. Having created an Olympic sport and a whole new industry that reached so far, it impacts the town I live in here in New Zealand. We are a ski and snowboard destination in winter. It's a beautiful episode. Thanks for such a great show.

0 (37m 2s):
If you wanna share your favorite episode of How I, Built This record a short voice memo on your phone telling us your name, where you're from, what your favorite episode is, and why a lot like the voice memo you just heard. And email it to us at HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com and we'll share your favorites right here in the ad breaks in future episodes. And thanks so much. We love you guys. You are the best. And now back to the show. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's around 2015, and Mike is thinking of launching a bottled water brand that's unlike anything that anyone's ever seen before.

0 (37m 52s):
Starting with the idea that it won't even be bottled.

3 (37m 55s):
The original idea for a can or a tall boy can was like, Hey, this looks like something like a beer or energy drink that feels fun, but what's inside is actually really good for you, which is rare. There's rarely anything inside of a can that's really good for you.

0 (38m 10s):
The co the concept from the beginning was canned water, not bottled water. Not plastic or glass. Right. Being an aluminum can, it would be a tall boy. So it could look like a, you know, like a malt liquor or an energy drink. Yeah,

3 (38m 21s):
Exactly. Yeah. And then, so I'm trying to find like, okay, where's there a water source? Like who can actually can water? So I'm like Googling, you know, water sources in Kentucky or Tennessee or places like, hey, who can maybe actually produce this stuff. Then I also started seeing the, you know, the new more news articles about how bad plastic is. Like that was like, those were starting to pop up in a big way then where hey, you know, how much plastic ends up in the ocean. And companies were starting to say, Hey, we're gonna stop using, you know, plastic, you know, bottles in our companies. And it was, it was a, it was kind of a hot button topic that was starting to kind of, you know, sizzle up at that time as well.

3 (39m 3s):
So it's like, oh, great. Not only is the can really cool now, there's actually, there's like a, a deeper reason why, you know, aluminum's infinitely recyclable. It's way, you know, it's a way better alternative to plastic. Like it all, all these moons just started aligning that this was the right path.

0 (39m 21s):
Okay, so while you're researching this, right, first of all, imagine there's lots of places that bottled water in the United States, in North America. So I, I imagine it's not that, it's sort of like cosmetics, right? You go, there's tons of white label manufacturers and you stamp your brand on it. So was it, was it relatively easy to identify, you know, a, a bottler that could take water and then just put, put it in a can in the us?

3 (39m 48s):
I, I had the same exact thought as you had, and it was the opposite of that. It was impossible, didn't exist. And that's kind

0 (39m 55s):
Because, because why? They were only using plastic.

3 (39m 58s):
So when you create a bottled water or a canned water, the only way it makes economic sense is you have to basically bottle it at the source.

0 (40m 9s):
And you did not wanna use city water. You wanted to use spring water.

3 (40m 13s):
Right? Right. And even if I wanted, okay, even if I wanted to use city water, there's a whole other thing that you'd have to do there. But no, I, I wanted this to be like a premium spring source. 'cause you knew that Got it. Based on the cost of aluminum, you're not gonna be able to sell this for the same price as a piece of trash plastic bottle. Right. It's like this is gonna have to have a premium price point. So you're gonna have to justify it with at least the product inside feels like there's a premium story. Oh, it's from a mountain, it's from a natural source. This isn't Yeah. City water.

0 (40m 41s):
And most spring water is bottled at the source because presumably it's very expensive to to to truck it down somewhere. Yeah,

3 (40m 48s):
Yeah, yeah. It's like you have to finds a source. Yeah. You'd have to tanker truck it, you know, spend money on fuel.

0 (40m 53s):
So nobody does that all, no one does water does that, that the spring waters. And so presumably there are places that are bottling water at the source in cans, right? Presumably,

3 (41m 2s):
But no, because it was not a category that existed. So every single, you know, water source that had bottling capabilities, they only had plastic capabilities. Maybe a couple of them had glass. Glass. Right. But even that was rare. So it was all plastic, like the whole industry.

0 (41m 19s):
You could not, you could, you could not find a spring in North America that had a, had a had the ability to, to, to bottle this or to can it. So that's probably discouraging right here. Yeah. There goes your idea.

3 (41m 33s):
Yeah. That kind of slowed some of the momentum of my idea down when I realized how hard it was gonna be to produce. Like what started as this, like ferous, oh my God, I found something, I found something I'm researching. Yes. All this stuff makes sense. And then, yeah, it's kind of this big roadblock of, well literally there's no one that can make it. So this, you know, this might be a lot harder than I thought it was gonna be.

0 (41m 56s):
And meanwhile, I guess around this time you decide to move back to California this time to, to la and I guess you get a job as a creative director at a skateboarding company down there. But, but, but, but this idea, this canned water idea is obviously, it's in your head. This is like gnawing at you. I mean, you think that there's something there of course, obviously. And, and at a certain point you, you come up with a name for this thing and a concept for how you want it to look.

3 (42m 29s):
Yeah. So I think once, you know, once we're in like, I think it's like 2000, you know, 17 early. I think when I'm like, I, I finally have kind of landed on, you know, what the general concept for Liquid Death was gonna be. 'cause it wasn't always gonna be look like a beer. It was kinda like, you know, does it look like an energy drink? Like, so then when I finally decided, hey, I want this thing to look like a beer. Like that was kind of the concept. I remember calling one of my best friends and telling him, I'm like, Hey, I think I have the new business idea. He is like, what is it? I'm like, I wanna put water in cans that looked like cheap beer. Yeah. And, and that felt right to me. 'cause I'm like, you know, everybody wants stuff they're not supposed to have, you know?

3 (43m 11s):
Yeah. It's like they say, Hey, if you want teens that think something's cool, you actually market it to people in their twenties, you know? And it's like energy drinks, they kind of market to teens, but 17 year olds don't think monsters the coolest thing, but 12 year olds do you know? Yes.

0 (43m 27s):
Oh yes.

3 (43m 28s):
Yeah. So it was like, hey, if we actually want, you know, teens or even people in their twenties, the the want something like, let's not make it look like a kitty energy drink that 12 year olds think is cool. Let's make it look like a beer that like everyone between, you know, 15 and 50 think is cool. So then I just really started pulling all these beer references for like, Hey, what does classic beer design look like? What kind of fonts do they use?

0 (43m 56s):
You started making like a mood Mood board. Mood

3 (43m 57s):
Board, exactly. Like pulling all these references of like, I used a lot of craft beer inspiration, not so much in the design because craft beer design, part of what makes it great is it doesn't look anything like typical big beer. But it also just, it almost is like, craft beer is cool because it kind looks like a soda or energy drink most times and not a beer. That's what makes it interesting. Yeah. So then, but from like a naming perspective, I thought some of the craft beers had some of the most interesting like brand names compared to regular beer where it, it was like, there was like a skull crusher. IPA, there was like arrogant bastard ale.

0 (44m 36s):
Yeah. Yeah.

3 (44m 37s):
They they had all these really interesting

0 (44m 39s):
Fat tire.

3 (44m 40s):
Yeah. Fat tire. Yeah. Mm. Like I think like one of the early like really bad names that I had was like, Southern Thunder I think was terrible name, terrible name. But I think when I really started thinking about, like, again, it's like, okay, let's take a step back. Like if I launch this thing for real, what I learned from Western Grace, there's going to be no dollars for marketing. And the only chance this has that survival is it has to be something that people naturally wanna share on social. So then I started thinking like, okay, what are some of the names where if someone saw this, they have to share it? And that's where it's like, you literally start trying to think of what's the dumbest, craziest thing you could think of?

3 (45m 23s):
Like start there. Yeah. Like Liquid Death. Like Liquid Death was one of these names. It was just like, what sounds like something that like you would never want to drink. And it's like, you know, Liquid Death like do the opposite of what you think you should do. But I remember thinking like, yeah, Liquid, like a beverage called Liquid Death. Like there is no chance someone's not sharing that if they see that in a store. Yeah. And so once I had the name Liquid Death kind of had like rough sort of package design came up with

0 (45m 54s):
That. You designed it, you, you came up with like a skull design?

3 (45m 58s):
Well, no, I worked with a buddy. The, the buddy of mine I mentioned a while ago who was like the intern Crispin years ago, who was a designer, he kind of helped me out 'cause he's way more of a designer I think than, than I was. So he kind of helped throw together some canned Designs based on like some kind of clear direction. I had like, Hey, kinda want this colors, this thing. I actually kind of made the type, like I found the typeface for Liquid Death and kind of did that.

0 (46m 24s):
You wanted old English typeface? Yeah. Yeah. 'cause it looks almost like a malt liquor.

3 (46m 29s):
Well what they call that? It's called German black letter font. And that's why so much beer, because beer came from Germany really? To the us Oh. All these old brands that they use, like that very German inspired look and feel. So then I started thinking of, okay, we don't have any money. This is gonna cost a lot of money to produce. Like you can't make, 'cause I knew, I knew a little bit about what it costs to make aluminum cans. 'cause I think I got a quote from one of the like, ball or one of these aluminum can manufacturers, like, Hey, what does it cost to produce, you know, 16 ounce cans or 24 ounce cans? Yeah. And it's like, oh wow. The minimum minimum you can produce is like 200,000. And so you're talking about a quarter million dollars or 150 grand, something like that, just to do the bare minimum run of a canned product.

3 (47m 16s):
Hmm. So I'm like, okay, I don't have anywhere near that kind of cash and there's nobody who's gonna write me a check for the idea at that time. Well, I wanna put water in a can and call it Liquid Death. They're like, that's the dumbest idea ever. No retailer will carry it. So I'm like, okay, I'm gonna make a funny kind of commercial for this that feels like it could be viral, like the stuff we had done at Human On and, and and things like that. And then the original idea was, but I'm going to use this video to be like a Kickstarter or Indiegogo thing.

0 (47m 48s):
Right. Oh, you would, you you would build an Indiegogo page with a video on it. Yeah,

3 (47m 52s):
Exactly. Okay. And I think, yeah, we set out to raise like, it was like a, you know, like, you know, $150,000

0 (47m 58s):
On Indiegogo? On

3 (47m 59s):
Indiegogo. So we made this video that you probably saw where it's the, the woman who's pouring out can Liquid Death the entire time she's kind of giving this monologue about water has been like misbranded. And people think that, you know, water is some, you know, yoga thing when really water is deadly. Like, you know, it kills, kills surfers and you know, whatever. And then there was

0 (48m 20s):
Avalanches. Avalanches,

3 (48m 22s):
Yeah. And then there was this funny idea of like trying to position water comically as extreme.

0 (48m 27s):
And the closing shot, which is quite shocking and very risky, is of a guy duct taped to a table. Like she now you, it pans out, this woman pouring the water is actually pouring it onto a, a guy who's being tortured wearing a, like being waterboarded basically. Yeah. Yeah.

3 (48m 45s):
It's in this, yeah. It's a, it's a guy in a bus, in a business suit,

0 (48m 48s):
In a business suit. Yeah. Basically being waterboarded by Liquid Death. Yeah. So this, and you, you basically hired some actors and just made this, it's, it wasn't expensive to make this video? No,

3 (48m 59s):
We made this whole thing for 1500 bucks. My wife Carly Edited, the whole thing. She actually Edited almost all of the early Liquid Death video stuff, but

0 (49m 9s):
Just using like Yeah, like whatever software you use on your Mac.

3 (49m 12s):
Yeah. Yeah. And then that was actually me being waterboarded. So,

0 (49m 16s):
Okay. So let, I wanna just break down the two things. 'cause the video Yep.

3 (49m 20s):
And

0 (49m 20s):
Would be very successful. But the Indiegogo campaign did not, actually was not successful.

3 (49m 25s):
No. It was like, we set out to raise 150 K and I think we raised like $1,500. Mm. So now I'm like, okay, now I'm just gonna put it on social media. Like I'm gonna make a Facebook page for Liquid Death, make it seem like it's a real company. I'm gonna put this video on there. I'm gonna make a couple funny social posts about it. So I put maybe a couple thousand dollars in paid media behind the video and behind some of these little social posts over the course of like four months or so. Yeah. So then like after four months, the video had a, like, almost 3 million views. It was like two and a half million views.

3 (50m 5s):
The, the page had like, you know, 50, 60,000 followers that have hundreds and hundreds of comments from people that range anywhere from like, this is the greatest thing ever. How do I buy this to this is the dumbest, is this a real, yeah, is this a real thing? Yeah. Is this a real thing? Yeah. This is the dumbest thing I've ever seen. Because

0 (50m 23s):
There was no link at the end saying Order Liquid debt. You did not have a product to sell. Right?

3 (50m 28s):
No. Didn't have a product to sell. And then eventually I made like a pre-order page where it's like, oh, you could still pre quote unquote give your email and pre-order this.

0 (50m 38s):
Yeah. I, I'm wondering, Mike, how did you, so the idea was like, 'cause there's different ways of doing things, right? Usually people will make like a trial run. They'll try to maybe sell it at a farmer's market or like at one Whole Foods, you started with the ad campaign, you didn't even have a product Right. Ready to go. But when you made this video, did, did you have the infrastructure in place? Like, did you identify a man, a potential co-packer, a place that could bottle the water for you? Because you mentioned earlier it was impossible to find anyone who could do this.

3 (51m 12s):
Yeah, no, I had none of that. And, and I knew that the one thing I did know, if I did want that or if there was gonna be a way to produce it, it was going to be probably at least $150,000 per capital. It's

0 (51m 27s):
Gonna be really expensive. Yeah.

3 (51m 28s):
So I knew that the only way to get the capital was to really kind of prove out and de-risk the concept. So when I had, all of a sudden, early 2018, I had a Facebook page with a lot of followers. I had a video with millions of views. I had tons of comments of people seeming genuinely interested. I literally had a seven 11 franchisee from Michigan who said, Hey, I own three seven elevens. How do I get this in my stores? I had the biggest non ALC distributor in New York called Big Geyser. One of their people reached out saying, Hey, can I talk to a sales rep about carrying your product? So I use all of that to then say, okay, maybe I can actually now go raise, you know, a friends and family kind of round, you know, my family was not wealthy, so it's not like I could just go get money from my family.

3 (52m 17s):
So, but it was like, hey, former bosses that were big marketing executives that I had good relationships with, who maybe like, you know, them writing a $5,000 check for something wasn't a big deal. So I basically cobbled together all these, like, you know, 2000 to, I think the, the biggest two checks I got were each like 20 grand, but everything else was small. And I've kind of put together this round of like 150 K.

0 (52m 43s):
So you wanted to prove that you could gain virality and then you could raise the money that you would need to actually produce the product. But where were you gonna do that? You, you, you, you said that nobody was doing this. Nobody was canning water. It was all plastic bottles.

3 (52m 58s):
Yeah. So I bef, you know, before we actually started raising the round, I did have a couple different leads on who could produce it and roughly what it would cost. So there was, you know, there was one place that was I think like outside of Las Vegas that said, Hey, we can do it, but it wouldn't be spring water, it would be kind of like more of the city water. Yeah. Which I wasn't that excited about. And the guy was basically like, oh yeah, did you know that? Like, you're not, not gonna be allowed to call it Liquid Death, like the FDA won't let you do that. And I'm like, what do you mean? He's like, no, no, no. Yeah, it's death. Like you're saying it, you know, it's false advertising and you're, you know, I'm like, really? And I, and know, again, I trust some of these people, but yeah, they kind of didn't.

3 (53m 40s):
But, so I still kind of knew, okay, I've talked to the experts now and literally now they're telling me there's no really nowhere they can do this. So then I'm like, okay, I'm gonna start Google searching outside of the us. I'm gonna start Googling Europe, canning water co-packing in Europe. And sure enough, I found this place in Austria that said they own four of their own spring water springs. They had canning capabilities. Hmm. Emailed them. They're like, oh yeah, we can definitely make this for you. I'm like, really? So then it was, yeah. So then, so,

0 (54m 11s):
So just to interrupt, I mean, everyone told you this is impossible, but essentially what they were saying was, this is impossible in the United States. Yes. So my, like, if I was, you, I would be thinking, okay, even if I was looking at Europe, I would be thinking that's just gonna make the cost so much higher to get this done in Europe. Like, I don't really want to do that. But that was your only option. That was the only option available. Only

3 (54m 35s):
Option available.

0 (54m 36s):
But you still needed the capital to make. Yeah. So

3 (54m 39s):
I, at that time, like I was already raising the capital 'cause I had the one source ready to go in pricing, so I knew what it would cost. But then when I started, you know, the money started coming in and at that time, once I was raising money, I am not a finance guy at all. So a good buddy of mine, Jr, who I went to high school with, he was kind of like a serial entrepreneur ever since he graduated high school. You know, he, he went to college for finance. So then he came on board with me as like a co-founder. But again, at that point, so much of it was already like the, the brand was already figured out. The Facebook page was already going. I already rai raised most of the money. It was just like, okay, now I have all the pieces.

3 (55m 18s):
Now I need you to kind of help me, you know, execute all this stuff and do the stuff that I'm not good at. And he was very cool with that arrangement. And that was, that's what I think worked so well with us in the beginning was we never stepped on each other's toes.

0 (55m 32s):
And, and so when you, I mean, and even when you were raising money right, from friends and then eventually you, you, you were able to raise a little bit from a, a VC firm that had, I think had invested in Dollar Shave Club. Did any of them ever ask you, well, what's the qualitative difference? Like what, what makes your water taste better? Or were they all kind of convinced by your argument that that doesn't matter? It's water. You know, spring water is spring water. Generally it's all about the branding side.

3 (56m 2s):
Yeah, I mean that was always part of my pitch. Like as a marketing guy who really understands the nuance of brand, that's what I could make clear for people. The reality is that in most things it is brand why things win, not functional differences. Like Nike doesn't market because they say, Hey, our commercials, our shoes use this type of material that lasts 37 days longer than Adidas. Yeah. Like, no, no, no, it's all brand. Or why someone's buying a $700 Gucci t-shirt that has the same functionality and thread or whatever it is as like a $20 Target T-shirt might

0 (56m 39s):
Be the same factory, might be the

3 (56m 40s):
Same factory, but that you can more easily understand why brand matters and why that is still successful when, because I think for me, that's the definition of brand. So,

0 (56m 51s):
So there's no point in sort of leaning into this, our water, you know, mountain spring water tastes so pure and like that you, you, you couldn't really carve out a space in the water category by doing that alone.

3 (57m 6s):
I mean, it needed to be what people perceived as at least a premium product, which yeah, what we found is like, source did matter to people. So that's why it was like, hey, as long as we have a good source story, like, hey, this is, you know, mountain water, like this is from a mountain. That's enough to make people feel like, okay, this is a premium product. I don't need to get into the weeds beyond that.

0 (57m 27s):
How did you know that? Did you have access to market research?

3 (57m 31s):
No, I think it was just, you could kind of just, you could look at the brands out there and you know, it's pretty easy I think. Like it's

0 (57m 38s):
Intuitive.

3 (57m 38s):
Intuitive, like you could talk to average person, Hey, what do you think is more premium water from a city or water from a mountain mountain? Yeah. Okay, got it. It's not rocket math.

0 (57m 49s):
So you, alright, so you find this place in Austria to package and you've got now some money that you've raised. And the idea was to just what, I mean now that you have 80,000 followers on Facebook, that was gonna be your, presumably you, these were gonna be your first customers, so, so you were gonna sell them direct to, to consumer from like you, you were gonna, I don't know, have like a, a logistics or drop shipping or some kind of third party, you know, logistics team that would sell them directly or you would do it through Amazon or what, what was the plan?

3 (58m 24s):
Yeah, so it was through Amazon and you have your product as a page on Amazon. People can buy it, Amazon ships and fulfills the product for you. And then Amazon charges you a fee for every case that they ship and fulfill. And it was very expensive. That's why, you know, we had to charge $20 a 12 pack in the beginning to even get anywhere nor, you know, into the black in terms of like making money on a case, which was so expensive because it was so expensive to ship a heavy case of water that weighed 13 pounds. Like that's not cheap to ship. Like if you try to go to FedEx right now and ship a 12 pound case of Liquid Death, they're gonna probably charge you $20 just to ship it.

3 (59m 6s):
So

0 (59m 6s):
You had to sell this at a premium. I mean, you had to basically in order to make some profit, which I guess you could because you already had these 80,000 Facebook followers, many of whom are waiting to order this.

3 (59m 20s):
Exactly. Yeah. We had a little bit, little bit of a built-in audience. And again, so many of those people didn't even believe it was real. Like they still just thought this was a funny page to follow. And then once we were like, Hey, look guys, it's real. You can buy it. It it, it generated a different level of buzz I think. You know,

0 (59m 40s):
And you, i i for so you launched this, it's amazing 'cause it's, we're talking here at the end of 2023, you launched this in 2019 at, at the beginning of that year. And in the first month you sell out all your inventory, do about a hundred thousand dollars in sales. So that's, that's a very good sign. Was it all through that Facebook page that you were able to sell it? Was it, or did you, did you like pay for some PR at that point? Or did you, 'cause you had some money, did you, did you start to do some of that?

3 (1h 0m 10s):
No, so, you know, just before we launched it was, you know, we had real product that was getting ready to be shipped to the US from Austria in like October of 2019 of 2018. At that same time, that's when I met our first kind of venture capital investor science who, like you said was behind Dollar Shave Club, you know, you know, they put in significantly more capital, which actually enabled me to quit my freelance job. I was doing full-time to pay the bills to actually go full-time to Liquid Death at a huge, huge salary cut. So then I was able to just kind of quit my job and spend for the first time ever, like full-time.

3 (1h 0m 51s):
Full-time focused on Liquid Death and like late 2018. And I worked with science to kind of help me figure out the tech and digital aspect of making this like a true D two C brand to start. Wow. And you know, we had a strategy for, you know, paid social promotion. But again, I think the first month we only spent maybe 2,500 bucks in paid media to generate a hundred thousand dollars in sales.

0 (1h 1m 15s):
When we come back in just a moment while logistical log jams force Mike to find a co-packer that's closer to home, stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

MasterClass (1h 1m 33s):
Picture that thing you've always wanted to learn. Now picture learning it from the person who's literally the best at it in the world. That's what you get with MasterClass this year. Learn from the best to become your best with MasterClass. Don't just talk about improving MasterClass actually helps you do it. MasterClass offers over 180 world class instructors. So Whether, you wanna sharpen your storytelling skills with Ken Burns or write like a novelist with Judy Bloom. MasterClass has you covered. Plus every new membership comes with a 30 day money back guarantee. So there's no risk. And right now, our listeners get an additional 15% off an annual membership at MasterClass dot com slash built. Get 15% off right now at MasterClass dot com slash built MasterClass dot com slash built.

Airbnb (1h 2m 27s):
Maybe you've stayed in an Airbnb before and thought to yourself, this actually seems pretty doable. Maybe my place could be an Airbnb. It could be as simple as starting with the spare room or your whole place when you're away. You could be sitting on an Airbnb and not even know it. Maybe you're planning a trip for a long holiday weekend while you're away. You could Airbnb your home and make some extra money toward the trip. Or maybe there's a big tournament or concert in town and lots of fans will be visiting. You could Airbnb your home or extra room while people are in town. Whether, you could use extra money to cover some bills or for something a little more fun, your home might be worth more than you think. Find out how much at Airbnb dot com slash host.

0 (1h 3m 23s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's early 2020, a few years after launch and Liquid Death is starting to grow and starting to get orders from some big retailers first Whole Foods. And then kind of on the opposite end of the spectrum, seven 11,

3 (1h 3m 42s):
I was always targeting who are the people that don't care about healthy brands that are drinking soda and energy drinks and beer. Yeah. Most of the time, how do you get them to actually resonate with a healthy brand and actually want to make more healthier decisions based on, you know, it's more fun to have this brand walking around than it is, you know, a Fiji or, or something else. Hmm. So it's like you get a lot of overlap in terms of like, yes, we bring new people into the category where it's like, hey, these construction workers who shop at seven 11 who are buying two energy drinks for the first time ever are coming over and buying a premium bottled water just because of the brand.

3 (1h 4m 22s):
They were never buying Fiji or Voss before. But then you're also getting the people who did buy Fiji and Voss were like, oh, I I like premium water and this is just a more interesting brand. Like yeah, I'll try that. And yeah, it's good.

0 (1h 4m 33s):
Yeah. I mean it, it's, and the other thing that's amazing, so I understand why Whole Foods is interested 'cause they like, I mean this brand was a purple cow. It was like people were going, you knew that you people were gonna stop and pick it up, especially Whole Foods shoppers. 'cause Whole Foods shoppers are not used to seeing something called Liquid Death. Like you wouldn't go to Whole Foods and think like, wow, they're selling a sugary energy drink or they're selling malt liquor at Whole Foods. Like you're like, right. I mean, so in some ways it was like the perfect, you know, retailer to launch this brand.

3 (1h 5m 7s):
Yeah. And, and in a way it was the only retailer who would even give us a chance. I mean, we had talked to, I don't know, like a broker for Target and they were like, yeah guys, we don't think this is the right fit for mom. Yeah. And, and like any of these other big retailers like wouldn't really give us the time of day because it says death on it, but at least Whole Foods, what they really identified with was our whole death to plastic messaging. Right.

0 (1h 5m 34s):
That was part of the campaign. Because when you launched, I mean, not only did you, when you launched, you also then started making more of these videos, right? Yeah. Yep. And in an an and one of your videos is an animated video that is also just insane. I mean, it's basically an animated video of like a can a can like ax murderer, just like killing people and just laughter, murder

3 (1h 5m 58s):
Slaughtering him, murder, murdering thirst. Yeah.

0 (1h 5m 59s):
He's murdering thirst. Yeah. And it's just like gory and bloody. Yeah. And I mean it's basically like a, yeah, I mean it's like a kind of an insane video, but again, designed to get people talking presumably. And,

3 (1h 6m 15s):
And really it's, I think it's an interesting topic and I talk about it so much, like everyone uses the word edgy. Like, oh, you guys do edgy marketing. Yeah. So all we are doing is we just wanna make legitimate entertainment, not marketing. And it's a tried and true approach that Red Bull was very successful with Monster was very successful with where they blur the lines between an entertainment company and a beverage company. Yeah. Now their specific type of entertainment is action sports. Yeah. But that is a very, I think, limited genre of entertainment. Like yeah, it's really cool to watch skateboarders and snowboarders and skydivers like do crazy stunt like stuff, but there's a lot more entertainment in the world that people consume.

3 (1h 6m 57s):
So for us we're like, Hey, our entertainment is comedy. Like that's what we're really good at. We're really good at making people laugh and making funny videos. And not a lot of companies are like, a lot of companies struggle to deliver humor, but that's our unique strength that we have.

0 (1h 7m 11s):
And if your tagline is Murder Your Thirst and your video is of a cartoon Giant can on a, on a, you know, mu muscle bound beast, just ax killing people who are drinking, then you're gonna get attention. One of the things that I'm, I was curious about is you launched in Whole Foods, like the week the pandemic starts. And a big part, I have to imagine a big part of your whole like strategy is that it's so, such a weird product, Liquid Death that that people were gonna pick it up and that's half the battle. Like once somebody picks up a product, there's a good chance that they might actually take it to the register and buy it. But now Whole Foods are, are, you know, mostly, I don't know mostly, but a lot of the shoppers in there are like, you know, professional shoppers or for delivery services.

0 (1h 7m 60s):
Right? Right. I mean, were you worried that your sales were actually gonna be badly affected because people wouldn't be able to physically like see it and, and pick it up?

3 (1h 8m 10s):
Well, luckily by the time we had launched in Whole Foods in, you know, the late spring of 2020, yeah. We had already built a pretty large Amazon and direct to consumer business.

0 (1h 8m 27s):
You guys, I think did about what, in your first year? 3 million Yep. Dollars

3 (1h 8m 31s):
Already. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Just under 3 million In revenue. Yeah. In revenue. Yeah. And again, remember we were selling those cases for like 20 bucks on Amazon. So now all, so

0 (1h 8m 42s):
1212 cans for 20 bucks. Yeah.

3 (1h 8m 44s):
And then because of all the how expensive it was to ship a heavy case of water, now when it was in Whole Foods, they could actually sell it for 1499 mm. So now we can tell everyone, hey, you can go get it at Whole Foods now for a lot less money. So we were able to kind of drive a lot of existing customers that we had from Amazon into Whole Foods. So that definitely helped.

0 (1h 9m 8s):
And you didn't have any issues getting it to the US given that there, you know, shipping and all that, all those disruptions?

3 (1h 9m 14s):
No, there was, I mean, there was some issue. Yeah. We definitely dealt with some issues where things were held up at the ports. I mean, we had things where some of the first shipments of Liquid Death were held up by customs because they see something called Liquid Death and they wanna make sure it's not like a terrorist thing. Yeah, right. But

0 (1h 9m 29s):
Liquid methamphetamine or

3 (1h 9m 31s):
Something. Yeah. Yeah. So we definitely had, you know, issues where, you know, our containers were held up for like a month at a port and we had to like wait on product. Like there was, you know, a ton of stuff to kinda to battle. And then the real, you know, pain point was in spring of 2021, if people remember there was that container ship that ended up blocking the Panama Canal. Oh

0 (1h 9m 57s):
Yeah. Was it the Panama Canal or the Suez?

3 (1h 9m 59s):
The Suez Canal. Yeah, you're right, you're right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And it just completely halted so mu it was such a, like, it, it kind of started this chain reaction of the ocean freight costs. Literally over the course of two months, ocean freight costs went up like five X or something insane.

0 (1h 10m 19s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 10m 20s):
And all of a sudden we started getting killed on ocean freight costs in the back half of 2021, where, you know, we might have been spending, you know, $3,500 to ship a container from Austria to, to the US and now all of a sudden it was 12,000 and then 2022 everyone's saying, oh, it's gonna come down, it's gonna come down. Never went down. And then like midway through 2022 it went up again. Hmm. So we kind of knew eventually we would move to co-packing in the US once there was, you know, a good partner for us that could do all the things we needed them to do. So, you know, we got connected with a great source in the mountains of western Virginia, not West Virginia, but like Western Virginia West.

3 (1h 11m 4s):
Yeah. And then we also, at that time, you know, we had launched flavored sparkling, which again is more like a healthy soda than it is like a,

0 (1h 11m 12s):
They're low in sugar, right? Yeah, yeah. Two, three grams. Yeah.

3 (1h 11m 15s):
Four grams of sugar. Yeah. Like three or four grams of sugar, 20 calories. So that opened up some of our co-packing abilities. Once, you know, we started having a ton of success in our flavored flavored sparkling

0 (1h 11m 27s):
Mike. By 2021, you, I mean you now you're starting to really attract investors, and I'm sure they're banging on your door by 2021, you raise a series C already at a a a over half a billion dollar valuation, which is file accounts just crazy. I mean, you launch this brand with no valuation and, and you're at half a billion in a year and a half. And you know, I, and you're, you know, as I say, you, you're, you're attracting all these people who wanna, wanna work with you. And, and I wonder whether a a part of you start to get nervous about how quickly, I mean, or maybe, I don't know.

0 (1h 12m 8s):
I mean, I've talked to founders who are like, we're growing too fast, you know, this is too fast or there's too much pressure. But I don't know, was it was a part of you worried at all? Or were you just like, yes, amazing, let's bring more of this money in?

3 (1h 12m 21s):
No, I think I was, I was excited at, at how fast it was growing because I think we built the team the right way to be able to sustain the growth. I think, you know, even as an organization, we've taken a very almost top heavy approach where it's like we want seasoned gangsters in every position, you know, where they've done things at a much higher level so that right now they can do this level of stuff in their sleep versus, like, you start with, I don't know, a lot cheaper labor to kind of try to save money, but it's less experience and less, you know, talent and then there's more risk that if you're growing that facet, they don't even know how to deal with that kind of growth and it breaks.

3 (1h 13m 8s):
So I think we, we built the team the right way to be able to sustain that level of growth we were at because yes, it was fast growth for us as a company, but you know, even in 20 20, 20 21, I think we, you know, we did, I think it was like 45 million in like gross top line revenue that is tiny for a beverage company. Like, you're not even a blip on anybody's radar at that level. I mean, and, and I think, you know, people had reactions to, you know, whatever it is over a half a billion valuation for, for water. Like what's, what's wrong with, with the world?

3 (1h 13m 49s):
It's like, did you know that smart water plastic bottles of municipal tap water sells a billion dollars a year of it? Same thing with the Aquafina, same thing with Poland Springs. Like these, these are massive categories. This isn't,

0 (1h 14m 3s):
You know, I'm not sur surprised. No, I'm not surprised at all. I, I wonder, I mean the, the thing is, and we've done on the show, you know, we've talked to founders who started a brand or product and really try to build a moat around it, right? Because that's what you're, it's like the m the famous Microsoft documents where you, you build a moat and then you know, nobody can compete with you. Your product is, is protected. It's so hard to replicate. Water is not hard to replicate. You obviously anybody, you know, with the, with some capital can bottle water. But your whole play was about brand. Right Now you're in a space with a lot of big players, the Poland Springs and the Aquafina and the Dasanis and they can go on and off Fiji.

0 (1h 14m 44s):
Did you start to see any of them even attempt to try and eat into your, your audience, your market share?

3 (1h 14m 55s):
No, and I think that, you know, brand is the moat and I think it's hard for people to, to wrap their head around what that means. But there's a lot of sort of historical precedence to show that that's the case. I mean, you've seen that there was a great example. Coca-Cola, the biggest company in the world with all the resources and shelf space in the world, tried to take share in the energy category by creating Coke energy.

0 (1h 15m 22s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 15m 23s):
And it was a two year experiment that was a massive failure and, you know, hundreds of millions of wasted dollars. And you would think, Hey, how could Coca-Cola fail at creating an energy drink brand? And it's just like, it, it, it shows that giant companies are really bad at creating brands. Like they, there's just too much bureaucracy. There's too many focus groups. So I'm sure Koch Energy, it probably passed the focus groups, it probably passed all the layers of test and everything. And then in market it just totally fails. Think about the other things people in beverage try to use as a moat. Like what is your functional ingredient? You can't own that ingredient.

3 (1h 16m 3s):
Coke can buy that ingredient for way less than you can. Like Yeah. There's real, like you can't own cans. Coke gets cans for a fraction of the cost that you're gonna get cans for. So if you're a canned water brand, marketing it as canned water, aluminum infinitely recyclable, that's your whole brand. You're just, yeah. You're just educating people on why cans are great. So then now Coke can just put it in a can and you've just helped them, you know, break in. So that's why we always led with brand and what we could own first, which is funny. Irreverent brand, making people laugh, murder your thirst. Death of plastic was always the second thing because at the end of the day, we knew we can't own aluminum cans as a brand.

0 (1h 16m 45s):
Yeah. Okay. Now here, here's I think a fair question to ask and yeah, probably have been asked a version of this, but you know, you have this amazing brand that was obviously hit. It's really hit and I can see it with my kids, right. And I can and can see with with with your sales. I mean, I think you're on target to do track to do at least what, a hundred million dollars in revenue this year? Maybe more.

3 (1h 17m 12s):
Oh yeah. Significantly more.

0 (1h 17m 14s):
Significantly more. Okay. So what is, what makes this brand sustainable in the long run? You know, I mean there are so many examples in history starting, you know, I can go back to the pet rock that, that were phenomenon. They were, they were, these were phenomenon for, for a few years and then they just kind of went away. I mean, what makes Liquid Death have staying power? Like, you know, per has been around forever. Avon's been around forever. So what makes this brand or does it matter whether it's around in 20 or 40 years?

3 (1h 17m 50s):
Yeah, I mean I do think that the era of brands lasting 50 years are, are no more because of the, because of the internet and technology. Huh. Like look at Coca-Cola, like of their, whatever it was, 120 year stint, a hundred of those years did not have the internet. Yeah. And I think because of the internet and the hyper speed digital culture, the other difference is you can make as a brand now with digital and virality and, and the democratization of, of media and attention in five years, you could be a brand that's literally doing billions of dollars in sales.

3 (1h 18m 38s):
Yeah. But that used to take 50 years to get there. Yeah,

0 (1h 18m 41s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 18m 41s):
Like, like look at White Claw. I mean, that was a brand that didn't exist and then all of a sudden in five years they were doing, you know, whatever it was like over a billion in sales.

0 (1h 18m 51s):
But that's a good example. 'cause they're, they've also declined significantly since then. But

3 (1h 18m 55s):
It was, that was an interesting scenario because they had hard Seltzer was a new category that had this massive spike during Covid that was kind of unprecedented. And now it has just kind of settled down to what is still a huge category. It's just not that like in the outer space level that it was during a very particular cultural period. I

0 (1h 19m 17s):
Mean, part of you, and maybe, maybe not, I mean, given that, you know, this, as I say, this is like a, it's like a a an overnight success story that took 25 years, right? Yeah. Because you were in this space of advertising branding for so long. You were observing, you were watching, you were like trying to push your ideas and, and you couldn't quite convince people to, to do the things you wanted to do. And so essentially you started a brand so you could, you could make funny advertisements. I mean that's basically the story of Liquid Death. You, you wanted to have fun making ads and this was the vehicle to do that.

3 (1h 19m 47s):
Exactly. Yeah. It was, yeah. It was, you, you have a product that generates money to help fund, you know, cool things that people wanna see in the world that is not more crappy marketing. That people are willing to literally spend $10 a month and not have to watch or that they can skip. You know what we are, we are in the attention game. Like we need to generate outsized attention for our budgets. That allows us to swing way above our, you know, our weight class really where we can generate similar amounts of attention as let's say Coke or Pepsi type brands can, but we can do it with like one 50th of the budget.

3 (1h 20m 31s):
You know, like that's the game we're playing. Like if we start trying to play the same game as the big guys where it's like, oh, let's go sign a $2 million athlete endorsement deal, or let's go wrap a NASCAR for a million dollars. Like, that stuff is not gonna move the needle for you and you're just gonna burn through your money before you ever get to the finish line. 'cause now you're trying to play the same game as the big guys with without anywhere near the resources. And you'll lose,

0 (1h 20m 58s):
I mean you in a very short period of time, 'cause your whole career you were paycheck to paycheck, you know, you're making a decent living. Yeah. But you are not a rich guy. No. But in a very short period of time, you made a lot of money. Probably much more than you could have imagined. I mean, it must be kind of amazing to, to be in that situation. But unanticipated or, or, or what, like in 2019, if I would told you, Hey, you're gonna be multimillionaire in like a year and a half, would you have been like, yep, I know it.

3 (1h 21m 27s):
No, I wouldn't have. 'cause I think with all the things that I'd gone through in so long, it's like I, you know, I, I think I had a cynical view of like, man, like every good thing I try something fucking happens. So I think I, you know, it, it was, I try not to let myself get too excited about things too early. So I kind of just want it to like, play out. So I take everything with a grain of salt and I've, I've, I've sort of always have that approach and I still have that approach now. It's like, yeah, I don't want to ever like get too carried away or too comfortable. I think it's so important that you're always hungry and feeling this could end at any moment. And how does that change the way you think?

3 (1h 22m 7s):
If you, if you know, it could end at any moment, like how do you approach things differently? How do you take more precaution? How do you not take too big of risks? 'cause I think that is a fatal is like the bigger companies get, you start trying to act more and more like a big company. Yeah. And, and, and you know, it, it can go south pretty quick.

0 (1h 22m 28s):
When you think about the, the journey you took, right? And I, I I use that word journey hesitatingly 'cause it's so overused, but I don't know. Do, do you, do you ever, do you ever think about why it happened? Like, do you think it was because you worked really hard and you were really smart and you thought things through? Or do you think a, a significant amount of this has to do with just getting lucky?

3 (1h 22m 51s):
Yeah, I mean there's always luck involved. I mean, I think back on so many moments where it's like, man, so good thing we did this and got that, or this might not even be around right now. But I think to your point, a 25 year o in, in the making overnight success, I think all of my previous experiences all kind of helped ladder up to help me make the right decisions. And then again, just the hunger of all this failure. I think it just all laddered up. And, and then the fact that it could be a brand that was truly a reflection of myself in the brand. It's not like some MBA business guy who's like, what are the kids into, here's what they're into.

3 (1h 23m 35s):
When it all starts with me as the CEO, it just kind of trickles through the rest of the company. And decisions get to be a lot easier. It's a lot simpler to have a unified voice and know what to say yes to and what to say no to. I think it, it, it's all sort of, I think come together to, to make it this successful.

0 (1h 23m 55s):
That's Mike Crio founder and CEO of Liquid Death. By the way, remember back when he was working in advertising, how they nixed his idea about selling your soul to the devil to get a Diablo golf club? Well, Mike sort of brought that idea back, but to Liquid Death this time, you can now go onto the company's website and sign away your soul for exclusive access to merch and other deals. And on the signup sheet, it says, by selecting Sell My Soul. I agree to receive important info and offers from Liquid Death since they will own my soul for eternity. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show.

0 (1h 24m 40s):
If you wanna contact us, our email address is HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com. This episode was produced by Carrie Thompson, with music composed by Tine Arablouei. It was Edited by Neva Grant with research help from Casey Herman. Our audio engineers were Robert Rodriguez and Josh Newell. Our production staff also includes Alex Chung, Chris Masini, Carla Estevez, JC Howard, Sam Paulson, John Isabella, Catherine Cipher, and Malia Aga. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This.

Wondery (1h 25m 16s):
If you like How I Built This, you can listen early and ad free Right now by joining Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts. Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon music.

0 (1h 25m 28s):
Before you go, tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Wondery (1h 25m 36s):
Being an actual royal is never about finding your happy ending, but the worst part is if they step out of line or fall in love with the wrong person, It changes the course of history. I am Aisha Skidmore Williams. And I'm Brooke Sifron. We've Been telling the stories of the Rich and famous on the Hit Wondery Show, even The Rich, and talking about the latest celebrity news on Rich and Daily. We're going all over the world. On our new show, even the Royals, We'll be diving headfirst into the lives of the world's kings, queens, and all the wannabes in their orbit throughout history. Think Succession meets the Crown, meets real life. We're going to pull back the gilded curtain and show how royal status might be bright and shiny. But it comes at the expense of, well, everything else, like your freedom, your Privacy, and sometimes even your head follow. Even the Royals on the Wondery app or Wherever, you get your podcasts. You can listen to even the Royals early and ad free Right. Now by joining Wondery Plus.