0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Charles Schwab last year taught us. We don't know what tomorrow holds, but Schwab knows that successful financial planning can help propel net worth by 2.5 times find easy, flexible planning options and more at schwab.com/plan.

1 (19s):
Hey everyone. So I don't know if it's actually possible to get a sugar rush just from listening to a podcast, but pate, why not see if that happens? When you listen to my conversation with Christina Toesy founder of milk bar, it's one of our favorites from the archives. I spoke with Christina in front of a live audience in New York city back in September of 2019. I hope you enjoy.

2 (46s):
I just remember my Blackberry kept buzzing and buzzing and I was like, what is going? Like, did the bakery catch fire? Is my family. Okay, what could this possibly be? And I had all these voicemails and I have a w my favorite voicemail was from this woman in Kansas city, who I think maybe was someone's grandma. And she was just like, well, I heard, you know, Anderson Cooper talk about this crackpot. And I just, I'm never going to make it to New York. So like, would you mind shipping me one? And it was like, are you going to tell her, are you going to call her back and tell her no, because I was not going to call her back and tell her no. And we now have an online business where, and that is like, when opportunity knocks, what are you going to say?

2 (1m 30s):
Like, not today, when it's time to rise to the occasion, you rise

1 (1m 41s):
Ramen PR. It's how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built. I'm guy Ross. And on the show today, how Christina Tosi his passion for pie and cookies, litter to open milk bar, a multi-million dollar sweet shop. That's reinventing the <inaudible> American desserts. We absolutely love food stories on the show. When we had Alice Waters on, I could've listened to her. Talk about strawberries for the entire hour, or spent the whole interview with Jeni Britton Bauer hearing about the molecular structure of her rich dense Jeni's splendid ice cream.

1 (2m 27s):
There's a special creativity about food, and also something else. I'm like a tech device or a product that requires sophisticated machine tooling to build food stories, just seeing a tiny bit more accessible, almost like you hear it. And think I could do that before we get carried away. Let's be clear about one thing coming up with an amazing burrito or burger or ice cream is hard, but it's even harder to produce it at scale and keep the quality high, especially if you are as obsessed about the details as Christina Tosi. But the funny thing is, if you've ever seen her milk bar pie or a compost cookie, you would never know, because in some ways they look like the least obsessed over desserts in the world.

1 (3m 15s):
The cookie is a jumble oats and butterscotch, potato chips and pretzels. The milk pie is a gooey mixture of butter and brown sugar and cream and eggs. Her cakes are unfrosted on the sides, but the moment you bite into any of those treats, I'm willing to bet you will freak out because that's, when you begin to understand Christina's level of precision, the exact amount of chocolate or cream or vanilla, the perfect crumb on the cake. These are the products that Christina Tosi sells at her milk bar bakeries. But what she's really trying to sell is joy. A moment, a small and relatively affordable intelligence.

1 (3m 58s):
All of this from a kid who was raised on junk food and ended up deciding to learn, to become a pastry chef for several years, Christina worked in some of the best restaurants in New York until she became a logistics manager for David Chang. David's one of the most influential chefs in America who opened a chain of Asian themed restaurants under the name Momofuku and with his encouragement, Christina, eventually founded milk bar. The bakery has since spread to 16 locations across the country with a cult following and an estimated revenue in the tens of millions of dollars. And if you're one of those people who love the leftover milk, the bottom of a bowl of cereal, Christina was perhaps the very first person to take that milk and turn it into soft serve ice cream.

1 (4m 44s):
Christina Tosi joined me on stage at the town hall in New York city a few weeks ago for a live conversation. And one of the first things I wanted to know was how do you milk a cornflake?

2 (4m 55s):
You're very hip on culinary technique. That's exactly how we make cereal milk. You just milk. That's exactly

1 (5m 1s):
It. Little teeny

2 (5m 2s):
Fingers, like from the farms of Ohio in the streets of New York city,

1 (5m 8s):
You should be very deft with your fingers, right? So, so let's start with, with where you grew up outside of Washington, DC, what kind of kid were you, I mean, were you like I'm super academic, I'm sporty? What, what do you remember about being a kid? I was

2 (5m 25s):
Mix of all those things. I was very much an academic because like, my parents would be like, toes, you don't get anything, but A's, and I was active. I remember loving running at a young age and I just have always had a lot of energy and just found places to put it, but I was always a curious kid

1 (5m 46s):
And you actually grew up speaking Italian, right? Yeah.

2 (5m 50s):
Yeah. My dad's side of the family is from Northern Italy. He's first-generation American. And I didn't realize I didn't even occur to me that that was interesting or strange or different. It kind of just was, but I grew up with like romance languages, for sure

1 (6m 6s):
As a kid. I mean, cause we'll get to this a second about what you majored in which I, you know what, I'm just going to tell everybody you majored in applied mathematics and what was the other thing? Italian and Italian, right? That was a slam dunk that totally foreshadows compost cookies, but half is

2 (6m 26s):
So straight and narrow.

1 (6m 28s):
So when, I mean, so when you were like a teenager or, you know, I mean, were you was baking even part of your life where you

2 (6m 36s):
Baking was, was part of my life from a super early age. I grew up in the home kitchen and it wasn't with the nuance of technique or like culinary wisdom. It was just, I was the youngest and that was like kind of where childcare happened. My mom was a working mom. So it would just be like, go hang out with your, grandma's go into the kitchen. Cause they're making dinner. I grew up in the suburbs and like you didn't food, wasn't a thing back then. Like you didn't go out to eat. Like maybe if I read all my books for school, I was like a booklet member and went to pizza hut to get like a pan pizza. Or if we were really, really, really good as teenagers, we would go to like Baskin Robbins on Thursday night.

2 (7m 19s):
That was like, if we were very well behaved, but everything else happened at home and cooking was, was fine. I was never really that into savory food based on my diet that I'm so happy. You shared with everyone.

1 (7m 33s):
You were basically, you grew up on Kraft, Mac and cheese and hot dogs and Doritos, right?

2 (7m 38s):
Lima beans with ranch salad dressing. That's been a, that's been a hidden secret for awhile, but I, so I like grew up being trained to be super studious and super yielding. And the place that I like resonated with most was when we were making cookies or baking brownies or lemon bars, or just like co hum home baked goods. But it was the place where I kind of like broke the rules and acted out. It was like stealing a little bit more cookie dough. And my grandma wasn't looking or like the little, the little nibbles that I knew I wasn't allowed to have, but that was also what resonated with me most because we would bake every single day or every single night.

2 (8m 23s):
And it was less about having dessert on the table and more about these baked goods, bringing us into the community that we live in.

1 (8m 32s):
But as he, as a teenager and when you eventually went to college, like I'm, I'm imagining that like baking was just something you did. It was just something you enjoy doing, but it wasn't like I'm going to do this. Cause you went to, you start out at the university of Virginia studying applied mathematics and Italian. So I think

2 (8m 51s):
During school, at UVA first, and then I was like science, what's this about? I like math. And I like to bake, not really seeing

1 (8m 60s):
The connection says, did you envision your life as a life of somebody who was going to do something with applied mathematics? Like, like being an accountant or an economist or something like that?

2 (9m 11s):
My very practical mother after like my first year of college was like, great. I got home, you know, like first day of break. And she was like, great. Like when are you starting your summer job? And I was like, what are you talking about? And she was like, let's go. And I got a job at an actuary office. And I was like, oh, I don't know that this resonates with me. But I was raised by these people that were so passionate about what they did for a living. And they always raised us to follow that passion. I think they just would have preferred that it was like as an actuary, as a mechanical engineer.

1 (9m 45s):
Yeah. And so did you, I know that after a year at UVA, you dropped out, you decided it wasn't for you for a variety of reasons and you kind of decided to go to Italy for some time. And, but that again, that wasn't like, it wasn't like the sort of regulatory like epiphany in food or

2 (10m 4s):
No, it wasn't. So I figured out how to transfer from UVA to JMU, but instead of going to JMU on campus, how to enroll myself right into the study abroad program in Italy. Because the thing that I, that I knew for sure about myself was that I was a wanderlust and I still am today. And I just started over that timeframe of, of being in my late teens and early twenties, just starting to be like, who are you? And whenever I'd get an answer to one of those things, I start to collect the answers and I want to be out in the world. I feed off of that. So I went to Italy, not under the guise of food, under the guise of education, but I got so much more out of.

1 (10m 47s):
And so you finish James Madison and I think in 2002, you get your degree in applied mathematics and Italian. And what, what was your thought? Like, what did you think you were going to do at that point? Did you have an idea?

2 (11m 1s):
So I was a little short-sided. I basically took as many courses as possible to get out of the formal education process. I graduated in three years being like, I gotta get outta here, I'm over getting straight A's. And I know I don't actually want to do anything for a living with these things. And so it was kind of on the Eve of graduation that I was like, oh, I can't go home. I sped so fast through this formal university education, but I don't want to do these things for a living. And so I just asked myself the simple question of like, are I girlfriend and like real talk, what is it that you're passionate about that you want to make into a living?

2 (11m 42s):
And it was this one thing that I just did every single day habitually without thinking about it. And it was bake cookies.

1 (11m 52s):
You would bake cookies, like even in your dorm room

2 (11m 55s):
Is very common. When you are like super studious, you work really hard. You study all night and then like your, your way to sort of like shed the weight of expectation, stresses to bake. It's an outlet. And for me, it was like a social outlet. Cause I would bring it, I'd bring it every day to high school. You asked people who went to high school with me, I would show up every single morning with something baked

1 (12m 18s):
And you finished. So when you finished college, you start the gears in your head, start to think, okay, maybe there's something there and, and you decide, all right, I'll move to New York. And, and, and sort of find my way.

2 (12m 33s):
I knew my answer was baked cookies. And so I took a step back and I was like, okay, am I going to do this at home? There's no way I'm going to do this at home. And I knew I wanted to get out. And I was always drawn to New York city. And so I kind of said like, all right, I've been doing this formal education thing for a few years. So I already feel behind on this like new found dream. So like I got to go to the like most fast paced, most well-known food place. And I got to figure out how to make cookies a profession. So I enrolled myself in culinary school to become a pastry chef. That's like what you would call a formal cookie maker.

2 (13m 14s):
And at least in my term, that was my translation of it. And I moved to New York city. Having only been here for a few hours once as a teenager and just hit the ground running.

1 (13m 26s):
What did your parents feel about that? Because you went to the, I think it was a French culinary Institute to learn how to be a, become a pastry chef. How does your mom and dad feel about that?

2 (13m 35s):
I didn't give them much time to react because I knew how they would feel about it. And I knew who I was and I knew what would made sense to me. And I wasn't asking for permission. So I think I told my mom two days before I got on like the Chinatown bus and with a suitcase full of like cleaning supplies and a sleeping bag and a change of clothes. And she wasn't happy, but I imagine on some levels of child, they also realized that there was a stubbornness about me and that I did everything they asked me to do and that it was my life to live.

2 (14m 15s):
And

1 (14m 16s):
What did you think about, about culinary school? I mean, did it, was it everything that you'd hoped for is this like transformational amazing, intense experience?

2 (14m 25s):
I loved every minute of it. I mean, part of it's kind of goofy because you're wearing a uniform and your uniform is like a white chef's coat and occur chief that you have to tie a certain way and a white paper Toke that make kind of makes you feel very goofy. The second you like lean over, it falls off your head and the unit, I didn't go. I went to public school, like the thought of wearing a uniform that someone tells you how to wear. Like I will buy the things. I wear always an expression of what I was. So there was part of it that was militaristic and curious to me. And then the other part of it, I realized very quickly that with culinary school, just like any part of my education, you get as much out of it as you put into it.

2 (15m 5s):
And that's when it really started clicking. I was learning all of this technique. I was eating a lot of chocolate making friends and I was, I was on my path. I was going to culinary school by day. I was working at restaurants to pay the rent at night and I was never home because who can really afford any livable space in New York city.

1 (15m 27s):
W what did you do after you graduated? What was your first job?

2 (15m 30s):
So I got my first job while I was in culinary school. I was a pastry cook at Boulay and dialect just wedged my way, my foot in the door when I was still a student, because I was like, again, like I'm behind. I was like in my twenties and it was like, I got to play catch up. So I basically convinced them to hire me as an intern and then convinced them to give me a full-time job. The second that I graduated and I was working like the fine dining four-star hustle, which is basically working six days a week. My schedule was from 11:00 AM until 3:00 AM. And on the sixth day, you had to work a double, which meant you had to go in at 7:00 AM to 3:00 AM to get your seventh day off.

1 (16m 16s):
And what would you do? Like, what was your

2 (16m 18s):
Prep in a kitchen? You have a prep list. And so you, you look at the prep list and it's a list of things that you need for the day based on the dessert you sold the night before, the number of covers that you were expecting in terms of reservations. I like in the morning when I worked at the double, I would always have to make this white chocolate mousse, pipe it into this beautiful, tiny little cup, and then make this green tea chalet. And it was with super expensive green tea. And you had to boil it to a certain temperature, and it could only sit there for two Mississippi's. And then you had to whisk in the ag car and still, and if you messed it up, which I messed up, plenty of times, you would really get hammered for it. And even now to this day, the smell of green tea, I will never be anything green tea flavored on the menu at milk bar, because it's like the most beautiful PTSD, even though I, I so appreciate why other people love it.

2 (17m 13s):
For me, it's something completely different and personal.

1 (17m 18s):
So I imagined like, what was like, cause kitchens can be like, we've all seen cooking shows and have read stories about kitchens. Like they can be pretty, you know, nasty places. Right. Really kind of brutal places. What was it like there? I mean, you know, it was a hot restaurant, lots of people coming in, was it, was it, you know, hostile tense, uncomfortable? Or was it just messy? Other things

2 (17m 42s):
It's tough. I mean, it was tough. It's tough work. It's a tough pursuit. And somehow I was totally built for the ride of it on some level. I think my dad raised me enough as a tomboy to be like, let's go, like, let's go. We're not like, we're not crying over spilled milk. We're not like I like, I see you skinned your knees. Like, you're fine. Let's go, let's go. Let's go. And to not think about the barriers that were put in place to just like, are you here? Did you show up? Do you mean it nothing's that's worth, it is ever easy. And I didn't think about anything other than that.

2 (18m 24s):
I just charged forward.

1 (18m 25s):
So D I mean, I'm just curious while you were at relay. I mean, you are learning how to be a pastry chef, right? I mean, this is sort of like you are in the trenches where you already at that point thinking, yeah, you know, this is, this is the thing I think I want to do. I want to be a pastry chef. I want to be the pastry chef at some famous restaurant. Was that, did that start to become an ambition or was it more just, you were enjoying what you're doing and you were doing it.

2 (18m 51s):
So my first year was just about getting to a point where I wasn't getting my butt kicked at some, if not every point of the day. And so for me, it was this pursuit of learning almost like in the Sisyphean complex of just like, you're just rolling the Boulder up the hill and thinking about like, oh my God, okay. Tomorrow, how am I going to do it better? How am I going to do it faster, quicker, more technique oriented. And after about a year of it is when I really started to see opportunity, not just meeting the standard, but seeing opportunity.

1 (19m 27s):
You were there for a couple of years. And in 2005, you went to work for WD 50 was kind of a legendary molecular critic, astronomy restaurant in here in New York, famous chef Wylie, Dufresne, but you didn't go there to, to work in the kitchen. Right?

2 (19m 42s):
So I left Boulay because I had learned everything about that technique and that style. And when I was thinking about what I wanted to do next, I was starting to think about who I was in food, not just learning how to perfect someone else's techniques, but who I was through food. And I knew I was all about like the home baked. Good, but I also knew I was super curious and adventure seeking. And so I did the same thing. I stuck my foot in the door at WD 50 and said, I want to intern for you as a pastry cook until you have a job opening. And then I will happily wedge my way in there. And it got to a point at WD 50, that my role was beyond pastry cook.

2 (20m 26s):
I was helping the chef think about hazard analysis plans with critical controls.

1 (20m 31s):
You're listening to the hazard analysis, hazard analysis, critical control point plan. This is basically food safety, right? Because every restaurant, especially in New York, you're going to get hammered. If you do some tiny thing wrong. So you got sort of brought into help Wiley like come up with a food safety plan for his kitchen,

2 (20m 51s):
I'd say, Hey chef, like, is there extra credit I can do? Cause I was raised to be that person in school. And first he was like, what are you even doing? What are you talking about? Not understanding that lens. And he was like, I need help with the health department. I'm trying to figure out what this HASSOP plan. What is it? They just are telling me I need it. And he was a super smart, super savvy guy, but there were a lot of walls up that he had to figure out how to break down any of that.

1 (21m 17s):
I had to have a hazard analysis, critical control point plan

2 (21m 21s):
Using a certain technique. We're going like super dark.

1 (21m 24s):
What's the tech, what's the technique.

2 (21m 27s):
The cooking technique is called Suvi. So under pressure, creating an anaerobic environment by sucking air

1 (21m 33s):
And then gently boiling it. And, and so to do, to use that technique, you needed this like health safety plan and your restaurant,

2 (21m 41s):
This like 60 page analysis of everything from you, bring the watermelon in and who's receiving it and who's taking the temperature. And is there a, is there a potential bacteria contamination step? And if so, is there a kill step all the way through it landing perfectly placed on your beautiful,

1 (22m 3s):
All right. So you help write this thing in the meantime, are you doing any cooking at the restaurant?

2 (22m 7s):
Yeah, I'm working as one of two pastry cooks in the restaurant

1 (22m 12s):
Super hot restaurant, right at the time, like it was getting press.

2 (22m 16s):
Yeah, it was, it, it was, it was probably the last great restaurant in New York city that, that, that, oh my gosh, no stuff that existed before, like eater and food blogging and, and access to these great restaurants existed online. It was, it was the restaurant that only existed in this beautiful way in the underbelly of the New York food scene by word of mouth. It was in the lower east side. No one even went to the lower east side back then.

1 (22m 51s):
And were you getting a chance to experiment at that point or were you still sort of doing what you were told to do?

2 (22m 56s):
So I found a way to both experiment through the ideas of my pastry chef at the restaurant and learn so much about technique and flavor manipulation, how to bring the flavor of corn bread into an ice cream base. And then I started realizing, because I didn't really have a kitchen in New York city in my own home that if I just showed up to work early, I could just like make my homespun dessert before my shift started work through the crazy technique, driven demands of the shift and then serve my like brownies cookies for family meal.

2 (23m 38s):
And that was my first like step into serving my baked goods in an environment of discerning culinary minds.

1 (23m 50s):
So when the staff like the restaurant staff, usually it's like four o'clock right before the restaurant opens at five 30, whatever the family meal, you would just bring desserts. And

2 (23m 59s):
I would just bring up whatever I had showed up early to

1 (24m 2s):
Bake. And that really is the beginning of what would become your most famous dessert. Right? That's right. When we come back in just a moment, how to make a pie, that people cannot stop eating, stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR Support for this podcast and the following message come from. Klayvio the email and text marketing platform that puts creators in control. If you're the creator of an e-commerce brand, you need a platform that hustles as hard as you do, Klayvio unlocks the power of your e-commerce data.

1 (24m 44s):
So you can personalize and automate messages that keep customers coming back. Creators communicate with Klaviyo, get started for free@klaviyo.com slash NPR.

0 (24m 59s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Charles Schwab last year taught us. We don't know what tomorrow holds, but Schwab knows that successful financial planning can help propel net worth by 2.5 times find easy, flexible planning options and more at schwab.com/plan.

4 (25m 23s):
In 1999, the music industry began cranking out. Latin music meant to crossover. How do we make it Latin without being too of that? Some of the inspiration came from strange places, channeling more. We unpack Pop's Latin explosion. Listen now to, it's been a minute from NPR.

1 (25m 52s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's 2005 and Christina is working at the restaurant WD 50 as a pastry chef. And she's about to make a pie that will change the course of her career.

2 (26m 7s):
It was a Sunday. I was showing up to work early, like as I always did. And I was going to make something for family meal. That was my routine. And I was looking in our fridges and I was like, oh, I don't really have anything extra for me to work with. And it was a Sunday. And in restaurants, you don't get deliveries of supplies of your, of your raw food goods on Sundays. And it's like, what am I going to make? What am I going to make? What am I going to make? And my favorite cookbook at the time, and still today as the joy of cooking, it's like equal parts, dorky and historical. And there's like not really pictures. So you have to really be under the words and was deep into the pie section.

2 (26m 49s):
And I fell in love with the story of chess pie and chess pie. Is this pie down south that you make when you don't have enough apples, make apple pie or pecans to make pecan pie, you make just pie. And with like the Southern Twain said over and over again, chess pie. And I loved the idea of like his kind of pie with the filling and none of the other, probably better for you stuff. And I love the idea of putting just whatever you have together, the basic pantry items, butter, sugar, vanilla extract, eggs, and whisking it together and putting it in a pie shell and baking it. And I was never one for really following the recipes of another cookbook cause I was always tinkering.

2 (27m 31s):
And so I kind of, I purposefully didn't measure anything to sort of tasted the batter, put it in the shell baked. It went off to do my normal pastry cook duties, never really set. And the meal that you make for family meals and important one because it shows your peers what you're made of what you think tastes good. What you cook for them is almost maybe more important than what you're cooking for your guests. Not really, but in theory it is. And so I was, I was in bed. I was embarrassed that day because I thought this is the first time I'm going to put up a family meal dessert that I'm not proud of. It didn't even set that just that's everything about that. As bad technique threw it in the fridge. Didn't think about it, threw it up for family meal at 4:00 PM and kind of went and hid in a corner and ate my meal quickly.

2 (28m 17s):
And before I knew it, there was just like loud oohs and AHS and strange things. And I was just, I'm going to get up. I eat in the kitchen, what's going on. And these guys that I worked with were just like, just buzzing all over the place. Like, what is this? What'd you make? And I'm like thinking that I'm hiding in the shadow around this dessert. And instead they're freaking out about this, like gooey, buttery, delicious mess of a pie that they named crack pie. And we have since renamed for other reasons. But it was, it was this thing that lived in the underbelly of New York city dining before I even opened milk bar.

1 (29m 0s):
You're still at WD 50, you working as a pastry chef, but I guess around 2005 or 2006, while he gets a call from David Chang, the famous David Chang, founder of Momofuku, he's having some problems with the health department because he wants to do right. He's trying to do Soviet as well. And they keep shutting him down. Right?

2 (29m 22s):
Yeah. These guys, well, 2006 also noodle bar David Chang, like y'all probably even know who that was. Noodle bar had just opened noodle bar had probably been open 6, 7, 8 months at the time. But Dave called Wiley and was like, dude, I'm getting in trouble for this thing that you just

1 (29m 43s):
Kind of was being, he was being shut down by the health department. Cause he wasn't able to show a plan with his,

2 (29m 48s):
I mean, what entrepreneurial cook you don't, they don't teach you the stuff at culinary school. It's like never seen before technique. And therefore the idea of writing this crazy hazard analysis plan, a great chef is not typically a bookworm on that level. And so Wiley knew like clockwork that I'd be like, chef, it's my weekends. What, what do you got for me? And he'd be like, I need you to go. I need you to go uptown, which was the east village. I need you to go uptown. Oh my friends, Dave. And I was like, cool, great.

1 (30m 24s):
When you got, when you met him, did he say, Hey, can you help me write this Passard critical analysis control point plan river's called.

2 (30m 32s):
He was like, I did a bad thing and I need your help because if you know, Dave, you know, like, and most of us that are in it is personal to us. So when someone comes in and like threatens to shut down your business, it's everything, we've got that's in it. And when someone threatens the one thing that you've been working so hard for, it's like, and he kind of lost it on kind of lost it on them. And it was my job to clean it up.

1 (30m 59s):
You started building a plan for him and what, at some point he said, Hey, will you come work with me?

2 (31m 7s):
Yeah. I was in this interesting transition period at WD 50 because I knew it was time for me to move on. I didn't see myself as the pastry chef there, fine dining. It felt different than who I was as I was figuring out my voice and food. And on top of that, there was this magnetism to Dave and to what he was doing and to how we got along. It was like, we spoke the same language without ever having to say a word.

1 (31m 35s):
And what were you doing there? Because you were not cooking. Right.

2 (31m 39s):
He was like, do you want a job? And I was like, well, what would the job be? And he was like, I don't know, you figure it out. And there was something about the, like, I don't know this or that really like whatever is needed. And also we'll figure it out. Like the openness of it was like, perfect. Where do I sign up

1 (31m 59s):
At that time? I don't think Momofuku had a pastry chef. Right. They didn't even have a dessert menu. Two is the

2 (32m 4s):
Wild west. I don't know that there was even a girl anywhere in, I don't even know that there was a girl in the kitchen. They were a bunch of dudes in a tiny little space, like going for it, blood, sweat, and tears, the thought of dessert. Right. At that point it was dainty. It was time-consuming. It takes up space from an economic standpoint. Like it, it was kind of in their mind just to waste.

1 (32m 31s):
I mean, did you do the same thing at Momofuku? Like when they had family meal, would you bring desserts and stuff like that too? Yeah. Crack pie and all these things. Yeah.

2 (32m 40s):
I think, I think the first time, cause Dave was like, what is this? Was this crack pie that like, while he keeps telling me about, I was like, I was just pie fine. And he was like, I want to taste it. And I was like, okay. And I made it, I think I made him a me, so crack pie wants, I'll just make whatever and bring it in. I mean, everyone who doesn't look big, this was the person that brings baked goods in for work.

1 (32m 60s):
Everyone loves that. But I mean, it sounds like this was really an outlet for your creativity, right? Like it really was just something you loved doing. And because it was at this time where you kind of came up with the idea of playing around with cereal, milk and making panacotta. So, because cereal milk of course would loom large in your life eventually. How did you figure out how to extract milk from

2 (33m 24s):
The guy? I was starting to think through desserts differently and starting to really understand and flex these muscles of like rule breaking in the baking and in the dessert space. For me, the fine dining part of desserts that I have always struggled to resonate with were the ones that feel like they're so far over your head or they're so luxurious that there's no like connection to what your taste buds know to be like sweet and guilty and indulgent and naughty and all the reasons why we love to eat dessert.

2 (34m 5s):
And so I was thinking through like basic desserts panacotta is a basic dessert. And I was like, oh, what a missed opportunity? Like buttermilk or lemon. Those are great ideas, but like, wouldn't it be cool if it was flavored something different? And I just, I started to like use the weird isms that I'd saw solve a math problem with where it's like, what's the lowest common denominator milk. What can I flavor this milk with to speak to people? And I would just, I, my favorite thing to do as a kid and still my favorite thing to do today is just walk the aisles of the grocery store in New York city terms. We don't really have grocery stores as much as we have bodegas. And I would just walk the aisles and be like, could you be a flavor of milk?

2 (34m 46s):
Could you be a flavor of milk? I got to the cereal aisle and was like, I mean, this is always a flavor of, I was like, it's a good idea or a bad idea.

1 (34m 57s):
Right. Cause I mean, who doesn't remember that as a kid? Right? Like captain crunch, crunch berries. Right? Amazing whatever, amazing

2 (35m 5s):
Flavor.

1 (35m 6s):
Yeah. Cinnamon toast crunch a month.

2 (35m 8s):
Again. Like this was where, when I made cereal milk for the first time I did the same things I did with the pie where I was like this either a little ashamed, not really certain because when you're trying to find your true voice, you're not even sure that it sounds right when it comes out, but it was seeing the look on people's face. It was seeing the look on Dave's face was seeing the look on my coworkers.

1 (35m 33s):
You made, you basically took milk and you infuse the milk with like cornflakes, right. You just poured corn flakes in there and just let us sit there. And

2 (35m 41s):
Then it's more than that. But that's like

1 (35m 46s):
Strained it and made panacotta out of that and then stripped it. And you said, did you tell them what it was? No,

2 (35m 53s):
I gave it to them. I said, tastes us, tell me what you think. And I kind of scattered away because it was

1 (35m 60s):
Cornflake milk. Yeah.

2 (36m 1s):
Maybe a little toast on the cornflakes, little seasoning. And they came running after me and we're like, what is this? What is this? It was like, they knew what it was and they can't

1 (36m 12s):
Put their finger on

2 (36m 13s):
It. And it was seeing their reaction of like, you get me, you got me, what is this? I know what it is. I can't put my finger on it. My eyes are popping out of my head. And I just want to give you a big hug that I was like, this is it.

1 (36m 33s):
Wow. Like this is special a serum. I mean, nobody was taking milk and infusing it with cereal. I mean, it's certainly

2 (36m 43s):
A little weak. It sounds silly to say now it sounds,

1 (36m 46s):
It sounds like a no brainer now. Right.

2 (36m 49s):
Or you can say that everyone was doing it. We were just doing it over, like in our holy pajamas. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. No one was setting it into a Panna, cotta us it into a soft serve or thinking about it through that lens.

1 (37m 3s):
So at some point, David asked you, Hey, can you, I want you to make dessert for the restaurant. What he just decided let's try this let's make dessert. Okay.

2 (37m 13s):
I think he saw in me, someone that always needed to be in over my head to be moving. And I think at the same time he knew he was building this amazing, magical thing in Momofuku. And that in order to continue to be taken seriously, he was going to have to take his restaurant empire seriously. And like it or not, that includes desserts. So what

1 (37m 41s):
Did you make?

2 (37m 42s):
Strawberry shortcake, but it wasn't, it wasn't, you know, it wasn't, it was like the best dorky approach to strawberry shortcake. Wasn't it? It was this super high-fat butter shortcake that had a little bit of corn powder in it for flavor and buttermilk. And I would roll it in confectioner sugar before baking it. Cause that was something my grandma would do with her cookies when I was a kid. And so it gave this incredible, like salty, but sweet and sharp and buttery and crumbly and tender. And I take these tiny little gems of Tristar strawberries and I'd mass rate them, but in a certain ratio of sugar and I would just a little bit of Sherry and balsamic vinegar to make the strawberries tastes like something you had never had.

2 (38m 24s):
And I'd put sour cream in the whipped cream because it needed a little bit of an edge. And I had all these things that like, it couldn't just be strawberry.

1 (38m 33s):
Yeah. Don't you guys want that? Yeah, <inaudible> so good.

2 (38m 41s):
I mean, I couldn't just make us strawberry short, but I had to make something and it was that it was being pushed to make something to say, who are you on a plate? You're not standing behind somebody else. You are the person making the dessert that brought out a different side of me.

1 (39m 0s):
So I guess around 2008, there was this opportunity, right? David had, he had a restaurant, another restaurant and the neighboring laundromat or whatever they move out and what he comes to you and says, Hey Christina, why don't you open like a dessert place next door was that? I mean,

2 (39m 22s):
I was making desserts for a few of the Momofuku restaurants at that point. But the only place that I could make the desserts was in one of the restaurant kitchens. And the only that guess what? That happens at three o'clock in the morning when everyone else goes home because there's no space. Right. And so there would be a point where he was like, we gotta like find, we gotta find, we're gonna find you space. We're gonna find you space. And he knew that I love to bake. He knew that. I mean, I was, I would still bring in baked goods. So he's like, I have an idea. We got to take over this laundromat space. I think you should take it. I think you should take it. We don't want somebody else to move in to the block. I think you should take it. You'll still make desserts for us, but you'll then you'll just like do your own thing on this measure.

1 (40m 2s):
It would be a bakery that had like a door storefront, but you would also make desserts for his restaurants and it would be like kind of part of Momofuku, but also sort of separate.

2 (40m 13s):
Yeah. I was like, great. Let's do that.

1 (40m 14s):
Wow. Like that. Yeah. And so he was going to basically kind of sponsor this thing and you were going to go in and kind of run it.

2 (40m 22s):
He was like, great, go figure out how to sign the lease. And like, let's go, one's it gonna open it? Wow.

1 (40m 29s):
And, and at that point, I'm just curious. Cause you were so, I mean, you, you know, you were so experienced, right. But still really young. I think you're 27. Did you go through the process of like, I don't know, creating a business and putting together a business plan and like getting lawyers and all these things. No,

2 (40m 50s):
No cook would ever do that. No, I was young and I didn't know enough to know any better. I just said yes. And John was a

1 (41m 1s):
Cool opportunity. I said, yeah.

2 (41m 3s):
I was like, great. That sounds great. That sounds like something exactly like what I would like to do and I'll go do it. I'll just go do it.

1 (41m 11s):
When we come back in just a moment. Hey, Christina prepared from milk bars opening day. And what happened after Anderson Cooper ate a piece of crack pie, stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor DocuSign every day, someone signs something that means everything millions of people use DocuSign to share and sign legal documents from purchasing a car to closing on a first home or adopting a pet into the family. DocuSign has helped facilitate those important moments in their customer's lives. Learn how DocuSign e-signature can help be there for the next important moment in your life.

1 (41m 56s):
Visit docusign.com today. DocuSign as real as it gets. This message comes from NPR sponsor ignite. When ransomware strikes you lose access to documents and customer trust small and mid-sized companies fall victim the most. That's why ignites cloud-based collaboration solutions have ransomware detection and rapid recovery built in rated a leader in data security and governance on G2. Ignite works seamlessly with cloud apps and can be deployed in just minutes. Start your free trial today@egnyte.com.

1 (42m 42s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this on guy Roz. So it's 2008 and Christina has just signed a lease to take over the space next to Momofuku second restaurant and turn it into a bakery and to milk bar. And when it came to the look and feel of the bakery, it was a big departure from fine dining.

2 (43m 0s):
The original inspiration for a milk bar was it's going to be like a modern day take on dairy queen slash Baskin Robbins, but I'm also going to serve a bunch of baked goods because that's just what I love.

1 (43m 11s):
I'm curious about the aesthetic of it, because I've read that I've heard it described as part punky, Brewster part, Lisa Frank. I wish I love, I think it's awesome.

2 (43m 20s):
Like

1 (43m 23s):
Amazing. I mean, did you think, did you have an, a kind of a vision in your mind of where you wanted it to look like and feel like, or did that just kind of happen organically?

2 (43m 34s):
Aesthetically? It didn't even occur to me to think of what it would look like, but I knew what it would feel like. I knew that I wanted to open this quirky American style bakery that served cookies and cakes and pies and soft serve and that I wanted it to hold space in people's lives. I was like, the world doesn't need more bakeries. We don't need more talkative cookies. We need more of the theory of that. But in a way that like inspires and is sticky and is a place that anyone can come and people can get like, just feel a little scene, get a little wacky. And so everything was just like brass tacks, stainless steel, you know, the cheapest furniture we could find scraping scraping paint off the side of an exposed brick wall.

2 (44m 24s):
And then all of the other aesthetic from that, like our neon milk sign was literally a, the is a quarter of the way into the block and people can't find it because I refuse to pay for like permitting and drawings to put a sign outside. And I was like, but if I hang a really big neon sign in this creepy hallway, I bet I bet that would work. And I was like, okay, well what does it say milk? I couldn't fit all of milk bar without it coming awkward. So I typed milk on my laptop and highlighted it and was like, you know, if it's modern day dairy queen, it should have like a little bit of that nostalgic brush grip, medium.

2 (45m 7s):
And then

1 (45m 8s):
Off the shelf off the shelf font medium.

2 (45m 11s):
And then I was like, what color is it going to be in? It's like, okay, well, taxi cabs in new Yorker, yellow, the stoplights are red and green, the little crosswalk eyes, you know, like flashes white and it's like pink, that'll stand out, that'll get someone's attention. They'll at least see the light. And they did. Okay.

1 (45m 31s):
And, and what, and, and what were you when, when you opened up, what were your first products had they all been tested out at, at Momofuku?

2 (45m 40s):
Yeah, I would still just make family meal the way that I always had. So I would some of the things that are still on the menu at milk bar today, like the cornflake chocolate chip, marshmallow cookie was somebody burnt the corn flake crunch that was used for another dessert. And I was like, well, we're not going to throw this away. We were like raised by parents that like waste, not want not mentality. So I was like, hide it in a cookie, put some chocolate chips in it. And we were using marshmallows for some other like R and D moment. And so I was like, just use the rest of the marshmallows. It was kind of just like a hodgepodge cookie and we made it and put it out and it, people freaked out and we were like, okay, well that's going on the minute.

1 (46m 15s):
Yeah. I read that. I read that. I don't know if there's a apocryphal that you for breakfast everyday, you eat a cornflake, marshmallow chocolate chip cookies

2 (46m 22s):
To every morning. And the bot 11 years later, like gets very angry. If I start with two warm cookies without like caffeine and something else, that's like slightly more responsible though. My diet today is proven.

1 (46m 37s):
All right. So when, so, so the store was going to have cornflake, marshmallow chocolate chip cookies. It was going to have crack pie, birthday cake. I mean, did you have staff at the beginning or was it just,

2 (46m 51s):
I think there were four of us at the beginning and they were the, they remain four of the most incredible loyal human beings. Lord knows why they followed me down into this crazy path, but we would show up every day. I mean, we'd literally be like, you go home and sleep two hours. And then when you come back, I'm gonna go home and take a shower. And then you'll

1 (47m 13s):
Because it was a hamster. We like the day you open, there was a line around the block to get an a ha what was that? How did the people have people know about it?

2 (47m 22s):
We have the trust of people that knew what the Momofuku name meant. And it was one, it was tooth November 15th, 2008 recession. People were scared, but you know how new Yorkers are, like people still wanted to get out and, and, and be a part of a scene. And everyone loves a good line. I don't know. It didn't make any sense to me. I was like, how do these people even know we're opening a bakery today? Do they even know what they're waiting in line for? And, and they came and it was like, I'm so grateful that I didn't have time to worry about.

2 (48m 3s):
Are people going to get this? Are they going to get why we would put pretzels and potato chips and ground coffee and all these other crazy salty, sweet things into a cooking called a compost cookie? Are they going to be like, what are you doing? And it, and, and what it proved out was like, there's like an incredible number of people that are like, I think of them as like sweet tooth soulmates that like showed up and they showed up for like a milkshake on a Monday morning at 10:00 AM. And they showed up at 2:00 AM because they were like, I'm trying to while out, but I got $2. And so can I get a cookie? Can I get a cookie?

1 (48m 41s):
I, I, I'm trying to figure out how, how did you like manage the business and also bake all this stuff? Cause you, these were your recipes. They had to be to your standards. Like you were in the kitchen, you were scooping out cookie dough, you were mixing stuff, but you're also like running a business that was increasing in popularity. Like, did you never sleep? That's great.

2 (49m 9s):
That's correct. I still to this day am like always stressed out that I'm not going to get sleep at night, but it never occurred to me. It was a one day at a time thing. It was the same thing of like, cool today, I'm going to show up and I'm going to roll that Boulder up a freaking mountain, and I'm going to do whatever it takes to make it happen. Cause it's what I believe in it's because it's what these four people believe in. It's because people that are showing up at 9:00 AM and are like, I am here for that milkshake that we're going to show up and we're going to figure out how to make it happen.

1 (49m 42s):
How was the business funded? I mean, I know of course David had, you know, came in and helped you open it up. You were putting in sweat equity all your time. I have to assume you were independently wealthy at 27 years old. So like, was it, I mean, did he put in money? And then you had to depend on cashflow.

2 (50m 2s):
He loaned me money through our, through the HoldCo of Momofuku. And it was, I was very well versed at operating on a shoestring budget because that's how we built the Momofuku empire. And so it was, it was a loan that we agreed that I'd paid back and I just figured out how to make it work. I mean, I was raised in this mentality of like, you only need what you need and most of the time have everything that you need and you can make so much more work with so little. And it was always also really important to me that it was a patient pursuit and that it was a real business and that it was a business that was successful both emotionally and financially.

2 (50m 46s):
But

1 (50m 47s):
The profit margin on baked goods is really slim. And your cookies are not bad, expensive. I mean, at the time when there were $2,

2 (50m 56s):
Yeah, they were a dollar 85. When we first opened,

1 (50m 59s):
Were you able to have a sustainable business, even with all the hype and all the attention? I mean that, that's a very narrow margin.

2 (51m 8s):
It has always been important to me. Like you can't hold space in people's lives. You can't be a bakery for the people. If people can't be a part of the bakery. And so it was always important to me, our cookie over 11 years, hasn't even gone up a whole dollar in price. We, we pushed back on that sort of said, listen, you have to sell a lot of cookies to pay the rent and it's. And so on some level it's a volume business, but I've always thought about it in terms of like, well, the more cookies we make, the more people we're feeding cookies, that's what we're showing up for. That's what we're here for. I am not changing our fancy, very expensive butter that the team that does the financial analysis of food causes like S like, please, please a cheaper butter.

2 (51m 58s):
And it's like, no, this is what, this is what it's built on. It's a reality. And it's something that we believe to be really important. My access to food, my inspiration of food was from the grocery store. And I got excited about food because it was something that we could afford. And so it's always been important to me that, that I'm always building something that could inspire like my 10 year old self and I can't price my 10 year old self.

1 (52m 22s):
Yeah. I mean, I'm curious though, because obviously there was a lot of hype and in 2009 Anderson Cooper on national television on Regis and Kelly said, Hey, I have had this amazing crack pie in new. York's incredible. Like, was that a turning point? Did that result in just an explosion of interest? Yes.

2 (52m 39s):
I, I didn't know what was going on TV and I certainly, it's not like he was like, Hey girl, heads up. I got you tomorrow morning. I got you at, at eight 15 in the morning, but I know him a few hours before. And at that time, my Blackberry was the customer service, like dial up hotline. And I just remember my Blackberry kept buzzing and buzzing and buzzing and buzzing. And I was like, what is going? Like, did the bakery catch fire? Is my family. Okay, what could this possibly be? And I had all these voicemails and I have a voice. My favorite voicemail was from this woman in Kansas city who I think maybe was someone's grandma. And she was just like, well, I heard, you know, Anderson Cooper talk about this crackpot.

2 (53m 23s):
And I just, I'm never going to make it to new. So like, would you mind shipping me one? And it was like, are you going to tell her, are you going to call her back and tell her no. Cause I was not going to call her back and tell her no. And as like, I know how to ship PI my felt like my whole upbringing was about taking half the baked goods we'd make and putting them into care packages and sending them in the mail. There's nothing better than receiving big goods in the mail. So I was like, I know how to do that. And I went to like all the local drug stores and bought those like break and freeze ice packs, and then went to all of the ups and USPS PS stores was like, I'll take all the boxes, I'll take all the boxes and just showed up at the bakery and was like, here we go, we got a new day.

2 (54m 5s):
It's a bigger, bolder than it was yesterday. And we now have an online business where you can <inaudible>. That is like, when opportunity knocks, what are you going to say? Like, not today for like, when it's time to rise to the occasion you rise?

1 (54m 33s):
What, what was, I mean, I can't imagine how insane it was. Like baking all, keeping up with demand, running a business, like probably a lot of media requests were coming in. What was keeping you up at night? Like what was causing stress for you? Was any, were you stressed out?

2 (54m 51s):
It's so interesting. I'm, I'm confident I was stressed out, but I wouldn't be like, I'm so stressed out. I can't function. I'd just be like, okay, what's next? What am I thinking about? What's slowing us down. There was a point where I, I was worried about, I'd be worried about like, do we have enough cookie scoops? And is the team feeling inspired to scoop as fast as I know we can scoop Those are realities and it became more operational than anything else financially. I was very, I was very like self mandated on knowing what numbers we needed to hit to be in a good place, to be in a medium place.

2 (55m 33s):
And I knew every year I, I, or every quarter I would line up the like, what do we need to be able to do it better and more thoughtfully now that we know a little bit more. And what is our bottom line resource and how do we invest it back into the business?

1 (55m 47s):
What, what was the relationship between you and David? Like? I mean, he is a brilliant chef, obviously an incredible reputation, but also has a reputation of having clash with lots of people. It's not, I mean, was he like coming in and trying to give you tips and advice? And I dunno, like, were you sort of pushing back and saying, get out of my way or, or, or did he just leave you alone?

2 (56m 7s):
All of those things, all of those things, depending on the day, I think if you work in a kitchen that like healthy tension, that like your one moment you're on my team, the next moment you're in my way, the next minute we just don't see eye to eye about how we're going to get to the finish line or whatever it is early days we'd argue. He'd be like there Gabby alive. No one wants to wait and let, like, we would argue about how quick or how slow the line would take and why. And at the same time, when you are as stubborn as I can be, you need someone that's also willing to dig into you because they're, you can't see it. No one can see everything.

2 (56m 47s):
And would I have taken the step or the leap or ha I don't know. I mean, I have no clue and I'm so grateful for having a PIM in my life to kind of kick me out of the house.

1 (57m 1s):
Did you, I mean, w w I think within about two years, you started to expand, you went to three stores, you had 60 employees. I'm just curious about the economics of this. I mean, we're even paying yourself in the first year or so.

2 (57m 16s):
Yeah, but like also, what am I, I'm here to live to build this bakery. I'm not like taking a day off. What am I doing? Like the, the, my going out is like going to a local bodega to get like a dirty sandwich late at night, that is joy and splurge for me. And it was whatever it took to make the business work. After the first, I was like, I'm gonna write a cookbook because one, I know that that part of the business will help. I can put that back into the business and plus it helps us reach more people and give recipes and this, and the other, the reality of opening another store, because at the time I had this sweet little care package business, thanks to Anderson Cooper and this one store.

2 (57m 57s):
But that business was so big that we were doing crazy things like sticking shop shipping boxes, basically all over our only store. Like there was a point where if you went in, you could only take five steps forward and three steps to the left, and then three backwards, five backwards steps out. And I've thought to myself, like you got to build a bigger ship. And so I knew I needed to think about a larger production kitchen. I founded amazing space in Williamsburg, which is where we produce everything for our New York city stores. And I was like, great. This is like wonderful and take so much weight off of that tension. And then all of a sudden it was like, oh, that's just two rents to pay instead of one.

2 (58m 38s):
And though the production part of it is easy. I'm now under utilizing this commissary space and I need to open another few stores to support.

1 (58m 47s):
I'm curious because there's a point right? In every business, when an entrepreneur has to sort of decide, is this a lifestyle business? And this could have been a great lifestyle business. You get about three, three shops. You could, you could have baked on, you know, two or three days a week and done payroll and done accounting and run a business and made a good living and had a nice life. Or do you scale it up? Do you make it something much, much bigger? W when, I mean, you must have had that internal dialogue, right? When, when did that happen?

2 (59m 16s):
I think the first time that it started, that I started really taking that conversation seriously was two years ago when I decided to raise money to grow the business for the first time to actually start taking this business, which was eight years in at the time seriously. And yeah, we can start charging $5 for a cookie, but that, that wasn't right to us. That's not who we are, and that's not what we believe in. And I had a real reckoning with myself of this is a real business, and it's time to start thinking you're at that crossroads. And what is it? And what do you want to do with it?

1 (59m 54s):
You know, it was, I was at the San Francisco airport recently, and it was just like a, a deli or bar there. And they had cookies with potato chips and marshmallows and things that were so unusual when you introduce them in 2008, right. Crack pie, cereal, milk, flavored things, all of those things are out there. I think Ben and Jerry's at one point had a cereal milk. I don't know if they still have the cereal, milk ice cream. Do they still have it? They don't. Okay. I got ya. Sore point. Sorry. Sorry about that. How do you, how do you feel about when you see like, you know, the mainstreaming of potato chips and sweet corn and cereal milk flavors in and desserts all over the place?

2 (1h 0m 46s):
It's kind of supernatural. It's like both endearing and wonderful, because I think it points to people's enthusiasm to like ignite their curiosity and to like, get a little wacky and wild and to think about breaking the rules in these tiny little ways. And then on another level, like it turbocharges us, it makes us say like, we're coming to the aisles of the grocery store. Like that's our space one. That's where my imagination started. It's where I still go. And that's, that's where we're going. That's what we're doing.

1 (1h 1m 22s):
And, and we're

2 (1h 1m 24s):
Coming out, like we're coming in strong in the future guy. Like we're, we're here. It's both wanting to celebrate. People's like curiosity and food. And, and then to also be like, we got to keep going, we're going to keep going. And we're going to keep pushing,

1 (1h 1m 43s):
But you bootstrap this thing for like eight years and you were growing and growing and growing. So did you feel like you had to take outside money to really scale the business that you couldn't do it without outside money?

2 (1h 1m 56s):
No. It wasn't that at all. I mean, we had, I had proven for eight years that I didn't need the money, but I also knew that at this inflection point, it would almost be stubborn to not consider it to not take myself seriously, to not take this thing that we had built that is like, based on humanity and patience and real things and things that we do with our hands and not with our thumbs and to not put more of that in the world. Like, I have been super thoughtful around how to raise money to fuel the business while also making sure that the, the values and the principles of what we stand for exist.

2 (1h 2m 42s):
And that boss of control. Is it possible?

1 (1h 2m 47s):
I think you guys have 16 shops now, right? You've got the mail order. Business accounts are like a third of your business. Something like that. Almost 400 employees,

2 (1h 2m 58s):
440. Wow. Today I took the count for you just in case.

1 (1h 3m 4s):
I think I know the answer to this question because you have, I mean, very, obviously a really strong work ethic. I mean, does any part of you ever just want to, I don't know, just kind of sell it and I mean, get up hamster wheel and just kind of enjoy the fruits of your hard work over the last decade.

2 (1h 3m 22s):
I don't see it as a hamster wheel. Like I'm so fueled by it still where I'm like, I could go into like my, my g-mail and click on my drafts and my list of ideas that have to go on the menu, whether it's in grocery stores, whatever it is is so long. I just, until that list gets shorter, I, and I can't see it getting shorter anytime soon. I like, what am I going to do? And what would I do in a day? I probably just wake up and start baking. So why would I, like, why would I give that away? I got a lot of, I got a lot of ovens to do the baking in these days.

1 (1h 4m 1s):
No, that you didn't get into you didn't, you didn't open milk bar with David for, to make a lot of money. It was a cool opportunity. It was a cool thing to do. You, you didn't sort of look out in the distance and say, I'm going to be really rich, but you've made money. How has that changed your life?

2 (1h 4m 18s):
Not much. I would say like, the thing that has changed about my life is I'm not like sleeping and eating and baking in the same cubby, which is nice. I mean, but then also you miss the romance of it. Cause it was so lovely when that was it. I spend, I would say for me, my biggest, how it's changed my life is I put so much of myself into this profession before milk bar, even coming to New York city. I said goodbye to my family and knew that they wouldn't understand immediately and now, and I put everything into it.

2 (1h 4m 60s):
I never took a day off. And now I can like, arguably take a day off and get on a plane or a train or in a car or on a bus and go and see my people and go and live life in the ways that we like create those sticky moments at milk bar for you. And that for me is like the greatest indulgence. Like nothing else changes. Like I'm still trying to go through a store shopping. I'm still trying to make friendship bracelets. Like it's cool. Cause I can take like an embroidery craft class and not be like, oh my gosh, am I going to eat? Am I going to be eating like Kraft, Mac and cheese for the next six days to support it? And that part of it's easy and the rest of it, I just don't really care.

1 (1h 5m 41s):
You've heard me ask this question before and I'm going to ask you the same question. How much of all this that has happened to you is because of your intelligence, incredible hard work. And how much do you think it's just because you got lucky.

2 (1h 5m 52s):
I think it is more opportunity than it was luck. I think it was, I'm never liked the one that I don't win. Scratch off lotto tickets. That is a splurge. That's when I left out, I don't consider myself to really have great luck. I'm never the one that like wins the contest, but I show up and I mean it, and I'm just a really big believer in good people that show up and mean it winning in the end. And I think that's a mixture of like focus and smarts and hard work. And PS, like I had no street smarts when I moved to New York city, all of these skills you can sharpen. As long as you remove the barriers to convincing yourself, you can sharpen your skills and its opportunity.

2 (1h 6m 35s):
And, and like when opportunity knocks, when that Blackberry started buzzing, you better get your heinie out of bed and get to it.

1 (1h 6m 43s):
Christina Tosi found her milk bar, Christina <inaudible>. I spoke with Christina Tosi two years ago at the town hall in New York city. And since then she's been keeping pretty busy milk bar has launched its baked goods and ice cream at stores across the country. And just recently to mark the final episode of Ted lasso season two milk bar gave away for free the shortbread style biscuits that had become kind of a meme on the show. The cookies were only available for like a day, but Christina's version of the recipe is of course find-able online.

1 (1h 7m 23s):
Thanks so much for listening to this live episode of how I built this. This episode was produced by Rachel Faulkner and Candice Lim with music composed by REM team Arab, Louie. He was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Sequoia Carrillo. Our live events team in New York was Jessica Goldstein, Ellie Prescott, Ellen Jorgensen, and Andy Huser. Our production staff includes Casey Herman, JC Howard, Julia Carney, Elaine coats, Ferris safari, Liz Metzger and Harrison BJ Choi. Our intern is Katie cipher. Jeff Rogers is our executive producer I'm guy Roz, and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.

0 (1h 8m 5s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Charles Schwab last year taught us. We don't know what tomorrow holds, but Schwab knows that successful financial planning can propel net worth by 2.5 times find easy flexible planning options and more at schwab.com/plan.

6 (1h 8m 26s):
The world seems like a more confusing place than ever these days.

7 (1h 8m 30s):
Good thing. NPR has two daily podcasts to help you make sense of it

6 (1h 8m 34s):
Up first in the morning, to bring you up to speed

7 (1h 8m 36s):
And consider this in the afternoon to put the day in context each in less than 15 minutes. Listen, wherever

6 (1h 8m 43s):
You get your podcasts.