1 (0s):
Support for how I built this and the following message come from American Express. You want to build your business? They can help build your business with financing solutions for eligible business customers the powerful backing of American Express don't do business without it terms apply visit American Express.com business.

3 (24s):
I remember the very first pitch day which was a PowerPoint of graduated to Kina. But like we had a PowerPoint of like clip art because I didn't have the things. I remember being so embarrassed. So I had like this 15 slide pitch deck that just sold a hope and a dream and we pitched 56 TV seas and folks were turning this down and it wasn't until they started to push back that I realized. Hmm. They just don't get it.

1 (1m 0s):
From NPR it's how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm guy Roz and on the show today have a lifetime of shaving with products that irritated his skin inspired Tristan Walker to build a better shaving and Beauty brand for men and women of color Walker & Company. So what are the guiding principles of creativity is that some of the very best ideas come out of sheer frustration products like honesty or Clif bar or all Burns or Dyson?

1 (1m 43s):
These all came about because their Founders couldn't find the beverages or energy bars or shoes or vacuum cleaners that they wanted so they invented them but in the case of Tristan Walker, I think it's safe to say that he didn't just start from a place of mild frustration. He actually started from a place of being fed up even angry because for most of his life he had felt completely ignored totally overlooked whenever he walked into the Shaving aisle of a drugstore virtually all the big shaving Brands were making products that worked well on men with relatively straight hair, but Tristan couldn't find a high-quality razor that worked on his curly facial hair without leaving razor bumps.

1 (2m 28s):
Over his neck and jawline and he knew that like him many African American men were dealing with the exact same problem. So he decided to design bevel a shaving system with a simple single blade razor that was easy on his face and he wanted everything about the product to look and feel great not like the dusty boxes of shaving products for African-American men that always seem to be on the bottom shelves of the drugstore and his ambition to build a black-owned and Lead consumer brand as big as Johnson & Johnson or Procter & Gamble, but of course when he first tried to raise money from all those VC firms on Sand Hill Road in Silicon Valley, he got a lot of NOS, but eventually he was able to launch his company with the razor some shaving cream, but of oil and a brush and over the past five years, his brand has grown to include more than 30 specialized hair and beauty products for men and women which are now sold and lots of Retailers across the country a few weeks ago Tristan, sat down to tell me how he did it in front of a live audience at the Lincoln Theater in Washington DC.

1 (3m 40s):
Thank you. This is like Tristan Walker Central. I'll take it. So to let's start let's start at the beginning tell me about about your childhood. You you grew up in

3 (3m 51s):
Queens the way I like to describe it is, you know, I had a bit of The Rose That Grew From Concrete story. I grew up in Queens New York projects welfare belts of homelessness that sort of stuff right and I realized very early I had one goal in life and I was a good as wealthy as possible as quickly as possible. I realized three ways to do it. The first was to be an actor and an athlete that didn't work. The second was to work on Wall Street that didn't work and the last is entrepreneurship. And then thank goodness. I came to that realization

1 (4m 28s):
we Little boy your dad died. He was killed him. He's killed get and you grew up with an older brother. And your mom. What did your mom

3 (4m 37s):
do yet for work? So my mom worked three jobs. Mainly New York City Housing Authority Administrative Assistant. She spent some time working for Time Warner Cable and she did some retail all at the same time within seven days. I don't know how she did it. She did it thank goodness for her. It was not easy, but she persevered as a result of I think her perseverance. He had the Good Fortune to be first graduate college in my family, and she she really perfect.

1 (5m 13s):
What do you remember about like your neighborhood growing up as a kid? It was it. I mean, I don't know. What did you do? Did you

3 (5m 20s):
you know, it's funny. I I didn't do much because I couldn't do much like my father was killed when I was three years old. I don't remember too much about him. In the fact that he was killed when I was three years old, which is a little bit telling too kind of the type of environment that I did grow up. And so, you know, I lived probably the first six seven years of my life in Jamaica Queens New York 40 Projects and the time I turned around seven years old. We moved to Flushing Queens to another project kind of development and it was much of the same. Right and my mother was like you're going to be the one you're not going to go through this stuff. This is very disciplined. Stay home. You get your studies done. You're not going outside when I snuck outside. She caught me I got in a lot of trouble but you know, that was really kind of my life right get to school get home.

3 (6m 7s):
Do you work repeat? And you know that discipline actually you kind of got me to where I am

1 (6m 12s):
now with school easy for you as a kid.

3 (6m 17s):
Yeah good student. I was a good student because of the discipline that was inspired in me. I always excelled right I tended to be at least up until high school anyway. At or near the top of my class, you know, and I kind of slowed down when I say that stuff because by the time I got to high school, I realized I didn't even know what a verb was right. I went through this entire kind of time all the way up until my high school years doing really really well and top of my class not even knowing what the verb now and that sort of thing

1 (6m 47s):
was as a teenager you ended up going to this really elite private boarding school Hotchkiss in Connecticut.

3 (6m 59s):
So the way I like to describe Hotchkiss is the first time I got to see how the other half lived. I went to school literally with Rockefellers Ford's right and I learned a couple things first name mattered to being wealthy wasn't same as being rich and the last and probably the most important was I can compete with each and every one of them while while I didn't know what a verb was I learned and you know by the end of my four years there, you know on a roll like that sort of thing, you know, it was an absolutely just wonderful experience for me but transformative in a little bit different from how I grew up

1 (7m 47s):
was it I mean was the transition for you when you got there because you were what like

3 (7m 51s):
14 years old. Yes. I've been living away from home since I was 13 14 years

1 (7m 55s):
old and were the first few months that hard for you

3 (7m 58s):
academically. Yes. We get to the school and I realized I don't even have a computer and you know, all of my other classmates at computers that sort of thing and yeah, I went to believe is the English Professor who is my advisor at the time and I remember he took me to like this basement where all the use textbooks are and then there's this old Compaq like prayers Aereo computer that we had to like haul out and take it to my room. So academically was very tough because I wasn't equipped with the tools to compete but over the years that kind of accelerated

1 (8m 32s):
away. So you finish Hotchkiss you go to Stony Brook University New York to study economics, you know, most most college students don't necessarily know what they're going to do. But did you have a sense of what you want to pursue their and what you what you thought you would do

3 (8m 45s):
after yeah. I mean, I was always thinking about the after I wanted to get wealthy, you know, I was I was pretty singular in that hope very singular in that hope and you know over time that's kind of morphed and changed and the things that are important. Morphed and changed but I knew like I was very very very focused on how to get there and Wall Street was the next greatest option all the Silicon Valley stuff. I had no idea about my world was New

1 (9m 10s):
England. So you were thinking I'll do this degree and I'll go into finance.

3 (9m 14s):
That was your that was the amine economics is the closest degree. We had at Stony Brook to get into Wall Street. Yeah, and in between my first and second year of University, I got an internship at Lehman Brothers and their back office halfway through I said, you know, I want to try some of this front office stuff. So I left that and joined trading desk at the time just observing.

1 (9m 38s):
So when you graduate you went actually went to work for Lehman and then as a traitor, right and then a bad and and eventually JP Morgan in and that time at that time period did you still think this is what I should be doing? Like this is my sort of path

3 (9m 55s):
to was the worst two years of my life. This is 2005 when I joined the company and as a Trader your job is to make money with other people's money to at the end of the year make money for yourself. Like there's just no fulfillment in it. Yeah. Now I should also say I wasn't really good at it. But even if I were I realized that there was an emptiness in it that I just couldn't live with and also the culture wasn't one that I wanted to be a part of and the last thing I'd say in all this and I observe this and not only a lot of friends that I had but also a lot of folks who have been around for 20 30 years in the industry is you know, all she had a good way of locking you in.

3 (10m 43s):
They pay more money. They pay you more money and they pay you more money and at some point your opportunity cost gets so high that you don't want to let you're unwilling to leave and fortunately and kind of unfortunately at the time I got laid off at a time that made me not have to think about that.

1 (10m 59s):
You were laid off by JP Morgan I want yeah. This is the middle of financial crisis. So actually is right before so

3 (11m 6s):
here's the blessing and this is a true Testament to Faith. I got laid off in January of 2008. I was applying to Stanford for business school. I applied there in the fall of that year and fast forward. I started Stanford September of 2008 crash happens a month later. Wow,

1 (11m 29s):
so you get to Stanford and from what I've read like you didn't really have a sense of what Silicon Valley was and what the tech world was or any of that at all. So what did you like? What was your impression when you got there,

3 (11m 41s):
so Stanford I got there's 2008. I was 24 years old and very quickly. I knew it was where I needed to be primarily because I saw the other 24 year olds, not only making millions of dollars but fundamentally changed in the world and like how come I had no idea about this place. Seriously, you know, I thought Silicon Valley was a place where semiconductors got made. All right, that's it. Right, right. That's it. This was before kind of you know, Facebook became what it did to Claire B&B Twitter Airbnb Uber all that stuff right Foursquare. And I said, wow, I can participate in this and I started to have that kind of Hotchkiss moment again, right?

3 (12m 27s):
This is something new but I can do it

1 (12m 30s):
while you are a student at Stanford you start to reach out to for square like this. I mean what what what's the story? Like, what was the FourSquare the time

3 (12m 41s):
for square? Location-based app at 10,000 users at the time. It was getting me to explore my city is getting me to do things that I didn't want to do is get him either go to the gym more right? I was like how is this thing actually inspiring me and changing my behavior? And I said, wow, like I want to figure this out found the founders emails on the Internet is the classic story emailed Dennis Crowley the CEO founder eight times and the 8th time email me back and I'll never forget this he said verbatim. He said after all these ideas I shared with them. You know, what comma I just may take you up on some of this period are you ever in New York question mark

1 (13m 30s):
dens,

3 (13m 32s):
my wife and I were watching Lost we were binging on lost at the time. I remember this very vividly in liver and I looked around like what should I do and five minutes later I say that Really? Yes. I was planning on being in New York tomorrow. So I booked my flight that night throughout the following morning.

1 (13m 49s):
He show up at the office and you're like I'm here. Yeah,

3 (13m 51s):
and literally what happened. I was 36 Cooper Square. We're on the fifth floor where they surprised to see you. I opened the door Dennis was facing the back he turned around and he looked at me surprise is if like I wasn't actually going to come and there's this Awkward Moment. Like what does he do now? And it so happened that there were like two empty desks there. He's like, yeah go over there go over there and throughout the day and he had a meeting in a couple meetings and when he's done with it, you came over. He's like, all right. So what do you want to do? I was like, I don't know. Yeah, and you know, I said them some ideas over email around kind of signing up retailers Merchants that sort of thing anyone who's familiar with Foursquare.

3 (14m 36s):
It's very small business focused. He wanted to get merchants on the platform to start engaging with their custom. Yeah. He said our I'll tell you what sign up 30 Merchants by the end of the week and get a job and he's like, what do you want your title to be as like Business Development because it has the word business in it and I go to business school. So it makes a lot of

1 (14m 56s):
sense and how many people by the way how many people worked at Foursquare there are

3 (15m 0s):
two and a half. There is Dennis Naveen, they were co-founders and then Harry who was leading engineering but he wasn't quite full time yet, but I guess theoretically

1 (15m 10s):
so he's he gives you a challenge sine 30 businesses up by the end of the week, and we'll see what we can do and what happened

3 (15m 16s):
signed up 300 400 some like

1 (15m 19s):
that. Wow, so you end up going to work for Foursquare after you after you graduated

3 (15m 29s):
from nope is actually is in between my first and second year business school. So I work full-time at Foursquare during my second year of law school and Foursquare gave me a gift. You know because I was so early there I felt as it was as much as my company as everybody. It's like it was a family there. We're doing something completely different, you know, we had folks like Facebook trying to come after us and I felt that was energy. I loved it and I felt like my work wasn't done. So, you know, Dennis was kind enough to let me work on the west coast to allow me to get a platform for people to know who I was after I graduated he didn't ask me to come to New York. He's like, yeah, you can stay open past the company was growing.

3 (16m 12s):
Yeah, there's a lot that I had to learn to write and through that process in not only kind of kind of growing the business. What does it look like to go from two employees 250 to raise tens of millions of dollars to build something uniquely authentic. It was an education that I wouldn't have gotten the loan.

1 (16m 33s):
So you were there like, I think three and a half almost four years three years three years. So you decide that's Run its course and I'm going to do the next thing and it turns out that you either met or you knew Ben Horowitz the one of the partners of Andreessen Horowitz and he convinced you to become an entrepreneur in Residence there. How did that happen? How

3 (16m 53s):
did you meet? Yes, so when it's been alright, he's on the board for squares. They were one of four squares largest investors. I known been not very intimately. It's just kind of as board member in a new of the work that I did. So when I told Dennis that I was leaving the company Dennis reach out to the board told them that I was leaving and then been reached out to me a day or two later. He said Tristan I get it right. I understand you should not be an entrepreneur in Residence. All right, you gave me the reasons why and he said but if you're going to be an entrepreneur as a nation should do it with

1 (17m 28s):
us. And what were you going to do as entrepreneurs residents basically come up with ideas and Pitch ideas to them and Theory they would fund those ideas

3 (17m 37s):
so in as I About the job is one of the craziest jobs in the world. You get paid to think of ideas all day. He said come spend six to nine months with us to figure this out. I was like, I'm gonna stay at all nine months to figure this out being an entrepreneur in Residence. It's interesting cuz I've never met one who's enjoyed it, huh? That's myself included but it's spending a lot of time to think about things in an inauthentic way, right, you know the lesson that I learned and been taught me a lot. He's like Tristan you got to understand that you need to do the thing that you fundamentally believe that you are the best person in the world to do right?

3 (18m 18s):
Well, you have a unique proposition giving your story to solve that problem. So again, if you're doing something that's like an authentic. This is hard enough, right? You can't do that and it took me seven months to realize that I needed to do the thing that I felt that I was uniquely positioned to do and

1 (18m 33s):
that was what you were basically trying to come up with an idea that you thought they would back.

3 (18m 37s):
Well, I was trying to come up with a good idea. Idea, yeah, and the lesson that I've learned and been I have to thank him for this. He said Tristan usually looks like good ideas are bad ideas. Usually looks like bad ideas are good ideas. The problem with good ideas. Is that everybody tries to do them? Right and as a result of it, there's so many people working on the same things. There's no value to be created. Yeah, like Airbnb was a bad idea. Right right, like folks actually like renting

1 (19m 5s):
out. Yeah rooms to strangers. Yeah,

3 (19m 9s):
but they've created tens of billions of dollars in value do it. Right. It's those ideas that actually create the value

1 (19m 16s):
and and were you thinking at that time tech tech tech tech as you were in Silicon Valley was that where your head was

3 (19m 23s):
I was I was trying to do the thing that I felt was the most ambitious that would make the folks who supported me proud of what I was doing as opposed to doing the thing that I was uniquely

1 (19m 32s):
positioned. Let me let me ask you about the mean you come up with a bunch of different ideas think one was like a hair extension mail-order idea. I

3 (19m 39s):
think that's a great idea. You guys should

1 (19m 41s):
take direct-to-consumer hair extensions, right? Um, so I so at some point you come up with with this idea for

3 (19m 53s):
sorry. It's a good idea or a bad idea. But yeah, so

1 (20m 1s):
at some point you come up with this idea for a Razor to just describe first of all before you tell me how you pitched it. How did the idea come to you?

3 (20m 10s):
This is the first idea that came to me actually and it is the combination of 15 years of experience. I when I went to boarding school for high school, he was in Lakeville, Connecticut nightmares, no retailer nearby if you went, you know, if I had to shave, you know, you get the peach fuzz on your face, right? It's like, oh it's a rite of passage time and I'll never forget I went to I believe there's like a CVS type store in the area and you pick up your multi blade. Razor with the shave gel because yeah, I didn't have a father at home to teach me how to shave my brother didn't shave that sort of thing. So get home to the dorm shaved woke up the following morning my face completely broken out and raising funds.

3 (20m 53s):
I was like, what is this? I've never shaving ever. That was a last time I had shaved until I started bevel. So what did I use I use for 15 years listening for folks who are not familiar with it called a depilatory cream, which is like a chemical it's gross so folks who aren't familiar with it and you know, a lot of women are familiar with it because it's Nair. Yeah. Yeah see a lot of black men are too because that's all we were able to use. Right. So a depilatory creams is cream stick. You put it on your face. It says for 6 to 8 minutes and you just wipe it off and

1 (21m 33s):
then dissolves. It is all

3 (21m 35s):
this is crazy, right? You know the funny one of the most interesting. Is if you actually read the back of the pack the caution statement says do not use this two days in a row, right? It's something that smells it burns your face. It discovers your skin, but there was no other option and in January of 2013. I remember being fed up. My wife is fed up I said I've had to do this for 15 years. I want to shave because this is terrible. So I wanted to learn how to do it. Look. I'm not thinking about a business idea at all. Right. I just want

1 (22m 12s):
this all just wanted to you just want to just want to solve and you didn't want to get razor

3 (22m 16s):
bumps. I did not want to get razor bumps. It's not a good

1 (22m 18s):
look and the entire right the market for razors in the United States had been two three four blades, right? But that was 7 that was seen as like the it was all about a close shave. That's right,

3 (22m 31s):
but not everybody needs that, you know, I realized that are kind of trying to get the closest shave possible cause the issue Is it all right if I can do this and combine it with kind of products help ameliorate this issue for people who look like me. I know that 80% of people who look like me men or women have this issue. I know 30% of people who don't look like me have this issue. It's the worst and I remember walking in it's a specialty retail store

1 (23m 1s):
like one of those like Art of Shaving or

3 (23m 3s):
grabs. I did this a couple times in different cities just to test it I go to the salesperson and I'd say, you know, I've had to deal with this issue related to raising us my entire life. What should I use now? These salespeople are totally incentivized to take me to the on brand like multi-blade razor with the nice handle their expensive cost $150 and all that stuff and none of the stores that they do that they've always taken me to use what they recommend which are these off-brand single blade double edge safety razors that your Their grandfather's grandfather used to use right? It's like, okay.

3 (23m 44s):
Let me try it took it home use it no razor bumps on my face and that got me to try to understand why that was actually the case right and I'm not going to belabor the point too much but it turns out that a single blade cuts the hair level with the skin not beneath if I have curly hair and I have blades cutting hair beneath my skin it grows into your skin grossed and it's one clean cut. So there's no pulling or tugging or anything like that. So this solution has existed for the past hundred years, right? Just no one had the incentive to sell it because there was no more patent protection on it. And that's when I knew I had some and this was around the time when a lot of the e-commerce company started to pop up how was listening to their pitches.

3 (24m 25s):
I understood the types of companies that got funded in the types that didn't and it was just great timing to start something like this and to go back to the kind of been hard. It's thing who else in the world was uniquely. Position to share that story to venture capitalist to raise the money to do this to build Health and Beauty Products company for the majority of the world. I couldn't think of anybody else is able to do

1 (24m 49s):
that. So when you talked about this idea to friends of yours who had similar issues, we're they like this is exactly what I've been waiting for. I need

3 (24m 57s):
this I didn't have to talk to him. I had to give him a safety razor they shave and they get razor bumps the following day. This is like a first moment of truth thing that when folks woke up the following day and didn't have to have this issue. That's transformative my first internship on Wall Street, you're told you got to shave every day. I remember being mortified. I was on the trading floor. They opened the doors and is a gentleman who got up. I can't curse the kicker's he said take that bleep off your face.

1 (25m 29s):
Hmm. Wow,

3 (25m 30s):
and I was like, okay. I can't because I don't know what to use that story scales. So when you when you

1 (25m 40s):
had this idea you go to bed and what you say. Hey, this is the idea. It's to create a Health and Beauty Products company for people who look like me. Yeah, what was his response?

3 (25m 51s):
In fact been really wanted me to do the hair extensions idea. Okay,

1 (25m 55s):
and at that point

3 (25m 57s):
at that point, I knew he was in because he had he understood an Insight that folks were unwilling to down the rest of Sand Hill Road. So by the time I came to him with the Shaving idea, then he was really into it because he's like that you write like you've got it and you have a uniqueness here that can help you accelerate. Let us help you in that

1 (26m 20s):
Vision. All right, so you've got sort of sign off from Ben and you've got to start to look for money. Yeah to pursue this idea and and just just to get a sense of where you were. What was the Initial idea to just start with a razor or was it to start with a whole kind of ecosystem of

3 (26m 37s):
products? So came up with the idea January. My ninth month was April. So I knew I had to hurry up

1 (26m 44s):
your ninth month as an

3 (26m 45s):
entrepreneur Red Lodge burner residents and that's when I was thinking about starting to go out and raise money. So my thought was all right. I had this razor also had kind of set of other products there is kind of the blades priming oil shave

1 (26m 58s):
cream or did you did you create a prototype at that point

3 (27m 0s):
on you? So it's great question two things here. There's the razor in the design for the razor. Then there's the products that go into the bottle and then there's like the design for the bottle Each of which had the kind of coalesce before I actually started

1 (27m 14s):
pitching you need some seed money for that,

3 (27m 16s):
correct. So, you know, it's car before the horse kind of thing right in order to kind of start what we did you need like two million dollars to do it. Right? But I knew that there are things that I can do to get that 2 million dollars to do it. The first was on the razor design. I actually found Some folks who are ex idea wonderful brilliant brilliant folks my pitch to them and their pitch to me was as follows Tristan for this razor we can do it. We will design six types of razors that you can select from if you decide to choose one you just need to pay us $10,000 to do it. But if you don't then we just get to keep these designs. So it's like okay.

3 (27m 57s):
Let me have these designs. I could put it in my pitch deck right? And if I raise the money to get your $10,000 then for the kind of oils and creams that go into the bottle. There was a website that actually had a list of all the private label manufacturers in the country. I click on the link. I point my finger out to the screen and I find cosmetic specialty labs in Lawton, Oklahoma. I call them up and I say I'm thinking about starting this concept. I think it's going to be great. I could potentially have the backing of all these kind of See,

1 (28m 32s):
this is a company that made like lotions and shaving creams and he's like that. Okay,

3 (28m 36s):
they did it for small companies and some big as well. Right? And she said great like I can get you these samples for free. Like let me make you some samples for free. I didn't have to pay for any samples. Now that never happens right like never happens. So by the time the end of April comes I have designs for razor like a hard good. I have formulations for the soft goods that I need and then one of my best buddies, he's one of the best package designers on the planet. He helped me with some initial designs for what bevel could but

1 (29m 6s):
this was all on paper. You didn't have any physical like prototypes

3 (29m 10s):
yet, correct,

1 (29m 12s):
but that would allow you to make the pitch deck to show what it could look like

3 (29m 16s):
kind of the pitch deck. Actually. I remember the very first pitch deck which was a PowerPoint of graduated to Keynote. But like we had a PowerPoint of like clip art because I didn't have things. I remember being so embarrassed. So I had like this, you know, Pitch deck that just sold the hope and the

1 (29m 34s):
dream and I mean you at this point this is like 2013. Yes. Was this the thing the first thing since I don't know you graduated college and then we really got you excited that you thought this thing could have

3 (29m 47s):
legs. It was the first time I realized that I saw something that people like other people didn't they didn't see now it has some of that for like Foursquare but it was the first time that something came to me that I actually had a comparative advantage based on my just being right like 15 years of experience of trying those terrible products, right? And I knew that I can compete here with kind of some of the best Venture Capital firms on a plan, right?

1 (30m 18s):
So so at this point before you even have a prototype, right, what was your sort of value proposition because there were products on the market for razor bumps and you could get shaving cream that was designed. To ameliorate that issue but what was the problem with those products and your view?

3 (30m 38s):
Here's my pitch. I would walk people through this story. I always have to go to a retail store at their retail store. You have aisle 15, I'll 15 if you look up it says ethnic Beauty aisle, the ethnic Beauty aisle is always next aisle 14, which is beauty aisle. It's never made any sense to me. I have to walk down that aisle and the ethnic vdi which is never really a towel because the shelf and then there are products and packages that are dirty with kind of old folks in it from the 70s with like Jheri curls on it and and and this packaging is not changed we lat.

3 (31m 19s):
So here's what's really really interesting. This is exactly what I tell people. I walk them through this whole story in the VCS laughs and the first slide that I show them our photos of the packaging they all shut in right Because it hasn't changed. I don't Photoshop those things now. What's the pitch folks the color spend more money and every single Health and Beauty category than anyone else folks of color or especially when you consider black folks and one of them the most culturally influential demographic group on the planet when we think about folks of color not only will be the majority of this country in 20 30 years. We are the majority of the world, right? So if you're a VC, right, why wouldn't you invest in that and it wasn't until they started to push back that I realized.

3 (32m 7s):
Hmm. They just don't get it that we're are afterthoughts. Right and that's just a testament to complacency and I can compete when there's complacency

1 (32m 18s):
just to understand. I mean essentially what you were saying was look there is a an opportunity here to create really great beautiful products for a market. That just is totally underserved. Like was that what you

3 (32m 33s):
wanted I have the graph was up into the right. I had the kind of beautiful inspiration and all that stuff, like look VC say they want Founders that they've worked with in the past that have pedigree and experience with a blue ocean opportunities like check check check check check and folks were turning this down. But having this is from

1 (32m 54s):
curious about you're going there you're showing them the numbers you're saying. This is a you know, there's a trillion dollars or whatever. However much money there is when it comes to Consumers of color in the United States, this is a market where African-American man. Quickly or spend women are spending more money than any other group in the country and VC's were saying what to

3 (33m 17s):
you razor bumps. Not a problem. Go figure. Literally. Yeah. I had one BC was like, oh yeah. Is this like that that Chris Rock movie with good hair like it's like literally--this.

1 (33m 30s):
No, but I mean, I'm curious you would hope you would sit with VCS and presumably most of them were men must them were white men. That's right and people are saying this is not something I've ever heard of as a

3 (33m 42s):
problem. Yeah, they just didn't want it to be a problem. I mean and it wasn't only kind of the white man who's like folks of color to and we pitched gosh 56 TV sees it, you know, like Silicon Valley particularly Venture capitalists who are investors who've never operated before almost have this really interesting kind of worldview that you know, they're always right, but you also have to realize Is it's their job to be wrong 90% of the time? And I had to realize that very very quickly. Maybe it was the case that they just haven't caught up to the concept yet, but they will you know, we spoke to 60 of them there another 60 behind that like we're going to figure it

1 (34m 27s):
out. Did you would you get irritated during pitch

3 (34m 29s):
meetings? Oh all the time. I mean like those Chris Rock comments used to piss me off, but I knew like every time they were saying no, I knew that bad idea was good as hell. Like I

1 (34m 40s):
said, wow, why did you what was it do it was because intuition. No, I

3 (34m 43s):
just knew if they were turning them down. They're not going to find anybody else that was trying to do this. Like if anybody else like if anybody else was qualified to do this, it was me. We didn't have any competition in still don't count. You know, he gets to some point where even if folks wanted to go and Pitch this idea they say well, let's see if Tristan's works first by then. It's too

1 (35m 7s):
late. I'm curious like for people who have straight hair right? Most of them most men. Right here. Don't think about shaving they shave and then they go to work and whatever were you sort of trying to explain to to investors? Like this is a really big issue. This is like something that black man men of color don't talk about but is sort of painful. I mean, I think there's even

3 (35m 30s):
bigger. It's me my trying to explain to people that people are different, you know, and that wasn't even registering, you know, if you can't even level set there, you know, you're gonna have a pretty steep uphill battle.

1 (35m 47s):
When we come back in just a moment how Tristan Walker finally launched his shaving subscription box and eventually got his products into retail stores and how that led to maybe the most Transcendent moment ever experienced by anyone in a target. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Support for this podcast comes from American Express director of global sales strategy Chase Hines explains how American Express works with their customers to find the right Financial solution for their business. It's a lot like solving a puzzle.

1 (36m 28s):
Each customer is different. Each business is different. We really want to understand what your goals are for the year for three years out and what would extra financing do to help you achieve those aspirations. One of our customers is a long-standing family-run restaurant and the sons dream was to open up a second location finances are a little bit tough as they were just running the business and we were able to partner with him understand exactly what he needed and help

3 (36m 54s):
them open up that second location and now they're on to their third.

1 (36m 57s):
So whether it's a need to open a second location or fulfill a big New Order, we want to make sure that we're there for you along that Journey American Express wants to help you move your business forward with flexible financing Solutions chat with them. A to see if you're eligible or visit American Express.com business to learn more terms apply. All right, Professor McConaughey. Are you ready for an ask me another challenge? Alright, alright. Alright everyone. It's a fear Eisenberg in this episode. We talk with actor Matthew McConaughey. Listen to NPR's ask me another the answer to Life's funny or questions.

1 (37m 41s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2013 and after eight months of trying to raise money Tristan finally gets a handful of investors to invest in his idea for bevel a new subscription Razor Company primarily for African-American men. He's got about two and a half million dollars a preliminary design for a razor and some ideas for the shaving products to go with it. So you have the seed money. Where do you go next? Where do you get the manufactured? Who do you call

3 (38m 13s):
so add the pay him 10,000

1 (38m 15s):
dollars the the design firm $10,000. Okay,

3 (38m 17s):
I went on the razor and then as far as the soft goods manufacturer, we started manufacturing. They're actually

1 (38m 24s):
with that good that

3 (38m 25s):
company specialized. Yeah, we went through for each of the products for five different kind of prototypes until he got to something that we were excited about her

1 (38m 32s):
some how did you know about I mean, you know, how did you know what ingredients to use shea butter? Cocoa butter? I don't like how did

3 (38m 39s):
you so a couple things number one? Light on Experts, right so they had actual

1 (38m 44s):
scientists at their

3 (38m 45s):
rights, right and then my own experience like a black man who needs to deal with these issues who knows that there are certain ingredients to help ameliorate these issues for us. So include those things Shea Butters the teacher URLs of salicylic acid the witch hazel I call that stings right soften skin and the wonderful thing about like what we have built is that we've just developed things that solve problems and it's not rocket science. We just pack your shit together in a way that's delightful and works. We haven't kind of traveled around the world to find that ingredient that's like in the earth's right that we like put into the bottle know these things exist.

3 (39m 25s):
We've packaged it in a way that is proprietary to the needs of the audience that we serve and we've continued to do that for the past

1 (39m 32s):
experience. And so for people who are familiar with the blade just describe what what it what it looks

3 (39m 37s):
like. Yeah. So a double edge safety razor is Think about this kind of single blade that has kind of two different sides is very very sharp. Right? So you take the single blade. How is it within a safe head? That's why they call it a safety razor. So there's two different plates one up top one at the bottom, right you squeeze it together blades in the middle and you attach a handle to it. And now

1 (40m 1s):
you can shave and you shaved straight down 30 degree angle 30 degree angle.

3 (40m 5s):
That's right. So that actually started the mass-market Shaving industry back in 1904 1905. There's this guy that

1 (40m 12s):
was looking Gillette. That was a

3 (40m 14s):
razors were that's right. That's right. That's what raises were. That's what razors still are today. If you find them and use them but efficacious enough, so attaching a handle to ahead and shaving with it, you know, we know it now today is just razors. It's just the amount of blades that you bring along with

1 (40m 33s):
it. I read that you were really like interested in like the whole unboxing experience right? Like when you get an iPhone, it's so beautiful. It's simple you just pop off. Top you open it up. No instruction book. It's seamless it's clean. What was that sort of your idea of what you wanted a

3 (40m 48s):
trailer. I wasted a lot of money on packaging boy. Look. I mean I felt if we were going to deliver an experience to folks who have not been treated. Well, we have to wow them with that experience. We went through like 10 12 different prototypes of amount of suction that like comes up when people lift the top box from the bottom. It matters when folks kind of lift it up and it takes that kind of two and a half seconds lift up and they see this beautiful razor underneath that's something that they deserve and those ten to twelve prototypes had to happen.

1 (41m 30s):
What do you remember when you when you got the first shipment and you saw this idea in

3 (41m 34s):
your head funny knox's the first shipment actually froze on a truck because we we were doing the manufacturing and December and you know use fulfillment in Oklahoma right like that sort of thing and a few of the trucks actually had things freeze on it. So before we kind of shit we had to do like another batch run in order to deliver to

1 (41m 58s):
custom this was going to be a subscription model from the very beginning

3 (42m 1s):
subscriptions in the beginning. That was the thing that actually got me to get the funding that I needed because a lot of these VCS were subscription subscription subscription and what

1 (42m 11s):
it was like Harry's and Dollar Shave Club. What were they? Out in the world at that

3 (42m 14s):
point. I believe Dollar Shave club's and in the world at that point Harry's launched a little bit before we

1 (42m 20s):
did and so there was this sort of sense you're saying there was a sense among VCS or there was excitement around a subscription model is the Commerce.

3 (42m 28s):
This was like Warby Parker day. Yeah, but no bows right like that sort of thing. So, you know fortunately had good timing because that kind of fell out of favor very quickly, but we started with subscription in the subscription model worked for us because you know, we wanted to build that habit, right? You got to keep shaving and we had this promise we had this clinically proven solution that would work if you use our product for the first four weeks, so it naturally lend itself to

1 (42m 53s):
subscription. All right, so you've got all of these boxes made and it was the razor was going to be a system right razor shaving cream oil a brush, right, but you had two million dollars. How do you get the word out, you know marketing

3 (43m 6s):
budget? Yeah, so funny enough, you know, when you build something that works people talk about it that first moment of truth. When you don't wake up with the razor bumps on your face, you're going to talk about it even today well over half of our customers come organically

1 (43m 24s):
a friend is like you got to try this razor. Right? Well, I mean now I'd like Nas is wrapped about it and stuff. So that helps. Yeah so bad out. But but before he didn't

3 (43m 33s):
ask him to do it, but before we talk

1 (43m 34s):
about the fade in the blade, yeah, that's right. Um, how did you get I mean, okay day one, you gotta sell the products. You got a website. How do you get people to to start buying it?

3 (43m 44s):
So I I've been fortunate particularly from my Foursquare days because we did so well and had a whole bunch of publicity that sort of thing. I was building relationships with journalists from way back

1 (43m 56s):
when so you have a net a little bit of a network.

3 (43m 58s):
Yeah, and like the thing, you know Walker companies had a ton of press that we're very very thankful for but I was speaking to gentleman who's written a number of articles about us around like why is it that we've gotten so much press and he's so, you know, I Tristan, You don't kind of treat journalist transactionally, you know like you build relationships with them. So by the time you're actually working on things they want to talk about it. So we've launched with a whole bunch of folks that were willing to talk about it. It was a time when we're talking about diversity and Technology, right? So not only did I have this new company that had raised money. I had my not-for-profit that was thriving at the

1 (44m 39s):
time and you're not a not-for-profit. We should mention it was a code 20 40 was nonprofit to help train black and Latina X coders. Yep

3 (44m 49s):
to get internships in Silicon Valley get them full time off for his mentorship and that sort of thing and that's continued to thrive.

1 (44m 56s):
So you had some attention from that we

3 (44m 58s):
had ton of attention from that. So it's hold a cohesive story that folks are willing to continue to talk about and that's the little push that we need and the rest is came from people using the

1 (45m 8s):
phone and we're sales brisk right away, or was it sort of a slow slow

3 (45m 12s):
climb, right? I mean we Between the first and second year third year, I think are kind of growth rates to 300% first year two hundred percent the seconds and then we started to get into this where we couldn't raise money. So it started to slow

1 (45m 27s):
down but in but before that point, I mean you started to attract more more money, right? Eventually you raised I think almost 30 million dollars.

3 (45m 34s):
There's 39 million dollars and The Story Goes and I tell a lot of entrepreneurs this I wish I didn't raise a cent of it every single problem that I've had at. The company was a result of our having raise money

1 (45m 47s):
because growth they

3 (45m 49s):
expected the thing we have to realize about stick roof there thing about raising money that a lot of people forget is you got to return it

1 (45m 57s):
and they want it fast.

3 (45m 59s):
I mean, here's I would go and kind of pitch. I wanted to build a company that was around a hundred fifty years from now. I mean that VCS have a 10-year Horizon that leads to some interesting board conversations, right? Yeah, and we weren't ready for the growth and raising more money particularly in a world where your competitors are raising hundreds of millions of dollars like 39 million dollars a lot of money, but not when your competitors are raising hundreds of millions of dollars, right VCS weren't going to fund it if they didn't see kind of more opportunity and more things, right? Oh, you're just a subscription company subscriptions. Not hot. Right.

3 (46m 40s):
I need to see more Innovation more distribution that sort of thing. So we accelerated kind of you know, you started with the shave system. Then we launched this electric trimmer and then we launched this hair care brand delivering solutions to this audience. Now, my biggest mistake is launching each of those things too quickly. Hmm, and that got us in this, you know, now you're managing to Brands right 36 different. Crazy supply chain, you got to Market etcetera.

1 (47m 11s):
And how many people were working at Walker & Company was elf 12. And what was your life? Like was it just like non-stop grind grind grind.

3 (47m 21s):
It was hard. I mean we as wearing multiple hats right? I'm the CEO of a company chairman of the board of that company new father two year old at the time. This is challenging. It's a lot of work being a CEO is the worst job in the world, but the most rewarding one and I can't think about anything else I'd ever do

1 (47m 45s):
one of the things that you that I noticed you did which were really reminds me a lot of like away the new case of travel comes suitcase company and glassy a the makeup company is it wasn't just a product that you were selling and you had websites you had find a barber you had Barbers and do videos you had bit videos of man using the razors and testimony of how these really beautiful. He owes and kind of men talking about how you know, this is the thing that I have been waiting for ya. I mean was the idea also to kind of build a self-care sort of Lifestyle

3 (48m 22s):
brand. Yeah, six months before we started and started shipping. We actually launched what was called at the time bevel code level code. Is this kind of online digital magazine talking about styling grooming for men of color. Think about this for a second. You know, I'm 35 years old right now. I still to this day do not know where to go with the exception of level code as a black man to know what moisturizer to use for my face. GQ Esquire, all that stuff. It does not exist. And we're serving kind of this consumer by telling these stories not only with moisturizer to use for your space. But what it's like to feel like when you wake up with razor bumps on your face, you got an interview that morning, right?

3 (49m 5s):
Like these are stories that need to be told need to be scaled and people should hear it because it's

1 (49m 11s):
real you I think by 2015 to the deal with Target. We're at this point you it was you could get the razor's you get the products at Target. So it wasn't just mail-order. It was just direct-to-consumer why I mean was it was that a sort of a shift in the

3 (49m 29s):
model or yeah, it's a huge shift. So we started distribution in February 2016 the way we got there. Yeah. I'm pretty involved in with all of our customers. I read all of our consumers success tickets. You can rate US from one to ten How likely you are to recommend the product to friends and then you could write your review of like the In it. So I remember reading it one day. There's one guy you can see the email of the person. I'm not going to put his name was first name dot last name at target.com wrote this glowing review. He was a subscriber of ours for a long period of time to customers beneath that first name dot last name at target.com glowing review.

3 (50m 9s):
He was a customer for even longer. So it's like mmm, what do I do here? So I go to LinkedIn. I realized like alright the first gentleman he actually was running personal care for Target at the time. He was a Stanford GSB graduate and a black man. It's like I'm gonna hit you up.

1 (50m 27s):
Wow, and then so this is just like tote like just like Serendipity certainty

3 (50m 32s):
and then the gentleman that was to beneath him. He ran the shave category at Target

1 (50m 39s):
wow, true story and you know them

3 (50m 42s):
and about a month later. We met three months later. We were in the store. Wow. But that was

1 (50m 50s):
only because you were paying attention to the cock like

3 (50m 53s):
right if I was not reading those things we would not be in Target

1 (50m 56s):
right now and how important it Target become for your sales

3 (51m 0s):
retail now is the majority of our business. Well, it became really think about marketing. It's a billboard for our brand and I think more important it was a statement for the movement that we were trying to create. So let me kind of give you a quick story and this is probably the proudest moment of my entire career so far. My son was two and we started distribution and Target February 2016. It's like all right, I'm gonna take my son. This is going to be like one of those momentous occasions, right? I got father takes that and sees the product. He's in the cart. We turn into the shave. I'll I get down about a quarter of the aisle and all of a sudden I hear my son.

3 (51m 41s):
Say Dada, right so I turn around. And I'm on one of the packages. I'm on the razor box. Your face is under the faces on the box and he saw me on the box and I realized two things at the time first. This is his first time ever in a retail store. Now, he's a two-year-old has no idea about it. But his first experience in retail is not down this like ethnic Beauty. I'll write the fact that he's a black child black will be black man who is deserves this experience in his getting it but even more important he realized that like or he will realize that he can also produce rice. And not only is he a great consumer, but can be a great producer for an audience that needs to that has gone under served for so long.

3 (52m 27s):
So I say and thank I thank Target for the movement push because that story needs to be scaled and it wouldn't have happened otherwise and it's getting scaled as we

1 (52m 43s):
speak. So Target essentially takes a product from just being a direct to consumer or a product that would have been in the egg cooker Hood ethnic aisle, and it's in

3 (52m 52s):
the made a bit and they made the right bet so. All

1 (52m 58s):
right. So you guys are steadily growing you've got this growing product line. You you're starting to gain momentum things are exciting and you sell the company. Yeah

3 (53m 10s):
in 2003 and

1 (53m 11s):
2018 Procter & Gamble buys the company for an undisclosed amount of money. Now my read of this I think a lot of people hear that and think okay, that's your exit and you walk away and you're you're swimming in cash and goodbye. And but that's actually not what it was. Why? Why did you sell it to Procter & Gamble when you were gaining

3 (53m 36s):
momentum? Yeah, 2018 is a crazy year couldn't raise money.

1 (53m 43s):
You could not raise money not raise money because they just didn't believe in the

3 (53m 48s):
it was the most acclaimed films. I think you start to get into a weird vicious cycle when you're raising money, you know, if there's one investor who's Link to kind of give you the money other investors aren't willing to do it. And if you're not raising the money, you can't kind of spend as much on Innovation marketing anymore, which makes it harder to raise my like you get into this like really weird cycle as a result of that also in 2018. We had to lose some really wonderful folks right kind of lay off like it because we couldn't get a company needed to thrive and this is all happening as like revenues are still kind of like growing it's like this weird thing anyway at the beginning of the year, we started to get a ton of interest from all the

1 (54m 30s):
cpgs. The big companies unilever's and Johnson Johnson, whoever they were I can't see can't say right

3 (54m 36s):
but a lot of the big companies and you realize you know, if you're starting to have these chats you better be serious about it because it's going to take a lot of time away, right? Yeah, so we came to the conclusion. All right. We're in this row. We can't raise money. We have this hundred and fifty year Vision. We want to serve this audience continue to kind of do what we can but in a way that's kind of lubricant pet itive in. Ember August September of last year Procter & Gamble came knocking on the door and we realized very quickly our values aligned Procter & Gamble reaches 5 billion people every single day five billion people around the world use their products every single day the majority of whom of people of color, right?

3 (55m 17s):
They came to us and said Tristan, we believe in what you're doing the way you touch these consumers the way you speak to them is unique. It's authentic. We still want you to be an independent company. We will not touch you but get to leverage our access to five billion people billions of dollars of research and development to do what you do right and, you know fast forward a few months later. We close the deal. It only makes me now think about the things that I have to do every day. I no longer have to worry about going out and raising money right being distracted by that

1 (55m 48s):
because they will invest back into the

3 (55m 50s):
company. Correct many Procter & Gamble has been doing this for a hundred and eighty years, right? The thing that like is really really important for me is that We are set up in a position to maximize our ability to serve Procter & Gamble set us up to do that. And that's really all that. I care for

1 (56m 7s):
women interesting because in the beginning of our conversation you talked about your goal in life was to become wealthy. It sounds like that was changing because you could have kept the company and grown it and maybe become a billion or whatever but it sounds like that that ceased to be your that's right. It didn't it wasn't about being wealthy.

3 (56m 30s):
Yeah. No, I mean I that Shades very quickly when I had my first son. I have two sons now and my kind of definition of ambition changed that moment when I took my son to Target and he said dad made me think about the world in a different way and kind of the goal that I have now, you know, I reflected back on this when I was 20 years old and I think right when I was 30, like what did I want? Right, you know the house right the wonderful wife the children. I don't need anything else anymore, right this idea of like more money won't get me anywhere. Like the thing that I care most about is being virtuous human a virtuous person so that my son's know how to live this world virtuously right that matter.

3 (57m 20s):
When you oh and one other thing I should say just so you folks know you talked about this idea of not really being an exit what the movement means Procter & Gamble has been around for a hundred and eighty years and I'm the first black CEO in the company's history United impact effect means for the world and like what we can do and the investment in that is very very important

1 (57m 42s):
when you were acquired by Procter & Gamble. You also told them by the way, I'm moving this company from Silicon Valley and I want to run it in Atlanta Georgia, which is where you are now based. Yeah. So tell me the story

3 (57m 56s):
why? Yeah, Atlanta I think is the most important city in the country right now. It has one of the fastest growing economies in the country you think about diversity particularly upward Mobility black folks in the country. I'm raising two black boys in this country and kind of there. Ability to see upwardly mobile black folks matters to me and my son we lived in Palo Alto for some time. He had wonderful education right with no diversity and that really started to impact me Walker and Company needs to be in Atlanta.

3 (58m 36s):
Most of our customers are there are highest revenues are their culture happens. There. It is the city and they've embraced us with wonderful open arms and Procter & Gamble has been incredibly supportive of are moving there,

1 (58m 51s):
which is what we can do a whole conversation about black Tech leaders in Atlanta and entrepreneurs. How what is your vision how put this into context? How big do you want this thing to be? What? Do you want Walker & Company to be in 10 years from now 20 years from now.

3 (59m 12s):
Yeah. We started this chat. We talked a little bit about Hotchkiss Rockefellers and Fords. And again, like I saw that there was purpose and name right and Procter Gamble, you know, a lot of people ask well. Why did you put your name on it here? That's kind of selfish and I think I did because there's an accountability there. Right and I want that accountability to this walker name to mean something to mean something for an audience that deserves to be served as first class citizens. So, you know, what's my goal in the next 10 to 20 years to be put in the position where I can ask that question of myself again for the company, right?

3 (1h 0m 0s):
This is a company that needs to be around a hundred and fifty years from now. I want this to outlive me and I will be around for as long as that

1 (1h 0m 7s):
takes you want in a hundred fifty years for people to say Unilever Procter & Gamble Johnson Johnson Walker &

3 (1h 0m 15s):
Company, I want people to say Procter & Gamble Walker & Company

1 (1h 0m 26s):
Tristan when you reflect on your journey, how much of all this do you attribute to your intelligence and your hard work and how much do you think it was just luck? It's faith.

3 (1h 0m 39s):
I I've learned 2018 was a trying year. I don't know if I told you this we it it was the first time that I realized that. Good season's end in Bad seasons end and you know, we like it's time. I moved to Atlanta and my last kind of session with like a therapist. I was working with I started with her in June of last year. She said Tristan man, you've come a long way when we started you weren't thinking about selling the company.

3 (1h 1m 21s):
You weren't moving to Atlanta. You weren't having a kid, right? You didn't do kind of like the layoffs you had to go through at the time like all this stuff happened all the same time in the only thing that got me through it was knowing that I had a faith that was strong enough to get me to the end of that season. And now I'm in this like wonderful season of like immense bouncy, right like Procter & Gamble has afforded our ability to really Revel in that but also know that Seasons going to end which is fine. But I know now that like my faith will get me to the next one and the next one in Next one. Do you feel lucky? I feel fortunate and blessed and thankful.

1 (1h 2m 6s):
Hello that Tristan Walker founder of Walker & Company.

3 (1h 2m 9s):
Thank you.

1 (1h 2m 14s):
I spoke with Tristan Walker at the Lincoln Theater in Washington DC. And by the way, if you have a minute, you should really check out some of the bevel videos. They feature tutorials tips and Men talking about their own hair care experiences my incredibly powerful and they include guys like Ryan Leslie Big Daddy Kane and The Roots MC black thought Thanks so much for listening to this live episode of How I built this our show was produced this week by JC Howard with music composed by rumty. Narrow Bluey our Live Events team includes Jessica Goldstein Ali Prescott Ellen Jorgensen and and huether. Thanks also to Julia Carney Neva grandson has Mexican poor and Jeff Rogers are interned is Sequoia Carrillo.

1 (1h 2m 57s):
I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.