edwardjones.com (1s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Edward Jones make the most of life's moments with an Edward Jones financial advisor from the trip of a lifetime to just needing some everyday advice. Life is for living let's partner for all of it, learn more@edwardjones.com.

1 (17s):
Hey everyone. So some great news because starting April 1st, we're going to be releasing not one but two episodes of how I built this every single week, but in order to prepare for that, we've got a lot of work to do to get those episodes out to you. So in the meantime, we're going to run a few repeats, including this one that was recorded in the summer of 2019, the team. And I traveled to St. Paul, Minnesota to do a live show with the founders of Angie's Boomchickapop. We all eat a ton of popcorn that night. There were actually bags of their snacks everywhere. And as you'll hear, we also had an incredible time with them on stage. It's a really fun and amazing story.

1 (57s):
So enjoy, You went to a bunch of banks and what did they say where they were, they eager to lend you the money? No, you went to bank after bank and they just said what

3 (1m 14s):
Some were more open to discussing than others. And, you know, we eventually found a partner that worked with us and lent us the money and what

1 (1m 24s):
You have to w what kind of collateral did you have to vote? You said he had no collateral. So we'll probably

3 (1m 28s):
Receivables and

4 (1m 31s):
Personal guarantee guaranteed, which was our home. Yeah. Future earnings, everything, but the minivan

1 (1m 47s):
From NPR. It's how I built this show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz. And on the show today, how Angie and Dan bastion went from popping kettle corn and their freezing Minnesota driveway to building an international snack brand worth hundreds of millions of dollars. So there's a piece of career advice that I've always struggled with because it feels a little hollow. And the advice is to follow your passion. For starters, not everyone has an obvious passion, and then not all passions are easily translated into sustainable careers, but if you heard most of the founders on this show, you might conclude that all of them pursued their passions like James Dyson, trying to build a better vacuum cleaner, right?

1 (2m 44s):
Well, in fact, they are all passionate about what they created, but for the most part, the passion came after the product came into being. And in the case of Angie and Dan bastion, neither Dan, nor Angie ever had a particular love for popcorn. Yeah, they liked it, but it wasn't their passion. At least initially the idea behind buying a kettlecorn kit was pretty simple. They needed a way to earn extra money, to save for their kids' college funds and popping and selling kettle corn seemed like a reasonable way to do it. So in 2001, after Dan literally saw an internet ad for kettle corn equipment, he convinced Angie that they should go for it.

1 (3m 29s):
They could launch it out of their garage in Mankato, Minnesota, and then, you know, sell the popcorn at little league games or in parking lots. And that was how Angie's kettle corn was born. It would be the beginning of a grueling grind, the long hours, the freezing cold days, the crushing debt and the stress on their marriage and finances. But 16 years after that kettle kit arrived, Angie's, Boomchickapop sold to a huge food conglomerate for a quarter of a billion dollars. It is like many of the stories in the show, seemingly improbable to people with no business experience, no connections, no real passion for popcorn, still managed to build an incredible company.

1 (4m 15s):
And a few weeks ago, Dan and Angie told me how they did it in front of a live audience at Ordway concert hall St. Paul, Minnesota.

2 (4m 33s):
Wow.

4 (4m 34s):
Those are our rowdy friends. These are your people.

1 (4m 36s):
Yeah. So welcome. Thank you for being here. And you want to start with you and then we're obviously get to win. When the two of you met, you grew up in Indiana, you grew up, I think, mainly on a farm in a, in a Mennonite community. Can you tell us a little bit about your childhood and your upbringing?

4 (5m 1s):
Well, my parents were very young. They were 18 and 19 when they were married at 19 and 20, when I came along and they lived in a trailer in the back of my grandparents yard on the farm and my parents met at Mennonite high school.

1 (5m 18s):
Cool. And so growing up, you went to the Mennonite church and you were really part of the Mennonite community

4 (5m 24s):
Says culturally, religiously, socially, all Mennonite,

1 (5m 28s):
Just for people who aren't familiar with, you know, with men and culture, what does that mean? I mean, obviously modesty, right? And so like, did you, I don't know, watch TV and go to movies and do all the, do all those things as a kid.

4 (5m 40s):
I had to go to a movie when I, my first movie was the sound of music. Yeah. I married a Catholic <em></em> no, it was, it was very sequestered. It was very protected. I was very loved and cared for and very simple. And I didn't know, I was an odd ball until I, you know, until I was 28.

1 (6m 6s):
And, and, and so you grew up in Goshen, Indiana, Dan, you grew up in, in Mankato, right? I mean, that's where, that's where you're from.

3 (6m 17s):
So I grew up in Mankato, third of four boys. It was kinda chaotic at times in our household, I'd say fun in a good way. Heading loving parents had an incredible experience growing up, very competitive. All of us boys played sports. So a few heads were thrown through the wall

4 (6m 38s):
Picture.

1 (6m 40s):
And, and, and where you were, I mean, tell me a little about, about your school, like where you could student in school. I

4 (6m 47s):
Love school.

3 (6m 49s):
Are you going to ask me that question?

4 (6m 53s):
No, I did. I loved school and, but I grew up in a environment that didn't necessarily encourage me to go to college. And you know, it wasn't until my, my aunt Christine in Colorado Springs said to me when I was 19, like, why aren't you in college? And I was the first time anybody in my family said that they thought I had some potential, or I believed them to think that I had some potential. Did

1 (7m 19s):
Not have any intention of doing that.

4 (7m 22s):
Well, I didn't know what, I didn't know what, you know, I just said, oh my gosh, you know, you think I could go to college? And she said, of course, you should go to college. And I enrolled, well, I, I took a chemistry prep course that summer just to prove to myself that I could do it. And I got to be, so I was like, okay, I think I can do this. So I'm going to college.

1 (7m 42s):
And then how about you? I mean, I mean, where you would, does school come easy to you?

3 (7m 47s):
No, I mean, it was hard. I probably would have been diagnosed as ADHD back in the day. I, you know, it was just hard, harder for me. Fortunately, I had, you know, my mom was really great about keeping me, keeping her finger on me to kind of get me through school. And I had two really smart, older brothers that allowed me to get into a really great school St. John's university. So,

1 (8m 14s):
And when you went, I think you said your history in college and, and was your, and then you, you finished when you finished college, was your idea to become a teacher

3 (8m 26s):
Toward the end of my senior year? I think I did a, like a month long, a little internship in a classroom. And so just love the kids. I kind of realized that was my passion and I was really good at it. And I could kind of manage the classroom how I want it to, rather than being told, you know, this is how you need to teach. And I, I think I really connected with the

1 (8m 47s):
All in a, an entirely separate universe. Angie, you went off to study nursing and you end up in, in Santa Fe, right. Or, or in gala in

4 (8m 58s):
Gallup, New Mexico,

1 (8m 59s):
Mexico. And was that to begin your work as a, as a, you were a psychiatric nurse?

4 (9m 4s):
Yeah, I was just saying I was working in Atlanta at Georgia mental health Institute, and I was interested in transcultural healthcare. And so I got a traveling nursing position, which was in Gallup New Mexico. And they had the contract for Indian health and with the Navajo tribe and the Zuni tribe for their inpatient psychiatric care. And I was like, I'm going there. I wanna, I wanna, I want to see what this is like.

1 (9m 29s):
And you also Dan end up in Gallup New Mexico teaching high school.

3 (9m 36s):
Yep. I had a family, a relative that was working at the hospital in Gallup New Mexico. And I ended up moving down to Gallup, teach at the high school and just so happened that, and was working at the same hospital where my uncle was. So that's how we met.

1 (9m 50s):
You met through your uncle, like, or he introduced you, or you just met

4 (9m 53s):
At the hospital. We met in Roger's kitchen, uncle

3 (9m 56s):
Rogers kissing.

4 (9m 58s):
Well, okay. This is, my job was broken. I had broken my job.

3 (10m 5s):
How'd you do? That is a lot to this story here.

4 (10m 9s):
So I don't know I was not eating well that to add fainted in the elevator and fell on my face and broke my job. So I was wired shut. And my friend Raymond, who was the social worker at the hospital was a good friend of his uncles. And he said, let's go over and hang out at Roger's house. So we went over to Roger's house. We hung out and my jaw was wired shut. And Dan said immediately, oh, you broke your jaw. I broke my jaw in college.

3 (10m 37s):
So when I was in college, I was playing baseball. I got hit by a line drive. And so Angie, I could relate to it. Like when she walked, when I walked into the kitchen, her jaw was wired shut. And it's like, I know what she's going through. She's blending food. She's like doing all that. So that was kind of our,

1 (10m 56s):
So you bond over this right away. There's an intense job for,

4 (11m 2s):
Right. So we, there was a group of people that lived in Gallup that just been hanging out together. You know, it's scallop is a very difficult place and a lot of people come in and work in the schools and the hospitals. And there was a group of us that were there doing that. And we would just go hang out and do happy hour every Friday night. And we kind of got, got to know each other that way

1 (11m 23s):
You start hanging out. Eventually you guys become a couple. And I think within like two years of meeting, you got married, right? You got married.

4 (11m 33s):
We had a destination wedding in Taos, New Mexico, where we just kind of had all at small wedding, but had friends and family come and watch us get married

1 (11m 41s):
A year later, your daughter's born 95. You guys moved to Santa Fe, right. For a brief period. And then you eventually moved to Florida. You're a young and you've got a child and two kids at the point, oh, your son was born. Your son in Santa Fe. Why did you move to Florida?

4 (12m 2s):
I just kind of said, Hey, you know, maybe it's time to get a little closer to grandmas

1 (12m 7s):
And grandpas, your family was in. My family

4 (12m 9s):
Was in Sarasota.

1 (12m 10s):
I'm sorry. So you moved there, you start working for a clinic in

4 (12m 15s):
Sarasota recovery center, which is a mental

1 (12m 18s):
Health clinic. And Dan, what did you do in Florida?

3 (12m 21s):
So I stayed home with the kids, got to spend incredible time with them. And I also, at the same time started the entrepreneurial process and we still, I started a,

1 (12m 34s):
Yeah. What do you mean by that? I mean, cause you're, you're the lead parent, right? You are at home and, and Angie, just working

3 (12m 43s):
A week, I'd go work at this golf course. And he and his mom would take care of Hanukkah and trip. What would you do at the golf course? I just slept bags and carts and I was just a car. It was, I was good at it, I guess. And I got free golf, but I started this golf business where I'd set up tournaments for corporations. I didn't get real far with it, but I only had one or two tournaments, I think. But it was, it was just kind of a good experience of Cassandra. And I had started thinking about, you know, can we do something together? Is there an opportunity to do something together? And so we had some other ideas floating through our heads and

1 (13m 19s):
You would basically kind of start to think about, Hey, you know, what, what could a business be? Like? What could it look like? This? Like ideas started to kind of enter your mind.

3 (13m 30s):
Yeah. I got a lot going through my mind guy. So I, I don't, I don't know if I was really like focused on anything specifically other than, you know, Angie and I wanted to do something together. We didn't really know what it was. We were thinking food at the time. Right. Not popcorn, but like food restaurant, co-op cafe type thing where we could do it together and we could go after it.

4 (13m 52s):
I think both Dan and I have the, have this sort of restlessness about ourselves. Like we, like when one adventure doesn't work, we're onto the next adventure. Like, let's go back to Minnesota, let's go to Minnesota. I, I loved.

1 (14m 6s):
And you guys decide, let's go to Mankato. You want it to be near your family.

3 (14m 11s):
Yeah. And so we decided to, to move back to Mankato, I got back into teaching because when we moved back, we were thinking of, like I said, opening up like a cafe or some type of food place. And we just realized it was going to be too expensive. We weren't prepared for it. So we got back into our careers. I got back into teaching and she got a job with the state hospital.

1 (14m 32s):
All right. So you're back in Mankato. And what, where does this idea for kettle corn even? How did that even happen? Like, you're going to your job. You are a nurse you're working at the clinic. Right. And you're teaching. Can I just tell you,

4 (14m 50s):
We were doing all of that. Like successfully employed everything. And yet we said, oh, you know, we don't have any savings. Like we got to figure out a way to put some money away for our kids as college fund, we have to figure out how to create something here so that we have money. Cause we both just absolutely valued education. Right? Like a

1 (15m 11s):
Six-year-old and a four-year-old or a three-year-old

4 (15m 13s):
Three and five at the time, three and five. Right. So we were like, we haven't started yet. Everybody's already got a college fund in a 4 0 1, whatever that is for cash, we don't have anything. We don't have anything. Let's do something together. And so Dan was like, okay, well we'll figure something out.

3 (15m 29s):
Yeah. So I'd go, I'd be teaching during the day. And then Andrew would, I'd get home. And Andrew would go into work at five o'clock to one o'clock. So at nighttime, when the kids were bad, I'd go online looking for different businesses and you would

1 (15m 43s):
Just search you

3 (15m 43s):
Search.

1 (15m 45s):
Yeah. And what did you, what did you come across? So yeah, like what you type things into Google, like this is early Google you type in like early Google you type in like, how can I make money from a side business? Like, what were you or your search parameters? You know,

3 (16m 6s):
I don't know. But I somehow stumbled across a site that said make thousands of dollars every weekend or day popping kettle corn,

1 (16m 17s):
Which is like a total scam. Right? How many scams actually seem like, like thousands of dollars selling kettle corn and you thought Eureka,

3 (16m 31s):
Well, $10,000 into it. We realized, ah, this is a potential scan, right?

1 (16m 37s):
No, but I mean, I mean, you sit, you see this and you think, yeah, this is cool. Like, and what are the sites say? Like

3 (16m 44s):
It just, it had popcorn and it's, I just, like I said, I said, call, I ended up in, it's probably like 11 o'clock at night. And I said, she's at work. And I said, Anch, this is something we could do on the side. I'm a teacher. We could do this on the weekends during the summers, you know, we could pop with this $10,000, you'd get

1 (17m 10s):
A pedal. It was $10,000 to invest in.

4 (17m 13s):
But I, I remember distinctly the phone call I'm in the middle of maybe a takedown or something like medication for a patient that's severe. And that the phone call your husband's on the line. So I run back to the nurses station and he's on the other end. And he says, and what do you think about kettle corn? I'm like, I like kettle garden.

3 (17m 37s):
I didn't even know. I didn't. I really, I mean, I don't, it was, I thought of it as popcorn. I knew it was kind of like sweet and salty, but I don't know if I had ever tasted it, but it looked like a cool side adventure where we can make thousands of dollars every weekend.

1 (17m 55s):
Of course, no brainer. So, so what did you do? Did you, did you order, like what did

3 (18m 2s):
We called him? And we bought it on a credit card. Like everyone else, we bought it, we got a kettle, a tent. You know, if you go to a fair, one of those outdoor kettles and all the equipment, a table, it probably wasn't worth eight or 10,000, but we, it was already a pre packaged deal that they shipped to us.

1 (18m 22s):
You. So it's a big kettle and you, and, and basically instructions on, you know, the proportions of sugar, salt and oil. No, I didn't even have that. Oh my God.

4 (18m 33s):
Was this to be fair. It was this couples out of gig Harbor. Washington's their own entrepreneur ship, sort of like they were building these kettles and these packages to sell to kettle corn vendors. Right. And they were making a business out of

1 (18m 50s):
It'll look like, is it, is it, yeah, it's like a big

4 (18m 53s):
It's like, I don't know how many courts is it? Like

3 (18m 56s):
It's, if you go to fairs, you see,

1 (18m 59s):
And that's what it was. It was, it was a hamster. Okay. And you plug it into like,

4 (19m 4s):
No, no open flame, propane open flame. It's like 500 degrees.

1 (19m 9s):
Right. So do you remember like unpacking the stuff and like looking at each other and say let's make cattle car.

4 (19m 15s):
It's exactly what we did. We, in fact,

3 (19m 20s):
No, this seems far fetched, but it works. It really works.

1 (19m 24s):
Oh wait. No. So you unpacked the, so the stuff arrived.

4 (19m 28s):
My truck pulled up and couldn't go down our alley. Our alley was too small, so it pulled up on the street outside and we had to haul these things up the alley to our little like garage that was in the alley.

3 (19m 42s):
Yeah. That first batch or five batches with the couple who had sold us the equipment, trying to figure out how this worked. So it was just, it was a little chaotic.

4 (19m 51s):
We burnt the first two batches. Right. And then after that we had it down and then we just tweaked the recipe. It was a really good,

1 (19m 58s):
And it's basically a kit. So you could go and sell kettle corn. And just out of curiosity, could you, I mean, at that point, could you just set up a tent and sell it or did you need like a permit and all that stuff?

4 (20m 10s):
No, no, we need it. We had to be, I started, that was my job to do the research, like get the, get us license, get the health department or whatever. And we, you know, we had to actually find a place that would let us pop and sell so that they could inspect us. So it

1 (20m 24s):
Was the first place that agreed to let you set up a tent, rainbow

4 (20m 27s):
Food and in front of rainbow foods, supermarket, supermarket

1 (20m 32s):
Chain, but they let you set it up in the parking lot

4 (20m 35s):
In front of the front door. And we decided to do it the night before Thanksgiving because we thought that the traffic would be good.

1 (20m 43s):
There's in

4 (20m 43s):
2001, 2001 at that. So that's November 21st, 2001. This was my first winter in Minnesota. So I, I, I decided the date that we were going to do it. And Dan was like, well, okay, don't remember 21st. Let's see what happens. And fortunately it was a beautiful fall day and it took us an hour to set up and we sold $300.

1 (21m 10s):
Let me, let me just step back for a sec. When you, Dan, I mean, your family is in Mankato, your, I guess your brothers were maybe were out of your parents, like when you said, and they said, Hey, what are you doing this weekend? You're like, I'm going to sell kettle corn. I'm in front of the supermarket under a 10. W was anybody like, that's a weird,

3 (21m 33s):
Yeah. I mean, I'm just curious. We had experienced, we didn't get into this, but there were a couple kind of crazy ideas that we had experienced mentored with before, like a network marketing gig. And so my family was probably like, here's where they go again, going again

1 (21m 50s):
Here, just harebrained idea.

3 (21m 53s):
And, and so, you know, for us, I think it was more about, you know, we're trying to kinda just, we were spinning our wheels. We couldn't figure out what we want it to do. And this was a way to get started.

1 (22m 4s):
But $10,000, I have to imagine investing that kind of money then was probably a kind of a big deal,

4 (22m 10s):
Big deal. Right? Well, 0% credit cards. Yeah. But

1 (22m 14s):
Still you got to pay it back.

3 (22m 17s):
Yeah. But we use another credit card to pay off that credit card. There was a lot of credit cards going around at that time.

1 (22m 23s):
And so you start selling the popcorn. The first time you, you, you set up a tent, you sell $300 to the popcorn and are you bagging in like Ziploc bags and just no twist, twist tie bags. Okay. And you're just hand scooping it and selling popcorn right. Is like an amazing, like the, the difference in what you pay for the kernels and what you can sell the popcorn for right. Is it's a nice margin.

4 (22m 47s):
People told us no one would pay $3 or $5 for a bag of popcorn or kettle corn or whatever. But they did. They did cause it's

1 (22m 55s):
Really good. So 300 bucks you come home, what's the next step?

4 (23m 0s):
Let's do this again. Like, I mean, it felt, I don't know, it felt exhilarating a little bit, you know, that like we're in business now, like we're actually doing this.

1 (23m 11s):
You were still teaching, you were still doing your, what would you see your students like on the weekends? Or would you see, you know, folks from the hospital?

4 (23m 18s):
Yes. And they would look at me like, what are you doing? Right. I would have, like when I was in the clinic in the afternoon, I saw patients, I was a nurse practitioner. So I was writing prescriptions and making referrals and then I'd run home. And I changed into my kettle corn clothes and go to the, go to the local baseball game or with Dan or whatever. And we may kettle corn. And sometimes my clinic patients would be at the amateur baseball games and they would come up to the table and look confused.

1 (23m 51s):
Yeah. Because you were just writing a prescription now you're selling them.

4 (23m 55s):
Yeah, exactly. And my message was, you can always be more than one thing in life

1 (24m 0s):
And you can, you can . So you got a license, you got a tent, you got a kettle. And what were you calling the company at that point? Kettle corn cafe. Kettle corn. Okay. Got it. So 2002, you take the winter off cause you can't really sell it outside.

4 (24m 21s):
We did pop in January in the snow because there was a girls' basketball tournament at Minnesota state university and they didn't have any concessions. And so we said, here's our opportunity. You have

1 (24m 32s):
To do it outdoors. Right.

4 (24m 34s):
So we put the tent outside the garage and it was snowing and we just put the sides up and we'd pop it outside and deliver it over to the

1 (24m 42s):
All right. I think it was that summer of 2002, where you basically started to sell kettle corn at the Minnesota Vikings training camp. Right. So what, how did that happen? Did you just like go there and set up? You asked them assuming if you could go and set up a tent or no, you didn't. And when you asked, would they say, yeah, you have to pay us a certain amount of money if you want to set up outside here or

3 (25m 11s):
Yeah. I mean, so with the, with the Vikings, I had a former college classmate of mine that was a assistant athletic director at the college at Minnesota state university. And he opened the door for us to set up our tent at, at the training camp. And, and I think there may have been a fear commission on that, but we thought, I mean, that was a huge opportunity for us to make, make some extra money. We thought that

1 (25m 37s):
We are going there to see the players train. Correct. So you start selling popcorn there. And I guess one of you has this idea. Let's, let's send the players, the team popcorn.

4 (25m 51s):
Yeah. Right. Like let's leverage this opportunity because Dan, like most Minnesotans are huge Minnesota Vikings fans, but I didn't understand it yet. Cause I had just moved here, but he was like Minnesota Vikings, everything all about it. And, and you know, it was at the time of Randy Moss and Dante Colepepper and you know, that like all that, that era. And, and he was like, wouldn't it be fun if the players ate our kettle corn? And we were like, well, let's figure it out. Let's figure out how to,

1 (26m 22s):
So what did you do? You, you just made tons of bags of kettle corn. Just,

4 (26m 26s):
I made a few phone calls just to see if we could give it to them. And we waited and we waited and we'd call back. No, we got a phone call back. And they said, so we hear that you have some kettle corn that you want to give the players we'll take it as long as it's free. So we were like, okay, don't give it to them for free. So we popped 120 bags and send it over to,

1 (26m 50s):
And you didn't even know if the players ever saw it. It was just in the locker room and in summary.

3 (26m 55s):
So we, so they came, the sales marketing team came over and more or less offered us a contract on the spot because the

1 (27m 1s):
Players loved it

3 (27m 2s):
So much. Yeah. And I think, I think the sales people at the Viking saw it as an opportunity to bring in another company to another sponsor because it wasn't like free to pop kettle corn for the Vikings. There was a fee involved and we didn't really understand that until we got really excited and then all of this.

1 (27m 23s):
So they came to you, they said, Hey, we have a great opportunity for you. You can be the official kettle corn of the Minnesota Vikings, but it's going to cost you a sponsorship fee,

4 (27m 33s):
$8,000,

1 (27m 34s):
$8,000 to be the official

4 (27m 39s):
Either. It would, they, they, they said preferred

3 (27m 46s):
The costs more for a fee. The word

4 (27m 48s):
Cottesmore for official. Oh

1 (27m 50s):
Well,

4 (27m 51s):
But we said, we're going to be official.

1 (27m 54s):
All right. So you are starting to sell in front. And so this is like football season. You're going there every weekend to, in front of the stadium, tailgaters, not inside the stadium. Right. Just in front. And, and were you, I mean, would you selling a lot of category? Are you doing well?

4 (28m 12s):
We're selling. I mean, every Sunday we get up at like 5:00 AM, pack the trailer and the, and take our equipment up and we'd be up and ready to go by 9:00 AM. They had a party on the Plaza on Kirby Puckett drive in front of the Metrodome and there'd be a band. It doesn't matter if there was a blizzard or if it was 10 degrees or zero degrees, the party was still on and we popped kettle corn. And it was

1 (28m 37s):
Just the two of, you

4 (28m 38s):
Know, we had friends come and help us volunteer

3 (28m 41s):
Friends and help audience right now.

1 (28m 44s):
<em></em> and I have to assume, I mean, your costs weren't that high, right? It's salt, sugar, some oil and corn, right. Corn kernels. So we're but so when you were probably making some money or, but not too much money, like a little bit of money or were you actually, was it, were you starting to be able to save for this college fund? Not

3 (29m 11s):
Really.

4 (29m 14s):
It all went back in the business, we bought a trailer, we bought more equipment. We bought, I don't know a heater for the, you know, I don't, I mean, it's just, everything seemed to go back into the business.

1 (29m 25s):
So w was this a kind of a turning point where you start to get attention? Because I think within a year or so, a local supermarket chain in Minnesota approached you and said, Hey, you know, do you guys want to sell your popcorn here in our stores? Is that, is that it happened?

3 (29m 42s):
Well? Yeah. So we started after a couple of years of being this outdoor event company, we started realizing like, this is not something we want to do for the rest of our lives. I mean, we, it was, it was, it was an opportunity to reach people, but we thought, you know, is there another way to get our kettle corn into people's hands or miles? It was cold, right? It was, Hey, exactly. And, and so when we started in 2003, two years into it, I, I quit teaching and I started focusing on the business and she was continuing to work. Full-time supporting the family as well as helping in the business. And we met with the local grocery chain, Lunds and Byerlys, and they said more or less, get your act together and come back and talk to us, get nutritional panel, get packaging, you know, twist ties, don't work in grocery stores,

1 (30m 38s):
Get

4 (30m 38s):
In your garage

1 (30m 39s):
And packing the popcorn with twist ties and cellophane bags. Right. So what did you do? How did you, how did you start?

4 (30m 46s):
Well, we just said, we'll get our act together and we'll you see us again? And it took us six months. We found a small kitchen. We bought some equipment, we moved the operation indoors and got that, that kitchen licensed. And we came back in six months.

1 (31m 6s):
And what is your packaging look like at that point? It was,

4 (31m 9s):
Oh, like a clear Cielo bag with a label that we, that we would pay

1 (31m 14s):
Manually by hand, your kids are doing wow. So you are still doing this by hand and you were sealing the bag.

3 (31m 22s):
So Annika trip and Angie and I, and whoever else we could find would do these labels

1 (31m 29s):
Every night, you'd slap on w what was it called at that point?

4 (31m 32s):
Well, we called an Angie's cause somebody said, you got to name your PA, you got to name your product. Cause it can't be kettle corn cafe. Right? Like, so we didn't know what popcorn was called really. So we went to the grocery store and we looked online. And what we saw at the time was in the grocery store, it was Orville, it was Vicks. It was a cracker Jack poppy, cock Dale, and Thomas, Harry, and David. And I just turned to Dan and I said, where are the popcorn women?

1 (32m 1s):
<em></em> when we come back, how Angie's, kettlecorn eventually managed to get into trader Joe's, even though it almost didn't and how it eventually spread just about everywhere. I'm guy, Roz, stay with us. You're listening to how I built this from NPR.

USAFacts (32m 24s):
This message comes from NPR, sponsor, USA facts, working to make government data easier to access and understand on their free website, chief product officer Richard coffin shares the inspiration behind their founding USA. Facts was Founded 2017 by Steven Connie bomber, who really wanted to understand where government was spending money so that they could, they could fill in the gaps. And after a couple of years of painstakingly going through government data, we realized that just should not take this long for people to understand the state of their country and numbers, To learn more, go to USA, facts.org

Bubble (32m 60s):
Support for this NPR podcast. And the following message come from bubble.io, a no-code platform that enables you to build launch and scale real ideas and products without investing thousands of dollars on engineers or wasting time trying to code it yourself, join over 1 million builders and use bubble's drag and drop tool to develop and launch custom interactive multi-user web apps in hours go to bubble.io/npr. And the first 500 listeners will get their first month free on any of bubbles pay plans

8 (33m 34s):
This new year life. It wants to help you succeed because everyone needs a little help being human. It can

4 (33m 40s):
Seem so overwhelming. You're not alone. Who can I

8 (33m 43s):
Commit to being, if you want to do something and just do it, just take that first step. Great advice every week, listen to life kit from NPR.

1 (33m 60s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this high rise. So it's the early two thousands and Dan and Angie, it started to get their popcorn into a few local grocery stores in the twin cities. They're still doing most of the popping and bagging and delivering and barely making enough money to hire anyone. But then they find two people who seem to be willing to help out.

4 (34m 23s):
Well, we, we hired Don and Jeanie. We're retired T third grade teachers and they helped us out. They were married, they retired, they just wanted to do something together. And they said, we don't care what you pay us. And so we said, well, we could pay you $8 an hour for both of you. And they said, sure. And they were amazing. They would do demos for us in one store while we would be in another store. And, you know, over time we were able to pay them more. But they said yes, because they were kind people and they wanted to help. I mean,

1 (34m 59s):
At this point, you know, 2004, 2005, I mean, how are you financing this just through the sale of popcorn.

3 (35m 7s):
Okay. I don't know. I, and I I'm, I'm not sure. I mean, yeah, we were probably going further and further in debt, to be honest with you. I mean, it was just a continual

4 (35m 21s):
Totally chaotic, totally chaotic. And just doing, doing, doing, I mean, we used a lot of credit cards. We funneled all the money back in. There was a time when I think we had enough credit card debt that a family friend came to us and helped us. He was an accountant. He looked at our books and just said, you know, why don't I just give you a loan here? And we can relieve your credit card debt and you can pay me back, but I don't want to see you going on vacations and spending money at the golf club. I mean, that's fine.

1 (35m 53s):
And you're like, okay. I mean, that's, that's, that's the question, right? It's you, you started this out to create college funds for your kids. And it sounds like for the first seven years, you just buried yourself further and further into debt. Like they weren't going to call it. They were never going to go to college on this plan. Right.

4 (36m 13s):
And the other thing is we have a misunderstanding that when you have your own business, you you're, you know, you own your time that the opposite is true. The business owns your time. Like we were like, how did we go so wrong here? I mean like,

1 (36m 29s):
Was there ever a point in that in the first five or six years where you were, you're thinking, what are we doing? I mean, we're in debt. We're working like all the time.

3 (36m 39s):
It was hard. I mean, it was, it was really, I mean, I think early on, you know, it's just, just takes over your life.

1 (36m 49s):
Did you guys fight

4 (36m 50s):
All the time? Yes, we did.

3 (36m 54s):
Yeah. And maybe that helped us.

4 (36m 58s):
We're not ones to spare words with each other,

1 (37m 2s):
But I mean, how did you, Angie, how did you compartmentalize? Like you're dealing with patients who have serious mental issues and then you're like,

3 (37m 10s):
, I was one of those patients guy,

1 (37m 18s):
And then you are pivoting to kettle corn.

4 (37m 20s):
Okay. You wait at the end of the day. I mean, even though all of that stress is there, we're both pretty tolerant of each other. We S we were committed to each other and both of us are pretty kind people. So we, we gave each other some latitude in, in the whole situation. And we just, you know, I think we both just said, we're, we'll be fine. Like, we'll get through this. We'll be fine.

3 (37m 47s):
It was really hard to refocus. And to realize that, you know, we got to keep moving forward here because we're, you know, knee deep into this. And, and we have to find a way to continue to grow it. Not really understanding where it was going or what the outcome future outcome was going to be still.

1 (38m 5s):
All right. I think it was around 2008. You had to get a loan to get a much bigger space, think like a million dollar loan. And you went to a bunch of banks. And what did they say? Were they, were they eager to lend you the money?

4 (38m 23s):
No, they were not

1 (38m 25s):
Eager. Even though you had, clearly you, you had revenue coming in and

3 (38m 31s):
Yeah, but we had debt. We didn't really have any collateral. And I mean, looking back now, I, I, I can kind of understand bank's position at that time where we were, and it was just, it was a long journey. It was really hard as

1 (38m 46s):
To bank after bank. And they just said, what? Yeah. And we

3 (38m 48s):
Had communication with some, you know, a variety of banks and some were more open to discussing than others. And it was just, I think ultimately we just weren't strong enough in a strong enough position for them to lend us a lot of money. We needed a lot of money,

1 (39m 5s):
The money for a bigger facility to ramp up production,

3 (39m 9s):
Because we had just, at this point, decided to move into a brig, bigger facility at 25,000 square. How many

1 (39m 14s):
People are working for you at that point?

3 (39m 17s):
Probably at that time, 2006, seven, maybe 20 ish

1 (39m 22s):
Or so full-time or mixture

3 (39m 24s):
Mixture of both. But, you know, we eventually found a partner that worked with us and a bank and, and lent us the money gave you the money. Yeah. It gave us the money and gave us a line of credit.

1 (39m 37s):
And what did you have to w what kind of collateral did you have to buy? And you said he had no collateral,

3 (39m 41s):
You know, probably receivables and a personal guarantee.

4 (39m 45s):
So guarantees, which was our home. Yup. Future earnings. Yeah. Everything. But the minivan,

1 (39m 55s):
Because you know, you, your kids are getting older and you guys are in your forties at this point. And, you know, for a lot of people, that's kind of a turning point too. You start to think about, okay. In college and all these things. And was any part of you nervous about that?

3 (40m 11s):
I, I don't, I don't think yet. Ha when you make that decision, like if you start going down that path, you're going to crack. Cause the bottom line was, people loved our product. We just had to figure out how to make it better, more efficiently and how to get it into more stores. Yes.

1 (40m 29s):
But did boot, I mean, I imagine there was probably a little bit of frustration, right. Because people would probably come up to you and say, oh, you guys are Angie's. I love your kettle corn. It's awesome. You guys are crushing it or so it's so great. And meantime, you're struggling financially. Right.

4 (40m 44s):
Can I just say like, when you, when you don't have any real money to start out with, and all you have is ambition and potential and skills, you count on those things, you know, to make your way through, you know? And so we never really had any money and we did all kinds of amazing things in our lives, you know? So if this whole thing went south, we'd owe a lot of people, a lot of money, but it wouldn't stop us from living our life.

1 (41m 10s):
Did you feel the same way, Dan?

3 (41m 12s):
Yeah, I, I, I'm pretty, I have a pretty high tolerance for risk and debt. I mean, it was about, you know, if we had money, let's put it back in, let's grow, grow, grow, grow. And that wasn't the scariest part. The scariest part came the next spring of 2008.

1 (41m 31s):
This is trader Joe's when trader Joe's.

3 (41m 33s):
Yeah. And so, but before, so we had, we were just very persistent with traders and we ended up getting,

1 (41m 40s):
How did you even get to trader Joe's?

3 (41m 43s):
A lot of phone calls and a lot of product being sent to the buyer. It was, you know, I think finally the buyer got sick of me and like said I finally got ahold of her. She was in her office, Marcy was her name. And she like said, all right, what do you got here? I've tried popcorn before. It's not going to work. And I said, you haven't tried ours. You know, it's that line that all of us use is that we have the best product. And anyways, she, she liked it. She said, all

1 (42m 11s):
Right, did you send it to her? Did you go out there?

3 (42m 13s):
No, I sent that to her. Right. And so we, she agreed to bring us on

1 (42m 19s):
What was the order that she put in. She

3 (42m 21s):
Put in an order for 25 trucks,

1 (42m 23s):
What does that mean? How many bags of popcorn is

3 (42m 25s):
That that was what four or $500,000 worth. It was crazy. It was.

1 (42m 30s):
And that would go all across the country and every trader Joe's. So she, and this was a one-time

3 (42m 36s):
Well, we didn't know she was going to try it. And we obviously, we had some problems with some clumping that first order, and she immediately called and said, fix it, or we're kind of done. And, but at the same time, the scariest part was our line of credit for $150,000 had run out and we didn't have any money

1 (42m 53s):
To buy, see you for

3 (42m 54s):
30 or 60 days. It wasn't going to be paid until later in June or July or something of 2008 and you had to deliver it, but we had to buy the supplies

1 (43m 3s):
And then you have enough money to buy sugar and corn. And

3 (43m 7s):
So that was terrifying. It was like, we were this close.

1 (43m 11s):
How much did you need?

3 (43m 12s):
Well, there was a credit card that came through the mail, it just another credit card. And it said call for a hundred thousand dollars. And I got on the phone one night and said, can we get this a hundred thousand dollars wire to us? And our credit was good. And so they wired us a hundred thousand dollars at like

1 (43m 35s):
A high percentage, probably

3 (43m 37s):
I, and so that allowed us to get to check thing.

1 (43m 46s):
Oh, like when they send you a check that says, sign this, you get a hundred thousand dollars. I don't, I don't

3 (43m 50s):
Remember, but it was in our bank account quickly. Yeah. And

1 (43m 53s):
Start paying attention to those checks in the mail. I didn't, I didn't realize those are real. Okay.

3 (43m 59s):
So once we had that, we could pay our staff, we could buy supplies and we could, it would tie to sober until we got paid by traders. And then traders came back with another order of like 25 trucks because it was going bonkers. And then that that's when we turned the corner.

1 (44m 15s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Angie and Dan did a complete rebrand of the business and why they rejected the name, boom, Chicka pow, stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this.

Shopify (44m 36s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, Shopify, the all-in-one commerce platform to start, run and grow your business. Shopify gives entrepreneurs the resources once reserved for big business so they can sell everywhere, whether it's shopping in person online or across social networks with integrations and apps, Shopify powers, millions of businesses from first sale to full-scale go to shopify.com/built all lowercase for a free 14 day trial

ZipRecruiter (45m 7s):
support for this podcast. And the following message come from ZipRecruiter. According to research, 90% of employers plan to make enhancing the employee experience a top priority in 2022. And if you need to add more employees to your team, there's ZipRecruiter, ZipRecruiter's technology finds the right candidates for your job and proactively presents them to you. You can easily review these candidates and invite your top choices to apply. Try it for free at ziprecruiter.com/b U I L T.

1 (45m 50s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this guy rise. So it's around 2008 and things are looking up Rangi and Dan, because trader Joe's has just ordered another 25 truckloads of popcorn, but that also means the business has to scale up quickly and hire a lot more people.

4 (46m 9s):
We were fortunate to look to hire people during 2008 when the economy was sort of in the tank. And so there were a lot of people looking for,

1 (46m 19s):
And you guys were not that affected by the economic downturn,

4 (46m 23s):
And this is dance sort of strategy. It's when, when things are going south, he's going north. You know, so

3 (46m 29s):
I think we, we just knew that there was opportunity out there. Cause a lot of big companies were pulling back during the recession and we were getting vibes from stores and from warehouse, Costco and others that, Hey, there's an opportunity here if you're willing to invest because others are not. And so we went for it at that time and, and kind of said, we'll do this, this, then we kind of said yes to everything. And we had, because of that, we had to hire a lot of people quickly to work in our plant so we could manufacture enough to ship out.

1 (47m 2s):
So you are starting to sell that. I mean, you're really, this is selling well at trader Joe's. Do you remember what your revenue was in 2009,

3 (47m 11s):
Maybe three, 4 million.

1 (47m 14s):
So pretty great. I mean, you could start to see some of that.

3 (47m 17s):
We started to realize there was a chance here

1 (47m 20s):
You stayed on until 2010 working as a nurse. What was the turning point for you where you thought, okay, now I'm going to be in this you full time. I'm going to stop. You know?

4 (47m 33s):
Well, I had, I had left the state because there was very little flexibility at the state hospital. So I had left the state and started my own contracting business so that I could contract my time and have my own flexibility and say, this is when I can work and I can't work. So

1 (47m 50s):
We'll basically supporting your family, right? Yes. Dan was not, you were not taking income from the company quite yet.

4 (47m 57s):
Yes. We had a mortgage too, you know, so that was, we were doing pretty well in that regard, but I started weaning my time back because Dan would call me and he would say, okay, we have a Costco meeting on May 12th or whatever. Can you move your clinic around and go to Costco up? Sure.

1 (48m 14s):
And when you did those meetings, like when, when you went to Costco, how did you pitch them? What would you, Dan, would you have Angie kind of be the face of the product and make the pitch, or did you make the pitch or did you guys kind of bounce off each other like you're doing now?

3 (48m 28s):
Well, initially I did all the sales calls early on. And then by the time we got to 2000 8, 9, 10, especially after that, when Angie came on full time, they wanted to see her. I mean, she, her name was on the package and she, you know, told the story really well. So I kind of took, you know, instead of just instead of doing ops and sales and everyday I kind of stayed focused on kind of the operational side, working with Greg, my brother, and kind of managing the team and, and started focusing more on working with the sales side.

1 (49m 5s):
You guys get a, an outside investment from Sherbrook capital. It's a VC firm, come in, make an offer. Did you feel at that time you needed, you needed to have that capital to, to grow in the way that you, you know, that you want it to,

4 (49m 23s):
Honestly, we didn't know what they wanted. We didn't know.

3 (49m 25s):
I really understand private equity. We didn't know. I mean, I wasn't a business person. I, I didn't know exactly how it worked, you know, and, and Stan. And so it was more of my brother, Greg, who started taking some interest in that. And he's the one who initiated the dialogue with Sherbrooke after they contacted us. Or

4 (49m 44s):
He said like, to us, he goes, you know, we don't need the money now, but if we're going to continue to grow, we're going to need money sometime. And we understood that because we had just been through years of like, oh God, we need money. Right. So, so even though we don't need it now, it made complete sense to us. And now we were in a position where we didn't need it and that's the time to go ask for it. So,

1 (50m 4s):
Oh, but that money obviously helped because at that, at that point, you decide to begin a rebrand and to introduce, to move beyond just kettlecorn. Right.

4 (50m 17s):
And they, okay. So a couple things that when they, when we decided, when we understood what private equity was about, like I had only ever seen private equity and movies and they were deconstructing businesses and they were the bad guy, right? Like, but the, you know, we, these, this private equity was a small PR shop and they had built brands and they were interested in partnering. And we said, we wanted our people's success to be, you know, success along with us. Can you help us figure out what to do? And they helped us set up a, an employee equity pool. They helped us set up a board. They helped us set up a, a professional sales team and build a marketing team

1 (50m 58s):
And a whole new, entirely new

4 (51m 0s):
Level. And it felt like, like we understood partnership because Dan and I were in partnership, you know, this whole way. And so now we just had another partner, you know, we had, we were now, our business was marrying their business.

1 (51m 12s):
And so what was the impetus to, you know, cause your kettle corn is your bread and butter, right? What is the impetus at that point to go to, you know, salted popcorn or buttered popcorn or other flavors? Was it, was it them, was it, was it other people saying, Hey, you know, we want different flavors.

4 (51m 31s):
Well, in 2011, there, there we were in the national and organic snack section. Right. So, and that's where we live Costco,

1 (51m 39s):
Costco target at this point.

4 (51m 41s):
Yes. We're in target and, and in a lot of regional grocery chains doing very well in the natural and organic section. But it, to me, when I looked at it on the shelf, it looked very masculine.

1 (51m 54s):
Look, when you're talking about other natural and again, all of it, you

4 (51m 57s):
Go to the groceries. I used to walk the stores and just stare, you know, stare at the salty snack and the natural organic snacks that were aimed at women. I thought looked like they assumed we were all on a diet. Right. And so I was like, okay, like we can do that, but we don't have to do it in that way. Right. So let's do that along with our kettle corn, let's do more let's. So we built out an innovation sort of product innovation map and started looking at innovation as more than just the product, but in the messaging and branding. Okay.

1 (52m 32s):
And did you, I mean, it's, this is also coincides with like the gluten free explosion right. Which we were still did that. Did you also, were you also able to kind of ride that wave?

4 (52m 43s):
We absolutely did. We would have mothers calling us saying, is your product certified gluten-free and we, this was early on Dan's cell phone was on every single package because that was our business. Oh, really? That was our business number. And so his cell phone would ring and it would be some moms standing in front of a Costco pallet saying, is your, is this allergen-free?

3 (53m 4s):
Well, the reason I did it, I did it early on before we were very big and I wanted all complaints to come to me. And it's just, we never ended up taking it off until

4 (53m 17s):
2011, till this private equity said, it's time to get your phone number. But yeah. So we said yes, that we heard all these mothers calling us yet. We got to get certified gluten-free. So he did

1 (53m 28s):
2011. You decide to find somebody to help you with a new name. You go to a branding agency. And what, and what, what names did they come up with

4 (53m 41s):
For really boring ones? And one that I thought we thought was interesting, it was called boom, Chicka bow.

1 (53m 51s):
Well, we laughed,

4 (53m 52s):
Right? Like every last bunch of Kapow and this, the brief was like, Hey, we don't want to be diet. We want to elicit curiosity. We want to be something different. We want to be celebratory and come from a position of empowerment. Right.

1 (54m 8s):
So this is going to be Angie's Boomchickapop power.

4 (54m 11s):
And, and we, this was the days that we were all at one table together. And we had a business analyst at the end of the table, eavesdropping on the presentation. And after the creative agency left, he said, you know, boom, Chicka pow, pow is seventies porn.

1 (54m 33s):
That would not go down well in the Mennonite church.

4 (54m 36s):
No, it would not. And we ever got we set. And how do you know? So we said, okay, but if there was energy, you know, there was energy and it, it, it ha it struck the right tone. And we just told them, go back and fix it. They came back Boomchickapop we launched it in may of 2012.

1 (54m 59s):
How did your customer base respond to the new name?

4 (55m 4s):
Well, we had buyers that said, oh, it's just awful. You know, it's, don't do

1 (55m 8s):
That confusion. Right.

4 (55m 10s):
Yes. Right. And, and we don't really like it. They don't really get it. We had people internally that said, don't do this, you know? And, and, you know, there were two of us women on the leadership. Mary Hanrahan was our marketing director and myself, and we fought like, yes, we want this because it is, we are not going to do. Angie's nearly naked. We're not going to do Angie's skinny. We're not going to do Angie's, whatever that is. We want to own something

1 (55m 41s):
Else. It's going to be fun. It's going to be

4 (55m 44s):
Creative. It's going to be dimensional. It's going to celebrate the feminine. And, you know, for years, women have bought, you know, chips and everything that had, that, you know, are marketed to men. And we don't think a thing about it. And so why not put a package out there that appeals to women? And I will say an end. It was that first non-GMO branded popcorn on the market. And it, it became our number one selling skew in four months,

1 (56m 12s):
The yellow bag

4 (56m 14s):
After nine years of business. Wow.

1 (56m 17s):
So I think around 2014, TPG growth comes in a bigger private equity firm. They buy out and, and take a pretty big stake in the company and it's real money. And I think at that point, you guys started to distribute money to people who had been with you and worked with you for a long time. So

4 (56m 41s):
Yeah, those granted equity shares became liquid for our staff. Best three days of my career

1 (56m 51s):
Probably was transformational. Right. Yeah, I think

4 (56m 53s):
So. Yeah.

1 (56m 55s):
<em></em> do you remember? Do you remember how much money you were able to distribute millions?

3 (57m 2s):
Millions of

1 (57m 3s):
Dollars? Well, yeah, and I mean that can't probably doesn't happen very often in Mankato, right? Like a liquidity, a liquidity event. I'm not, I mean, right. It's

3 (57m 15s):
Yeah, it was an emotional time. I mean, it was, you know, for everyone that had given, you know, everything to us for in the company and, and I mean, it's still emotional, you know, thinking about it, but it w it was, it was kind of a thank you to everybody. And then we got to do it again,

1 (57m 37s):
2017, 2017 ConAgra, a huge company that owns many brands buys out your company reportedly for quarter of a billion dollars, astounding quarter of a billion dollars for popcorn And the brand and the brand. I mean, talk about it. Great. 8,000, $10,000 investment fly by night, kettle corn kettle, man. Now, now we're all thinking, Ooh, I wish I saw that ad on Google with a hopping in 2001.

1 (58m 17s):
So they buy it out. And I mean, what did you even have time to absorb what that meant? I mean, were you just, I don't know,

3 (58m 29s):
You know, that the last three years from 14 to 17, when, when TPG came on, we sold a pretty big share of our ownership to TPG. I mean, I think if we had to jump out in 14, it would have been really hard, but we, we, we were had three years run where we were able to kind of slowly step back and participate as much as we wanted to, and as much as the staff needed us. And so I think when 17 came, it was the F the 14 sale was much more emotional in the sense, because it was like, oh my God, we did it. Yeah. Yeah.

4 (59m 8s):
And that whole thing about like, Hey, we, we started this to put our kids through college and have enough money. Now we're doing that for all these other people.

1 (59m 20s):
, I mean, also, I know you are a brand ambassador and you are on contract with, with ConAgra and Dan, are you involved with the company at all? Not at all. First of all, I mean, the fact that you came into such a substantial amount of, of money, has that substantially changed your lives, has it? And so how,

3 (59m 53s):
Yeah. I mean,

1 (59m 54s):
I know we're in Minnesota, no one likes to talk about money.

3 (59m 59s):
I think. Yeah. I mean, you know, we just, we've got into this later in life. And so, I mean, I'm still wearing these jeans that I've had for 10 years, so

1 (1h 0m 13s):
Yeah. Those are nice dad jeans. Yeah. I noticed those. I noticed those jeans there,

3 (1h 0m 23s):
So, but yeah, it's allowed us, it's given us an opportunity to do things that you never would have had the opportunity to do. I mean,

1 (1h 0m 32s):
Could you have imagined when you ordered that kettle and it arrived in your garage and you were like mixing in burning the corn, the popcorn like that you would go on, it would go on to be purchased for a quarter of a billion dollars, like 16 years later. Could you, could you have imagined that?

4 (1h 0m 51s):
No, no, no, never. I mean, not even, not even, probably halfway through or three-quarters of the way through, did we think about it in that way? I mean, it was just for us looking at the next horizon and the next thing that we needed to do and the next right thing that we needed to do,

1 (1h 1m 9s):
I have done interviews with co-founders, who were married before and are still married in some cases, Melissa and Doug are still married, but then there have been examples. We had an episode recently, EO products, they divorced, they kept the company going, you guys had a marriage, you, a family, you a partnership, a lot of stuff. I mean, just, just being married and having kids, right. Anyone who's who experiences that their stress, right. You argue and, and that's normal, but, but running a business together on top of that, and the business that for years and years is a grind. And just, you don't really know if it's working and the people calling their stress.

1 (1h 1m 52s):
How do you, how did you survive? How did it survive?

3 (1h 1m 57s):
Go ahead.

4 (1h 2m 6s):
You know, at the end of the day, it's about love, right? Like you just, you decide, do you love this person? Yes. You do. You, are you willing to commit to this person no matter what yes. You know, and, and think for Dan and I, we both had that sort of frame of mind and, you know, it doesn't make it easier, but I think that, you know, both he and I have this mindset that we're going to make something work, you know, by God, if anybody can make it work, we'll make it work. And, you know, I, I think it just hooks with the business and with our marriage just recommitment all the time, you know, every day, every week, whatever, whatever it meant.

3 (1h 2m 53s):
Yeah.

1 (1h 2m 55s):
Do you think Dan foresee you, do you think that what you achieved in this business was a result of your work and your skill and your intelligence, or do you think that luck played a big part?

3 (1h 3m 5s):
I knew this question was coming. I love it. You know, guy, I think there there's a ton of good fortune that has come our way. People have been so embracing and kind and helpful in so many ways. So many people, this crowd is the reason we're up here, but I, I, we put a lot of energy into creating an environment that was about giving to the consumer giving to the customer. I think there's some skill in that. I think I was blessed with the ability to interact with people and build rapport pretty quickly. And I knew the importance of that.

3 (1h 3m 46s):
And Anne had so many other gifts, the marketing side, the creative side, the initial finance side, that we were able to understand our talents and pull it together. And, you know, no doubt there was good, fortunate luck that comes your way at the right time. Things happen, a credit card mailing comes in and I mean, it's, there is there's luck involved in this. And we were just fortunate at the right time. We made some good decisions and rebounded well from some bad decisions. Angie

4 (1h 4m 18s):
Boy, you know, I've seen a lot of really good people work just as hard as us or harder and not experience the same good fortune that we've had. And so I, I think it does take, I mean, we made a conscious effort to create Goodwill and positivity. And when you do that, I believe that that comes back to you, but you can't do it without hard work.

1 (1h 4m 46s):
And G and Dan . I spoke to Angie and Dan Bastian at the Ordway concert hall in St. Paul, Minnesota. And by the way, that original kettle they bought in 2001, Angie and Dan no longer own it. When ConAgra bought the company in 2017, they also acquire that old kettle and Angie believes it is now sitting in the back of a very large storage facility somewhere in Minnesota.

1 (1h 5m 26s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to this live episode of how I built this. Our show was produced by Rachel Faulkner with music composed by rum teen era bluey. Thanks also to our live events team, Allie Prescott, Rachel McGrath, John Isabella and Andy . Our production team includes Neeva grant, Jeff Rogers, JC Howard, Casey Herman, Julia Carney, Alex Chung, Carrie Thompson, and Elaine coats. Our intern is Margaret Serino and guy Roz. And you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.

American Express (1h 6m 6s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, the American express business platinum card. Get the car that's built for business by American express.