0 (0s):
Hey everyone. So it's August, which means we are taking a bit of a break before we would turn in a few weeks with a whole bunch of new episodes. But even while we are away, we are still putting out new content every single week. My conversations from the, how I built this virtual summit and this Thursday, it's Adam Grant, the author of bestselling books, like think again and originals, he's got some really excellent advice on how to think creatively had a no when you're in a rut and how to get out of said, rut, Adam and I spoke back in may. And that conversation will be in your podcast feed later this week. But in the meantime, we're replaying my interview with logic and Chris Z from 2019.

0 (46s):
And even if you've heard it before, we can all agree that this one really is totally worth hearing. Again, it is one of the best episodes of the show ever. So here you go.

1 (1m 2s):
I met a lot of shady people who wanted to manage me. I didn't feel like I was a priority. It was a bunch of guys who knew everything and were telling me, you got to hit a girl record. You got to hit a hard rock record for the club. You got this, you got to that. And they're like telling me what to do. And I sat down with a young man who had just as much experience as I did and was prepared to risk everything, to attain his dream. And he needed me, needed me as much as I needed him. And I was like, yeah, let's like, Yolo. Like let's do it, man.

0 (1m 42s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. Hey bill, I'm guy Raz. And on the show today, how a broke rapper and an aspiring music manager with no experience teamed up to top the billboard charts and build a multi-million dollar business. So back two years ago, if he turned on a pop music station, you could not get away from this song.

2 (2m 15s):
I've been no, no, no. I've been taking my time. I feel like a matter of my mind, it felt like my life. I don't want to be alive.

0 (2m 26s):
Now, if you don't know this track, it's worth listening to the title of the song is 1 802 7 3 8 2 5 5. This also happens to be the phone number for the American national suicide prevention lifeline. This song blew up on the billboard charts. It was nominated for a Grammy and it actually turned logic. The rapper behind the track into a superstar. The song, as you can imagine is about pain, about the pain of loneliness and depression to subjects that aren't always front and center in the world of hip. And the thing about this song is when logic performs it live people in the audience break down and cry.

0 (3m 6s):
So many people connect with it in a deep and personal way. Almost like he's rapping about their exact experiences, but logic who was actually born. Sir, Robert Bryson hall, the second was writing something that authentically describes his own experience about growing up around violence and addiction without a stable home life and sometimes without anywhere to live. And the chances that he one day be performing in front of tens of thousands of people was so totally remote, but would logic could do was write music and rap. And for the most part, that's what he was doing 10 years ago in and around the Washington DC area at around the same time, Chris Saroo was a recent college graduate, struggling to find work in the music industry.

0 (3m 58s):
In fact, he couldn't even get an internship at any of the big record labels when he first came across logic, but we'll get there because the story of how logic built the brand logic is as much about his talent as a musician, as it is about Chris <inaudible> talent as a marketer. And today's episode is about what happens when two totally different people with totally different skillsets happened to meet. And just to note, you'll hear from Chris a bit later, first to logic who, as I mentioned was born, sir, Robert Bryson hall. The second,

1 (4m 35s):
My dad likes to tell me now that we have a better relationship, that he's the one who named me that, but I know it was my mom because she's like of English descent. If you go far back enough and she's an eccentric woman and she decided to name me, you know, surfers, and my father's name is Robert Bryson hall. And so she named me, sir, Robert Bryson hall, the second we're in, technically, because she added the sir, I'm actually the first, which is really funny. And whenever I have a boy, I'll name him the third, but he'll be the second.

0 (5m 3s):
So tell me about your parents. And I guess you were the only child of their marriage or their time together. Were they married?

1 (5m 11s):
They were never married. I was born out of wedlock. My mom, like the nitty gritty of it is she's just a deep, deep, deep, deep down good woman who, you know, at a young age was molested. She'd been raped growing up. She got into all kinds of drugs running around with drug dealers. And my father was never really in the picture because he was addicted to crack cocaine. So when you were

0 (5m 38s):
Little, it was just, it was, you never knew your dad. He just knew your mom.

1 (5m 44s):
Yeah. I knew my dad, you know, but I knew him as a drug addict, which is messed up, you know, but he, yeah, it was like, he'd go away for a few years and then he'd come back and he'd, and then he'd come back. And, but they were never together. That's the one thing is like, they it's really weird. I've seen my mom go back to a lot of man. She never went back to him. I never had that moment or that time of where I felt like family. So your,

0 (6m 9s):
Your mom and dad, basically, they had a brief relationship. You were you're the product of that relationship. Your dad is African-American and your mom is Caucasian. She's white. Yeah. And tell me about like where you grew up. Did you, did you grow up in a, in a house or an apartment?

1 (6m 26s):
I grew up in section eight housing. So food stamps welfare had a few hundred dollars a month from the government to live off. It was mom's mom. Yeah. I'm just me and my mom. She spent a lot of that in different times on alcohol and cigarettes. And I remember times where we'd have three and a half dollars that could have bought us some rice and some, some powdered eggs and, you know, she'd buy a pack of cigarettes. And I grew up with her saying the craziest thing. So like, I would, I was just a kid, you know, I was a hyper kid. And then if I pissed her off, she'd say things like you deserve to feel pain, or she called me or any of these crazy things because of the systemic racism that was deep down inside her, which is insane. But mind you it's like she was troubled. So I've, I feel bad for her.

1 (7m 7s):
It's not like, I'm like, oh my mom's screw her terrible woman. It's just like, was she a good mom? No. Was she a human being who had a terrible past and took that out on me and her other kids? Yes. And that's the reason she's not in my life. It's just that simple.

0 (7m 21s):
So you grew up with your mom mainly and you would see your dad from time to time. And was he, would he sort of go in and out of bed spells or was he constantly, you know, using drugs? Yeah, he was, he was

1 (7m 36s):
Pretty much constantly using drugs. You know, a lot of my childhood was in AA meetings. Like, you know, I, you know, just kind of reciting the prayer at the end of it and listening to all these people, talk about all the things they go through, which is so hard. And it's so difficult. And seeing people, you know, just kind of using again and then getting clean and this and that. And my dad was like that. One of my earliest childhood memories, I was about five and my dad, I don't know why I was with him, but my, I was with him for, I think the weekend. And my dad took me to Southeast DC and left me in a car back of a car for five hours while him and some woman, I didn't know, went to go smoke crack and this in his house, which was insane.

1 (8m 22s):
It's crazy.

0 (8m 27s):
How, how did you avoid like getting into drugs and alcohol?

1 (8m 32s):
It just really, really, really scared me. You know, I ran around it. I've done a lot of stuff. I've shot guns. I've robbed people. I've ran from the police. I've done a bunch of stupid things because I was around other stupid people because I felt that they were my family. You know, it's why a lot of young men and women join actual like real gangs. It's because they have nothing at home and here's a family who will protect and it's kind of sick and twisted because it's like, okay, we're going to hurt other people. But these people won't hurt me. So we'll hurt others together. And then at least that way I'm safe. But there was that voice deep down that was like, yo, like this isn't right. And for me, when I got into music for real and I was 18 and I was like, I'm not going to let anything hold us back.

1 (9m 16s):
My father is an incredible musician, singer, percussionist playing go-go and chocolate city DC. I mean, amazing. And I saw what cocaine did to him and, and I was like, I can't let this happen to me. So that's why I steered

0 (9m 29s):
Clear from it. Hmm. So, so sticking with music for a second, being exposed to it, I guess, as a teenager, you, you start to meet some people who kind of took an interest in you, musically, who were they?

1 (9m 43s):
Well kind of, even when it comes to music, I had a friend named Josh and he was, who would eventually go on to be my, my godmother's son. And her name was Mary Jo. And I love her and she's the sweetest woman in the world. And he kind of saw that I had a niche for wraps. I just freestyle, you know, on the block with all the, all my friends and had fun. And so he was a person that was there and a gentleman named Solomon Taylor, who was my mentor, who Solomon. So Solomon was this guy that I met when I was volunteering at RFL, which is the rock V Rockville football league just to get extra credit, to be able to pass eighth grade. So I was 13, he was 19 at the time. And he's a hustler. So basically you have all these football, I would set up the football fields and you'd have like Peewee and you know, these kids in middle school and stuff, playing football.

1 (10m 27s):
And what he would do is he would show up and how he built this whole kind of business is he would film the kids' games and then duplicate the tapes, create highlights, and then sell those to the parents, which was really amazing. And then, so we became friends and then I eventually kind of worked for him at his booth and he paid me nothing. And it taught me a lot about a lot in the winter and the freezing cold in the snow, standing at a booth outside. And this dude was there for me. He, he, he, he introduced me to, you know, so many incredible MCs. He, he, he brought me these old things called ha how to be an MC CDs, which is basically like a bunch of instrumentals, famous instrumentals of the two thousands. And he'd be like rap on these.

1 (11m 8s):
And I would literally rap on every single song. And if he gives me 10 CDs, there's like 80 beats. I wrapped on those and he was cool. And he was great. He was, he was a good dude.

0 (11m 18s):
I read that. I read that when the movie kill bill came out, you got, you got the soundtrack to that, to that film, which was, which was produced and composed by, by, by Rissa for lutein clan. And that was like a huge, like turning point for you heard this in your life. Why is this?

1 (11m 38s):
Yeah, man, that movie, like,

3 (11m 41s):
Just something about it. It was probably also the fact that my mom was like, you can't watch this. It's too bloody. And your parents say don't do something and then you want to go do it. When I heard that soundtrack, I was like, who the is the reserve? You know?

1 (11m 56s):
And like, this was like back in the time, like where it was like a pop login, drop it and do that laugh at it. It was like that like the whole south, like fun turn up music, but I wanted something, a little waiting. I'd listen to <inaudible> and, you

3 (12m 14s):
Know, outcast it UGK, like hearing those stories. So after being introduced to the rays, I've found Wu Tang clan,

1 (12m 27s):
Obviously we've all heard a sure, but I'm, you know, I'm the 14 year old kid, like I don't really know is I'm learning. And then I listen to Wu-Tang and I'm listening to Wu Tang album. And then I discover

3 (12m 37s):
Quan's only built for Cuban

1 (12m 38s):
Links. And then I discovered NAS. And then I discovered the beef between NAS and Jay Z. Like truly for kill bill, if it wasn't for the reason, if it wasn't for Tarantino. Yeah. Like we wouldn't even talk to her right now.

0 (12m 54s):
So when, when you were like RD, teenager, where you just like would just rap with friends, like just mess around and just like, you know, throw it rhymes or just try to imitate your favorite artists or, or did that come later?

1 (13m 7s):
Yeah, no, no, no, that was, yeah, for sure. Like, we would always do freestyles, but I took it seriously when I was 15 and, and I was introduced to how to record myself through, you know, a BS microphone into a computer. Like I took it seriously and I learned to emulate all my favorites. How, how does POC rap like this? How does Jay do this? How does Kanye do that? I want to rap over this boom-bap nineties beat this run. DMC B. Okay. Now I want to rap over super mainstream hit song. I want to sing like Drake. I want to do this like that. I want to, I wanted to do it all.

0 (13m 40s):
So take me back to 2007. You're 17. You leave home, you, you stopped living with your mom and you're working jobs, but you're also making music. How are you actually making music? Like, did you buy a microphone? And like, did you have a computer? And like, what, how are you actually doing that?

1 (13m 57s):
I, I was on a Yahoo messaging chat about music and hip hop. And some, some person introduced me to a program for recording. A lot of people use it in radio called Adobe audition. And I was like, what the hell is that? I don't know what that is. And this is back in the day where like this small file took probably about nine hours. The person actually was sat with me for nine hours on my computer. So they were somewhere else. It could have been Alaska, I don't remember. And they transferred the file onto my computer. There's an illegal download, a hundred percent and everything works. Right. And so I learned kind of how to use that. And by the time I was 18 years old and living with Mary Jo and had two jobs, Solomon had provided me with a PC, very strong PC at the time.

1 (14m 43s):
And a million torrented albums. I mean, from Jay Z to R Kelly, I was rapping on Brian McKnight beats like I did. And it was whatever, it didn't matter what it was. You would just take,

0 (14m 56s):
Just take like beats and like samples from other records and then just like mess around the rap over those.

1 (15m 2s):
Yeah. And I would just like loop them. I would like write the end of the beat and I had the beat and I did that with an $80 microphone in a Jerry rigged closet with a pillows around it. And, and just would just go, I would just go and go and go. I would just, and the crazy thing is I have every song I've ever created. Wow.

0 (15m 23s):
Wow. But you thought you were going to, I mean, you were like working Jiffy lube or whatever job you could get, but like you really thought I am going to make a career out of being a performer. Like this is what I'm going to do. Like, you really thought that

1 (15m 36s):
That moment came two years later. I was 20 years old and it's, before I put out my first mixtape ever called young, broken, infamous to the public on the hosting site, debt, piff.com.

0 (15m 46s):
Put you just put your mix tape out there of your own music and anybody could put, put their music on the site.

1 (15m 53s):
Yeah. Anybody could put their music on the side. I think you had to pay like 50 bucks or something to upload it. But

3 (15m 58s):
That was the time that was the moment

2 (16m 0s):
He steps into Mike. And now my catcher call me on the floor was prominent, hella dominant on salmon. It went on from when it is actually

1 (16m 9s):
A song on there called young Sinatra, which then inspired the series. So then my following the estate was in Sinatra. Then Youngson after 1, 2, 3, 4. So that's when I said I was working at a supermarket. I quit. And I was like, this is it. This is everything I'm just going to do it. Now is the time I'm young. It's okay to fail. Now. It's okay to fall down. Cause I don't want to look back in my fifties like with regret. Can you imagine being, you know, 50, 60, 70 years old filled with regret, there was that voice in my head. Like, nah, man, you can do this. And that's when I went to go live with, with Lenny in his basement and a college park.

0 (16m 46s):
You're living in a basement with a friend in college parks around 2010, 2009, 2010. Trying to understand, I mean, you decide I'm going to make, I'm going to make a go at this. Like you're putting out mix tapes and I guess you're performing locally. You're like going to the open mic stuff, but you had no money. You were still, I'm assuming you were still pretty broke.

1 (17m 3s):
Oh, you don't understand. I was so broke that I would steal quarters from Lenny's little like collection that he had. So I could go buy food. And he actually like screamed at me and was like, just ask man, like, it's all good. Like you just got, you know, I got to do his ass and I didn't have a job. I was supposed to get a job when I moved in with him. And I was living with him, his brother and his mother who passed away named Cathy beautiful woman. So amazing took care of me. And I kind of just sat down with him and was like, can you just give me a year? Like, can you just give me one? I know this is insane, but it seems like every week something new and exciting is happening. And now is the moment like, could you just give me just one year? And this was 2011.

1 (17m 44s):
So I was 20. I was just turned 21. And, and, and yet he gave it for a year. I did everything I could. And you just put

0 (17m 52s):
Out music on the internet. You weren't selling it at that point.

1 (17m 55s):
Yeah, no, it was all free. All right,

0 (17m 58s):
We're going to come back to logic and just a couple of minutes, because while he is crashing at his friend's basement, his future manager, Chris Saroo is going to college in New York. Now at this point they do not know each other. And in fact, a career in music isn't even on Chris's radar, because at that point in his life, he was laser focused on soccer.

4 (18m 22s):
I thought I was going to be a professional athlete. I played soccer, very competitively growing up all the way through high school and, and got an opportunity to play division one, which, which I thought was the first step to, you know, completing that goal. Right?

0 (18m 40s):
Where are you by the way? What, what college?

4 (18m 42s):
I, my freshman year, I played for Canisius college in Buffalo and, you know, I thought that was the best opportunity for me at the time. Very, very competitive team. Soon after that, I think after my sophomore year and I transferred in between then to play at a different school, I realized that I just, you know, I wasn't good enough. I was, I was very good, but I wasn't, I wasn't good enough to play at the higher level. So I'm trying

0 (19m 5s):
To, trying to figure out how you like made a transition into music. I mean, did you, did you just think I'm not going to do sports? I'm going to get into the music business?

4 (19m 17s):
Yeah, I was, I was 20 or 19 probably at the time when I started trying to figure it out. I knew when I stopped playing, I wanted to do something I loved and was passionate about. I think that's all I knew. So I kind of asked myself, you know, what else do I love as much as that sport? And the only thing that I could answer with was music. So I said, okay, that, that's what I'm going to do. I didn't know where I'd start. I didn't know anybody. I didn't have any relationships. So I would literally go to Barnes and noble and kind of read books on, on the music business and, and try and figure it out. And I, and I chose management because I thought it would be the least barrier to entry. And I was like, okay, if I find talent and start working with them, that would be my way into the business.

4 (19m 60s):
But you didn't

0 (20m 0s):
Think like, let me go, like, see if I get a job working for like one of these big record labels or management companies and kind of get experienced like that. Wasn't where, what you thought you should do at first.

4 (20m 11s):
I tried, I definitely tried that route. I started with internships. I, I didn't graduate college yet, so I didn't really apply for jobs, but I had almost every major record label. I applied for internships and, you know, I kept getting turned down. W one, after I actually got one interview that they actually had me come in for an interview and I thought it went great. And ultimately they, you know, they said, you know, sorry, this, this isn't gonna work. And I just remember, I emailed the woman and I asked, I actually still have the email. I asked why isn't isn't this going to work? And she told me I didn't have enough experience, which I just thought was really funny. I was going for an internship. Right. And the funny part about it, and the reason why I said, you know, I, I have the email actually printed out recently.

4 (20m 54s):
Now I'm getting it framed for the office. It was Def jam, which is ultimately where were logics logic signed to probably a year, a little bit over a year after that. All right. So

0 (21m 5s):
You're living on long island with your parents and getting all these rejections for internships. So, so what, like you decide, maybe I'll just do this on my own without an internship. Like maybe I'll just figure this out.

4 (21m 18s):
Yeah. And to be honest, I didn't have another choice. I didn't, I couldn't get an internship. I didn't have any relationships or, you know, friends or family that worked in the business that could give me an opportunity. So yeah, I didn't, I didn't have a choice. That was, that was the only pat that I had.

0 (21m 33s):
So what did you decide, did you decide to like start a business or did you just first decide, let me kind of scour the internet and see if I can find someone?

4 (21m 41s):
Yeah. I think that, that starting a business came a little bit later. I was just like, you know what, let me, let me find some talent. Let me, let me reach out to them and just kind of start a dialogue and try to build a relationship with some of them and, you know, convince them to let me manage them.

0 (21m 57s):
How did you come across logic stuff?

4 (21m 60s):
Yeah, it was, it was, it was, it was kind of by, by chance. It was, you know, I use the word serendipity. I was managing an artist, a rapper at a Philly at the time, and this was 2011. So it was very early days of Twitter, you know, and I probably, at the time fall 25 30 people. And I was sitting in front of my computer and his DJ, the Rapper's DJ that I managed from Philly tweeted out a, a YouTube link, right. There was no description. There was no anything else in the tweet. It was just the link. And I, and I clicked it. It was a acapella video of logic rapping at the university of Maryland campus.

4 (22m 43s):
And it was super, it was super low budget and poorly done. There was, there was wind in the microphone. He actually, I think had the microphone like tucked in his hoodie. There was just something about it that, that stood out to me. And I thought it was really special. And I kind of dug in a little deeper to try and find out who he was and, and reach out to

0 (23m 3s):
Him. Did you say like, I'm Chris and I'm a, a manager.

4 (23m 7s):
Yeah. I'm a manager, you know, can we, can we jump on the phone? Do you have, first of all, I probably asked him if he had management, because I didn't want to step on anybody's toes. You have to understand it. You know, I'm a kid trying to get another kid to trust me with their career. I had no, yeah, no experience, no resume. I think I pointed to some of, or one of the other artists I was working with at the time and said, Hey, you know, I'm working with this artist. We had built this so far, you know, check it out and I'd love to, to, to be involved.

0 (23m 39s):
All right. We'll just kind of reset Chris. This is what I'm trying to figure out. Like you were 20 years old and you were emailing like different potential artists, including logic at the time who was, you know, not that well-known. And, and you were saying, I'm a manager. What did you like, what did that mean to you? Like, how would you even know what to do? Like did, were there books that said, Hey, here's how to be the manager of a recording artist. Like, how did you know what to, how to negotiate contracts and find venues and record music? Like, how did you know to do any of that?

4 (24m 11s):
I, I didn't, to be honest, you know, a lot of what I was doing was, was learning as I went and I too, looking back now, I, I'm very grateful and glad that I did learn that way. Cause I think that's the best way to learn a lot of management. And a lot of the music business is very difficult. I don't think you can learn it in a textbook. Yeah.

0 (24m 33s):
And you caught, and I should mention you called your, your company visionary music group, right? Yeah. Yeah. Which is a great name. It sounds, it makes it sound like a huge company. Like you've got a big building in Hollywood visionary music group. Yeah.

4 (24m 47s):
It was. I remember I made, and at the time having to come up with a company name, it was more just to kind of, you know, I formed an LLC when I started to make money. Cause I had to be paid and I had a little, I remember a Microsoft word document with some names and I ended up landing on, on the word visionary. I thought it was at the time fitting. I think that's how logic and I, you know, looked at ourselves. I think we were doing something very different that I thought, and we thought it was, was visionary.

0 (25m 21s):
All right, Chris, we've been leading logic and alerts here cause you are sitting right next to each other logic. What are you, what do you remember about Chris? Like you were, I guess 21, this guy named Chris comes down to meet you. What was your first impression of him? Actually,

1 (25m 39s):
We met in New York city. It was my first time ever in New York. And it was just kind of happened by chance that I was going to go there to shoot a music video. I wanted to do something that was different.

0 (25m 48s):
And this was like a low budget. Right. Love video. You may even like, yeah, there's low budget

1 (25m 53s):
And then there's no budget. And that's where we had

3 (25m 57s):
Literally, you know,

1 (25m 58s):
Just a camera and you know, point and shoot as we call it. And so yeah, I go to New York and Chris had like a friend who had a rooftop and we're like rooftop, you know, that's that's content right there. So we're like, yeah, let's get a rooftop in New York. And, and we go there and the, the music video was called mind

3 (26m 17s):
Of logic. And it's like, skeleton me rapping at like 120 pounds a long time ago. Just like winging it.

2 (26m 26s):
I don't really give a damn want to do is make you want to say it. But if you don't want to listen, I guess you went up in a plan

3 (26m 31s):
After the shoot. He was like, Hey, I want to buy you lunch. And I'm like, free food.

1 (26m 34s):
You ain't going to say, say less. Yeah, I'm ready. I'm like, okay, let's do it. And so we're kind of near times square. I'm like, yeah. And every bit of time square before a like, this is great, let's go somewhere. And he's like, okay. And I'm like, yeah, there's like a Ruby Tuesday or something like that. And I'm like, let's go, man. I'm about to get a free chicken sandwich or something. And he's like, nah, you know? Yeah. I mean, it's just tourist stuff. You want to go somewhere else. And like, what I didn't realize is, you know, looking back, it's like I'm talking to a broke college student with maybe $150 in his account. Like if that, like it's got to last them the next six years of his life. And yeah. I mean, we, we talked and he was like, I want to manage you. And he was honest with me. He was like, Hey look like, I'm just getting into this too.

1 (27m 16s):
He's like, but I've made some connections. I know some people. And you know, he had met some people at blogs, different blogs, online and, and kind of music spaces where young people were excited and word of mouth via the internet was a big deal. And I was like, all right, well, I was, I didn't want to sign anything. That was a big thing. I was like, I don't want to sign anything if we're going to do this. Like, I don't want to say anything. And he wasn't pushing to sign anything either. And that's a really amazing thing because he, he allowed, he was like, oh, I'm going to walk the walk. Like, I'm going to show you that I'm going to do this. And that's what we did for about the first six months. And then we, and

0 (27m 51s):
The signs you were like, okay, yeah, we can, we can try this out, but I'm not committing to you.

1 (27m 55s):
Yeah. And I remember we released the music video and like overnight, it had 20,000 views. Now you got to understand dude, 20,000 views in 2011, I was going from a hundred views. And it was all people I knew, like to, to that, to the point where we actually sat Chris down, all of us and kind of, it felt like an intervention. And I was like, yo, what's up, man. You paying for views of what? Cause there's like back then where like people, it was a big deal because it's kind of like fake it till you make it. People would pay and it'd be, it would be fake. And he's like, no, bro. He's like, I could prove it to you. I could show you. And, and man, he, it was legit.

0 (28m 34s):
But before you get to that point, like I'm trying to, I'm trying to figure out like, you're like eating a Ruby Tuesday or whatever. And Chris was like, Hey, give me, you know, give me, give me a chance. And you don't have anyone managing you at that point. And I guess you're still not kind of an unknown artist, but what made you think? Yeah, I, I, I'm going to trust this guy with zero experience. Who's like my age, like what, because obviously we know how the story's going to end, but at that point in 2011, you did not. And neither of you knew how this was going to end. You both. Could've just like kind of fizzled out, but what was it about him that you thought, yeah, I'm going to try this.

0 (29m 15s):
I

1 (29m 15s):
Met a lot of shady people who wanted to manage me, you know, older dudes who were once kinda in the industry, you know, different people who were musicians themselves or this or that. I didn't feel like I was a priority. It was a bunch of guys who knew everything and were telling me, you got to hit a girl record. You gotta have a hard record record for club. You got this, you got to that. And they're like telling me what to do. And I sat down with a young man who had just as much as I did. And I was looking in a mirror. I was looking at a green kid who had no idea what he was doing and was prepared to risk everything, to attain his dream. And he needed me, needed me as much as I needed him.

1 (29m 59s):
And I was like, yeah, let's like yellow.

3 (30m 3s):
Like let's do it, man. Like, yeah. And that, that's what it was.

0 (30m 6s):
So at this point and, and, and logic anchors forgive me for kind of characterizing this way. But in a sense like, like logic, you were, you were the brand that the business was being built around you and your brand and your talent. And you it's like, you're the product that is, you're putting out into the world. But Chris, like when I do interviews with other entrepreneurs, it's at this point when they go out to VCs and raise money to get the product out into the world, how are you funding this? How are you, how are you having logic record music? And because I think at this time you were just releasing all of his music for free. Just, just putting it on the internet and letting anybody take it.

0 (30m 47s):
Right.

4 (30m 48s):
Yeah. And, and what we were doing, like you said, we were building the brand. I viewed that putting out free music as, as investing in the brand, right. As we were building an audience and a fan base that was becoming more and more invested. And what that means is they would later down the road, whenever we asked for it, spend the money, meaning, oh, we're going to put out our first project for sale or, Hey, we're going to put up a tour for the first time. We, you spend $12 to come see me in San Diego. Hey, we're selling t-shirts for $20. So I that's how I viewed it. We were essentially monetizing free music.

4 (31m 28s):
Hmm.

0 (31m 29s):
So, so how did you guys make a living? I mean, if, if in 20 12, 20 11, 20 12, you were putting out and maybe even 2013, like you were just putting out free music. How are you? Like, how are you guys paying your rent? How are you buying food?

4 (31m 43s):
My parents were very, very good about allowing me to live there again. I was still in school, so I didn't have to, I didn't have to worry about that. Logic was still at Lenny's apartment. So, you know, we didn't have too many expenses at the time and

1 (31m 59s):
Not to interrupt, but like I was in college park, sleeping on Lenny's couch. And you know, we were, we were still shopping ourselves. Like we wanted a deal that was like the goal. And, you know, there was even independent companies that put a contract for $1.5 million in our hand, in front of you in front of us. And Chris had it. And I remember he said something really corny. It was really funny. Like he was just excited. He was like, how much you think our brand that we're creating is worth. And I was like, I don't know. And he was like, well, somebody thinks is worth 1.5 million and mind you it's like bro, like $1.5 million is a lot of money right now. Like it's like, let alone is like some super broke young kids. And so we turned it down and long story short.

1 (32m 40s):
Yeah. We turned it down. Like it was nothing. Why? Because they wanted, I mean, first of all, we were getting screwed over on points, on royalties, on longevity. They also wanted us, they were going to take a lot of control and we were like, no, we always have to be in control because we know what we want.

0 (32m 58s):
Kind of pause for a second. Just ask you about music for a moment. Because like what, what do you think it, it is, and it was about your music that connected with people. Like it's rap, it's hip hop, but generally like, you know, you're described as, as having positive messages and, and you know, talking about things in an open way about your own emotions and about injustice and about anxiety and depression, all these things. I mean, do you think that's what was connecting with, with people even from the beginning? Yeah.

1 (33m 33s):
I think I was the, every man or every kid or every person or every, whatever it was like, people were watching me grow up like a child star, you know what I mean? Like they were, they listened to this and they hear me say, I can't wait to make it. I can't wait to have fans. I can't wait to beat a man with the master plan. I can't wait like that. And they're like, me too. Like, I can't wait to graduate college. I can't wait to, you know, raise my children. I can't wait to follow my dreams. I'm going to do that. And I'm like, follow your dreams.

3 (34m 3s):
Like, no matter what and hate is go, Hey, <inaudible>

2 (34m 12s):
Like a snake

3 (34m 14s):
Even today. Like on a mainstream level, like all, so much of the things I talk about openly from anxiety, depression, just all the, like you said, injustice, the things going on one I'm scared

1 (34m 27s):
To talk about. Or I was scared at a point, cause I was scared of how people would perceive me or this or that. But too, it's like now it's become a trend. You know, you've got, you've

3 (34m 36s):
Got, you've got rappers, hardcore rappers

1 (34m 39s):
And people talking about depression and mental health. And I ain't the first one, I think it's just time place, you know, a bit of image just there was this nerdy, young kid that other people felt they could relate to. Yeah.

0 (34m 54s):
So how soon after Chris, you started working with logic, did you say all right let's we gotta go on tour and, and, and, and did you go on tour? Yeah.

4 (35m 2s):
I'm not sure exactly how soon, but it was, it was an intuition thing, right? Because there was no, there was no metrics at the time or data that we had that said, Hey, you can sell out 30 shows across the country. It was something that we both felt, Hey, I think it, it feels right. And, and I think we could probably go, go on a tour now and how we did that because that's an expensive thing, right? There's a lot of startup capital that you need to fund a tour. We ultimately signed a record deal to fund our tour because we needed the money. I think we could have waited longer if we had some money, but you, we didn't have an opportunity to, to, to wait. And just to

0 (35m 40s):
Clarify, this is 2012 that the record deal you signed is with Def jam. Yeah. 2012.

1 (35m 46s):
Yeah. No ID comes to you, you know, legendary producer, who's, you know, new executive at Def jam and Def jam in general, like Def jam records. The most iconic hip hop rap label is willing to sign. You, give you great money, give you creative control. It was kind of like if there's a time, like now's the time and yeah. But I'll tell you this. It was very difficult. You know, looking at a check and seeing, you know, lower six figures, very lower, just six figures in an advance, which is still great. And then literally going, okay, well, you know, after X, Y, and Z takes their percentage just on my team management and lawyer, at that time, I have to put all of this into a tour. And the, and that was, that was a hard thing.

1 (36m 28s):
But it was it just as a young man who was like, oh wait, I just got this check and out, I got to let it all go, but it was worth it. Right?

0 (36m 33s):
This was your sweat equity in the brand. Basically this is like, you had to kind of put all that. So you could have gone to that tour and been broken and we might not be talking today. And that was a positive. That was a very real possibility. The

1 (36m 46s):
Odds were in that favor, that it wasn't going to happen

0 (36m 51s):
When we come back in just a moment logic and Chris hit the road, but there will be speed bumps ahead with money and mental health, all on the line, stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Simply Allmand, simply almond is the alt dairy milk you would expect from simply made with simple ingredients for an all natural, delicious taste. This almond milk comes in four varieties, original, unsweetened, original vanilla, and unsweetened vanilla.

0 (37m 33s):
It's a perfect addition to cereal, smoothies and recipes, or just pour some in a glass and enjoy discover more about simply almond at drink. Simply beverages.com. The following message comes from NPR sponsor and I with their new podcast testing 1, 2, 3, how do engineers teach AI to make human even ethical decisions in self-driving cars? Or would you get on an elevator that wasn't tested testing 1, 2, 3 explores these thoughts, celebrating the unexpected challenges that engineers and innovators face and the value of testing testing.

0 (38m 13s):
1, 2, 3 is now available at <inaudible> dot com slash perspectives or anywhere you listen to podcasts support for this NPR podcast. And the following message come from bubble.io, a no-code platform that enables you to build launch and scale real ideas and products without investing. Thousands of dollars on engineers are wasting time trying to code it yourself, join over 1 million builders and use bubble's drag and drop tool to develop and launch custom interactive multi-user web apps in ours go to bubble.io/npr. And the first 500 listeners will get their first month free on any of bubbles paid plans.

5 (38m 60s):
There are arrowheads in the walls. I'm rom I'm Randall, and we're the hosts of through light NPRs history podcasts, and for our special series this month, the best of through lines, you know, if we carry on, as we have been, this is what we might wind up with. Listen now to the through-line podcast from NPR.

0 (39m 27s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's 2012 logic and his manager, Chris Saroo have signed a record deal with Def jam, but it's hardly glamorous. They still haven't cut an album and the money they got from that first deal, they had to put most of it towards their first tour. We toured

4 (39m 47s):
The country and in a minivan and a Nissan Altima, I rented from enterprise rent a car, and I remember filling out the paperwork and it specifically said that the cars, the vehicles could not leave New York state. And we were literally touring the country and the way it was routed, we were going to California and back. So I was like, right. They'll you know, they'll never know we left. And then I ended up getting, you know, 1,000,001 tickets for, for going through tolls and all over the country. But no, it was not first-class and five-star accommodations. We were lugging garbage bags and we were, you know, selling merge after shows I'd run and sell merge after shows logic would come over to the merge booth and meet fans.

4 (40m 32s):
And yeah, so it was, it was a, it was like a mom and pop tour and we, we try to figure it out. And I had my right hand man today, my, the COO of visionary music group, Harrison rambler at the time he was in school, he was, he was 18 years old. And this was your only employee at the time. At the time he wasn't even employed. I think he was interning for me. And I said to him, I said, Hey, because I realized very quickly that I couldn't be on the road full-time and try and sustain and run the business. It was very difficult. I think I did the first two weeks of it. And I remember saying to him, Hey dude, you know, how would you like to tour manage? And he was sure, and I threw him on the road.

4 (41m 15s):
And again, we were doing terrible. We had no idea what we were doing. I, our, our accounting, my accounting system was Manila Manila envelopes. So before tour, I kind of wrote out every show. So you had Denver, Colorado, and we'd settle the shows in cash at the time that tour was actually a no guaranteed tour. So the, the risk was massive. Tell

1 (41m 41s):
Him real very quick. Cause it's something I want to say. Tell him about what happened with the money.

4 (41m 45s):
Oh, trust me. Okay. Yeah. And it was meant Manila envelopes and I'd settle and we put the cash in an envelope and seal it. We ended up finishing the tour. So I had these, I think it was 30 shows. I had 30 different envelopes and, and looking back, we just did. So I, I kept a backpack on the tour of all of the envelopes with all of the cash and we'd carry it around and we would just leave it in a green room and walk away. Now, if someone had took that backpack, that was the entire income from the, from the whole tour. So we ended up getting back and I've later put everything into, you know, an Excel spreadsheet and try and, you know, log everything. So I would take out the cash and I would count it and put it on top of them in an envelope.

4 (42m 27s):
And I was at my house at the time. Harrison was helping me. I had, I was working still and Harrison was like, yo, I got it. Don't worry about it. I'll finish up here. I said, cool. I ran off to work. And I came back. What was your job? By the way I worked at a, it was called rural. It was, it was like an Abercrombie and Fitch, you know, retail store. And after

0 (42m 49s):
Going on tour with logic, managing logics tour, you were back at the mall working retail. Yeah. Okay. Right.

4 (42m 55s):
And I came and I came back and the envelopes were gone. There was just 30 piles of cash that I had no idea what belong to what and I, and, and I called Harrison and, and I think he ended up trying to clean up. So he took the envelopes and ripped them up and threw them out. So I had, no, I had,

1 (43m 17s):
Chris was so mad. We had all this cash. We didn't know where it was. We didn't know how to divvy it. But I say all this to say that Harrison went from fumbling 20 grand or whatever. We had to juggling multi, multi, millions and millions of dollars in this company with Chris. And it just goes to show that some 19 year old 18, 19 year old kid is now this young 30, under 30 boss. And I just, I just had to show some love.

0 (43m 45s):
So basically our, your, your accounting system is jotting it on the back of a Manila envelope. And then later on inserting this into Excel. But, but you walk away from that tour in the black, you, you made some cash. Yeah, we did really well. We did really awesome. How do you, and this is a super awkward question for both of you, but I always ask us partnerships because it is part of business. Like, how do you figure out who gets paid? What, I mean, obviously logic you're, you're out there. You're the face of this organization. Like you represent all of the people now who work for visionary music group and the other people involved. And so Chris, like, how did you know how to divide that up there?

4 (44m 29s):
There's a typical is how management works,

0 (44m 34s):
Right? It's anywhere, anywhere

4 (44m 37s):
From 15 to 20% is, is the traditional commission for, for a manager. I've learned to love the commission model. The more that I've grown it's because you, you don't eat in less. Everybody eats. There's not one person at the table that has a full plate when you're starving. It's it's, that's why I've learned to love commission.

1 (44m 59s):
Yeah. And things are crazy. Now, you know what I mean, 30 plus million dollar deals here and there doing this, doing that. But you just gotta, you gotta look in the mirror and say like, well, does this person deserve it truly like yes or no, take your ego out of it. Take, take one in one, an extra mil here or there in a deal that if they had a lower percentage, but the truth is man. Like he earns every penny because he provides that with me. I don't feel cheated. I never felt that things were unfair or this or that. And we all were so open. We have conversations about it. We have talks about it. And also to be fair, when you get to my level, there are, there's, there's a bunch of different people in your pocket, but they're all there to make you money.

1 (45m 39s):
But I am always the majority. And I think that that is fair. And where you find yourself with artists who are being like taken for 70%, like it's just, I mean, that is insane as a collective. And, and that's where the music industry is really horrible, vile, and they chew you up and spit you out. But this is my friend and my brother in arms. I

4 (45m 59s):
Think that's the secret element that has enabled us to be successful for so long. Is it just, it's really simple. It's just genuinely caring about that. Person's wellbeing. And what I mean by that, you know, going back to 2012, when we had a $1.5 million offer, I knew in my gut, it wasn't the right opportunity. They were not the right partner. It was not a good deal. But if I had just suggested or advised him that we take this deal, because I didn't really care what happened to him, I wanted to get my commission and get my check and then, you know, I'm out,

0 (46m 38s):
But I did it. So, so this is 2012. It's still gonna be like another two years before you guys release your first studio record. But between that point and the release of the studio record, you still are releasing mix tapes. Where are you guys selling that? Or will you just, again, still kind of building the brand and releasing the music for free. We were still putting out for

4 (47m 1s):
Free. That tour was a massive eye-opener for us. It was what logic and I had thought we were building it. It proved to us. And I think everybody else that it was, it, it was something very real bringing out three, 400 kids in different cities, across the country from putting out free albums and free mix tapes, then selling a lot of Merck. And, and it was very, it became very real at that time. And we wanted to keep that going, because again, we were building leverage in his, in building his brand. So our thing was, we wanted to make a splash when it was his, his time for debut album. We wanted to have a really big first week sales.

4 (47m 42s):
So we, we decided to continue building and putting out free products.

0 (47m 46s):
W w what I'm trying to figure out is how did you get the word out? Like we've done, we've done interviews with like the founder of Glossier, the cosmetics brand. And she started with a beauty blog. And over time she just, you know, she built a following and then she introduced the brand of, of the products, the product line. And then we've, we've done episodes with like the founders of Instagram and how that was kind of a, a slow build. Like, how did you, how did people discover logic's music? I mean, you just, you can't just put it out on the internet and hope people will find it, right?

4 (48m 15s):
No, it was, it was, it was much more thoughtful and there was a strategy behind everything. I think I, what I did a lot is I watched right. I would watch the way other artists would break and I would try and reverse engineer that and figure out, okay, this is really interesting. YouTube is an amazing tool at the time for being discovered, because the way their algorithm worked and their suggested, suggested video algorithm, if you remember, and it's still there today, I think it's much different. Now on the right-hand side, if you'd be watching a certain video, a music video would suggest another artist. That's something that we took advantage of. I sat down with logic, we would go through the project and I'd say, okay, let's identify four or five songs that we think are singles and we'd shoot no budget, low budget point and shoot music videos for those, because that was, that was a way for us to, to get more attention to those songs.

4 (49m 12s):
And as social media started to come out, paying attention to that, I remember the very early days of Snapchat was something that we took advantage of and logic was on there and building, you know, a big audience on that platform. And then Instagram played a role, and we tried to be first movers. And on these platforms, quick logic did a great job at, you know, speaking directly to his audience. He was

1 (49m 37s):
Always about, sorry to cut you off in like, taking something that's already been done and making it better. You know, I've, I've recently come out with this thing called freestyle Fridays on my Instagram, where you essentially create a perfect loop of a song. And it, it seems like it's a never ending music video that doesn't stop. And I don't necessarily know of anybody who's done that. At least not on a mainstream platform, but it's like finding ways with something that already exists to put your own stamp on it and make people want it. And all that freestyle Friday thing is that's it just crowdsourcing logic.

4 (50m 10s):
And I were just having a conversation. We came up with the idea. Now we, we get to go and look at 15,000 comments and see what their opinion is on the song before we put it out and we can decide, Hey, is that something we want to put out? Should that make the album or not? I mean,

0 (50m 24s):
It sounds like you had a, you had a slow from sort of 2000, well, for you logic from 2009, but once you entered the picture, Chris really the first two years were, were sounds like they were, they were focused on building up, you know, the brand awareness, like who is making sure people knew who logic was. So by the time you put out your first studio record in 2014 under pressure, that record, but I think it debuted or went right to number four on the billboard charts for which is like, I mean, were, were you guys surprised by that? Were you shocked? Or did you think, yep, this is exactly as we planned it.

4 (51m 2s):
We were devastated actually. Yeah, no. I mean, I think we were legitimately devastated for us, it was a number one album or bust. And number four

0 (51m 18s):
Record of the billboard charts. You F you were devastated that it wasn't number one

4 (51m 22s):
Devastated because, and that was where, again, looking back, I think I could have done a better job probably at educating the record company and making them feel a little bit more involved in the early days as we were building still very much independently. Like we're putting out these free albums and touring the country at that point. I think he had gone on, you did a great

1 (51m 46s):
Job. I'm sorry to interrupt you, bro. You did an amazing job. And we were working with people who aren't at that company anymore. Cause it's like musical chairs who didn't believe in your vision. And you, you know, you're talking about like, like communicating bro, you did a fantastic job. And to say what Chris won't, they under shipped us. They didn't believe in us so much that they under ship my album. And you had all these other huge artists with, you know, 400,000 plus CDs in stores. And I had fans going to best buys having to have the workers there, go to the back and take it out of the box because they are labeled it and believe in us enough to even buy shelf space, not just new release shelf space, but shelf space.

1 (52m 27s):
I just have to say you're the band, bro. And you did your job say, I mean

0 (52m 31s):
It's, I mean, I mean, just let's put some perspective on this for a sec. I mean, there are thousands of records that are released every single week around the world, like number four in the U S billboard charts, a fraction of a fraction of a fraction of a percentage of albums will ever get that high. That's a huge achievement. I mean that like, even if, okay, I believe you that you were sad, it wasn't number one, but it, it sounds like you spent the first two years building up the awareness and by the time that album came out, it was gonna, it was going to sell a lot of records, sold a half a million copies, I guess eventually. Yeah, I think that was the first

4 (53m 7s):
Time that we prove to not only ourselves, cause I didn't think we needed to. I think we understood it. And we, we, we believed in and knew what we were building, but I think we prove to the business and, and really the world that what we had built. I think a lot of people viewed it as almost like building it in a vacuum. I remember having the conversations and being incredibly frustrated, you know, with the head of sales at the time at Def jam where he didn't understand. Cause he was like, Hey, you have zero. You've never sold the song in the history of your career. And I'm like, that's accurate. But we had sold a hundred thousand tickets and X number of dollars in Merck.

4 (53m 47s):
So that's going to translate because it's fans who are invested in him, right? It's the first time we're asking them, not even asking, we're putting out music for sale. If they're coming to shows and selling out rooms across the country and we're selling out, shows all over Europe, they're going to buy an album for 7 99. To me, it was, that was the next logical step is like, okay, it's just the natural progression of his career. Now he's a major label artist and we're going to sell music

0 (54m 19s):
Logic when you perform. Right. Are you, do you feel like you're the same person? Do you feel like you're sort of a heightened version of yourself? Do you feel like you're almost embodying a character when you're, when you're on stage

1 (54m 33s):
Man? What? Yeah. I'm I think I'm me at my purest form in a way, like I used the best version of you. Well, not even, I think the most vulnerable I used to be so nervous if I would mess up a line or flub here or do this or do that, but then you got to realize it's like, do you know how many lyrics are in my mind? Like right now, one breath, get down to lay down and hit you with the brevity to get better, stay down straight shots in a playground, living how I'm living with the life that I'm giving anybody. Just ride them with me. I'm riding with him, show me the enemy. And I'm a hit him. The second I beat him, I get him. I hit him with the ventilator Nita, but send them to never do it. I knew what I've already been through it. I do it for the street, for the fan, for the life, anybody that's gang related, like, you know how many times I had to mess that up to, to be able to do it like that cannot imagine. Yeah.

1 (55m 13s):
But it's like, I was, I was kicking myself. It wasn't good enough. I was, I was Michael Jackson. And after the show I was Joe Jackson looking in the mirror, like how could you do this? And then I kinda started to realize like, yo, it ain't that deep man. Like, and it was because I felt I was at a time where I needed to like prove myself. So everything had to be perfect, but it's like, oh, if you hit one wrong key, bro, it hate that deep. You know why? Because you have a sold out arena at the garden of people who, if you make a mistake, if anything, it makes them feel a further connection to you because totally make mistakes. Cause we all make mistakes. So it's definitely a heightened version, but a Marvel durable version

0 (55m 53s):
You guys released the second studio release was the incredible, true story that debuted at number three on the billboard charts, your third album, everybody debuts at number one. And I think a huge turning point in terms of like your mainstream popularity and maybe I think it's fair to say superstardom was a song 1 802 7 3 8 2 5 5 that came out in 2017. How did that song come about?

1 (56m 21s):
Oh man, it's so crazy. So earlier with the second album, we did a tour where, you know, we paid six figures for a tour bus for fans to go to their homes and surprise them and play them the second album before it was even out. And you know, we ate dinner with these people and met their families and their friends and, and I heard about their hopes and dreams and hard times and happy times in the biggest thing that I heard, you know, when they would talk about my music, they're like, yeah, dude, I love your music. Like it's, it goes without saying like you make great music. And I'm like, wow, well thank you. But they're like, but that's not it. The reason I love you like logic and your brand and what you represent is because of the message, you know?

1 (57m 5s):
And there's people who are like, you know, you've saved my life. Your music has saved my life. And I, after that, I thought about it for a long time. And I was like, yo, I didn't even try to do that. And I actually have the power to do that. Could you imagine what that would be like? And, and, and so when I, when I wrote it, I knew it had to be simple, man. It had to be, and it just came. It just was, we were just in the studio and I, I had the hook and I sang it and then I did the verse and then I knew in my heart, I was like, man, I need other people on this. And I need other young influential people, you know, that can, can help get this message out. Mind you, I'm not in the studio.

1 (57m 46s):
Like, yo, this song about killing yourself is about to be a bang, a number. What? Like, no, like no way, none, nobody, I don't care. Nobody saw that. Like nobody saw that. And, and, and it was Chris who had the idea to make it 1 800, 2 7, 5, 8, you know, and, and really give it the, the whole number because then we could reach people and give them that platform, how to sell

2 (58m 10s):
The shit I'm talking about. They think they know it. I've been praying for somebody to send me no one so well with him, I don't even matter. I know it. I know when I know I'm hurting deep down cast show it. I never had a place to call my home.

0 (58m 21s):
And that number, the name of the song went in her two seven, three eight, two five, five. That is the telephone number for the national suicide prevention hotline, which is, I mean, wow. Like you could have called that song. I want to be alive or something else. And you, by giving it that title of the phone number, it was like, it was just super powerful. Did you, did you know that,

1 (58m 47s):
You know, hindsight's like 2020, like sure. We could sit here now and be like, oh, of course it could have been. But like, no, like, especially with what was on the radio. I mean, it's glorification and we knew it was a great song and it's funny. Cause then the song comes out and you got people like, well of course it's going to do well because, and it's like, get outta here, man. We had no, we had no clue.

0 (59m 6s):
Did you? I mean, I, I understand that you are singing on that record from different perspectives of sort of embodying different voices, but did you ever feel that way? Did you ever, were you ever suicidal in your life? Here's

1 (59m 20s):
The crazy thing. I've never thought I've thought about killing myself. I've, you know, I've thought about punching a cash register. These are intrusive thoughts that just happen. We're human. Like they happen in sure. It wasn't until I was like, I experienced true depression and didn't even know I was depressed while I was touring and working that song because everywhere I was going it's suicide, suicide, suicide. Talk about killing yourself. Talk about this. Let's let's talk about this. Oh, death, death, death. And I mean, can you imagine doing a solid year of talking about killing yourself? Even if you're, aren't like talking about killing yourself in particular as the artist singing the song, but it's like, yo and that is, is crazy. And, and going from like, I'd given up on trying to get a hit record.

1 (1h 0m 3s):
And I remember telling Chris before that album, I was like, I'm done. I don't want to do it. I was always like in the studio trying to make hits. That doesn't mean I wasn't trying to make something from the heart, but it's like, man, I want it to be Drake and Rick Ross and this, I wanted to be that popular guy too. And when I gave up, I ended up making the song that did it. And then I kind of was like, oh man, like I love this. I love being in the spotlight and being in the spotlight for a positive message, but I just worked it and worked it and grinded and did it so much while I was waking up every day. And I wasn't happy going on stage.

0 (1h 0m 34s):
And I guess at the end of that, sort of towards the end of that, just long stretch of tourings is in sort of the fall of 2017. She had a breakdown like on concert, what happened? This is in Pittsburgh. What, what happened? Yeah. It's crazy,

1 (1h 0m 47s):
Man. So I'm backstage throwing up. I'm going on malnourished completely unhealthy, you know, are you nervous or was it no, I wasn't nervous. No. I was like, be, feel like you're out of your body. Like you, you, you feel like, like a little person in your brain, kind of like you take a swig of water and you're like, wait, did I, did I actually drink that water right now? And what I've come to realize. I think it's a hope, a hyper analization of the world around you in real time. And, and that was really hard. So I'm going through all this and you know, won't really get too much into it. But obviously I was dealing with like relationship issues and I'm trying to manage a company in my business and make albums and go on tours.

1 (1h 1m 28s):
And, and there was a time where I was even like, like I love Chris, he's my partner. And I want to like, quit, not quit rap or that, but I just, I just want to run away, but I can't. Cause we got multimillion dollar deals on the table and if I don't do this, then it's all going to crumble and he's sacrificed sacrificed his life for me. I'm up here it's oh, the weight is on my shoulders. I can't, I can't, I can't do this. I can't do that to him. I can't. And then I start realizing I'm doing shows for other people, not just him, for myself and for my, my future family. And I have to stack this money for my children and I've come from nothing. And if I don't do this, it could go away. And they like me now, but then they might not later and I go on Instagram and it's you suck and you're terrible and you're going bald and you're white and you're you can't rap.

1 (1h 2m 8s):
And you're horrible. You're a disgrace to hip hop. And what is this one 800. I liked you better when you rap like this. And somebody is like, well, I like this. And you don't like, and your mind is going crazy. And you step on stage. You don't want to be there after nine months. I mean, think about nine months on the road, nine months of hotels, nine months of, of dark places in behind the scenes in this. And, and I'm here, I'm a human being and that's something that a lot of people don't understand. Fame be like famous, crazy. And, and, and that's what that was. And I didn't go home and shoot guns and Rob this and do, and just like, no, I went home and I said, I'm going to go see my therapist, who I see regularly.

1 (1h 2m 49s):
I'm going to drink a lot of water. I'm going to work out. I'm going to eat better. And I realized that my goals have changed. You know, it's like, it's not about money anymore. It's about, it's about happiness. Why go do a show? Just cause it's gonna make me $500,000 in an hour on stage. Like, that's great. But if I'm not there, I should want to be on that stage. And now I do, I want to be on that stage because I've taken in that time.

0 (1h 3m 13s):
Chris, how did you, how did you deal with, with logic's anxiety and, and exhaustion and, and you know, that what happened in Pittsburgh like that, that, wasn't just a, I mean, obviously that was an expression of things that were probably building up over a long time. How did you cope with it and what did you do?

4 (1h 3m 32s):
I mean, I immediately, you, you kind of put on the, the friend hat, right? Because that's what makes this relationship and, and special is that again, you, you generally care about him. So for me, I, I, it was a lot of questions about, Hey, how, how can I make you feel better? And what can I change? What can we do differently to make sure something like this doesn't happen again? And we learned a lot from it. I think both him and I on how to move forward and, and, and conduct the business and operate on a daily basis. Even it, it kind of changed a lot of the things we did from just daily communication, to what we say yes, to, to what we say no to.

4 (1h 4m 15s):
And I think we're better for it. I think he'll, he'll say the same thing. And I think we're going to be much more successful moving forward. And, and it's because we got through that and it, it allowed us to, to grow.

0 (1h 4m 32s):
So when I think about like the business that you guys have created, I'm curious about where it goes from here. Like, I think about like, if I'm an investor, right? And, and I go to Jay Z or to Kanye west, like I could buy their company outright and JZ could leave the picture. Cause there's still like an investment arm and there's a label. And there's other things that at this point you don't necessarily need JZ. The business can thrive right now you have a business around your brand, whether it's performing or selling merchandise or the tour or writing books or acting, and all of those are, are great, but they all require you to constantly stay on the hamster wheel.

0 (1h 5m 16s):
Did you guys, do you ever, both of you different sort of think about how do we build something for the future that may not require both of us that can just be a business that is even bigger than, than the two of us?

1 (1h 5m 31s):
Well, one, I think Chris has already done that in visionary music group and the partnerships that he has, but I won't speak for you. I'll let you say that. But even still, I have a record label and we're both equal partners on that, that, that we run together called Elysium with artists that I've signed, that we believe in that will go out and essentially make us money, you know, by, by killing it. So it's those, those businesses. And I think that mind state, like I have a production company and I haven't really discussed it too much, but it's called Bobby boy. And these, these are things I'm doing my films through and, and yeah, exactly. And so imagine like if I have this production company and I write a script and somebody else takes the wheel.

1 (1h 6m 12s):
So I, I am looking at the future through still being creative, but more so behind the scenes, because I have a fan base that wants any product. I am willing to give them as long as they are familiar with where it is coming from. So how about you, Chris? What

4 (1h 6m 32s):
Do you think? I mean, the brand logic, there's a lot of equity in that now, as I'm growing my business and, and have, have used my experience and I think some of the relationships and most important, I think the knowledge and experience that I've been able to gain while building logic career right next to him, I've I've recently took on a handful, more clients. I think I've seven management clients right now. I just, I just did a joint venture, a label with Sony music, which I'm very, very excited about. So yeah, there, there's, there's a lot of things to look forward to. And

1 (1h 7m 8s):
One thing I will say though, is we kind of didn't answer his questions and the question was, what are, what do we have? So kind of, cause we have these artists, you have these artists, we have sheriffs that are doing things for us. I can't speak for Chris. I like to think I can. When I say this, you say, you know, that we're always on the hamster wheel is always going. The truth is my brain is a hamster wheel. It does not stop. Right. That's how I live. So I have to be involved some way if I'm not in, I trust no one with my money, with my company, with my, this, with my, that. If I'm not involved, like I trust Chris with my life, but I'm not just going to be like, just go take it. Not because I don't trust them, but because I don't work that way, I need to know how you cook the fries at McDonald's who sweeps the floors, who flips the burgers the exact time to flip the burgers, this, this, that, that even if I'm sitting all the way on the 57th floor and the CEO chair I need.

1 (1h 7m 59s):
Yeah. So

0 (1h 8m 1s):
This is a question that I ask everybody who comes on the show. And of course, I'm going to ask both of you. And first to Chris, when you think about the journey that you've taken, you know, 20 year old, no experience like pitching this guy, logic to where you are now, like how much of that do you attribute to just really hard work and intelligence and skill and how much attribute to luck?

4 (1h 8m 23s):
I think it's probably somewhere in the middle between the both, you know, I look back at my life and I think being raised by my parents played, played a large role in, in who I am as a person today and instilling confidence in me. How serendipity played such a role in me discovering who logic was. I told the story. If I hadn't been sitting at my computer at that very moment to click that YouTube link and see the video of logic. I don't think we'd be sitting here today, but there's a large, large portion of that where, you know, it, it, it just takes in an almost unimaginable amount of hard work and perseverance because of every roadblock and every door that's closed to figure out a way to get through it.

4 (1h 9m 12s):
I think it lives somewhere in the middle. I think my journey, I would, I would probably have one foot in hard work and intelligence and grind and hustle and one foot in pure and simple luck logic.

1 (1h 9m 27s):
Yeah. I mean, I think in the beginning, it's a lot

3 (1h 9m 31s):
Of luck, right? Because

1 (1h 9m 33s):
If without that luck, you wouldn't even be blessed enough to be in those positions in those situations. You know, what's really funny. I can't speak for other famous people, celebrities, musicians, whatever. But I can tell you like, no one knows how hard I work and until you, how hard we can work. And I pay out over a million dollars in salary to my employees a year,

3 (1h 9m 55s):
This is a real, real company and hard

0 (1h 9m 58s):
Work, man. You work hard every mother day. Yeah. We're

3 (1h 10m 2s):
Got everyone. We work hard. Everyone.

2 (1h 10m 6s):
I work hard. Every mother <inaudible>

0 (1h 10m 25s):
That's logic, AKA Bobby Tarantino, AKA young Sinatra, AKA sir, Robert Bryson hall, the second and Chris <inaudible> founder, visionary music group, despite the success of logic's music, the two of them are relying on an old business strategy to keep the business relevant diversification. Like a few years back logic published a novel, a psychological thriller called supermarket. He also just released another book, a memoir called this bright future. And for the past few years, he's been working on a project with filmmaker, JJ Abrams, and Chris, as he mentioned, he launched a joint venture with Sony a few years back and built a brand new label for discovering new talent.

0 (1h 11m 9s):
And the label is called what else? Visionary records. Thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you are not yet a subscriber, please do subscribe or follow wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us, our email addresses each ibp@npr.org to find us on Twitter. It's at how I built this or at guy Ross and on Instagram, it's at how I built this NPR or pat guide dot Raj. This episode was produced by James Della who see with music composed by Ramtin Arablouei, who was edited by NEPA grant with research help from me. Vencat our production staff includes Casey Herman, Rachel Faulkner, JC Howard, Julia Carney, Elena coats, Farrah safari, Liz Medsker and Allie sober.

0 (1h 11m 54s):
Our intern is Harrison BJ Choi. Jeff Rogers is our executive producer and guy Roz. And you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR

1 (1h 12m 9s):
Message comes from NPR sponsor monday.com. If you manage a team, you should try monday.com. It's the work OSTP platform teams need to succeed in one platform. Teams can build the tools they need to run all of their work. It's super flexible and can be customized to fit any team in any industry with just a few clicks. Your team can build workflows that fit exactly how they like to work. So you can focus on macro managing instead of micro-managing visit monday.com/podcast for your two week free trial.