4 (0s):
Support for NPR and the following message come from Comcast through Internet Essentials Comcast has connected more than 8 million people from low-income households to high-speed internet most for the first time more at Comcast Corporation.com Internet Essentials support for how I built this and the following message come from American Express. You want to build your business. They can help build your business with financing solutions for eligible business customers the powerful backing of American Express don't do business without it terms apply visit American Express.com business Why did you feel like you had to open it within 30 days of getting into that location?

4 (45s):
That's all you're doing. Drywall. You're building it out. You're like but why why the rush

1 (51s):
we needed to get open we were at that point in time things were

4 (55s):
tight. You need a cash

1 (57s):
flow. Yes. I'll give you one specific example two days for you open then text and said, hey, can I go down to the Bowery to buy some trash cans? And I said, no, there's no money in the bank account.

4 (1m 14s):
From NPR is how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They go. I'm Gyros and on today's show how homesickness and an ad on Craigslist led to guys to build a single Lobster Shack in New York and turn it into an international brand Luke's Lobster. If starting a business is supposed to be about solving a problem then many of you probably deal with a version of this problem almost every day.

4 (1m 55s):
You happen to live in a place far from where you grew up maybe you're there for a job or a partner or school and every time you go out for food, let's say fried chicken or barbecue or a bagel. Maybe you are that annoying person who always asks, why can't they make barbecue or fried chicken or Bagels? Like they do work? Come from and just to be clear. I can be that annoying person. I grew up in Los Angeles. And for most of my adult life. I lived on the east coast and no one ever wanted to go for tacos with me because I would always complain how they are better in La I have friends who will not eat smoked meat outside of Montreal or barbecue outside of South Carolina.

4 (2m 39s):
And for Luke Holden, it was Lobster or more specifically lobster roll. Al's Luke grew up in Cape Elizabeth Maine in a family of lobstermen and after college he ended up working a job in finance in New York where he became incredibly homesick and I started to think maybe he could solve that problem in New York by opening an authentic main style Lobster Shack Luke knew about lobsters had a catch him how to process them and Source them, but he didn't know anything about how to run a restaurant and so that's when he turned to Craigslist to find a Partner who could help and the person he found was been kind of a recent college graduate who also had zero knowledge about restaurants.

4 (3m 23s):
In fact Ben's degree was in history, but somehow these two guys decided to see if they could make it work. They started with one tiny Lobster Shack in New York. And today more than a decade later Luke's Lobster has grown to more than 40 stores in the US and Asia a few weeks ago. I sat down with Luke and been on stage. Age at the Back Bay Events Center in Boston for a live how I built this Luke described how he grew up around the lobster business his dad ran a lobster processing facility, which can be an incredibly unpredictable business to be in

1 (3m 60s):
commercial fishing and processing Seafood is you've got to have a passion for the business. I think any industry that is dependent on a natural resources unstable. Ultimately. There's a lot of highs and lows and it takes passion and Only a dedication to your trade in order to persevere.

4 (4m 18s):
And by the way, did you eat a lot of lobster as a kid? Every time times were hard at home? We had more Lobster. So as a kid, I mean you knew how to I mean you were sort of around Lobster men. Did you in your mind think you know, eventually I'm going to get out of here. Like I'm not gonna do this Lobster thing. I'm gonna go out into the world and find something to do or did you think you know this this could be good. This could be my thing

1 (4m 48s):
when I was 16 years old. I got my first job as a sternman. I had worked in production facilities my dad's so it is I worked on Piers unloading boats, but I really wanted to work on about so I got a job as a sternman. I can remember one day where the fog was really low. The bait was really old and the waves were very Rowley and I got sick at 4:30 in Morning, and the captain thought I was out drinking the night before. I mean, I was 16 years old. I didn't touch boobs till I was 22 and I was sick all day, but the excitement of going out and and setting a trap and Hauling it back and not knowing what was in that trap is an excitement that I still have today when I go out lobstering with my family and it propelled me to go out and build a boat in high school, huh?

1 (5m 42s):
And ultimately when I was 17 18:19. I was hauling hand hauling a hundred and fifty traps the day and it's exactly what I wanted to do.

4 (5m 52s):
I wanted to be in the lobster business when you were

1 (5m 54s):
kid. I did and my parents made me get out of it. Your

4 (5m 57s):
parents did not want you to do it. Why didn't they want you to be

1 (6m 0s):
in it? So I think because of some of the unpredictability and in the lack of stability in the industry at the time, my parents worked very very hard to send me and my two brothers to four-year colleges. Yeah and my sophomore year. My parents basically said to me forget Georgetown unless you go pursue some other interest or not run dealing with this financial burden if they wanted you to go to Georgetown to pursue something stable like law or or you know, or like Investment Banking in 2007.

4 (6m 34s):
All right, so you all right you go up to Georgetown. Let's put this on hold for a sec. I want to turn to you Ben you grew up also New England in Connecticut.

1 (6m 44s):
I did. Yeah, I grew up in coastal Connecticut. My dad was a writer. So he also had been his own boss since before I was born but very different industry and you

4 (6m 55s):
went off to college also to a good University went to Yale. You studied history. What did you think? I mean, did you think maybe I'll do something around history or writing like your dad was that where you're sort of had was

1 (7m 7s):
I was very bad at thinking about the future at that point in my life. Life, but eventually I graduated and I had to find a job. So at that point I thought I seem to be pretty okay at this maybe I can find a job writing or an editorial position. And did you move to New York after college? I did. Okay. So you move to

4 (7m 30s):
New York thinking I'll get into writing and what you start to do is food writing,

1 (7m 35s):
right? Yeah. I worked my way and started freelance writing about food. I had struggled to find a focus, but I found it what I really love to do. Is cook and eat so it made sense. Yeah, that's what I would start writing

4 (7m 49s):
about. Did you like it was this did you think? Okay. This has legs? I think I can do this. I can be the next don't know Craig Claiborne or something

1 (7m 57s):
the longer I did it the less. I liked it and it wasn't just that. It was extremely hard to pay my rent. It was I felt always alone, you know, I was sitting at my computer. Yeah sending pitches out into the ether wedding hear something back. I always wanted to shut my laptop and just go cook something

4 (8m 18s):
really. Are you a big like a home cook, I am a

1 (8m 21s):
big home cook. I've cooked my whole life. My parents got us a little teddy bear cookbook when I was old enough to stand and but from what people are told me being in the restaurant business was too stressful for a career. So what did you want to do? Well at that point I decided no matter how stressful it was. It made sense for me to go find a job in the restaurant biz. Business because that was clearly my passion and you know, I was done kind of sitting on my butt at a computer. Yeah, so I applied to basically every job I could find like rest kind of jobs like to share washer pressure. No way. I would have even tried for sous-chef like dishwasher counter service, you know anything that would put me in a kitchen in a position to learn something that could eventually get me and did you get any offers?

1 (9m 13s):
No, I did. Right. I know you interview so that you can get it over. So they're looking at your

4 (9m 18s):
resume and are like this Yale graduate is not qualified to wash dishes in our restaurant.

1 (9m 25s):
Yeah, and that's exactly right. Totally get it. I kind of

4 (9m 29s):
wasn't. Yeah. Alright, let's pause for a sec. So we're going to you look so you are you graduate from Georgetown and you do exactly what you are meant to do you go work and Finance in New York City. Your parents are happy. They're really excited. You got health

1 (9m 44s):
insurance. Assurance some stability.

4 (9m 45s):
Is that more or less a scenario?

1 (9m 48s):
Yes, my parents were happy with it. So was I it was a it was a really neat experience to to go explore right out of graduation. And there were you living in Brooklyn. No, so I was terrified of the subway system. I've worked at 49th in park and I lived at 52nd and second. So I'd let you just walk back and forth. There was like three Irish bars that I was comfortable at a gym. My desk right hand like that. Was it got it? Yeah and you're doing this for a couple

4 (10m 19s):
years. Did you was there a point where you just start to get unhappy doing it or board? Because it can be a grind right?

1 (10m 27s):
It was definitely a grind I was with a great team. I just didn't have any passion for it. It was just a job and and and really nothing more and the honest-to-god stories that I was at my desk on a summer Sunday afternoon. I was missing home. And so I went online yet. Look just looking for an affordable. Fordable classic main style lobster roll and there's all these great restaurants serving their interpretation of a lobster roll, but it was not a quintessential affordable

4 (10m 56s):
experience. I'm curious about what was a good lobster roll to you. What what did you want it to be

1 (11m 3s):
an unadulterated product? So a good lobster roll is a it's a New England tops. Would Bond shave sides get a nice buttery toast. Little slick and mayonnaise 1/4 pound of fresh Lobster meat and

4 (11m 20s):
just from a particular part of the lobster

1 (11m 22s):
right Knuckles. And Clause is the most tender part of lobster. Got it, then a little bit of lemon butter and a little bit of secret seasoning.

4 (11m 30s):
So you start to the gears in your head start to turn your thinking there might be a lobster opportunity here because there there was nothing like a Maine Lobster Shack anywhere near where you left. That's right. All right. I want to I just want to pass them on because I mean I know a lot of times we talk about these business stories and sister Eureka moment, but it's really more complicated than that because I have to imagine that over those to you that two-year period or whatever was where you work in the finance firm in the back of your mind. You knew that you were going to start something or or no. That was that was that the

1 (12m 2s):
case I so I grew up in a family between my uncle and my dad who were partners and they were great role models. Both entrepreneurs were always For their family and I had it in my mind that and owning your own business ultimately gave you the lifestyle that I thought my dad. My uncle were living. I mean the reality is that now that we're doing it like you realized that they were just burning the clock when I wasn't paying attention. Yeah, but they made me feel right like they were always there. Yeah, so I had definitely had it in my mind that vest and banking was a stepping stone to ultimately start my own business someday, but I had no idea it was going to be back.

1 (12m 44s):
Lobster

4 (12m 44s):
industry and what was the first thing you did you like? Call your dad up and say Hey Dad. I have this idea. I kind of save that. So

1 (12m 54s):
I wrote this business plan and my network of friends and mentors ultimately reviewed this as you guys might be able to tell I'm someone who thinks a little more clearly and writing so I shared my thoughts through this business plan

4 (13m 7s):
and we're people encouraging or was anyone like this is dumb stay in Investment

1 (13m 11s):
Banking. Most people are honestly, Urging that concept of like your three years into Investment Banking. You've got that notch in your belt your positioning this so you can keep your daytime job and pursue a side

4 (13m 25s):
hustle though. This was going to be a side

1 (13m 27s):
hustle. Absolutely.

4 (13m 29s):
All right. So when you told your dad, how did he

1 (13m 30s):
react? Yes,

4 (13m 32s):
he didn't say we sent you to Georgetown so you wouldn't get into this crazy business.

1 (13m 40s):
He didn't and especially because it was initially positioned as a side project. My mom on the other hand even dipping my toes in the water of the lobster industry made her cry. She was upset about this because gateway drug

4 (13m 53s):
ultimately

1 (13m 57s):
got it. Okay, so

4 (13m 58s):
dads on board mom's not and

1 (14m 1s):
did you have any cash. Did you be money to do this? We had a little bit of cash. So I had about 15,000 dollars in savings. My dad. I said, could you match this and be 50/50 partners with me? He says yes a couple years later. He told me he literally borrowed the money against his 401k. Well, alright, let's get back to the I'm going to pause would get back. There's

4 (14m 23s):
like you decide at a certain point can't do this alone. So first of all, why did you decide that you needed a partner?

1 (14m 31s):
I was pretty risk adverse again the no real passion Investment Banking, but it was paying the bills and I ultimately you needed somebody help you run it a hundred percent Okay,

4 (14m 43s):
so Were you going to find your business partner through

1 (14m 47s):
Craigslist? I got like 500 responses in a matter of a couple of days. All right.

4 (14m 56s):
I'm going to turn back to you been. What were you doing trolling Craigslist one night? What were you really looking for?

1 (15m 7s):
Well, we always say we met in the men seeking men section, but it was men seeking men for help, you know to start a lobster business what you were like on

4 (15m 19s):
Craigslist just looking for some opportunities. And what do you what are the ads say,

1 (15m 23s):
so it's in the restaurant section and you know, I'm they're applying to dishwasher job. And and counter jobs and getting no response and I see this ad it says I'm a guy from Maine. I have a good job. But what I really want to do is start a Lobster Shack that is similar to what I know from my main childhood and well, I wasn't lucky enough to grow up in May and I was lucky enough to go visit a bunch of times as a kid and we would rent a little house in five Islands Main and I would go down to the five Islands Lobster Claw. Co-op and hang out at the lobster dock there and watch the guys steam in and out and unload and and you know eat at The Lobster Shack there.

1 (16m 7s):
So

4 (16m 7s):
so the ad basically says hey, I'm opening a Lobster Shack. I'm looking for somebody to help me out

1 (16m 13s):
like the last sentence was I just need somebody who can raise their hand because I really don't exactly know what this job description is this point in time.

4 (16m 21s):
But so, all right, so you get 500 applications and what what stood out about Ben's

1 (16m 26s):
he wrote a really nice cover letter kind. Bringing back like his fond memories at these Lobster Shack. So like he understood kind of the essence of what I was looking to create here in the city. Okay, he was clearly smarter than I was. All right,

4 (16m 42s):
but you get this letter and did you email him right away and say hey let's meet

1 (16m 47s):
yeah. I said I got to be at my desk at like 8:30. Why don't you come by Starbucks underneath my building at 7:30 and let's talk for half an hour. This is

4 (16m 56s):
an August of 2009. Yeah, okay. Hey, so one morning you guys meet at Starbucks. And how'd it go?

1 (17m 3s):
It was great. It was an easy conversation. It was a two-way interview, which I appreciated. I shared the business by one of them ask them to follow up give me his thoughts on it. And then my next move was all right go up to Maine and meet my

4 (17m 18s):
family. Wait, that's really fast. You're moving really fast.

1 (17m 23s):
Yeah. It was weird how that came out or even but it's true family.

4 (17m 28s):
but so okay and then what was it about his business plan is idea that appeal to you wasn't that you know Luke was so interesting and smart and and enthusiastic about this or were you really just desperate to get a job in the food industry this point

1 (17m 45s):
careful when I when I initially wrote the email I I had said yes to a lot of worst ideas in the past and I think in our email exchange before we met he He was in finance and I kind of went into that interview thinking a finance guy who's got a pet project and ultimately involves Lobster. So I'm excited about it. And before I met Luke that morning that's kind of what I expected

4 (18m 14s):
and

1 (18m 15s):
walking out of that conversation. It was completely different because you know, this was somebody who actually had such a deep personal history in the lobster industry and such a clear understanding of how sourcing worked and how sustainability worked and all the different pieces that would actually make a business like this and yeah walking out of that meeting. It just seemed like something that I wasn't just going to go help out with for a little while and just because something we could actually

4 (18m 43s):
work. So a couple days later you bring Ben home to meet your family now and

1 (18m 49s):
even come with me.

4 (18m 50s):
Oh, you didn't hear you said some up alone to meet the parents. And and did you want that to happen to get their take on him before you Decided whether he was going to be the right partner.

1 (18m 60s):
Absolutely. It was it was it had like seems real smart. He seems honest he seems hard-working. He's interested and it was clear that we had complementary skills. So as a business leader, there's all sorts of areas where I've got deficits and there's areas where I've got strengths and I've always been pretty good at recognizing and reading people fairly truly. So been just read very truly and thing about it just sort of felt right? All right. So you

4 (19m 31s):
guys decide to partner up. This is the part of the story is even crazier. It's September of 2009 and you decide we're going to open this thing in October. First of all, how did you even find a place and get a lease? And why were you in such a rush?

1 (19m 49s):
So we were looking down in the East Village and we looked on East Seventh Street. It was a great food Street. There was a handful of Brands that did one or two things really well, but really no complete menus. You could go get an arepa here you get a porchetta sandwich here. You get a cupcake here get a smoothie over there. And so I felt like our brand our concept which is selling lobster rolls would do well here because it was a small footprint and if somebody wanted to go on a mini food crawl would participate well in that

4 (20m 21s):
and I mean $30,000. Okay. It's am working capital, but rent in New York, you got to sign a multi-year. Lise I mean, how did you do

1 (20m 30s):
that? Well, I had the guy from Yale review the lease and then I knew nothing about but I could read I had you know a really strong sense of what was fair and not fair and most of the things I asked for were flatly rejected. Okay. And what

4 (20m 55s):
was the size of the space that you

1 (20m 56s):
located? It was like 200. Our feet it was an old consignment shop that was just it was called Sousa's closet it was painted brown. So it resembled like a big walk-in closet. Wow.

4 (21m 7s):
And what was the rent going to be per month is $3,100 month? Okay, so you get this place and you decide that you have a month to get it in shape and to open up in one

1 (21m 17s):
month. So it was three months security deposit. Okay, first month's rent up front. We had to upgrade the electric which we did not anticipate. That was like a Thousand dollar bill and then everything else. We fit within that the remaining ten thousand dollars like Ben had to go figure out how to pull the building permits that we needed my uncle and and brothers were in there doing construction work and painting you

4 (21m 45s):
guys were doing all this you were remodeling at yourselves anything you didn't need a

1 (21m 49s):
license for we were we were doing it had okay. No one may be some things that you didn't you

4 (21m 54s):
know, And so what did you have to build in this space like you to make it look like it was gonna be a takeout place.

1 (22m 4s):
We basically rolled refrigerators in there. We put griddles on top of them built a little half wall to show where the kitchen was and where the seating area was and then you have the rest was really I mean a little bar top some stools we bought at Kmart and then actual Decor that we went. We got Luke's old buoys from his old. Lobster boat and we had a good friend of Luke's brother Brian, you know stepped up to paint a mural for us and we tacked lobstering gear on the opposite wall. And yeah, but we didn't compromise on was we had the best tasting and most affordable Lobster.

1 (22m 46s):
All right, that's what we were going to have and we were going to create a team that treated people the way that we like to be

4 (22m 53s):
treated. Was there any doubt about the name? Were you I mean Luke's Lobster it was going to Look slabs from the beginning at that time. I had a

1 (23m 1s):
friend who was a great marketer and I gave him 10 different

4 (23m 6s):
names. What were some of the other names like

1 (23m 8s):
overboard Lobster like Lobster Shack Clam Shack, even though we weren't going to have clams there was there was a there was a variety of just bad names in there. I was super gun-shy about naming a restaurant after myself. I kind of had add still sort of do anybody names a business after themselves is probably not a very humble person where I got over that was the the significance and the story of my family and the direct tie that that we had two fishermen and putting a person behind the brand right was something that ultimately been helped me realize but

4 (23m 51s):
why did you feel like you had to open it within 30 days of getting into that location me? That's all. You're doing drywall you're building it out your like but why why the

1 (24m 1s):
rush I'll give you one specific example two days for reopen been text and said, hey, can I go down to the Bowery to buy some trash cans? And I said, no, there's no money in the bank account things were tight. You needed cash flow. We need a cat but we needed to get open we were at that point in time. There was no wiggle room at all.

4 (24m 24s):
Okay, you are still working at the finance job during the day, right? Right.

1 (24m 28s):
Yes, this is decide how so I didn't really have any admission to to make it what it is today. It was it was just something fun that was going to bring a little bit of passion

4 (24m 37s):
about alright, so we know that your dad had a lobster processing plant. He basically would process lobsters for other people in Maine. So he was going you were going to buy the lobster from his processing facility.

1 (24m 53s):
We were in luckily. He didn't make us pay for the first 90 days. So that really helped cash flow in the beginning.

4 (25m 2s):
All right, so October 2009 You open up how many lobster rolls were you expecting to sell that first day we had

1 (25m 12s):
probably planned initially on fifty to a hundred rolls

4 (25m 17s):
and you were not there for the opening you were at your desk in the financial firm, right

1 (25m 23s):
at like 9:00 a.m. I gave been in my dad a high five and say go get him guys. I just didn't it's the first day we had a handwritten sign on the window. We had no press like not a lot of press what was going to happen on the first day. Yeah, two o'clock total crickets didn't hear from either one of the guys. So your dad was at the

4 (25m 46s):
shop with Ben and they did not nothing. You heard nothing from them nothing.

1 (25m 51s):
So I'm like what are their protect me from the bad news? We haven't sold a lobster roll yet. This is horrible. It was going to do it a couple hundred lobster rolls that we've got on site. Two o'clock been surfaces and says, it was a line out the door before we opened. It's now around the corner. It's going great. People are happy team is crushing. It. Just wanted to give you a heads up and I just immediately like wow, that was a

4 (26m 14s):
good for you run out of inventory of

1 (26m 16s):
lobster not quite that day. But so we had been just cranking away making lobster rolls and Luke's dad was there on the line making lobster rolls you driven down from Maine the day before?

4 (26m 30s):
And

1 (26m 30s):
everybody in a kitchen Sky wear a hat. So Jeff had borrowed a hat from one of our other teammates who was a skateboarder. He had this mesh antihero hat. So Jeff is there is good. He's got a big white mustache crushing lobster rolls and a certain point. We looked up at each other and said, I was Jeff. I need to go back to Maine. Wow. We need more

4 (26m 55s):
Lobster. How many lobster rolls you saw that first day 500. first day Let me come back in just a moment how Luke and been grew that one Lobster Shack into an international brand and how along the way in one very dark moment. They both wound up encountering the worst smell that either of them had ever smelled which by the way had nothing to do with lobster stay with us. I've guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

4 (27m 48s):
Support for this podcast comes from American Express director of global sales strategy Chase Hines explains how American Express works with their customers to find the right Financial solution for their business. It's a lot like solving a puzzle each

1 (28m 3s):
customer's different. Each business is different. We really want to understand what your goals are for the year for three years out and what would extra financing do to help you achieve those

4 (28m 13s):
aspirations? One of our customers is a

1 (28m 15s):
long-standing family-run restaurant and the sons dream was to open up a second location finances are a little bit tough as they were just running the business and we were able to partner with him understand exactly what he needed and help them open up that second location and now

4 (28m 31s):
they're on to their third.

1 (28m 32s):
So whether it's a need to open a second location or fulfill a big New Order, we want to make sure that we're there for you along that Journey

4 (28m 40s):
American Express wants to help you move your business forward with flexible. Financing Solutions chat with them today to see if you're eligible or visit American Express.com business to learn more terms apply. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2009 and Luke and Ben have opened. The first Luke's Lobster in New York's East Village and they realized pretty quickly that they are a lot better at making lobster rolls, then running the actual restaurant. We

1 (29m 17s):
weren't using what we now call a point of sale system. We're using an old school register with numbers on it and a calculator so pull up that strip and see how many lobster rolls it says we saw. At the end of the night and then we back into what we had and it was I had never used excel in my life at that point. So I would I would do scratch work on paper and then every now and then I would sort of somehow I got those numbers crashed on paper to Luke and his desk he could put it into Excel and send it back to me in a way that made sense

4 (29m 54s):
and how I mean, how are you figuring out like kicks where you basically just kind of winging it like how much do we need today? And maybe we're not gonna have enough and I made rules do we need and

1 (30m 6s):
I actually think this is one of those areas where it's an experience was our was our friend all of the lobster came down from me and and units when you say new units wrapped / lobster roll perfectly steamed cooked next day shipment

4 (30m 21s):
is lobsters in a role as cold. It is

1 (30m 23s):
served chilled. So for us we create an inventory system that We had sales based off of units that we use to just project what we needed for inventory all in a very complicated Excel sheet. Yeah, and then we just use those historical sales to predict what we would need and that's ultimately how we did all of our purchasing. So we were never had Lobster in the shack. That was more than a couple days

4 (30m 48s):
old. Yeah. I mean this is thing like lobster is not like I don't know Stacy's Pita Chips has been on the show right? Once you bring a lobster for processing like the clock is ticking, right? Or it goes bad and then you got to get it to your stores really quick. So how was it? Was it coming in refrigerated Frozen. Like how was it coming in?

1 (31m 7s):
So typical day catch a lobster on a Monday. It's cooked on a Monday shipped on a Tuesday. It's in our Shack Wednesday morning all through refrigerated trucks and then we'd use it Wednesday Thursday and another shipment would come so you have really 10 to 14 days of shelf life and we were always through it within four or five days.

4 (31m 29s):
Tell me I mean you were running the Lobster Shack and at this point, did you have somebody working there during the day helping you out as well. We had an

1 (31m 39s):
amazing team that started with us on day one. And that was I mean it was it was crazy. But in all of that like figuring out permitting and building out the restaurant and you wouldn't hang out

4 (31m 50s):
license in 30 days to write.

1 (31m 51s):
Yeah, it turns out somebody needs to be on site with a New York City Food Handlers license at all times so luckily I was able to get that before opening day, but nobody else did so in that third a process. There was also obviously a lot of Craigslist posting and then and then reading responses from people on Craigslist, and we ended up with just extraordinary people may partly because it was at the height of the recession and there were there's a lot of people looking for jobs, but amazing support team there from day

4 (32m 25s):
one and your price point was for Teen dollars initially for lobster roll presumably a lot cheaper than a restaurant in New York. Right

1 (32m 35s):
more affordable. Right more affordable right is not a cheap products more affordable. Yeah. Yeah, so we certainly working directly with a processor and working directly with fishermen. There was no middle men from day one, right? So we had access to the best quality product at the best price and our economic model was was we needed Volume in order to be successful. So we got that from day one and and tried to price the role accordingly.

4 (33m 6s):
I mean you hired all these people from Craigslist to work with you. I don't know you nervous that you wouldn't be able to pay people because you were at this point 30,000 you burn through it, you're dependent on the cash flow. It's on you all. These people are like, alright Luke, I believe in you want to come work here were you nervous about that?

1 (33m 25s):
I was terrified out of the gate. I think I asked Ben not the process is Payroll for the first week but sales were so good the first week and deferring paying for a seafood for 90 days capitalize the business very very quickly.

4 (33m 40s):
I mean, I understand you were making like a premium product or really high quality Lobster Roll But like this is really now the ra financial crisis is like in full swing right before teen bucks, even though the price is great for lobster all the people get a burrito for five bucks. So why do you think it people I were willing to spend that money. I think

1 (34m 2s):
you know lobster's A celebratory food and at a time when people aren't necessarily going out to the fanciest steak dinner or getting the most expensive bottle of wine,

4 (34m 14s):
they could come and they could spend

1 (34m 16s):
$14 for this, you know, the surroundings may not have been luxurious

4 (34m 23s):
but the product was a luxury of that but they could go in and have Kind of all luxurious lunch or dinner and there was no

1 (34m 34s):
question that the recession did actually benefit the opportunity without a recession. There's no way a landlord would have taken a chance on us. Wow, there's no chance that I would have found smart motivated people that need a jobs or we're out there and

4 (34m 52s):
available. So, all right, so you've got the store going you're getting momentum making money. So what was the conversation between you guys where you starting to say? Alright, let's open another one.

1 (35m 5s):
I remember talking about what's next where I put together a snapshot of the financials and said, what do you think about but scaling this thing? This is we got a real opportunity here. We're having fun. We're making money. Let's go try a second one and I'll put all my chips in the middle. I'm willing to take the same thirty five thousand dollar salary that have been signed up for you were going to quit you want to pause there? Ya know $3,500. Yeah.

4 (35m 33s):
No, but you Side, I'm gonna throw I'm gonna jump into this two feet. This side hustle is now my full-time

1 (35m 39s):
hustle. I'm willing to I'm willing to do that if you guys are in this with me and everybody said, yeah, let's let's go ahead and give it a

4 (35m 46s):
shot. And your mom was like, yes, go for it. Now she was on board.

1 (35m 52s):
Now now Mom was not on board. She was not on board with you quitting your

4 (35m 58s):
stable job with health insurance and all that stuff to do this not for six

1 (36m 3s):
months of success, right? She's a little more practical than that.

4 (36m 7s):
Alright, so you find a second location. Where was this? What was this

1 (36m 10s):
place? It was on the Upper East Side in Manhattan. It had been a high-end French restaurant. But when we started kind of peeling the layers off the onion to see what In that kitchen it was a nightmare. I mean layers and layers of grease on the walls on the floor. The original owners had sold it and the interim owners had really just run it into the ground and then just walked away to the extent that there would they left food in the walk-in refrigerator? And that was six months ago

4 (36m 44s):
restaurants. I think a lot of people don't know this but restaurants have something called a grease trap restaurants have to trap and then dispose of their grease, right? So there was a grease trap there.

1 (36m 54s):
There was a grease trap there and probably in the two years that the interim owner had owned. It had never been cleaned and then it had been vacant for six months. So yeah that that was about the worst. Anything either of us have ever experienced two of you cleaned it out. Yeah. So so there are professional companies that do this. Okay. They come they have, you know, this great pump system and they open it up and but we really didn't know about those companies got it, right. So yeah, we would saw the tops off milk jugs and you know kind of scoop it into a into a bucket or like double bag trash bag and just kind of run around to try to find a dumpster.

1 (37m 48s):
Wow.

4 (37m 51s):
So I mean will you open this eventually open the second store? And how long does it take you again? 30 days or

1 (37m 56s):
something. It was fast. We open May 26 and I think we took possession of the The Shack May 1st. Wow,

4 (38m 5s):
and now you've got two stores which is double the work and double the

1 (38m 10s):
stress. Yeah, absolutely and our first general manager who now runs our HR department. We left her there in the east Village during the throes of the build-out process in the Upper East Side and you know, thank God she didn't leave us she didn't walk away. She she held strong and but yeah, it was it was a stress that was shared by the entire

4 (38m 34s):
team. Alright, 2012, you're buying your Lobster from your dad's processing plant. He decides he's just fed up with it. They're a bunch of regulatory challenges. He's dealing He doesn't want to do it anymore. And so he kind of dumps. It gets rid of it. You guys don't have a processor anymore. So what did you do? I mean, what did you who do

1 (39m 1s):
you turn to we actually spent a year actually buying from other producers? Hmm thinking hey, this is a way that we can scale the business at this point in time. We are thinking growth and good six or seven shocks. It only took about a year for us to realize that we needed to invest back into the production. Business in order for us to scale from a quality and price standpoint. We needed to have

4 (39m 26s):
that you decide to start your own production facility. We are going to bring in the lobsters steam them or cook them break them apart sell the you know do something with a Tails because you don't need them and the not get the knuckle meat and ship it off to the restaurants you guys were going to do all of that. That's

1 (39m 44s):
right. So once we decided to go into the processing This wasn't just her like a we're going to do this. Now. It was a we're going to take every penny of earnings that we've accumulated from 6 Plus locations over a couple of years. We're going to put that next to some debt that we're going to raise and we're going to push all of those chips in on an

4 (40m 13s):
extremely

1 (40m 15s):
difficult to manage technically intensive and capital intensive. Of endeavor here where we're not in control of Supply or demand of all the products that come out of it. And in this business a lot of our vendors folks that were selling lobster tails and lobster mints and lobster bodies and lobster leg meat things that were not using at the restaurant group. They all want to pay in 30 or 45 days that the fishermen need to get paid and 2 to 7 Days, right? So we had to accumulate enough earnings or to go to a bank. And get a proper line of working capital or Vlog working credit so that we could ultimately bridge that Gap

4 (40m 57s):
when your dad had his processing facility. He was hard for him to make significant income from that but you guys are in a better position because you've got the restaurants you're right because you own the restaurants and you can just take that meat and Supply your restaurants. And then even if you're not making a whole lot of money off lobster tails and what else do you sell that you don't use

1 (41m 18s):
like the lobster with this? Neat machine that rolls all the meat out of the lobster legs. I've got another machine that takes the bodies of the lobster and debones it so we saw that to soup and chatter companies to make lobster bisque. And so there's what we're finding value in lobster shells. So we're now getting into that

4 (41m 39s):
business as well. But it makes more sense for you guys to have a processing facility because of the restaurant a hundred percent. So you guys were expanding gut your production facility and even super impressive business 2016. You went to private Equity Group and you took in outside investment for minority stake in the business. You know, what I've had found we had a Founders on the show say I'm so glad I never took outside Capital because I control it, you know, Gary Erickson of Clif Bar and others and then there are others who say oh so great, you know, this enabled us to do X Y and Z then there are others who say was a Steak that I took it because now they'll these private Equity people screwed up my company you guys are doing really well with your own cash flow.

4 (42m 25s):
Why did you decide to take outside money? Did you need it to scale the business?

1 (42m 30s):
We got to the point where we had been operating in cities that we had lived in were York Boston DC Philly was in the middle General level of comfort this point. I'm writing 500 checks week feel great responsibility. Possibility for those checks and it just it felt like at this point in time it made sense to bring in a season to partner that could ultimately just help us avoid that trip wire that we weren't going to

4 (42m 59s):
see. So what what do you imagine? I mean, what will Lux Lux? I mean you've got now I think what almost 40 locations in the United States and even in Asia, it's amazing. I mean, this was like a side hustle in 2009 their 40 of them. What's the vision like I mean

1 (43m 19s):
thousands not thousands. I mean our our brand mission is to be the world's most respected Seafood bread because we're not a group that is motivated by store count or Revenue, right? You know, honestly, we had we had some moments and in 2017 2018 where we felt like we may have actually grown our store count too quickly. And we also looked at our business as a whole and said what Is that what is that mission that's going to drive us not just the restaurants but you know the processing company and everything. We've built up around this and Luke throughout the the most respected Seafood brand in the world.

1 (44m 2s):
We talk through me said well what is respected mean? Yeah it to us respect men stakeholder theory that working directly with lobsterman transparency only serving sustainable products and then, you know above all being Committed to Quality at all

4 (44m 19s):
costs I'm curious about sustainability right that you know about this there is there was a report in Maine from a group of scientists and they basically predict that by 2050 the lobster yields and Manor dramatically going to be reduced like maybe by 50% Do you guys think about this? Do you lose sleep over it? I mean, this is your product.

1 (44m 43s):
Our brand is a great opportunity to to be playing a leading role in helping to work to understand what that changes a great example is the kelp business that we've been investing in SoCal sequester's carbon and we've been putting funds through the ocean Foundation to go out and do the research to understand how that type of aquaculture can positively affect the environment that our fishermen are working in. We have this great opportunity as a brand to educate and and to put dollars into research that that ultimately allows us to understand what the change is going to do before it actually affects change and in how to get in front of it.

4 (45m 28s):
Yeah. I'm curious when it comes to your personal lives Luke. You're married. You got a kid got another one on the way Ben just got married like four days ago. Are you guys able to kind of you know real back a little bit and kind of relax or you working just as hard just as crazy as you were in 2010?

1 (45m 60s):
Can be really careful about how we answer this one. I think we're working just as hard but having kids just helped me prioritize my time a little bit better my wife and my kid are honestly the most important thing in my world right now and that makes me a Better Business leader because it enables me to figure out how to say no a little bit more frequently and that keeps the business a little bit more focused. Yeah,

4 (46m 25s):
you guys did about six The million dollars in Revenue last year probably do more this year sounds like an incredible amount of money. You've heard the show before and we've had people on the show who are fabulously wealthy because of the businesses that they started. It's a sixty million dollars in your pockets. Its revenues. You've got a tiny fraction of that. Do you either of you guys feel rich or wealthy it all

1 (46m 49s):
personally think it's kind of a loaded question. I mean, I there's nothing that I wouldn't be doing. I wouldn't choose any other life. So yeah, I feel rich. But monetarily things are okay. Yeah, I mean, you know from my perspective I wasn't I was never in finance. So when we started Luke's I was kind of down to my my last penny so from that perspective, I'm exceedingly fragile. But but now I'm and I think we you know, neither of us are people that that need all that much and we get joy Of the work that we do in the time we spend with our

4 (47m 30s):
families. I understand the passion and the energy and the excitement but you guys have now been doing this for closing in on ten years. You could probably Cash Out find a private Equity people who will buy it out and take Luke's Lobster and you guys will have some money probably potentially that could sustain me for the rest of your lives. Is there anything about that attractive to you jumping off a hamster wheel and and selling it?

1 (47m 57s):
I think that's you know, the this whole company kind of his our it is our family now. It's you know, what would we do? It's the same for me the fish are no my friends. The teammates are my friends the guests and suppliers. Like all of our stakeholders are my friends and part of my life and I again I can't imagine doing anything

4 (48m 24s):
else. You've heard the show before so, you know, I'm going to ask you this question how

1 (48m 29s):
much of this

4 (48m 30s):
success is because of the hard work you put in your intelligence and skill how much you think is just because you were lucky then

1 (48m 38s):
I mean, there's no denying that there was a lot of luck involved. I mean the fact that I happen to be trolling Craigslist that very particular night as we said and you know, the fact that there happened to be this recession that give us Us the ability to hire such wonderful people to get that lease to get that first location to do what we did. You know, there was there's so much luck that that undergirds all of it. But you know as a team, it's what you do with kind of a the luck that you're given. I

4 (49m 13s):
think Luke I would

1 (49m 16s):
completely Echo that the good fortunes of the recession we're luck, but I would take the smarts and hard work and the I have my team and stack them

4 (49m 26s):
up against any other team. If you are sitting in this audience, you know, 15 years ago watching guys like you what do you wish you knew then that you know, now what would have been helpful for you to know about the journey you guys took

1 (49m 42s):
for me? It's always been the strength of my my peer Network when I was when I was in college and I was I was definitely not the guy who would go up and Shake somebody's hand and say can I build a relationship? Friendship with you. Yeah, and I can't tell you how important that actually is the strength of your network, especially when resources are limited and times are challenging is just so incredibly

4 (50m 7s):
important work can be friends. It doesn't be a powerful group of people just be people that you know people that you meet along the way. Absolutely Ben. What do you wish you knew? I think

1 (50m 17s):
the most important thing that I've realized as I became a manager of people. There's never a Time. When you're the smartest person in the room or the most right person in the room the humility of a manager just looking to their team and asking what they think is right and how they would approach a problem and September 30th 2009. That was the conversation we had with our team. We were doing practice Run the Night Before opening day. We just looked him in the eye and said we don't know what tomorrow. Is going to look like we've never done this before.

1 (50m 58s):
So we need you to guide us. We need you to tell us when we're doing something wrong. When you tell us when you have ideas of what would be right and listen, you know,

4 (51m 10s):
the golden been conniff cofounders of loose Lobster. That's from my live interview with Luke and been at the Back Bay Events Center in Boston. Today. Luke's Lobster has well over 500 employees and funnily enough. Even though Luke's mom did her best to keep her children away from the lobster business Lux two brothers, Brian and Mike and of course his dad Jeff are all Equity partners and working at Luke's Lobster. And by the way, no one in the family has a Commercial lobstering license anymore, but Luke and his brother Brian do have recreational licenses and a family has a running competition every summer to see who can catch the most Lobster.

4 (52m 1s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to this live episode of How I built this our show was produced this week by Casey Herrmann with music composed by routine Arab Louis. Our Live Events team includes Jessica Goldstein Ali Prescott Ellen Jorgensen and and huether. Thanks also to Julia Carney and Eva Grant said as much controller and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Sequoia Carrillo. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this.