2 (0s):
Hey, so really quick. I want to remind you about two incredible live shows coming up one in Seattle. And the other one in San Francisco on Thursday, March 26th. I'll be at Benaroya Hall in Seattle talking to the founders of sub pop Jonathan Parliament and Bruce pavitt. They founded the iconic Indie label behind artists like Nirvana Fleet Foxes Soundgarden and many many others and the very next day on March 27th. I'll be in San Francisco talking with Ken Grossman founder of Sierra, Nevada. Brewing Company a hugely important part of the microbrewing revolution in the United States that's happening at the Sydney Goldstein theater in San Francisco for more information on either of these shows or to get your tickets Please head to NPR presents dot-org and I hope to see you there as for today's show chip Wilson is definitely the kind of entrepreneur who is very attentive to Trends and what he was living in Vancouver in the late 1990s the trend he noticed was yoga.

2 (1m 0s):
It seemed like everyone was getting into it particularly women. So the story of Lululemon is a classic case of seeing an opportunity and just seizing on it right place right time. But along the way chip also ran into some major problems some of which he caused himself it first ran in June of 2018. It's a super interesting story. Hope you enjoy it. Here it is. People were just naked in front of the store.

1 (1m 30s):
Well, they showed up in their trench coats and you know, we went out when we went open the store. I went out with my wife and put my arm around her and then we we said thanks for coming and everyone dropped their trench coats and went running into the store.

2 (1m 52s):
From NPR it's how I built this a show of that innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm Gyros and on today's show how chip Wilson turned workout clothes into a fashion statement and along the way built a breakout brand worth billions. So it used to be that the clothes you wore to the gym. We're like the absolute worst clothes you own, you know, the ratty old t-shirt you got for free at some event sweat pants with your High School logo, you know the kind of short shorts.

2 (2m 37s):
Dr. J would have worn on the basketball court. Anyway, most of this apparel was cotton-based was baggy. It didn't look so great and honestly, nobody really cared you'd had one job to do which was to sweat at the Him, but at some point in the past 10 or 15 years all of that changed because suddenly the clothes you wore to work out were also the clothes you can wear to the grocery store or at a restaurant or even at work. So For Better or Worse people were wearing their gym clothes outside of the gym on purpose and this trend it was called athleisure and Chip Wilson. He was one of its Pioneers the brand he built out of Is house in Vancouver is now worth more than 14 billion dollars.

2 (3m 24s):
Now before I go on let me just address the elephant in the room chip has said some things that are well, how do I put this rude and boorish? He's put his foot in his mouth on several occasions. He's embarrassed the company and you will hear about some of that later on in the show, but he's also an open book and open to getting grilled all about his life. He's not a cautious Media train sound. I which is in part what makes him interesting because that's sort of how chip grew up without any pretension middle-class kid. And Calgary Canada chip was athletic. He played hockey and football his dad taught phys-ed at the local high school and his mom was a seamstress.

1 (4m 9s):
She live for it. It's were total passion was she tried to make clothing for the kids? But of course we didn't we'd never liked what she made for us. But you know if I want to spend and time with my mom it had to be editor foot in the sewing room.

2 (4m 24s):
So did you learn how to sew like from an early

1 (4m 27s):
age? Yeah, I can definitely so but more so I think it was working with the Butterick patterns and watching my mom lay them down on the fabric and then and then how she move them and twisted them in order to save Fabric and I only say how important that is because once I got into big production and you'd lay fifty to a hundred layers of fabric down when you can save even Five six seven inches of fabric it can mean thousands of dollars.

2 (4m 53s):
Now before chip would go on to sew and design clothes for a living. He actually got his first real job at an oil company working a grueling but incredibly lucrative job on the Alaska oil pipeline for almost two years. How much did you walk away with how much

1 (5m 11s):
cash well interesting in today's dollars? Probably about six hundred thousand and Watson. It was about a hundred and seventy-five thousand. Aiken that was is

2 (5m 20s):
amazing amazing. You were like 19 you were just given this cash and and that's simply because there was all of this money to work on the Alaska oil pipeline, I guess

1 (5m 30s):
right and you know, but I ge you know, I traded my life in for money. I mean there was no girls there was you know, nothing there except for you know, you work so I always wonder you know, if everyone got that opportunity would they have made the same thing out of it? I

2 (5m 44s):
did that's pretty good. Use your 18 or 19 or 20 with Bunch of cash. So what did you do? What you do with the money?

1 (5m 52s):
Well, I'd always had three goals in Alaska when I wasn't stolen my own house by the age of 20 to be in my own business by the age of 30 and retired by 40 and retirement meaning that I was doing exactly what I wanted to do. So so I did I bought a house and then I finished up my degree and I worked for an oil

2 (6m 12s):
company and this is an oil company back in Calgary, right? Because you moved back there are some brilliant. Right and I guess in like the late 70s right pretty much around the time you graduate college or you start to make shorts like baggy shorts for men.

1 (6m 32s):
Yeah, because I didn't you know, I have to get it what it was like at that time men wore very short shorts that were very very tight. You know, you only have to look at movies from the from the late 70s to get that kind of picture and and they made a lot of sense to me because His I had very big legs and I was I think because I was working out three times a day. I was always in a constant sweat and the idea of wearing shorts full-time was very appealing to me.

2 (7m 1s):
Yeah, and and so you know and and these were like flower printed like loud Hawaiian. Like I don't know if you've been to Trader Joe's like those shirts like that's what the shorts look like.

1 (7m 11s):
Yeah, exactly. But you know, you have to see it in a context that there was nothing like that before everything else was that era of Round rust off color okra yellow like solid colors. There was no brightness in the world at all that time. So that was a radical look so I started because I couldn't get blood flowered prince in 2000 meters which is kind of what a person needs to go into business. I started doing what my mom did she quilted fabric. So I would get masses of different types of patterns of fabric and then I would cut them into squares and then I would quilt them and then in order to Keep the stability of that. I put up backing on it of black Fabric and then I realized I had reversible shorts.

1 (7m 56s):
So not only were they long and baggy and reversible. They just really revolutionized short. So and then the skateboarder started taking them on because it kind of covered their

2 (8m 7s):
knees. Why do they even know about them? Did you start to sell them somewhere?

1 (8m 11s):
Well, I mean, that's the invention of vertical retailing because I made about 300 pairs of the shortstop in 1880 and I went to the big department stores here in Canada and they would have nothing to do with them. So I had my first inventory problem. So I thought well what am I going to do? So I basically set up a lemonade stand for the shorts and

2 (8m 32s):
we're in Calgary

1 (8m 34s):
in the downtown mall in Calgary and I had a partner girlfriend at the time and so we did that together and you know, we you know, we'd lay all these shorts out and then a day would make like a thousand dollars a day selling the shorts and I was making A hundred and twenty dollars at the oil company so then wasn't tough to figure out the math of

2 (8m 54s):
that and what are these will not swimming shorts. These are just like what like who would wear these shorts? What would you be doing while wearing these shorts?

1 (9m 2s):
Well these particular shorts, you know, I couldn't really see it was tough in the oil business of conservative Calgary where people were proud of suits and cowboy boots to sell them on loud baggy shorts. And so I originally called them barbarians. Barbecue shorts because I needed to give men needed an excuse to wear them. I knew they wanted to wear them but as you know, a couple years went on and that's again, that's when the skateboarding Market took over from the surf market and the young boys me know like 10 to 18 started wearing

2 (9m 35s):
them. So this is this is 1980. You've got barbecue shorts, by the way, the barbecue season and Calgary has to be fairly short like a couple

1 (9m 43s):
weeks. Yeah, 40 days

2 (9m 46s):
next 40 days. You got 40 days to wear these shorts and Calgary. I mean not a brilliant marketing move, but it worked people were like alright barbecue and so 1980 and then but it's the same time you were still working for this oil company on the side or or you were doing this on a second workflow and how long before you quit the oil company?

1 (10m 5s):
Well, I had my goal of quitting being in my own business by 30. So I worked through a little company for five years and quit on my

2 (10m 12s):
birthday your 30th birthday.

1 (10m 14s):
Exactly.

2 (10m 16s):
Did you create a brand around around it? The barbecue

1 (10m 19s):
shorts. Yeah, I I called it West Beach which at the time was I think it's probably from being in San Diego and I was young and probably the incredible feeling I had from living on the beach every day mind. You were a little kid. Yeah when I was a little kid and I being in Calgary rails wanted to get back to the beach house want to get back to the West Coast. I think that's where I felt best. So that was the brand I built up around it

2 (10m 43s):
and who and and so initially your customers were in Calgary, but how did you get the word out around? Don't be on

1 (10m 51s):
well, I went to Canada was pretty easy because you know that I got into it almost a decade before anybody else I think but and so I could slowly kind of move across like that. We opened up a store in Toronto, but then I went to a trade show in Singapore and then another one in Munich and so, you know, when a person kind of comes out with something that's so different like that that you know, there's a lot of interest in it and then I had this Sense, looking five years in the future that skateboarding and surf markets were going to be huge

2 (11m 25s):
and and by the sort of that time the mid to late 80s. What were you selling?

1 (11m 31s):
Well, I mean the beautiful thing is I when I formed a partnership with my two guys in Vancouver, I moved to Vancouver and then in I'd say 80 with starting an 83 in Calgary at started to do snowboarding and I could see snowboarding coming and boarding was going to be way bigger than Surfer skate and I didn't care about the boards and the boots and the bindings because for me that was low-margin hard Goods where I knew all the money was to be made in the clothing especially for us because it would take up the other eight months of the year, which we weren't really selling very much and Snowboard clothing was four or five times the price of surf and skate t-shirts and

2 (12m 14s):
shorts and who is designing the apparel that West Beach was selling

1 (12m 19s):
Well, I was that was my thing. And I you know, if I look back at it now, I mean, I never had any money for clothing when I was young. I probably had a genetic desire for you know, the kind of ideas that I had I think part of it was you know my size and I think part of it was I wanted athletic clothing that actually fit me. So I think there was driven to both those.

2 (12m 42s):
What were you making the stuff by the way, where's clothing being made at that

1 (12m 44s):
point? Well, I'm making it in Calgary. I found some Italian Couture. Miners that were you know, again just like my mother they were at home and they weren't working and they were amazing. So we set up a factory and so if you can imagine almost everybody else in the apparel industry, I think everybody else basically made clothing then wholesaled it to somebody else right Not only was I doing my own manufacturing, but I own my own stores. So I was basically taking the profit of two middlemen out of the business, but you know the big Revenue Ooh part of the business was in wholesale, but my wholesale business was losing a million dollars a year.

1 (13m 25s):
And then I had these two retail stores that were making a million dollars a

2 (13m 28s):
year. Wait, wait explain explain this to me because you have these retail stores and and they were doing well, but you also had a wholesale business which was losing money.

1 (13m 38s):
Well, it was a quandary because I needed the volume from wholesale to get to economy of scale production to bring my prices down and because my prices were down Retail stores could make so much money, but I couldn't really make any money in wholesale because if I made something for $20 and I would have to sell it to Dick's Sporting Goods 440 and then they would sell it for 80 wearing my own retail stores. Then I was begin putting it in there for 20 and making $80. So there was a sixty dollar profit in there. And so I kept thinking to myself. How can I get to economy of scale production?

1 (14m 18s):
And that was the The you know the big big

2 (14m 21s):
driver and were you were I mean, what was your vision did you think this is going to we're going to take on we're gonna be the biggest snowboard apparel company in the world.

1 (14m 31s):
Sure. I mean in a Japan had just exploded. So it was about 30% of all sores business and the drive to grow and to grow fast knowing that what I'd seen in surf and skate where it started off with three companies went to And then went down to three again. I need the same thing was how going to happen in snowboarding. So when's the right time to get in? What's the right time to build was the right time to invest and when to get out was always in the back of my mind and sure enough, you know, probably in 96 or so the Japanese Yen started to collapse. So we're starting to think that snowboarding wasn't the cool thing to do anymore.

1 (15m 13s):
And so the market was changing drastically and we still weren't making any money because As we were just reinvesting just to keep on top of the competition.

2 (15m 23s):
So you decide to sell

1 (15m 25s):
well, yes, we and we sold to a public company out of Salem Oregon moral snowboards. And you know, we quite honestly could not make payroll on Friday and we sold Wednesday based on brand value only.

2 (15m 41s):
Wow. He probably walked away with a good chunk of cash.

1 (15m 45s):
Well, I had partners and I had Banks and I Private equity in there at that time. So I walked away with a million and after-tax 800,000 and then you've got a you know, I had paid myself probably 30 to $40,000 for 18 years. So I did

2 (16m 2s):
now will ya you didn't walk with a whole lot?

1 (16m 4s):
No, I needed a car and I needed to buy a house of some sort, which was the best thing I ever did living in Vancouver.

2 (16m 12s):
Okay, so, okay. So here you are in your early 40s and like and what were you going to

1 (16m 17s):
do? Well, actually my goal all was to be financially independent by 40. So I failed in that goal and you know was thinking about what I wanted to do and then I and I had this thing I have always believed in this three times things when I see something three times and I move and I move really quickly. So I'd seen at seen an article in the paper about yoga at seen a poster on a telephone post with the little rip off about the yoga class. And then I overheard a conversation in a coffee shop. But York and I went wow, so I went to this yoga class. Yeah, I know it went from about 6 to 30 people in 30 days.

1 (16m 58s):
I was the only guy in the class and it's in a gym and you know, of course, I'm always noticing athletic bodies and clothing and how it fits. I mean, I'm really a big data guy around, you know, I look at everybody top to bottom and I analyzed it and at the time the fashion Of Jim's was to wear your very worst clothing and mostly because probably 90% of people in gyms were men. And and you know, you knew you were going to sweat and that you were going to get ugly in it. And you just wanted to throw it in the wash afterwards. So nobody thought about athletic clothing being nice.

2 (17m 38s):
So, so just to get inside your head here you're in this yoga class and you are observing what everyone's wearing. You must have been thinking already. I have a business idea. When did you start to add two and two and say wait a minute? I can make this this type of clothing. Like how did he go from one yoga class to that thought was an instant. Did it take a week to take a

1 (17m 60s):
month? Well, I wasn't doing anything and I think I was looking for what my life was going to be. And so what I saw in yoga was exactly the same thing I saw in Surf skate snowboarding. So, like I said, it went from 6 to 30 people in 30 days and I extrapolated out. Out to five years away and I went this is going to be substantial now. I didn't think it was going to be as big as surf skate or snowboarding and I had really no idea at the time. It would be a hundred times bigger

2 (18m 34s):
so big deal, right? This is like you're spotting a trend like really early in 1997 and and you probably can't fully explain why you were able to see that Trend, but it was just this like intrinsic feeling. And you just some such a part of you just knew that this was going to be a thing.

1 (18m 53s):
Yep again. I was extrapolating but you also have to get as probably the only person in the world thinking about technical clothing outside of mountain clothing. So, you know, the real question in my mind is do I use this or do I just say, you know, I called I called my 18 years at West Beach my 18 year MBA and so You know do I just leave all that information behind or do I say, you know, I've got something here and it's and it's worth using

2 (19m 29s):
after the break have chip Wilson eventually use that 18 year MBA to graduate to an even bigger business a business. That would change the Athletic Apparel industry forever. Stay with us. I'm guy rods and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible first to Kohler intelligent toilets with a range of Smart features for pampering relaxation and cleanliness Kohler intelligent toilets are designed to provide an elevated experience.

2 (20m 11s):
Enjoy warm water cleansing warm air drying and heated seat control surround yourself with ambient lighting and automatic air freshening because every moment with a Kohler intelligent toilet is designed to make you feel Your cleanest and most comfortable Kohler invites you to discover what you've been missing at Kohler.com intelligent toilets. Thanks. Also to indeed when it comes to hiring you need help getting to your short list of qualified candidates fast with indeed.com. You can post a job in minutes set up screener questions, then zero in on qualified candidates using an intuitive online dashboard, and when you need to hire fast accelerate your results with sponsored jobs new you Users can try for free at indeed.com podcast terms conditions and quality standards apply offer valid through March 31st 2020.

1 (21m 8s):
Astrology is as old as civilization itself. And today it's easier to access than ever before thanks to the internet and

2 (21m 15s):
smartphones this week on through-line how astrology almost went extinct and made a remarkable comeback

1 (21m 22s):
through line from NPR. The podcast will be go back in

2 (21m 25s):
time to understand the present. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So after attending his first yoga class in Vancouver in the late 1990s chip Wilson had this idea for his next clothing company, but it actually took him a while before he acted on it. Yeah. I

1 (21m 48s):
had to read an article in the paper one day that told me that sixty percent of the graduates at a university where women in 1998 and I went wow, you know something really really big is going to come. That this and that is we're going to end up with a market that's never occurred before and that is a 22 to 35 year-old single professional well-traveled. Stylish athletic women who kind of owns her own condo and and that so, you know what I kind of put these things together and I think that it just reinforced that this Market was there and ready for something big specially in athletic.

1 (22m 32s):
Nothing

2 (22m 33s):
did so did you what did you do? Did you did you run back from that yoga class and I go back to your house or wherever you were living and start to sketch out ideas.

1 (22m 43s):
Yeah, there was a little bit of that and I talked to a course Fiona staying who was the my yoga instructor who kind of dropped out of the New York Financial world to become a yoga instructor in Vancouver and like I did answer skating snowboarding. I started to use her as a sounding board and as Creative Source because unlike sir skating snowboarding where I as a boy and I could fit in the clothing. I knew exactly what was going on. I obviously wasn't a woman and I could see that yo get that time. Anyway, it was 99% women and if I was going to do this and I was going to transfer my knowledge of what I'd learned in snowboarding Lycra stretch pants into yoga then I needed some

2 (23m 26s):
advice. All right, so you had some money to play with from the sale of your other company and you knew how to so of course and you knew how to Source material. So what we like what was your first move and starting the

1 (23m 38s):
business? Well, one of my big issues in life is always been about rationing of clothing and I could never really believed that while Nike was a shoe company. So I know they didn't really understand clothing either because even in their running shorts, they had these open seams in between their legs and run 5K and I totally rush so for me, it was like solving athletic problems. I went to Japan I'd heard about these machines that were 40,000 dollars a piece which was huge at the time and I bought four of

2 (24m 12s):
them a machine to do what

1 (24m 13s):
they were flat seam. So it's the first time you could put two pieces of fabric together and the Machine would flat seam the Fabrics together and then cut off any excess fabric so that there was nothing flopping around on the inside.

2 (24m 28s):
So the idea was to basically make athletic wear that Eliminate rashes.

1 (24m 34s):
Yes, and when I was running 10 case or triathlons, the rashing was the thing that was always the pain point of what I'd call a high-level Athletics. And again what I because I became a fabric scientist of sorts. I could bring in the wicking the the moisture wicking I could bring in the anti stink. I could make it thick enough where it would smooth over a girl's body so she could feel comfortable wearing it, you know. Eating up in the morning putting it on at work and then walking down to the yoga class and then walking home

2 (25m 7s):
and was the idea to just make athletic gear or yoga clothes or was it to make a fashionable? You know

1 (25m 16s):
apparel. Well, I think I was just, you know the right person to be putting like I said the two together in my drive and what differentiated Lululemon from everybody else's I came at it from function and then put fashion into it.

2 (25m 32s):
All right. Let's do a reality check here for a sec. It's 98. You don't have a lot of money. You took a pretty big bat like a you pretty much bet everything you had right? Why would you why were you so confident? This was going to

1 (25m 47s):
work? I think because when I started to do my first design meetings with these ten groups of ten women and we had like five or six samples and they touch the fabric and they put it on it was the first time that really a synthetic fabric felt like cotton there was nothing like it any like it was just nothing like it. So I think that looking in the eyes of the consumer I could tell that this was something that was going to be unbelievable.

2 (26m 18s):
All right, so you bet everything on this and then you open a store, right?

1 (26m 23s):
Yeah, but it's, you know, I can only get a store on the second floor in the right area on the right Street in Vancouver, which is probably got more. Big stores in any place in the world because of the you know, the type of environment we have but I can't you know, it's really hard to get people up to the top floor. So the only way I can I figure out how to do it is to is to combine my business with Fiona staying my yoga teachers and I had all my clothing on rolling racks and would move it all out to the side and have yoga classes there early in the morning and then at night that would bring women into yoga, but also see what our clothing was and then it kind of moved from

2 (27m 2s):
They're so your first store was essentially a yoga studio with a like a boutique inside,

1 (27m 8s):
correct? Okay, so

2 (27m 9s):
you have you have this this company which which you decide to call Lulu Lemon, but by the way, where did that name come from?

1 (27m 19s):
Yeah. I probably get asked this once a day. And so when I had West Beach I had bought a skateboard brand called homeless and with homeless I started to Sell that to the Europeans and the Japanese and it started to occur to me that the Phi big trading companies in Japan were making North American brand name clothing. In other words. They would come up with their own brand name in order to deliver that to the Japanese customer. But Japanese those big trading companies would never come up with a name with an L on it because it doesn't exist in the Japanese language. And so what I got was that the young kids could see through that and they went a name with an Ellen.

1 (28m 5s):
It is more authentic North American. It's not like a Japanese knock off. So it had real value to them. So I started go all that's really a neat idea. So I over the next couple years. I just started doing a litter ations in my mind and with else but it was a pretty risky name at the time because lemon was really connected with really bad quality Detroit

2 (28m 28s):
car. Yeah, right a lemon. Yeah, but

1 (28m 30s):
I actually came up with about 20 names in a Logos,

2 (28m 33s):
what were some of the other names?

1 (28m 35s):
Well, the only one I can remember right now is called athletically hip so mean. Well, that's what the girls thought to because I had 10 focus groups of 10 people and I had them vote on the names and the logos and they came up with the name Lululemon, but the logo actually came from athletically hip so it was it was a stylized a from the athletic.

2 (29m 1s):
So here's a here's A question for each of course. I'm curious. I'm a as you know a man like you and you you are selling a product primarily to women in a you know sport that yoga or an exercise that you weren't really an expert in you were not like some Yogi Guru you weren't you're a big guy. You're like a football player type of guy and yet you were trying to create a market and sell a product to to you. Women how did you do it did you sort of step back and and have other women kind of sell the product

1 (29m 42s):
for you? Yeah. I mean I had the went in between West Beach and Lululemon. I'd really decided that I only wanted to work with people. I love to work with and so I was really determined to develop people to train them to Mentor them and then get out of the way and as I was running out of my money for my second time. I had taken another $200,000 loan.

2 (30m 8s):
Wait, because the first time you ran out of money you were you running west Beach. Right?

1 (30m 12s):
Right and I got West Beach my old company moved back from from Salem to Vancouver and they asked me to run it and it was like a gift out of Heaven because as we were really low on money, we're I didn't want to advertise. I wanted word-of-mouth to of the quality of our clothing to be The Branding Niche because I really did believe in the Tipping Point and it had to come from people at couldn't come from advertising. So I was again another incredibly lucky thing. I hired this woman who Shannon gray was her name the first person I'd ever seen that had a design portfolio with using stretch clothing and it within about two weeks.

1 (30m 55s):
I after hiring her I left her in charge a Lululemon as a CEO for a year and I went back and ran West Beach

2 (31m 1s):
and that's how you were. Will to make some cash

1 (31m 4s):
that's how he's able to make more cash exactly.

2 (31m 6s):
So you and so we should foreshadowed is a foreshadowing here that Shannon eventually becomes your wife. You're now married to Shannon. She's your wife. See you so Lululemon like really launches in in 98 in this neighborhood in Vancouver and does it take off right away as it was just like insane or was it a slow burn?

1 (31m 27s):
It was very slow burn and and then it was so slow that even When I left for to run West Beach, we were running out of money. I had a lot of inventory because I need to make at least five to six hundred of every of our six Styles in order to get the price down. So I fell into the Trap of wholesaling. And so I made a big deal to wholesale to a sporting goods company and Vancouver and I shipped to them and they immediately went bankrupt. So that really took the company to the very edge. We had no money to pay. Payroll again. I was only a couple weeks away from the end of it.

1 (32m 7s):
We had just decided to move across the street from our second floor into a store on the main floor on 4th Avenue at ten dollars a square foot because it was an old beat-up electronic store. And then the another thing from Heaven came and it was they fired me at West Beach. Well and I use that Loosely but they combined with Sim skateboards in the CEO of sim skateboards became the CEO so they let me go with a severance fee of $50,000 and if it wasn't for that $50,000 we never would have been able to finish our store. Wow, just before Christmas time.

2 (32m 44s):
This isn't

1 (32m 44s):
mm. Yeah this in 2000. And even though we had this great yoga pant and tops Shannon had designed this polar fleece bra which got into the newspaper and brought everybody into the store. And of course while they were there, they mostly bought the yoga pants because they could We're in a position then to educate people on the technical features of our pant. And once we had somebody in them, they they were a customer for life.

2 (33m 11s):
And if you were taking a yoga class in Vancouver at that time, presumably you would have seen the label because the label was like right on the outside of the waistband, right?

1 (33m 23s):
Yeah, I put it there because I was very clear that I did that I didn't want big low going and I thought that somebody should look in the mirror. Our and not see any logos and I definitely didn't like logos on the left breast because I looked at it as being kind of corporate logo going, you know, it's always there on the left chest. So I decided I wanted the logo small. I wanted to be discreet and a place that nobody could see

2 (33m 51s):
so you I guess around 2002 you open your first store outside of Vancouver. This isn't Toronto or Toronto as they say in

1 (33m 58s):
Toronto. Yeah, so we had in my Floor, you know in Vancouver was a really a pop-up store in the you know, where people had to really look and find it. We did the same thing in Toronto almost a year before we opened the store there and it was we got a way of developing the marketplace which became a Lululemon business model. So we would go into every city in the future set up a store in the back alley or in a side street and develop our Market invite yoga instructors in before we spent, you know, 602 a million dollars on a store and you know No, again created Word of Mouth which was you know, my favorite type of marketing is Break Even marketing because I never had any money for marketing.

1 (34m 39s):
So that was a given.

2 (34m 41s):
Well, you did. I mean you guys did some some stunts right like it when you opened your shop in Vancouver. You said the first 30 people who show up naked get a free

1 (34m 49s):
outfit. Well, it was worse than that. I actually put my first ad in as anyone that shows up gets a free outfit and then I realized his in Vancouver and I was going to get every person in the whole city would show up naked so I couldn't really do that. So I had Put another ad in a week later saying the first 30 and did that happen. Oh, yeah, and it created Global media. Everybody showed up. There was TV trucks all up and down the street and and we be

2 (35m 14s):
buck naked in front of the

1 (35m 16s):
store. Well, they showed up it was a October morning. It was you probably never heard this about Vancouver it was overcast and drizzly, you know, they all showed up in their trench coats and and then you know, we went out when we went open the store. I went out with my wife and put my arm around her and then we we said thanks for coming and everyone dropped their trench coats and went running into the store. This is

2 (35m 40s):
and like nobody nobody was arrested because like this is not normally allowed in most

1 (35m 45s):
cities. Well, especially in 2002, but I think it's part of the culture here and there's lots of nude beaches. So I don't think it was I don't think it was out of the realm for for Vancouver rights. I'm very proud of our city and our police for first, you know stepping back and you know, just observing

2 (36m 4s):
Surround 2002 glulam really starts to grow like 2003 you open this your first store in the US and Santa Monica, which is obviously you chose that because that was sort of right the center of the yoga culture in the u.s. I

1 (36m 18s):
guess. Yeah, I think probably the big thing that happened after we opened up Toronto and the second store in Vancouver is you know, I ask my lovely wife to marry me. She said yes, and so he was able. With Saturday when we were to get married and I'm working in the store and really I became almost a traffic cop because the number of people coming in the store was something they would never seen before. I think it went from a $10,000 Saturday to a $30,000 Saturday. So

2 (36m 50s):
obviously like you've got a store in Toronto. You've got one in Santa Monica and then I guess you're next stop was Melbourne Australia you're growing fast, but you would you still Did you Stitch I'm assuming you didn't have enough cash flow to really scale the business at that point.

1 (37m 9s):
Well, I only after that we started making a lot of money and I don't just don't mean a little bit of money. I mean a lot of money. I mean you have to understand that again that nobody in the world had was was owning manufacturing right to the retail store. I mean, I was taking triple the profit of most people

2 (37m 30s):
but I mean, I guess it was as 2005 that you went out and and sought outside investors who then kids because at that point you don't a hundred percent of the company so you sold I guess about half of the company and then step down as a CEO. Why did you do that? What was that? The only way you could like you could expand and scale.

1 (37m 51s):
No. No, I mean because I had built retail stores around the world. I done Global manufacturing. I mean honest to God, I could have done it all but even though it was Making so much money. I'd never taken any money out. My wife and I neither of us came from money and we were always scared. You know, we were scared that an earthquake would hit or you know, like this seems really good. But is it true is it happening would have to pinch ourselves every morning? Yeah, and then and I wanted advisors. I wanted people around me that could make sure that I wasn't going to run into roadblocks.

2 (38m 26s):
Okay, so you've sold about half the company to private investors a new CEO comes in. You stay on as chairman and then and then I guess you'd become like Chief Innovation officer at this point.

1 (38m 39s):
Right? Right, and it allowed me to sit in the middle of the design Department, which is my love is innovation and quality and and Athletics. So, I mean that's where I really flourished and I hadn't developed as a chairman. I didn't understand public boards. I didn't understand how to act or be. I mean, I think people think oh, you know I ended up A lot of money, I'm you know chip Wilson's a businessman but nothing really could have been further from the truth. I just a passionate product guy. So it's

2 (39m 12s):
interesting because even though you are still the biggest shareholder you all of a sudden had outside investors who came in and had their ideas for how this company should be run. So I have to imagine starting in 2005 even though you're no longer CEO. There was some tension that begins.

1 (39m 33s):
Well, yes, I think my my mistake happened when I was at West Beach and I brought in private Equity we Board of directors, but they had no vested interest. They were there to help us out and they were wonderful. So I had this context of my mind that bringing in private equity and having a group of like really great advisors with me where we are all in the same page and moving in the same direction was going to be another wonderful experience. Yeah, but it wasn't, you know, they it's my own fault. I mean the private Equity they're there to make money for their investors and I had a very long long-term vision for Lululemon and they had quite a short term vision for the lemon.

1 (40m 17s):
So we went we ended up going public way too quickly,

2 (40m 22s):
right? But when you guys went public alike in 2007, this was a hot stock, right? Yeah, and you actually sold a chunk of stock pretty early on

1 (40m 31s):
right? Yeah, you know again, you know, I had advisors that we're just giving me advice that was good for them and not necessarily for me. You know, I really only want to sell You percent of the stock to the private Equity guys, but end up selling 48. So I lost control of the board seats and I didn't know how to negotiate for them. So that is important because as we go public then you know, the advice I got was a chippy should sell more of your shares in the marketplace because the more shares are out there the more the more the institutional investors will be able to get up a good chunk of it and be able to hold it for a long time. But the reality of it is is all these were techniques to have kind of an owner founder dissipate and kind of move into the background and not have the power so to speak to control of board and that's really what I lost and it's my own fault and but that's what I ended up with

2 (41m 27s):
but this company just like went took off right I mean through the to the early 2000s and to 2 mm and then it just it was on fire. Right? I mean Lululemon was everywhere and and was is too But I mean that despite the challenges that you faced it did explode and growth. You gotta admit that

1 (41m 51s):
right? Oh, it was unbelievable. I mean, we you know, okay, so things happen to me big deal. I mean definitely I probably have a long-term vision for my family and I had a long-term vision for Lululemon and you know, and those things never kind of work out perfectly but all in all I mean you'd have to admit that what occurred and what Has happened is made me incredibly happy and incredibly wealthy. So

2 (42m 17s):
in 2011 Lululemon a you land on the list of Canada's billionaires, which I mean means you achieved your goal Financial Security and more. Was that like a marker for you. Is that important for you? Or did you did you think did you not really care?

1 (42m 36s):
I could I really didn't care because I again my dries were family. And my absolute passion for athletic clothing and I think my wife and I again, we just always so scared of losing it at all. You know, like it's still good as you know the store and only buy one tube of toothpaste, you know, we couldn't like we couldn't see her cells buying three, you know to save time it. Yeah, I could do it my business, but I couldn't do it at home.

2 (43m 7s):
All right. So let's address the one elephant that everyone I say I'm supposed to be Show everyone says that guy didn't he once a and this is this is the let's just give the outlines the story 2013 Lululemon has to recall certain pants because there were concerns of they were too sheer that that they were see-through and in an interview you gave offhand you said, you know, look some of these pants don't look good on all women's bodies uses something to that effect and this caused an enormous uproar like essentially the interpretation of it. Was that you were saying overweight women shouldn't wear Lululemon pants. What happened? What's your take on?

2 (43m 47s):
What happened?

1 (43m 49s):
Well, I think you have to go back and to the end of 212. I mean, I was quite frustrated with with the board. I think that you know the board and I didn't see eye to eye on how the company was being run. So and then there was everything kind of I said would happen did happen. There was a huge quality issue, so I went on this Program on I think it was NBC and lumbergh Bloomberg. Yes again. And I did know from working in the stores that there was definitely something happening to our clothing and I didn't know what any way that the question was a really about the pilling and I said, well what I call

2 (44m 32s):
killing in the in that one friction happens the fabric

1 (44m 35s):
pills, right, right? Okay, what was you know, you've done that interview with Blakeley on Spanx so suddenly woman were coming into the store and not wanting Lululemon for athletics. They were coming in looking forward to shape their bodies. But the sewing technique in the fabric wasn't meant for it. So what they were doing is buying two to four sizes smaller than what their size was in order to get out of the I meant would it wasn't made for?

1 (45m 14s):
So when you stretch anything to a limit and then it you sit on a wooden bench or something like that then killing a curse to a greater extent. So anyway that but I didn't know that till afterwards. I hadn't really put two together didn't realize what a big issue. It was and the words that I said were not all women. I think something all when belong in every pair of 11

2 (45m 44s):
pieces but you said quite frankly some women's bodies just don't just actually don't work

1 (45m 49s):
for yeah. Yeah, which is a lot different than what you said,

2 (45m 53s):
which is that a lot of people thought you said that overweight women shouldn't wear Lululemon

1 (45m 58s):
pants. Yeah. I mean what you said is what I think people here, which is a lot different than what I said, just so we're there

2 (46m 5s):
did you or did you get depressed?

1 (46m 9s):
Yeah, I'd have to say I was because you know, then they the board took me off as chairman because Cuz they felt like I wasn't the right front man for the company anymore and I was a liability to Lululemon. I mean this is you know, after 30 years of doing, you know thousands of public interviews and you know, I say one thing and then suddenly I'm a

2 (46m 31s):
liability. So what I mean, so, how did you kind of I don't know. Did you did you think about that? I mean, I take your point that you feel like you were misunderstood and that that wasn't contention but whatever. That's what came out. And that was how it was interpreted. And did you have some time to reflect on it to think? How is his I'm just that was just dumb.

1 (46m 55s):
Well, it was a poor choice of words. It was absolutely devastating to me. It was devastating to my family. I mean people would come up to my wife and go how can you be with a man like that that would say that type of thing but more so it was the antithesis of everything I had built, you know with Men and four women for Lululemon. It was the very opposite but yes, it was it was if I could take it back. I certainly would

2 (47m 30s):
yes it is it strange. I've asked this question of other Founders chip. Is it strange to build a company Put Your Blood Sweat and Tears in something that people don't pay attention to for a long time and all of a sudden everyone jumps on it when it starts to take off, you know, right success has a million fathers and and failure is an orphan, right? So all of a sudden and your company this thing you built Or idea the name the product and then you you're no longer in control. Is that is that weird?

1 (47m 59s):
Yeah, you know my vision for Lululemon and what it could have been that is not everything that I think it can be and you know life is all about how you handle setbacks and I think Lululemon still on them on the most informed cheerleader and I think it has you know has a great future still

2 (48m 18s):
you have another you have another business in you

1 (48m 22s):
well. Well, what I learned is that when I left Lululemon, if you know, even though it was maybe two billion dollars in sales at the time. My my brain was on Lululemon being seven eight billion dollars and I had worked so hard building a company like by Brick by Brick that it was I don't think I can go back and and be a starter of a company at the age 62 anymore and I'm probably got to get a life to want to do that again and My absolute favorite thing I do is my I've got 12 year olds twin boys and I'm coaching flag football and nothing could be more fun.

1 (49m 3s):
Yeah. Nothing could be more fun

2 (49m 5s):
chip. You've heard the show before how much of your success is because of your intelligence and work and how much of it is because you were really lucky.

1 (49m 18s):
I think I was pure passion. For athletic technical product and I would have worked 18 hours a day for the rest of my life for no money. Now. I think what happened is I got lucky because my drive and passion met a world that wanted what I wanted and that was the lucky part

2 (49m 46s):
that's chip Wilson founder at Lululemon last year the company made over three and a half. Million dollars chip hasn't been with Lululemon since 2015, but he's been staying pretty busy as the executive director of his family's holding company called hold it all Incorporated.

1 (50m 15s):
Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World

2 (50m 19s):
Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. Each of us is the star in the movie of our life. But how much of a role do we play? In other people's movies? It was a really sort of palpable fear that they were going to reject me or worse. The Unseen pressures we place on other people this week on hidden brain from NPR. Hey, thanks for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and today we're checking back on a story that ran about a year ago, but started in 2016, right outside of Boston with Kate Westervelt waddling around Target waddling around Target because she just been released from the hospital where she'd given birth to a nine and a half pound baby boy.

2 (51m 16s):
So Kate was sore and she had stitches and she wasn't really up for a Target run. Now the thing you should know about Kate is that She's kind of a planner. So she'd already fully stocked her Nursery with everything. She thought the baby would need diapers and wipes and clothing, but she didn't really give much thought to the things that she might need after her baby was born the nurses walked in with things like mashed underwear and he's ginormous pads plus ice packs and a squeeze bottle to help keep her stitches clean all stuff she needed for her recovery, but stuff Kate. Didn't have at home. So on the way home from the hospital while her husband and new baby waited in the car.

2 (52m 0s):
She went shopping and she felt kind of Clueless. I got a bunch of different breastfeeding AIDS, you know, organic pads synthetic pads, whatever I could get my hands on because I was just desperate and in dire need of any help and all help and I knew I wouldn't be able to get to the store again in the next couple days. Okay left the store totally overwhelmed, but she also laughed With an idea. We live in a convenience economy. We get razors delivered groceries delivered. Everything is delivered. How are we not providing this convenience for new moms who need it the most and as soon as you got back in the car Kate that I'm gonna go build this thing.

2 (52m 41s):
She meant a box filled with products a new mom would need a box delivered right to her door. She kept thinking about this idea during her leave. So after she went back to her nine to five job Kate decided To start working on it at night. I would order various products and then I would test them all eternity pads creams protein bars herbal supplements Kate tried more than 400 products over the course of a year and eventually she settled on a set of 10 items to go into her first boxes and the one product her test mom's really liked and ice pack at the hospital. They give you just bags of ice and they sort of stick them in your underwear and say good luck so Kate.

2 (53m 24s):
Found the perfect ice pack sized and shaped so new moms could walk around but there were some women who told her, you know, this ice pack is great, but I ended up with a C-section and what I really needed was a heating pad to place on my belly or some sort of oil for my scar and my incision line so he decided hey maybe I should curate a C-section recovery box. She went on to put up a website and build a social media following on Facebook and Instagram. Sixty percent of moms moms Source across the internet and so Mom started to talk about this box and in January of 2018 nearly two years after her frustrating Target.

2 (54m 6s):
Run Kate sold her first box. It was designed to look just like a present. It's pink and glossy and we sort of thought, you know, let's put a handle on this box because it makes it feel like a special arrival like a special trunk filled with self-care items in our first year. Kate actually sold almost 500 boxes all assembled and packed in a room above her garage since we last spoke to her Kate hits six figures in revenue and is out of debt, not only that but she's now on contract with some pretty big companies to send her box as a gift to their employees kind of like a congratulations for becoming a new parent but much more useful than flowers or a card.

2 (54m 48s):
Kate Westervelt business is called Mom box. And if you want to find out more about it, or here previous episodes head to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org. And of course if you want to tell us your story go to build dot npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe at Apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcasts. And while you're there, please do give us a review. You can also write to us at H IB T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's as how I built this. This or at guy Roz our show is produced this week by Shinee West with music composed by rum team Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Sequoia Carrillo Candace limb, Julia Carney leave a grant and Jeff Rogers.

2 (55m 30s):
Our intern is rainy toll I'm Gyros and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.