2 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor 3M committed to finding solutions for problems big and small in ways that

1 (7s):
improve lives to learn how 3M is helping the world respond to covid-19.

2 (12s):
Go to 3 m.com covid 3M science applied to life.

1 (18s):
Hey everyone. So I have a request if you value this show if you value the stories the lessons the wisdom and inspiration we bring to you if you think of me. As your friend, which I am because even though millions of you are listening. I'm actually talking just to you right now. I need you to be there for me as well, and you can do that by supporting what I do and buying my book how I built this. It is just out now and available everywhere, and it doesn't cost more than a few cups of coffee, and it's filled with wisdom and stories and ideas that will have you feeling inspired and fired up to Take On The World.

1 (59s):
So please if you Of the show and what we do for you do us one back and pick up how I built this wherever books are sold. You were a millionaire and you had lost all of it and you are also in debt and now you're 42, you've got three kids.

2 (1m 22s):
My eldest son. Took me to one side at 7 on suggested. Well Dad do not think you should get a proper

1 (1m 31s):
job. And what did you think

2 (1m 34s):
I said? Well, I think I've got a skill set that such that if I can Market it I can. A lot of money again, and he sort of nodded sagely at 7 and let me do it.

1 (1m 51s):
I'm in PR is how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They go. I'm guy Roz and on the show today. He'll Mark Constantine and his Partners emerged from a failed business to launch a little cosmetic store that turned into a global Beauty brand Lush. Back in 1995. I was studying in London. My sister Karen came to visit me that year. She'd been to London before so on her visit. She was the guide we trawled through the market stalls at Camden lock.

1 (2m 32s):
We picked up some India records at rough trade and made a special trip to Covent Garden to visit a newly open shop called La ruche. I hadn't heard of it, but my sister had instructions from all of her friends back in LA. Get me stuff from Lush now at the time. It was one of two Lush locations in the world. And this is before e-commerce. So unless you went to the store, you couldn't get the products. I remember the overpowering smell of roses and lavender and honey and lemon. I remember these long loaves of colorful. So played out on tables where you could slice off a chunk and pay for it by weight there were vast.

1 (3m 17s):
Alms and shampoos and lotions. It looked like the produce department at a fancy grocery store. You didn't see a whole lot of plastic and packaging and in front of each product you find a bright colorful chalkboard with a description. It was unlike any beauty product store I had ever seen and it probably explains why back then there was a line to get in Lush was part of a new wave of beauty companies that came. Onto the scene around that time many of them influenced by the body shop and its iconic founder Anita Roddick, who as you will hear features prominently in this story as well.

1 (4m 0s):
The main founder of lush Mark Constantine had already seen incredible success and then catastrophic failure by the time he launched his Venture. In fact right before Mark opened Lush. He lost most of his money on mail-order business. It went bust but Lush turned his fortunes around and today it's a brand with more than 900 stores around the world now in recent months. The pandemic has hit the company hard for time all of its stores in the UK the US and Australia were closed but Lush has also seen a massive surge in online orders and later on.

1 (4m 42s):
We'll get an update on how Mark and the company have navigated the pandemic and the Economic Fallout, but first a little bit about marks background he grew up in Weymouth a Seaside town in the south of England when he was only two years old his dad split from the family and went off to Africa and Mark never saw him again while he was growing up and his mother she took Mark and moved in with her mother Mark's grandma.

2 (5m 11s):
It was me my mum my grandmother who really brought me up a my aunt. So I was really brought up by three women. Yeah, what did your mom do she was a journalist in the local newspaper? And I knew my mum had to work in order for us to be okay, but it was a very very comfortable life full of love and hugs and security. My name was always there and I love mine and I looked after my nan and so it was comfortable. Very nice and very feminine life. I felt spoilt if anything to be honest, obviously mine and drilled into me the proper values as well with Proverbs and all sorts of other things.

2 (5m 52s):
You know, I had to write repeatedly good better best never let them rest till my good is better and my better best things like that. So

1 (6m 2s):
then I guess like around the time you were 12 or so you like you start living with your grandmother like you and your mom moved out.

2 (6m 10s):
What happened was there was a larger a my mother married the larger and we moved out and my grandmother died and I didn't realize probably until much later in my life how much that had affected me and I felt responsible. I think for my grandmother's death for most of my life because obviously I was important to her and I wasn't there anymore and I couldn't look after her and she died and then my my stepfather was fair. A cold I would say and violent, you know, but that's a very typical upbringing than the 50s because they come out of a war gentlemen. There was a they'd lost their friends.

2 (6m 51s):
Some of them had seen their friends killed or relatives. And so it was you know, not surprising that those people that were bringing up my generation. We're not the best balance people in the world.

1 (7m 3s):
What kind of I mean what kind of kid were you? What do you remember about how you kind of responded to those circumstances and the Did you I don't know Retreat into yourself or did you act out did you fight with your mom? But what do you remember

2 (7m 18s):
I didn't fight with my mom, but I fought a lot with my stepdad physical fights and they would argue we would all argue. It was just I want to say unsatisfactory which doesn't sound like it sounds like a strange word to use doesn't it? But certainly when I came to build my own home. I for example never lock the front door. You know, I make an effort on those smaller things that tell people that they're wanted and careful.

1 (7m 48s):
What can I get for you at school? Were you good student

2 (7m 50s):
but bad with school was called difficult for you. I want to go into how bad not really

1 (7m 57s):
was. It was it was just hard for you. I

2 (7m 59s):
mean there were a lot of gangs gangs were normal at in the 50s for everyone there were lots of gangs. So I went to the grammar school which was the better school in time Rio the top Hempstead students went to grammar school. Everyone is surprised when I got in and then I wasted it while I was there except that I did make friends and we were in a particular gang where we could make bombs and things like

1 (8m 25s):
that. You make it bombs what we were there like when we play pipe bombs.

2 (8m 31s):
They were we killer and sugar bombs with potassium permanganate and glycerin fuses and all sorts of things that we weren't making them for the IRA. We were Just using them for our own purposes to intimidate other gang. It was was that when William Golding wrote Lord of the Flies? Yeah that period of time so if you can imagine that style of living when that's how it was but for me, I'm not at all physical. Yeah, so I'm not going to fight anyone if I can possibly avoid a fighter. No, I talked my way out

1 (9m 5s):
Mark. Do you think mr. Around the edge where you kind of you know, these sit many things are happening. Remember being sad when you were a kid or

2 (9m 15s):
yes, you do every when I seen people sins. There was one girl who I went to school with called elspeth Cox and I saw some 20 years later and she said I'm so glad your life worked out. Well, you were such a sad child how you know, I mean I missed my father even though I'd never known him. Hmm. I think I was Melancholy to use the traditional old-fashioned word. Yeah, I mean my mother missed my father I missed my father I suspect I caught it from her Jeremy as a meme as it were up until I was 10 it was 12 or whatever. It was them. It was fine from then on there were five or six year period of my life which was not fine when you

1 (10m 0s):
were in school as a boy you at one point had some kind of some kind of argument or something happened. We can your mom and your stepdad. Yeah, I think you're 16 and you you left the house or you were locked out of the house. And that was it like you used to living there. What do you remember what happened?

2 (10m 24s):
So do I remember what happened now? But what I do remember is the very singular way you feel when nobody cares. It didn't matter what time I got in at night. It didn't matter whether I was there or not nothing mattered with regard to me. So when you're rebelling obviously it's important that the other person has of has some feeling regarding you. Yeah. Hmm, but there was no discernible feeling. I don't I can't remember what happened physically. Remember the door being locked. I remember it being the end of that of everything connected with that house and I just took it as the ultimate rejection. Should know when I didn't try and fight back or go back in and you know later on.

2 (11m 9s):
I have a conversation or anything. I just went and there was just this party and the waist and that was it and I don't think I should call my mom again. We say seven years on

1 (11m 18s):
and I guess during their time what you slept it at like different peoples houses and reg even camped out in the woods sometimes.

2 (11m 26s):
Yes, so I couldn't afford the cheapest room in time. So basically I slept in the woods or I just can't surf. So, you know, which wasn't a thing those that know it didn't have a turn in

1 (11m 38s):
this isn't this is we're talking about the 60s now, they'll sort of the late 60s.

2 (11m 42s):
Yeah. Basically I would sleep in one friends Greenhouse or I'm I have a girlfriend who took who is now my wife and I would go and stay her for a night. I stay on my friend Jeff Osmond and quite often. His parents were booked me up other people people were unbelievably

1 (12m 0s):
kind. Yeah, by the way, we're all are you working at? Time to did you have a job?

2 (12m 6s):
Yep. I had a job as an apprentice hairdresser and it paid two pounds ten shillings those days. So I don't know you can come up with eight hours your like that was

1 (12m 19s):
true week right a week,

2 (12m 21s):
but then I decided I wanted to do theatrical makeup is what I wanted to do for a living. I wanted to make people up with for the theater. I done it at school. I've done it for other schools. We were talking about the sheer excitement. Citement to be able to change appearances and we were talking then about the excitement of being able to experiment with different products on your face. And I was buying these makeup items from the local hairdressing Salon. I'm sorry, I would go there every Saturday and with whatever money I had I would buy frothing blood capsules or plastic in a nose plastic or the latest pathetic that were coming in from the states.

2 (13m 1s):
So I was really obsessed from that time. And then the hairdressing was just for me a means to an

1 (13m 6s):
end. So it sounds like like even at that point like you had a plan like a like a pretty clear

2 (13m 14s):
ambition. I think when you have to survive from zero, obviously, there's more Drive isn't there. I mean, yeah, I look at photos of myself and my early 20s and I see this all finally driven person. I mean just driven. Absolutely driven. I think I suppose, you know, if you if your left, you know, if you've got to look after yourself, you know it teaches you self-reliance

1 (13m 43s):
see your between sort of around the age of 16 and eventually around that time. You meet Mo the person who would eventually become your wife or you are still married to today. You meet Jeff who is are you knew Jeff. Are you Jeff already and childhood best

2 (13m 57s):
friend. So talking about class systems. I lived in the middle class a state on one side of the road where people owned Is this and Jeffrey lived on the other side of the street in the housing you rented from the council we call them Council Flats. Yeah. Yeah, so he would have been in the lower in the lower echelons. And the first thing I learnt when they put me up when they had absolutely nothing was the generosity of spirit of that in comparison to the other side of the street, right? Yeah, the the kindness and the care and the thoughtfulness and the charity they Were all great lessons for me and they stayed with me all my life.

1 (14m 39s):
See you or you were training as an apprentice hairdresser 1972 you I think 20 years old you and mow your then-girlfriend soon-to-be wife and Jeff your best friend. You all move to London and you get a job as a hairdresser in a pretty actually pretty relatively high-end salon, right?

2 (14m 59s):
Yes. Well, that was Elizabeth Arden. I work for Elizabeth Arden. So it was called The Red Door and it was a big sale on with over a hundred stop a tattoo. Of Staff in it. Wow, and you were

1 (15m 10s):
working there as mainly just doing whatever washing

2 (15m 13s):
hair washing at wasn't doing much else. I was learning stuff what they call an improver. That was the term used at the time and improve our so you went to The Apprentice but you weren't a hairdresser either. So basically I would accompany hairdressers when they had to go out to do the hair at the theater or I would go on a Vogue shoot, but I would be the

1 (15m 34s):
runner imagine. It was think of like London in the early 70s like the Rolling Stones living in Chelsea, you know like that

2 (15m 41s):
kind of well from my point of view. I was on that sort of below stairs angle. So I was in service really to the various people and saw that other side quite a lot of the people I was working with were drug addicts because nobody really understood that the severity of the drugs so they experimented and then they got the wrong side of it all and drug-taking us what I remember predominantly and The fun side of it. Yeah. I just remember a lot of a lot of sad sad stuff going on really.

1 (16m 15s):
Did you ever own when you were when I mean when you were, you know, young guy living in London's you ever experiment with drugs?

2 (16m 22s):
Vo because I couldn't afford them. You know, I had no money. I sit next to I could sit between two people. I mean, I would say, although there was a lot of generosity. There was a lot of generosity with drugs now I've my education was purely observational

1 (16m 42s):
So I guess at a certain point you move onto another high-end Salon in London. And this is really where your career begins to take a turn,

2 (16m 52s):
right? Yeah. Well what happened was that I was working that the owner because I was so nerdy. I think he thought I would make a good try College assist and in those days in London salons. They had two or three qualified psychologists who checked the Hopes for disease they dealt with the hair condition and they made the products for the salon and things like

1 (17m 17s):
that and just to clarify try ecology is the study

2 (17m 20s):
of Aaron's help OKC's is real. Okay, right, but it's also the science of has come so that whole thing of starting off doing my hairdressing Apprentice taking the qualifications with that then going on and studying trichology another three years of nerdy study all about hair and scalp and the skin

1 (17m 39s):
interesting because I don't think salons have tried. Ecologist anymore. Do they

2 (17m 43s):
no no. No. It was a

1 (17m 44s):
1970 Ico Norma. That's

2 (17m 47s):
okay. But I'm most of us that did it most of the try colleges went on them to make products for other people. So we very much went into products. We met products for the sounds anyway, and we developed our skills more and more in that area.

1 (18m 5s):
So at some point, I guess you returned to to pool like you're in London you and mother in London you've

2 (18m 12s):
got back. That's because I burnt

1 (18m 14s):
out he burns and pull is in the south of England. We should much mention you burned out in London. Why did you burn out in London?

2 (18m 23s):
You're all caught up with me. I suppose what did the leaving home the homeless period I think I had sort of got to a point where I was earning enough. Need to live and and so the striving fell away for a while. So I think that I got to that point where it well the other thing that have happened to me, I've got married and as you know as your listeners will certainly know getting married is quite a big thing and mo we have to bring mowing at this point who is much more stable than me. So is

1 (18m 56s):
my partner by the way, it's great choice that you made.

2 (19m 1s):
Well, I stayed I realized she made the a choice and I'm very grateful. So I think that probably gave me some stability. I was still relatively optimistic as far as I was concerned. But anxiety I had in space and panic attacks. Yeah, especially about heart attacks, which is how my grandmother had died that went into me at that moment and it stayed with me for an awfully long

1 (19m 26s):
time. I'm not surprised right and here's the other thing people didn't talk about these things in the 70s. There was no language to say I have intense anxiety. The reason why I'm asking about this is because of who you are today and what your success and will obviously get there. But this is important right that a lot of people don't talk about these moments in their lives because of shame or embarrassment or yeah,

2 (19m 54s):
that's how my went to the doctors tried to describe how I felt and he said I simply just don't feel normal. He's well Define normal. I didn't think I had heart palpitations. I thought I was dying of a heart attack every time so I you know, the joke was I never had indigestion? I only had heart attacks a very kind doctor that I still use said to me Mark you'd have been better off having heart attacks that that's disconcerting you having, you know, having you

1 (20m 24s):
are having panic attacks.

2 (20m 26s):
Yes, that's exactly it. But it was it was all connected with the death of my grandmother I think because you know, It entered me then in that very young age. And I was hyperventilating even at sort of 11 do to the circumstances. So I think yeah, it ends at me. Then it didn't really leave until I was in my late 50s.

1 (20m 48s):
I mean, none of this is surprising given the things that you went through as a child, right? Like none of these experiences are surprising.

2 (20m 58s):
I think it's the Human Condition. I think if you understand mortality, and you're not anxious Jesus what's wrong with you? Yeah, you know, I mean once you understand what you have a death like that of someone so dear and you don't understand then you've not got the hangar there. It's The Human Condition, isn't it? It's the that's the point. That's that's if we didn't have that we wouldn't be driven. We wouldn't do the things we do, you know, you have to have a clear understanding of a finite period of time you have to have it.

1 (21m 31s):
See you and mo return to pool your early 20s and you have this that you've had this training as a trichologist. What did you do when you when you got back to pool and you know in 74 I

2 (21m 44s):
persuaded a large Salon in pool that they needed to try colleges. Uh-huh. And then I went and did the same thing for them that I have been doing in these West End cylons. So there was a guy there called Mark Young who was very ambitious. He had a hundred staff. So Rassilon outside of London to be that side. That was that was good. Yeah, and so lots of people would go there he trained a lot of people and I would assist him and I was freelance. I didn't he didn't pay me but he gave me a room and gave me a little attic space to make product for them in and I made their shampoos conditioners and I was really not earning any money. My wife was keeping me my works in the courts as a system to the clerk of the courts.

2 (22m 29s):
And so she was working there that Good money on that. I was earning, you know, just a

1 (22m 33s):
pittance and you were what just you were just making stuff in your kitchen and putting it in like glass bottles and selling it to

2 (22m 39s):
people I wasn't doing the kitchen. I've made a tiny room might change my little tiny box room up in my bedroom into a little lab. Yeah. Yeah. It was above the kitchen. I've got a basin in there. I got TAPS in there. I got some vessels. I've got a big paddle, you know, I could heat water and I could eat oil and I could make products and I was making stuff on the side for different people because I couldn't earn enough money in the salon. I was

1 (23m 8s):
working and at that time were you using like

2 (23m 10s):
chemicals? I have an issue with chemical. I know you do now. Okay. Yeah, I know what I always did. I think it came in when I was about 7 or 8. I went with my mum to the movies and I saw a movie where rat poison got in some bread and it was a frightening black and white movie and I think it really made me frightened of chemicals. So I always had this leaning towards nature anyway, so I much prefer to be involved in herbes or eternity moves and Always very very conscious of what was a safe chemical and what was not a safe chemical so that that again informed what I did because now I make products with mainly natural materials and what I considered to be safe synthetics having studied that repeatedly all through my career.

1 (23m 60s):
All right. See you working at this Salon in pool as a trike ologist and I guess at you and mo we're living in the same apartment. I meant building as a woman and Liz we're is that it is a right. And and and who was she and what how did you meet

2 (24m 19s):
her we work together in the salon? Oh, I see. Okay. She was the beauty therapist in the salon and I was the trike ologist. We were both Freelancers. So we would spend our spare time chit-chatting about well hair and skin. Basically I always used to feel sorry if we were on the train the turnovers and someone fell asleep in front of us. We were just Take them apart bit by bit, you know well would you know because he would just talk about herons get yeah pretty obsessively

1 (24m 49s):
in me time. You were making all this stuff like hair care products and stuff in your apartment and I guess around this time you find a new customer for your products who who would become a pretty significant person in your life. What what's the story?

2 (25m 7s):
What happened? What actually happened was that I had Have seen a little advert in Honey magazine for a salon in Brighton not a salon a shop and I was making stuff on the side for different people. And so basically I found this woman's address and a phone number. I didn't have a phone at home though. So basically have to go to the phone box and phone her up and see if she would like any product. She'd started. This shop called The Body Shop earlier. It was a neat erotic and neither run. I'm so I phone her up and she said well, yeah come over and see me, by the way.

2 (25m 50s):
She was in

1 (25m 51s):
Braden you were in

2 (25m 52s):
poor quite a long train journey. Okay, because it's not direct right? Okay. So I I paid for the train journey met her. She don't per second shot by then. I went in the shop and it was just wonderful. Yeah, there was this charismatic woman selling the low packaged product that was genuine young people buying small amounts of stuff for fun and experimentation everything about the shop really wowed me. I just loved it very, you know, very simplistic bottles with very simple labels. No fancy stuff really suited

1 (26m 29s):
me and Mark was it was it totally different than anything that was out there at the time when you went into that body shifts, was it just like what is

2 (26m 37s):
this if I got my live with you now in San Francisco and we go up Dying the coast if we'd have done the same thing at that same time, we would have seen the body shop that inspired her in the first place and we would have seen a whole series of mom and pop shops. Exactly like that right up the West Coast from Seattle right the way down through Portland all of those those people were making small amounts of products and the packaging them simply, you know, there was the cleansing bar and yeah, you know all sorts of different businesses, but there were none in Britain that just we Not have that at all. He had nothing none of that Innovation. None of that

1 (27m 16s):
stuff. There was a shop called The Body Shop in San Francisco in San Francisco, which was a US company a totally different company.

2 (27m 24s):
It was a totally different company that inspired Anita Roddick to copy it do it in

1 (27m 29s):
bright and colored the body shop and

2 (27m 32s):
call it the body. Okay, but she you know, you've got to get context on Anita. We have a dynamic vital woman who's living in a fairly open. Ship with an unbelievable bloke. I mean Gordon Roddick poet Horsemen. He just he gone off to ride a horse from Buenos Aires to New York. He was writing for the Observer about his experiences while he did it he was he was just a you know Bohemian so, you know that we're not talking about everyday people here, which I definitely was okay and they've had a hotel which they sold and she just wanted to try this. This idea right that she'd seen in San Francisco.

2 (28m 15s):
And so when I first went there because these are you nothing about hair and skin and I knew everything three lives and I we knew everything about ants.

1 (28m 22s):
All right. So you go in the shop, you meet an eater and you have brought with you a bunch of samples of of what I think I'd already said the moment sent them over a

2 (28m 31s):
she then placed an

1 (28m 32s):
order right then and there she said, hey, I like this

2 (28m 35s):
stuff for a 5,200

1 (28m 37s):
pounds now just to clarify because I've read her account of this and this is what she said. And you may know that she said I remember that you know, he called me from a pay phone initially because he was feeding claims to the pay phone and that he was making henna cream shampoos that he sent to me. They look like sludge and smelled like horse shit and honey bees wax cleaner with black specks caused by bees returning to their hives with dirty feet.

2 (29m 5s):
Those were the products you sent and then

1 (29m 7s):
she ordered a thousand pounds worth of this stuff

2 (29m 10s):
sighs. Mm. Yeah. Was great. I mean I couldn't I had died had to borrow the money to get the train home, you know, but I mean

1 (29m 17s):
that the fact that like you were making these products obviously herbal based and natural products, but like they were kind of right they looked kind of grimy at that time. I guess.

2 (29m 27s):
Well, they were very authentic. Yeah. I tried them on anyone else. That's what they say to me. Yeah. Well we can see these are authentic Mark but we really don't think they're going to sell but she she believed they were going to sell

1 (29m 39s):
and and how are you getting the product or was it in like? Bags or jars or what like so she always just out of bounds

2 (29m 46s):
pops old glass glass jars. Hey, I wanted glass jars because of the environmental principles. Okay. She hated the glass jars. She wanted plastic jars because she wasn't struck on the environment at that time. So there were quite a lot of arguments a lots of arguments like that. She was a very argumentative person when

1 (30m 5s):
she said Rai 1,000 pounds worth of stuff you had to go back to

2 (30m 8s):
pool thousand four hundred thousand four hundred

1 (30m 11s):
pounds so you to go back to pool and go back to this little lab in your apartment and started making a thousand pounds

2 (30m 17s):
worth. Well, then I have to phone up the suppliers and ask for credit because I had no money right so I couldn't buy the materials to make the order they all kindly gave me credit. I then said to her she would have to pay cash on delivery. She then paid cash on delivery. I whizzed back afterwards and paid them all. I didn't expect to get a second order. I thought that would be I don't know why. I don't see didn't have much confidence in my own product. Then when I had a second order and a third and a fourth it run. Wow. I can't believe my luck

1 (30m 53s):
when we come back in just a moment how Mark built a successful partnership with the body shop that worked pretty well until it totally fell apart. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible first to First Republic Bank Safeguard your spending with the redesigned First Republic mobile app with features, like personalized alerts for unusual activity and customizable settings that prohibit unauthorized purchases. You could even turn your debit card on or off if it's ever lost or stolen right through the app visit First Republic.com digital to learn more.

1 (31m 42s):
Member FDIC Equal Housing lender. Thanks also to American Express small businesses are what keep our communities together, which is why it's so important to help them succeed American Express has created a new platform that all small business owners can use to keep their dreams alive. They brought together 100 plus companies to provide offers and resources to help small business owners. Get back to what they do best following a dream, sir. a community and employing America visit stand for small.com partner to learn more powered by American Express with the unemployment rate at record highs right now millions of Americans are without health

2 (32m 29s):
insurance this week on through line how our health care became tied to our jobs

1 (32m 34s):
and how a temporary solution turned into an everlasting problem. Listen now to through line from NPR where we go back in time to understand the present. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm die Roz. So it's around 1977 and Mark Constantine has just started to make beauty products for Anita Roddick of the body shop and both of them of course are just in the beginning stages of their businesses. Anita only has a few shops and Mark is still making his concoctions in a tiny room above his kitchen

2 (33m 14s):
what it would be. The Hannah cream shampoo Elderberry conditioner lady's mantle is each filter aromatherapy scalp oil herbal hair colors

1 (33m 25s):
and is a cell to this cell has the do they sell and there shall be

2 (33m 28s):
sold really? Well, I mean far better than I you know, I could have imagined. I mean we are talking about one of the best sales ladies. I'd ever met. You know, she could sell anything. So obviously she made them popular. Yeah,

1 (33m 42s):
so you have this cash coming in. From from the body shop and I guess like right around this time you and and Liz we're your colleague at the hair salon you decide to use that money to start your

2 (33m 54s):
own business. Yeah. I'm with that money. I started a little herbal hair and beauty Clinic with Liz. We're it was called constantina. Where's country Cosmetics good for your skin and good for your hair and that so hippie again. And so I've been told by another business person. What you do is you you buy Your raw materials you make the product and you double that when you sell it and then you don't spend that money on yourself you then reinvest that back into your

1 (34m 23s):
business. Why just a curiosity? Why did you bring Liz on what was what was she going to bring to the equation?

2 (34m 33s):
Well, it wasn't to do with making products. What we did was we opened our little clinic for me to treat people's hair and scalp and to do henna colors on and she would do her beauty therapy. Yeah, and we share the room, you know, the third room which was a reception storing, but the problem was that it was incredibly cold there and we didn't get much business. So we made money still by making product for other people much more than we did from our little clinic, huh. So we went a year or so just trying to make money there and we couldn't and so I said to Liz Liz well, why don't you join me in the making the stuff, you know all about it.

2 (35m 14s):
Skin, I know all about hair and between us we can come up with the products and then when I had to prepare a product for I mean she was a really hard task master. So I don't work and work and work and study and read up and that you know, the cosmetology these are the books until I got it right. I probably made better skin products I did here, you know with I'd learnt the hair stuff. It was just a technical skill I learned. Yeah with that with the skin stuff. I had to really study and

1 (35m 43s):
work out, huh? And I guess you and Liz made these products and sold into like a few shops or cilantro. But I mean, I'm assuming the body shop was still your your big client, right?

2 (35m 55s):
I was their biggest supplier. You were the biggest I was their biggest Supply and they had two shops. Well, no, but they started a franchise, right? And before we knew where we were they have the fastest growing Cosmetic Company in the world. I mean, you know, and they couldn't even touch the u.s. So that was outside of the US they had Sizes in Sweden multiplying they have franchises and Finland and in Germany and France

1 (36m 21s):
and here's my question for you Mark. I mean, how were you I have to assume that very quickly. You have to find another location to make your products and then there was a certain point where you yourself could not make the products anymore that you had to bring lots of people in to make the

2 (36m 40s):
products. So what happened was I like working from my home it work. To me. Okay, so I find a bigger house with a nice garage and plenty of space at the back to make product. And then I I managed to make product from there for seven years. Well now you're not supposed to do that in Britain because there's planning controls. So I managed to make it without the planners catchy me for seven years and I can remember I went off to see Return of the Jedi and when I came back my babysitter said oh a man's been running from the planning Authority. So I think I got my business up to a half a million turnover by then.

2 (37m 21s):
I took my garage and I have the back of

1 (37m 23s):
thighs. So this is like 1982-83 you're doing here a million dollars in

2 (37m 29s):
Revenue. Hi space are part of those days. That was nearly a million dollars. I mean,

1 (37m 35s):
I'm not like these days just pause on this for a moment because when you were dating Mo and and then asked her, you know for her dad for hand in marriage like you're not gonna This is like within 10 years. You're making a million dollars in Revenue.

2 (37m 49s):
Yeah, I mean did any of those

1 (37m 51s):
people like her parents or just princely say, oh my God, like wow, this is crazy.

2 (38m 0s):
Most of the time I was busy. He were busy. I was getting up at five o'clock in the morning making the stuff if I saw someone we certainly weren't talking about how well I was doing we're talking about the English here. Bear in mind. Yeah. We don't do that kind of stuff. We don't Admire each other. It's just not part of it.

1 (38m 17s):
Well, here's what I'm wondering. How did you know how to run the business like has United how to price your products? How did you know how to like what you know how to do invoicing and purchase orders and all that stuff. Did

2 (38m 31s):
you well go draw take helped me a lot. I don't know where he learned. But basically I've been taught already by Mark Young's father to double the price when I sold it so that

1 (38m 44s):
Being good. Step and Mark Young the guy who owned the salon.

2 (38m 48s):
Yeah, his that had said to me what you do is you buy the raw materials and then you double that to sell it. You have to have enough. Margin. Yeah, because as you add to the costs Jenna mean obviously, you know, I mean I was probably making a lot more money per product when I just made it myself up in a room. She has things developed because obviously but if you've got enough margin there in your model it works,

1 (39m 12s):
okay. We're going to attack a bit more about Anita Roddick has a very important controversial and really kind of revolutionary figure and certainly in the UK and around the world in entrepreneurship. Yes, but on the one hand I can imagine. I mean, this was huge. She she she ain't guardin transform and transform your life. Right?

2 (39m 32s):
Did you also transformed and elements of the Cosmetic industry? Yeah. They were unbelievably influential charismatic. It felt very much like royalty, you know, they're you know in the sense. It when they bless you with their presence, she were pleased and when you weren't their presence, it wasn't so good. We would have a fairly tempestuous relationship. I think would be the right description. I would have an argument with her on the phone. She would call me unprofessional. I would tell her that she couldn't call me unprofessional she would then call me a very rude word beginning with w and ending in our I would then say, yes, you can call me that rude word beginning in W and ending in our but you can't call me. I'm professional then about an hour later.

2 (40m 13s):
Later, there would be knock on the door. I'd open the door there be a florist with a huge smile on his face giving me a bunch of flowers along. The glass will have the word.

1 (40m 23s):
W

2 (40m 26s):
that's how it was all the time. It was chaotically wonderful. Yeah. She was driven not quite Medical but close, you know, there was a, you know, both of us we frightened of dying, you know, I mean, she she we were very similar vase treaty not comfy in our If she wanted me there was no we're not talking about a Confident Woman in the sense of accomplished and stylish and spelt we're talking about a woman who was as driven. As I was I thought she was gonna have a breakdown then I realized no I was getting their breeding.

1 (41m 1s):
What was your relationship like with Liz your partner?

2 (41m 4s):
Well, she was always wonderful very supportive. You know, when you look at Lush and people admire Lush for its values, especially Actually the way women are treated things like that. That's all this Bennett this that's she married and then they became better Liz. We're that's her. She was she took me to one side. I mean Batman, I had not had much of a social education and she would take me to one side and she would say if we're going to build a business based on women. You can't Pat them on the back side when they walk by. Yeah you do of course. She was very austere. So you didn't want to be told twice. Yeah. I absolutely took her word as That was it. She told me I did it.

2 (41m 46s):
So those standards, you know that she had the standards all the time, which I probably

1 (41m 50s):
lacked, right? All right, so you are just cranking it out and you're busy and you're expanding end when you're doing a half a million pounds of Revenue a year selling to the body shop. Do you remember how many people you had working with you at that

2 (42m 5s):
point? There was about five or six people working with me then but what's very nice when we're talking about well hide you have The success later on is one of them was called by by grave one was Rowena off bar as she was then bird. Now one was Liz Bennett, then all of those people Helen Ambrose and they are the team now. They're the elite team the top team who were with they continue to learn their skills. We still work together. Well,

1 (42m 35s):
alright we are now going to get to a scene that is a recurring theme in your life, which is you get you start to get itchy feet and you want to you want to Andrew move on to the next thing or you know, you've got this business which is a Constantine and we are and it's going well, but you know, you kind of you're doing well and it's and you get to a point, I guess in the mid-80s where you want to kind of build something out and you decided that you wanted to maybe open your own little shop in the

2 (43m 3s):
u.s. Yeah, so there was always much talk about. Well, we do something together rather than me be a supplier and then you know, we would do something together like a partnership. Okay. Yeah, so I said to Golden well, why don't I come up with a new Concept in the states and we look at that, you know because they couldn't do the body shop. So she would quite like of like to have a different business that was not nicked from someone in San Francisco with all that regulates the so I did a new product myself and my team we did something called Bodkins which we opened in Seattle.

1 (43m 36s):
You opened a store called Bodkins in Seattle. Yeah. This was like a body shop type of skincare type shop. Yes, and you did this with Anita Roddick and Gordon

2 (43m 48s):
or no? Anita didn't know I did it with

1 (43m 51s):
Gordon Waits. Are you did with her husband and she didn't know

2 (43m 55s):
yes. I don't know how that happened. I think Gordon said to me look, why don't we do this on are telling need to later on, right? Okay, so I don't know why I fell for that because that was definitely foolish and I did all the work. I did all of the product. I you know We got the shop. My brother-in-law said he would run it and why Seattle by the way, because that's where my brother-in-law lived. Okay. It's a great City. Great city. They're great City. Now they are mine my image of the state. I hadn't traveled at all. So I did I'd been to Seattle a couple of times but my image of the States was very much formed off of the American Comics.

2 (44m 36s):
I read as a little boy and also the American business books. I've read and the entrepreneurial Spirit of the state. So, you know, that's what I felt good about it. And so yeah, so we opened this shop. I mean when you describe something you think it is slightly lunatic, I it gets worse because it didn't really make money but then Gordon decided he would tell Anita I'd had a couple of glasses of wine and then he thought he'd tell Anita and then he told me I've never been more wrong in my life so weird so he turned the table, so Over she threw chairs. He said I'm not frightened of anyone and so I didn't lock my bedroom door, but obviously he wasn't sleeping in the same bed as her that night.

2 (45m 23s):
I'm from that moment on really our relationship wasn't so good. My nanny just

1 (45m 28s):
like she was mad because you know, you betrayed her she was like that's my business. What are you doing? That's always her perspective.

2 (45m 34s):
I think she might have been yeah,

1 (45m 36s):
which I'm not too. I mean we should say it neither. She passed away more than a decade ago, but she's so she's out here, too. Don't give her sad story, but I can kind of understand that I cannot kind of it. Right. Can I right? Yeah.

2 (45m 49s):
Well, I'm not obviously I'm not straight forward. You know, I'm very I just I'm going for all the time. I'm not you can't rely on me to stay still. Yeah, you know, I don't I don't become replete and sit back even now in my

1 (46m 4s):
60s you had to keep moving and to you it was like this is the next step. I want to keep moving on expand. I want to do the next thing but it sounds like you kind of Of did it in a clumsy way that you and I get I've done these things in my life, but it

2 (46m 18s):
didn't feel clumsy when I was doing it. But it but retrospectively obviously

1 (46m 23s):
wasn't appropriate and we should kind of I think put this the context because Anita Roddick by the mid-80s certainly by the the late 80s. She was like hugely famous like Blake Princess Diana was buying a star feeling. She was all over the place. She was a big deal already by then.

2 (46m 41s):
Yeah and rightly. So yeah, I'm You know how it is. Whenever you've had a very close working relationship with someone. You don't have to admit how much they taught you. I don't know. Maybe that's just the British thing. Yeah, she must have taught me so much said she it's quite

1 (46m 58s):
obvious. So it's clear that your relationship with Anita is as kind of damage at this point and probably you're not really gonna I mean, she needs your products, but there's too much tension between the two of you and at the time I mean she basically Really made an offer to buy out Constantine and we're yeah and you did sell it to her and was was that the reason that that you knew that basically you just kind of had to move

2 (47m 23s):
on? No, I basically drove that because it was very awkward. Yeah, I own these rights, but they didn't know what to do about that. They weren't taking any new product off me because they were frightened that I dominated so much of their business and they just gone public and and the city didn't know that I owned all the product

1 (47m 41s):
rights the city of enemies at that. The bankers the

2 (47m 44s):
financiers. Yeah, they went. They went public they were now a listed company, but they didn't own the product. They were selling

1 (47m 51s):
I owned it. So they had to Pivot they had to start making their own

2 (47m 54s):
product because that's what that it was my solution. I said to them look you you're going to have to buy the rights, but I said look I make three million pounds a year from each of these product ranges. So why don't you pay me 9 million over three years, you'll make the money back anyway by making it yourself and I'll go off and do something else

1 (48m 13s):
so you A walk out of that relationship with 9 million pounds

2 (48m 18s):
and no doubt. It was in three tranches already two

1 (48m 21s):
years and Bailey what happens to Bodkins that sharpened Seattle? Is that still going at that time?

2 (48m 25s):
I had closed out earlier. Okay. I'm lost 200,000. All

1 (48m 28s):
right, so you losing money on Bargains, but you've got nine million pounds and at this point you who can really kind of just live the life of Riley. Like that's a lot of money. You can buy a nice country estate in the south of England and

2 (48m 41s):
it's hot and you

1 (48m 44s):
You know can can do beekeeping or I know you're into birding a you could do that for the rest your life, but obviously that's boring I can do that. So

2 (48m 51s):
you just do that. You

1 (48m 52s):
won't do that. So you decide all right, I'm gonna start a new business and it's this concept called Cosmetics to go that you again start with the same team right that you done Constantine.

2 (49m 3s):
Well, because I wanted yeah, we were trying to keep the same people employed that we'd have before that but in a mail order business mail or a

1 (49m 10s):
cosmetic so the same products that you were making but Mail order.

2 (49m 14s):
Yeah, because that I didn't really want to I didn't want to be going into competition with with an e-tron Gordon and any way to get the money I'd had to sign a thing saying I wouldn't open any shops

1 (49m 24s):
for three years on it. So you had to do a mail order business. You

2 (49m 27s):
couldn't have a brick and what I wanted to anyway, so it suited me at the time but here's the thing you sold the rights to

1 (49m 32s):
all of these products that you were making you could not sell those recipes in your new business. You have to

2 (49m 37s):
make brand new things. Yeah, but I had loads I had so many new products ideas. We had shampoo. Bars bath bombs things and they didn't want to take so I already had a catalog full of

1 (49m 49s):
product. All right, I want to I want to hold on the bath bomb because this is a this is a product that's going to revolutionize your life. And this is what blush would eventually be done. But when did that idea come to you

2 (50m 3s):
but didn't come to me. So basically what happened was I was in the kitchen with my wife Mo a perfumer called Jeff Brown herbalist could dr. Um Stewart another try college is called Stephen s'mores and a couple of other people and we were talking about the problem of bubble bars creating urinary tract infections in young children under seven. Wow. Yeah. Okay, so we were just chatting about that and I had the problem was kids love bubble baths so much. So what happens is it breaks down the capillary action and it enables microorganisms to get in the urinary tract and cause problems. That's how a bubble bath. Does that okay?

2 (50m 43s):
I wanted to come up with something that was better for the kids wouldn't cause that problem and Jeff Brown had worked making Alka-Seltzer with bicarbonate of soda and citric acid. So bicarbonate of soda is extremely soothing in the bath very very good for you. It's you know, a Seltzer bath is really well-known or worldwide. And if you had chicken pox or something you'd put a bit of bass in so doing so remember that

1 (51m 9s):
very soon, right?

2 (51m 11s):
Yeah, so then my wife when tightening Into the shed and came back with a first bath bomb, but it was just a small disk and we call them

1 (51m 20s):
Aqua Sizzlers. Let me just pause for a sec. She would take basically baking soda and some some sense and essential oils and herbs and look like put it into a disk.

2 (51m 34s):
Yep. So she's just going back in there. It was so she had invented the bath bomb really,

1 (51m 39s):
but she didn't just do it of in 5 minutes, right? This is gonna take some time. She did what How do you make that in five minutes? Well,

2 (51m 45s):
she just she heard us talking about it. She's when I did it cuz she met practical more like oh, yeah just came in. There it is. So then we for a while we sold these Acquisitions there's a little tube but then we found that the kids weren't using the grown-ups were using them. So then we thought oh, well if a grown-up's using it will put a bit more with make it a bit bigger and we'll have a rind that you know, we did a bomb. We actually did a bomb we covered in Black sell the fame had a red Wick and of the top rope balm on it, but that was the black Rebar phone so that's how they developed but it started off with my wife going in the shed making one coming back.

1 (52m 19s):
So at Cosmetics to go you were already selling these products.

2 (52m 25s):
We started bath bombs came along about two years into Cosmetics ago, but things like shampoo bars. They were there at the beginning. We had a Peyton for shampoo bars shampoo bars like a bar of

1 (52m 37s):
soap, but instead of in a bottle

2 (52m 38s):
it washing and brushing hair. Okay, unbelievably popular at the moment. Yes, so, Everybody wants our shampoo bars at the moment because they don't want

1 (52m 46s):
plastic on plastic crate. Yeah, you have this business Cosmetics to go which is sounds like a great idea right you got its mail order and mail order is a big deal in the late 80s early 90s, and how's it going? How is it doing

2 (53m 3s):
every time we send the past like we lose a pound why? Well, you know how the either.com business was, you know, you figured if you got to a certain size you'd be Okay right there, right so you're constantly trying to get to that scale. Yeah, but just like the.com businesses. We never made it to that scale. There's a joke there if you want to make a small fortune you start with a large one and lose a pound on every order. Wow. So Cosmetics to go was a hell of a party. It was so intense. I have never been so stressed. We were producing these catalogs the whole every range had a different image. I mean it was just A people obsessed with Cosmetics which we all were and are it was a great party, but we just blew all the money and went bust.

1 (53m 52s):
So this is like 1994 and I mean you worked on Cosmetics to go for like six or seven years before it went under and then really went under and we're like, were you

2 (54m 4s):
broke? Well, I know he never said clever. I basically still had a mortgage on my home. So I still have a loan on my home. I still have a loan for a small Factory unit. I own and I still have a loan on on this property in the High Street that I I have my lap, so I still have these loans to pay off. So I then was having to borrow money from moneylenders user?s rates and then I managed to sell this house for half of what I bought it for. I bought it for 200,000 pounds. I sold it for a hundred thousand. I paid off all the loan sharks. I was left with 43,000 pounds and I had three kids and no business.

1 (54m 46s):
You had just a few years before and again, I'm not trying to shame you at all. I just want to To put this in context is

2 (54m 53s):
important. Okay, I've got plenty of shade know that Sheamus is trying to avoid this is a

1 (54m 57s):
very important failure that you experience, right? Yeah, you were a millionaire and you had lost all of it and you were also in debt and now you're 42 almost 43. You've got three kids. Yeah.

2 (55m 13s):
My eldest son took me to one side at 7:00. Uhn suggested well Dad do not think you should get a proper job. And what did you think I said? Well, I think I've got a skill set that such that if I can Market it I can make a little money again and he he sort of nodded sagely at 7:00 and let me do it.

1 (55m 35s):
We did we did you have anxiety about the future at that point or did you think I'm going to recover this is going to be fine.

2 (55m 42s):
Did I have anxiety? I mean I've Iowa I've had anxiety most of my life sir. I have plenty of anxiety probably enough to you know, Phillip boat. Basically, I didn't want to do anything. I wanted to stay home lick my wounds. I felt very ashamed shame was the the prevalent thing. I certainly didn't think I'm going to get up and do something else, but my colleagues especially Hallam Ambrose that that time Helen Ambrose and phoned me up and said the receivers are all gone, right? Everyone had gone. I had an Empty shop and an empty lab, I'm Helen Ambrose and foamed up and said I'm going to start going in 925.

2 (56m 28s):
How about you I'm like doing what with what and she said. Well, I just think it would be good. We can go in we can see what there is there. We can make a few products may be selling view here and there let's get going again. And so all of the the main team that I'd worked with Couldn't find work. Either that they wanted so bit by bit they all came back

1 (56m 53s):
and I want to just name them all because because you all get together.

2 (56m 56s):
Yeah Helen Ambrose

1 (56m 58s):
Liz. We're Paul Grieves your wife Mo. Yeah, Mike Bird Rowena hofbauer and you all kind of come together. And this is the beginning of

2 (57m 9s):
lush. Yeah. So then we were all learning no money Rowena ran all our credit cards up because she was the only one that hasn't already done that and she started to fit the shop at downstairs and run that and we started making the product upstairs. So me and having them. Oh, we would make product, you know, just with that. We got the green Grocers and by the avocados and the fruit and make the products then take it downstairs and she sell

1 (57m 33s):
it and here's what I don't understand. Yeah that year 95 you open a store in Covent Garden in London. How are you able to do that with 40,000

2 (57m 42s):
pounds? Well, what we did was the first store was really the little store downstairs. As in Paul 29 High Street, and that's what we did first. So we did a sort of Maki up thing. And then basically we knew we'd done all of our money and we knew we had to get a backup but quite a lot of people were approaching us offering to back us one of the guys Andrew Geary and Peter blacker. They were really nice peter black adjust said well, I'll do a punt for a couple of hundred grand and he put some money in for some chairs and we started the retail business and with his money. We opened a small store in Covent Garden and a larger one on the kingsroad.

2 (58m 26s):
So

1 (58m 27s):
you had never really had to raise money for your previous businesses because I'm Ross but this one you had to find some outside money. You had somebody that you had to find an investor. Yeah.

2 (58m 36s):
I'm what I did with Peter. I asked him. What was the best investment you ever made Peter and he told me what it was it was it was a property going and so he bought some properties off the Army in Scotland. I need managed to sell them for 12 times the Black Rise. Wow, so I promised him I said well, this will be a better there than that.

1 (58m 58s):
Let me come back in just a moment why that turned out to be a pretty good best and later on. He'll Mark crossed paths with the body shop yet again. But this time as a possible buyer stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor slack a new way to communicate with your team. It replaces email with something faster that are organized and more secure in a world where people can be anywhere. It becomes your office. Try it for free at slac.com slack where work happens.

1 (59m 41s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor 3M who's using science and Innovation to help the world respond to covid-19 3M. Is on track to produce two billion respirators globally by the end of 2020 in addition 3M is also maximized production of other Solutions, including biopharma filtration hand sanitizers and disinfectants. Learn more at three m.com covid 3M science applied to life. And just one more thing the how I built this book is now available. It's a great read and a great gift for anyone looking for ideas inspiration wisdom and encouragement to have the courage to put out an idea into the world.

1 (1h 0m 31s):
It's filled with a ton of stories. You haven't heard and how some of the greatest entrepreneurs, you know and respect started out at the very bottom check out how I built this the book available wherever you buy your books and please if you see For what? I do on the show. You can show that support by picking up how I built this the book and thanks. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's 1995 and out of the ruins of a failed business Mark and his Partners decide to take one more leap by launching a little cosmetic store They Call Lush and this time things seemed to click so pretty soon after opening their first location in pool Mark opens another store in London.

1 (1h 1m 26s):
I remember that show Covent Garden, I was a student in London at the time and it was a big deal or yes the bath bombs. Remember they were like these and you still haven't of these orbs they kind of look like they reminded me of a Sweet Tarts, you know, sweetheart. Yeah. Yeah. There's like a giant Sweet Tarts and they some of them had like dried roses in them and and things like that right like flower petals because I remember my sister came to visit me in London and shoot everyone wanted to Lush it was like all of a sudden was starting to people are talking about it. What how did that happen? The store has just opened their doors and

2 (1h 1m 59s):
huge. No one had ever seen anything like it before we would get a thousand inquiries a month for people to do business with us

1 (1h 2m 7s):
from the get-go. Well pretty

2 (1h 2m 9s):
soon. We opened up the kingsroad shop and within the first week, we had Jean Paul Gautier and Jasper conran come in and commend us well, and to be

1 (1h 2m 18s):
honest and Jasper conran is this son of towns can Wrangle up

2 (1h 2m 22s):
hook Terrence Conrad open the Cassandra his own right Terence conran great. Retailer throughout the whole of Britain but it wasn't just their status. But so many people were commending us and to be honest to have been that bad and to have everything that wrong and then suddenly to have everything that right was very tricky. I can remember having to go out the back of the shop. They have a moment, you know, you can't be that bad and that good all in the in a short period of time, you know.

1 (1h 2m 54s):
Yeah, and by the way, how did you decide on the name

2 (1h 2m 56s):
Lush? We have a competition and we said come up with a name for us and a lady called. Mrs. Bennet it then bro. I've called us Lush garden and we shortened it to life.

1 (1h 3m 8s):
So here's what's interesting. I've read that you kind of modeled. These shops that Lush shops after Neal's yard Dairy The Cheese Shop Right, which is a famous.

2 (1h 3m 20s):
It was it was various bits. I mean Neal's yard areas lovely a lovely cheese. Oh, yeah, we have big troubles of Shampoo and big Chuckles of soap like she struggles which we would slice and sell the product from and I'm that yes, it was partly that partly grocery shops. Like you know with with apples the bath bombs look like apples. To be honest. When I first did the kingsroad. I thought I made an awful mistake. I dunno. I just let my imagination and everyone else's imagination run Riot. We've got this stainless steel Basin full of ice with Face smile Senate that you would only last a couple of weeks and every we just let everything go crazy.

2 (1h 4m 3s):
And then we had some bottle product on little three little pyramids in the center of the shop. And when I was looking at it before I opened I thought oh God, you've had this money in this investment. You've just blown it. Yeah, you've done all this crazy stuff instead of just doing a much more understandable shop the public won't get it and then open the doors in the public came in and they just ignored all the bottle products. For everything else they were wonderful. They got everything. They just

1 (1h 4m 31s):
loved it. Yeah, because you're a mean as people now know when you go into until lash and really was kind of baked in early on there was not a packaging when you have the sort of the plastic tubs and and but then it was tens of things and and then just giant slabs of soap that were just sliced up and put in paper and you would

2 (1h 4m 49s):
walk out. Yeah so that yeah well because we first of all we didn't have the money for the packaging and secondly we did want to do it anyway. If you've got a bottle of shower gel when it when I from the factory back two-thirds of the money went into the packaging and the labeling and only 1/3 into the contents. So if you can get a business model where you can get rid of that unwanted packaging the customer doesn't want it. You don't want it. If you can get rid of that. You've got far more money to put into the ingredients. Yeah, you can have a much better standard of payment for suppliers and so on and you can have a bit more profit. And you can get a competitive price for the customer

1 (1h 5m 30s):
by the way that the six of you who kind of got together. Yes are Lush did you ever have to have an uncomfortable conversation about ownership?

2 (1h 5m 39s):
So the problem actually is an ownership, but it is an extent but it the problem is succession, huh? Because obviously if we Let's Pretend We're not a Cosmetic Company and we're not British, but we're an American tech company. Yeah, all those tech companies are the face. Finders all had to I they either died and they had to be paid off their families had to be paid off or they have to have their enumeration don't think really successful Greys and we didn't want to go

1 (1h 6m 8s):
public you decided early on we don't ever want to go

2 (1h 6m 11s):
public. Well, we watch what happens with the body shop, you know, they've gone public and according Roddick says still today that that was the biggest mistake he made because he was no longer control of it and things that he thought were important wasn't what A shareholder the city thought wasn't yeah,

1 (1h 6m 31s):
they don't want you to spend money on on high quality products and they want you to maximize profit

2 (1h 6m 37s):
exactly. So we dreamt up a scheme see we're all with capitalist straightforward. What am I God and I believe in capitalism, but it don't believe in the forms of capitalism that I would call Locust capitalism where it's where people are feeding off someone else without doing any work so we came up with this scheme where we valued our shares at five times the average of the last three years profit so that we captured a little bit but we only kept the greed and we still that's still enabled us to if we want to build the business we can build the business we can build the profitability we can make more when we sell our shares and then we gave part of the business to the staff which we would like to see increase so that the staff Can buy those shares off the founders and we put in a employee benefit trust to facilitate the sale of the shares as and when they're

1 (1h 7m 36s):
necessary. So essentially you are you have said you are not the other founders of said look we're going to get rich enough, you know, but we don't need hundreds of millions of dollars. We will be happy with tens of millions of dollars.

2 (1h 7m 50s):
Yes, because we didn't do all the work. Yeah now in Britain we have something called The Living wage And we're a group of clerics peed off with a fact that there was so much poverty in their diocese. Yeah got together and they dreamt up a living wage scissors a wage. That was a fair pay to we pay the living wage as decided by them. So we lifting our skirts up at the bottom to get people out of poverty sharing some of the business with them but still capitalists and it's still capitalism. We can still increase The size of that business the scale of that business the profitability of that business and get considerable benefit for ourselves, but not so much benefit that it's vulgar.

1 (1h 8m 39s):
I think like a lot of the entrepreneurs I've had on the show. It doesn't seem like your wire to work for other people right? Like like you are you're clearly super driven, but I think you're a little difficult. Right? I mean in a good way though. I difficult in every way

2 (1h 8m 57s):
but it doesn't

1 (1h 8m 58s):
sound to me like you are a control freak that like actually the other partners involved in Lush had a lot of say over the look and the feel and The Branding and because you know when you're in a low Store that you're no Less store. It doesn't sound like you were a control freak over every single aspect of that. Am I right?

2 (1h 9m 16s):
I'm not no. I'm not a control freak. I am I'm quite intuitive. I know when I see something that's wrong and I don't know how to describe that beforehand. So for a long time Rowena just Banned Me from the shop openings because all I could ever see was something that was wrong. Yeah, so she just ban me she just said you can't come to the shop openings unless you improve your Ratatouille, yeah, just we don't need that kind of miserable person pacing up and down outside when we're just greeting new customers, you know, and I'm allowed to go now. So I must have improved

1 (1h 9m 52s):
meantime, the the business is growing and I think by 2001 you actually put in a bid to buy the body shop and Anita Roddick would not sell it to you at the time. By the way. Do you remember what you offered for it?

2 (1h 10m 10s):
Well, it was very straightforward. The management could raise about 360 million themselves to by the body shop off of the strength of the body shops figures. Yeah, I can add my business to that and get up to about 450 something like

1 (1h 10m 30s):
that million pounds. Yeah, then

2 (1h 10m 33s):
basically that the, you know, like someone like Laurel could get up to much higher than that.

1 (1h 10m 40s):
They eventually sold Body Shop to L'Oreal for 642 million pounds. Yeah in 2006 at the time. I need erotic was very very sick. And of course is no longer alive and the body shop going to L'Oreal to you and to some customers meant something because L'Oreal's a huge multinational and The Body Shop represented kind of write it was their slogan was trade not Aid and moral

2 (1h 11m 6s):
had always been the arch enemy because of testing On animals, they represented those who wish to test Body Shop represented those that did not wish to take a right and that was quite sort of

1 (1h 11m 17s):
fundamental and I think it at one point there were signs at Lush stores. It said are you fed up with the BS obviously referring to body shop and it's sailed to L'Oreal and

2 (1h 11m 29s):
that was not one of my best not one of my best moments

1 (1h 11m 33s):
if you had known how ill and neither was at the time. I think you've said you would have received.

2 (1h 11m 39s):
Bonded differently. Yeah, absolutely no idea and you know, I miss her difficult to know what to say. I mean the weird thing was she always felt she had very short length of time and

1 (1h 11m 56s):
and she was right, you know, she did have a short length of time

2 (1h 11m 60s):
but I think I think the truth was with the body shop that even if she hadn't been ill I think they've had it with it. I think they'd had their ride and yeah, I mean and they didn't want to carry. you know, I painted a neat erotic as this Dynamic charismatic this woman, but what I once asked her just we were just messing about the trainer Sunny doing one of those psychological sort of quizzes, you know, and I said a neater if you were an animal what animal would you imagine yourself as and she said a form in other words a young deer now that if she'd have said an eagle I would have that's what I would have

1 (1h 12m 44s):
expected to say a form here

2 (1h 12m 47s):
and suddenly I could see then I could see her as Gordon husband saw her and how much he protected her and looked after her and how much they were at. They were a couple you you never because when you're in or of some of you don't see them as Human Solutions, you see them as this, you know, this great thing and yeah, well, of course the truth was she was she was very human.

1 (1h 13m 11s):
With Lush I think like eight years into the business you had it over 200 shops in 29 countries. I mean, that's that's just incredible expansion in eight years. How are you able to control the brand with all those shops around the world was it? Like was it just something that you weren't that worried about?

2 (1h 13m 33s):
Well, the brand is our brand is very much based on the people that work in the shops and the we attract but I get asked a lot. How do you choose your staff? Right? Yeah. I don't know if you've ever watched High Fidelity have when he talks about his staff. He says well, I employed them for a couple of days and now they turn up every day of the week, you know, we employ and attract enthusiasts people are really passionate about nature or animal testing or animal rights. And the brand tends to become that, you know, we control the products, you know, my my children involved.

2 (1h 14m 18s):
We've got a whole new set of inventors. I young people coming on through the business that we do that that side that controls, you know what you've got at home, but then the people that sell it to you just get attracted to the brand, you know,

1 (1h 14m 35s):
I mean obviously Lush today, I think you have 900 stores to 12,000 staff around the world but you know, this is a challenging business and Retail is challenging and margins are thin. So, you know, you've had years where you've got based on what I've read enough is right, you know 70 million pounds in profit and then you know you had years where it's plunge to like 25 million pounds and prop still profitable the next year. So what explains those huge swings back and forth. Is it just that you pour more money into the business and that's why

2 (1h 15m 7s):
well, let's take from that. Right when we got that that height that's when we introduced The Living wage in parts of our okay, so that's so that's what we decided. We got plenty here. We can share something so that that's quite often what's gone on? Yeah that we've changed the business model by introducing another element into it. I mean we give huge sums in charity. I mean we've given over 50 million

1 (1h 15m 34s):
pounds now and this is the lesson

2 (1h 15m 37s):
from Anita Roddick where she took just a small sum of money and she turned it into that massive business which Laurel bought for all that money that shows you that not all money has the same value small sums of money in hands of dynamic people who really care goes a long way. So when we give money when we give you know, a thousand or 2,000 or 5,000 to a group that wants to achieve something, you know, maybe they want to stop fracking or maybe they want to deal with some environmental issue. They will make that money go much further than if that money was in someone else's ass. That's very much how we

1 (1h 16m 11s):
focus on it? I think it was around 2012 when your childhood friend Jeff Osment located track down your dad he found them in South Africa? Yeah, and you were able to see him for the first time since you were 2 years old. Yeah. What was that? What was that light seeing him? Were you nervous going before that door open though? No,

2 (1h 16m 39s):
I wasn't nervous. I'd had a friend who told me he was the result of a one-night stand between his mother and an Italian on a beach, right and he still found his father and he said to me if you're ever fortunate to find your father go straight away do not mess about don't don't even think about it. So I didn't think about it. I just went And I was met by my two sisters who I can't explain how similar they were to me. And then when I got to see my dad he was so apologetic and you know, I didn't need any of that. I just said to him dad all's well that ends. Well, you know just really pleased to be here with you and we just had a couple of days together are they were just magical and they I can't just is very hard to describe such an emotional thing but The best way I can find to describe it is if I had an empty half where my heart was before I now have a blazing fire.

2 (1h 17m 44s):
So a lot of the anxiety is gone. A lot of that stuff's gone with that. He died shortly afterwards. He died within weeks of me seeing him. I could not have been more welcomed. I could not have been treated with more sincerity or

1 (1h 18m 1s):
Ian, that was a great one. Do you think Mark that because of your I think I know the answers question. So it must be the case and I don't answer for you but it must be that your early life, you know growing up with your grandma your dad not being part of your life your grandma dying and you know, you're 12 and falling out your mom and then we should say you did you have reconciled you have a Two other day, but I mean that must have driven you all those things must have driven you in some way right? I mean, how do you think about that as you think about your story your past and your childhood than

2 (1h 18m 46s):
I read an article in the in the Daily Telegraph the British Daily Telegraph and this particular journalist had spent her life interviewing business people and this was her last business interview, and she talked Of something that she called the entrepreneurs wound and she said all of the really successful people that she had interviewed in business had these similarities where they had a death or severe divorce or a sibling die something like that in their childhood. They had an event now whether that teaches you about mortality and you know, you only got a certain period of time and so you you get driven through that or whether you're trying to impress.

2 (1h 19m 31s):
Someone that perhaps is no longer here or maybe just you know, I don't know did I want to impress my dad? He didn't he was oblivious. So I don't know but if you look at you know, Steve Jobs or you look at any of those those guys, they got a similar profile. I mean the issues could create the character. I really believe that very strongly all of the the finders have all got issues

1 (1h 20m 1s):
Mark what when you think about all of the things that they've accomplished and achieved do you think that most of it was because you just got lucky or or because you're really smart and had the skills to make it happen.

2 (1h 20m 16s):
I think we've worked out that I'm not necessarily very smart and we I I see myself as a technical entrepreneur. I see I have the technical skills and I've made the most of those I mean, you know, it was it's always To church a little bit when he said what we were supposed to say that success is just stumbling from one state to another

1 (1h 20m 38s):
one failure to another.

2 (1h 20m 39s):
Yeah about that. Whoever originally said it well before he stole it that where anyone out there who's in a business. They know that's how it feels good. I mean, I you know, it just depends. I sometimes I have really big challenges and other times they're just challenges but there's never a moment when you can really sort of Say wow, I'm great.

1 (1h 21m 7s):
And that is pretty much how my interview with Mark ended back in February. But of course just a few weeks later everything changed. So a few days ago, I got back in touch Mark. Yes. Hello. How are you? Very good. And you I'm alright I'm talking to you is like it's like reaching back in time to a simpler moment in human history. Mark told me that in the days just after the pandemic hit Lush had to shut down lots of its stores and layoffs or furloughs some of its workers and then around the same time his longtime business partner Liz.

1 (1h 21m 47s):
We are Bennett passed away from cancer, but Mark has had some time to recover from that and when I talked to him the other day, he sounded mostly a beat and said the business has started to bounce back.

2 (1h 21m 60s):
Well, first of all obviously selling soap in the time of covid is quite sensible. So while those selling groceries seem to be doing exceptionally well selling soap doesn't survive. Yeah, my point really is that while you may not go on a cruise and you may not you may not be able to take the holiday. You've always dreamt of you can always take a

1 (1h 22m 20s):
bath so worldwide remind me how historically have right now,

2 (1h 22m 26s):
but it is so around

1 (1h 22m 27s):
900 and Can you estimate Can you estimate how many of them are closed right now?

2 (1h 22m 33s):
Well, it's 50 at the maximum closed right now this time probably probably

1 (1h 22m 38s):
less. So most of them are back open

2 (1h 22m 40s):
most the back open and most of trading not at the full level that they were trading before some are literally just kiosks where we open the door. We put some sort of barrier and people come to the staff there who are wearing masks and then others where there's enough space where they can come in and socially distance while they're shopping and we had between 200 and 300 percent. Increase and I've digital business and you know mail business. And so that was one hell of a sort of Swing

1 (1h 23m 11s):
round. So online sales have have really boomed but put up but I'm assuming like with many retailers. It hasn't fully closed the Gap the shortfall when it comes to overall sales because I'm assuming yes.

2 (1h 23m 26s):
Yeah and you're correct to assume that but we're much more that area of our businesses more profitable than the retail. So people moving. Hang on to the mail order business is quite a help because we

1 (1h 23m 38s):
then generate more profit. So it sounds like overall things are okay things some things are okay

2 (1h 23m 42s):
for yeah. Yeah. I think I mean for anyone in business listing I what one of the things we've tried to do is to break things up into six week periods, because you can't really anticipate what the virus is going to do Beyond a six-week period And so and then trying to work out within that six week period what do we think is going to happen, you know? you know, it's very convenient for us because we obviously go from season to season we so we'll have from now until what we call bonfire night, which is a British tradition, which is November the 5th and then we'll go to Christmas with another six week period and then we'll go to Valentine's another six week period then it's Easter and I think that's a good way to approach it rather than trying to imagine what it's going to be like in a year two years time we can do that, but you're not flexible enough if you do that, you know you need to Be very Dynamic I think in these

1 (1h 24m 36s):
circumstances given that you will probably face fall in Revenue this year like many retailers. Yeah. Are you also being very careful with you know with how you're spending cash as a business?

2 (1h 24m 49s):
Yes. Oh, yeah, absolutely. So I mean what's actually happened is that the bulk of the agony? We took in the last Financial year, which ended June this year just gone. So those figures are going to look pretty Dreadful. And then as we've quickly adapted, so this year this financial year will look a lot more positive and a lot a lot stronger, you know, so we have a lost last year, but we weren't Applause issue would have a reasonable profit and well at first we used to put talked about the new normal, but I've stopped doing that because I think that many of the things that are happening is what we wanted. Anyway, yeah. We wanted less air travel. We wanted less pollution.

2 (1h 25m 29s):
We wanted people to be more Discerning in their buying we wanted. It better Supply chains and better thought about products all those things are happening

1 (1h 25m 40s):
Mark in the episode. We just heard I mean you've gone through so many difficult moments. I mean from your childhood and going through dealing with anxiety and and then, you know selling your business to body shop and then starting a mail order company and then losing it all. I mean you describe you were broke in your 40s. Yeah. Do you think all of those? Variances those low points that you went through actually have helped you have the resilience to deal with what you're dealing with now.

2 (1h 26m 13s):
Yes, I think so. I think that I think it's for all businesses. I think that vibrancy that you require that flexibility the ability to to listen carefully and to make the appropriate changes are not be too well spoilt. That's the word isn't it? I mean in business we can Get spoilt we can get used to Too Much luxury. And I mean for me personally at the end of my career here to have to deal with this. I felt was really really really interesting. I'm far more interesting than running at a steady Pace, especially when there was so much change.

2 (1h 26m 55s):
We would like to see, you know, about climate change and other things like that. So so I find this far more exciting and far more real. Then I find when I last spoke to

1 (1h 27m 7s):
you. Wow. I love that. I love that. You said that that's an amazing

2 (1h 27m 12s):
perspective. Well, it's the truth.

1 (1h 27m 18s):
That's Mark Constantine co-founder of lush by the way, Mark told me that these days one thing he's doing to chill out and help him sleep is to take hot baths at exactly 4:00 p.m. Every day. He says that in addition to being super relaxing. It's a great way to test that all this products. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can write to us at HIV T at npr.org. If you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or add guy Roz and you can follow me on Instagram. That's at guy dot Roz.

1 (1h 27m 58s):
This episode was produced by James Taylor who see with music composed by routine Arab Louis. Thanks also to darreth Gales JC Howard, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Farah Safari. I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this. This is NPR.