3 (0s):
Support for NPR and the following message come from Comcast through Internet Essentials Comcast has connected more than 8 million people from low-income households to high-speed internet most for the first time more at Comcast Corporation.com Internet Essentials really quick before we start the show. I want to remind you about an upcoming live recording of the podcast. It's happening in Denver on November 13th at the Paramount Theater. I'll be interviewing Kurt Richardson. He's the creator of the OtterBox phone case and if you haven't been one of our live shows before they are super fun. There are chance to see me and to meet other builders and fans of the show. It's all brought to you by American Express, and we'd love to see you there.

3 (43s):
So to get tickets go to NPR presents dot org, and hope to see you in Denver. So our American was one of those people who owned a Cuisinart but never bothered to use it until one day she decided to make a new type of snack bar. So out came the Cuisinart and about three years later how Kane larabar if you haven't heard it. It's an incredible story that first ran in March of last year. And if you have heard it totally worth hearing again, enjoy. What what happened to that

1 (1m 21s):
name? Well, the trademarking attorney called me at the 11th hour and we were getting ready to launch. It was the year 2000 to Summer and she said I think you're going to need to change the name and I just thought you're joking, right? I've left working at Whole Foods and we're supposed to be launching that we don't launch and everybody's backing out. Because nothing's

3 (1m 47s):
happening. From NPR it's how I built this a show of that innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Gyros and on Today Show how long American through dates cashews and dried cherries into her Cuisinart and turned that mushy mix into larabar one of the best selling energy bars in America. So if you've recently walked to the energy bar section of the supermarket, you might be surprised or rather overwhelmed by the number of choices.

3 (2m 35s):
I mean for starters there are hundreds of different types of energy bars, which is kind of crazy. If you think about it there protein bars and paleo bars and Whole 30 and vegan and gluten-free and cacao infused with matcha powder. There is probably an energy bar out there for each and every one. The bus and that whole Revolution. It really got started in the 1990s with Clif Bar. And if you've heard previous episodes of the show, you might have heard our interview with Gary Erickson who actually invented those Cliff Bars. Well in the early 2000s Lara American came up with a pretty simple concept that shockingly wasn't really out there in the world. It was an energy bar made from two or three ride ingredients like almonds or cashews all bound together with dates.

3 (3m 22s):
So now our bars may not seem like a big deal today, right? You can get them pretty much anywhere any 7-Eleven but back in the day, they were kind of revolutionary and how she even came to inventing them to building this brand. Well, there was no direct path Laura never intended to start her own business or even to sell a product she grew up in the Denver area her parents ran a pretty successful high-end clothing store and Lara was really into sports. She was actually good. Enough to make the USC women's volleyball team, but after she graduated from college with a degree in Psychology, she wasn't really sure what to do. So she came back to Denver and got a job as a social worker and she started to work with kids and teenagers who needed help.

1 (4m 9s):
It was hard. I mean just emotionally difficult job. It was intense. It was always chaotic. We were on call every six weeks I'd cut this is a

3 (4m 20s):
time where I had to carry a pager around remember

1 (4m 22s):
the Major days. Yeah, and if the pager went off at 2:00 in the morning because somebody ran away from our treatment facility you had to answer the phone call, but it was it was intense work and to see you know, 15 year old girls fourth actually 13 year old girls with kids and I had to manage their care with the judicial system. I went to court a lot. I made recommendations. It was one of the most stressful jobs I've ever had in my life and I was in my early 20s. How

3 (4m 49s):
long did it take you before you got burned out? Like a year and a half so about a year and a half you're doing this and you just decide this is not this is not for me.

1 (4m 60s):
I knew I needed to change what the landscape looked like. So I wanted to help these kids, but I wanted to do it in more of a recreational component. I didn't want it to feel like I was the police all the time and so I became a community involvement leader and I got these kids involved in the community.

3 (5m 21s):
How long did you do that

1 (5m 22s):
for? About four years. I really loved being in the more recreational component with these kids and kind of opening their eyes to a bigger world and hoping that they saw opportunity for themselves. That was very

3 (5m 37s):
gratifying like you would play like sports or them and take them for like nature walks and stuff like

1 (5m 43s):
that. I would do anything and everything. I mean we went to a natural food grocery store one day and got a tour of that and then I would take them to Rockies games. Has somebody would donate the tickets and then we had the cat petting club and I'd take them to the local animal shelter because they couldn't have pets in their homes. And then we would have our community garden and so it was a year-round program they come after school and then during the summer I basically ran a summer camp and then I would teach him how to cook and do arts and crafts. I mean anything I could think of to do I would do so

3 (6m 13s):
this was like your MBA that was your management training. It was it was good. It was

1 (6m 18s):
it was really fun. I mean to this day I still think about these children and I Or where they are what's happened what they're doing. So during this time that I was being a social worker working as a social worker. I was also cultivating this passion for Natural Foods. How did that happen? Well, so let's go back to college college volleyball our coach had a rule of no sugar and no red meat. So at the time I was totally in a junk food. I was 18 years old, you know, my favorite place to eat was any fast food? A restaurant you can name and then I all of a sudden I'm starting stopping eating sugar and no red

3 (6m 59s):
meat and he just and just and just be clear. He felt that no red meat no sugar would result in and better performance from his players. Yes. And did he did he like enforce this

1 (7m 10s):
rule? Oh, yes.

3 (7m 11s):
This isn't a joke. This is real. Now. This was

1 (7m 14s):
very real like it was a rule in the team and

3 (7m 18s):
and that was a by the way my son and intense tiemens that's division one. Volleyball USC which is Major like pac-10 school.

1 (7m 27s):
Oh, yes. I remember thinking I can't believe I have the opportunity to play volleyball this team. I will do anything. This man tells me to do and then I all of a sudden I'm starting stopping eating sugar and no red meat. It was really an interesting experience. So I started feeling better. So that was the first light bulb that went off for me. Most college I'm you know, I'm working as a social worker. I start doing all this reading and then I started having migraines, huh. I started getting migraines out of nowhere. I never had them and I got a blood test and learned that I was actually very allergic to wheat.

3 (8m 6s):
Wow, you'd been eating wheat your whole life and after college you discover

1 (8m 10s):
this. Yes. I mean, we'd sin everything everything. So this is in the early 90s at the time and there wasn't really many options and their their solution to this is stop eating wheat and I'm thinking well, what am I going to eat? So at the time I didn't even really know how to cook much might, you know, I grew up with two working parents. My mom went to school and it was just she was frozen to know

3 (8m 36s):
like who's slaving over the stove

1 (8m 38s):
every alright. Okay now is very much Convenient Food oriented. So I really didn't even know how to cook why I had to learn how to cook for myself because I had such a limited diet and I got introduced a natural foods at the time. So things like kale. And quinoa and all the things that we kind of know now is normal we're totally foreign to

3 (8m 58s):
me specially in the mid-90s

1 (9m 0s):
like it was weird beta at first and then I had I thought well, I'm going to embrace this and so I would read everything I could about recipes and nutrition and I just got into it and I made the most of it. Yeah, so then I started thinking to myself and the background of going through this whole experience and feeling better. Better I

3 (9m 22s):
thought I don't know. I love

1 (9m 25s):
Natural Foods. This makes such. This is common sense to me. Why don't people know about this? Why isn't somebody teaching us about healthy food and so my passion started to

3 (9m 38s):
build. So I guess at a certain point you stopped working with kids. And did you find another job or did you kind of start to just like you start to think about what you had to do what you want to do?

1 (9m 53s):
Well, I knew I had an excitement and passion for Natural Foods. I just didn't know how I was going to make a transition between being a social worker and Natural Foods. They were two completely different

3 (10m 6s):
worlds. What was going on in your personal life. Where you sing? Eagle at the time

1 (10m 10s):
I was married and I was in the middle of getting a divorce. Oh, so it was a huge change for me and I realized that I needed to get a divorce in the middle of all of this.

3 (10m 20s):
So you were you were young young woman married and getting

1 (10m 24s):
divorced. Yes and and thinking about changing my career in a matter of like six months.

3 (10m 31s):
And what were you thinking about doing at that point?

1 (10m 34s):
I didn't know but all I knew is that I needed to Find the courage to take a leap of faith and somehow some way. I figured that out for myself and I left my marriage. I left my job and decided I'm going to go back to school and I'm going to study I want to get into naturopathic medical

3 (10m 58s):
school and a naturopathic is like like natural like homeopathic remedies and stuff.

1 (11m 4s):
Yes. So there's a school in Seattle Washington and one in Portland Oregon and naturopathic medicine and I thought I'm going to practice that which covers all natural medicine nutrition acupuncture everything and that's what I really I think that's the direction. I want to go. I looked at the school for years really renowned school. I thought this is what I'm going to do. So I started taking chemistry and physics and all these signs classes at the local community college. And actually I'd move back out to California my parents were living out there. So I'm on my path taking classes. And I made a friend of mine who is a dear friend of mine.

1 (11m 44s):
Now one day eating at the hell local health food store were eating lunch and he drags me to this raw food class and I have one of the most amazing meals I've ever had in my life at this class and I

3 (11m 55s):
thought wow

1 (11m 57s):
raw foods are kind of amazing and it just never had occurred to me and meanwhile, I'm taking my classes. I got accepted to this program two schools one in Seattle and one and Washington and I thought I'm going to be naturopathic doctor. That's what I'm going to do and I went to a meeting with all the doctors in California and they were very limited in their scope of practice there at the time because the laws weren't open there and I went to this meeting and it was like April I was moving to Seattle in July of this is

3 (12m 28s):
like nice is this

1 (12m 29s):
is the year

3 (12m 32s):
2000 you mm. Okay,

1 (12m 33s):
so I was three months away from moving to Seattle. I was thrilled to death I got into the school. I went to this meeting with all these you know, naturopaths that had been naturopaths for 20 years and this meeting scared The Living Daylights out of me. Why because all of these people were passionate but because the state of California didn't allow them to really practice their scope of medicine because the laws limited them. It just looked like a giant struggle. Yeah, it looked frustrating to be able to have a degree in something and not be able to really do it and then I went back. Colorado over Memorial Day weekend visit one of my dearest and oldest friends and I went hiking and I was just kind of eating a trail mix and thinking of food and raw foods and thinking about moving to Seattle and all of a sudden I'm on this mountain and this light bulb goes off for me and I think Why isn't somebody made something made of fruit nuts and spices like something very just pure simple real foods, but is portable and convenient but it tastes indulgent like you shouldn't be eating it like don't junk food.

1 (13m 44s):
I mean, I don't know that day that moment. It was like this surge of energy. I got I could feel this excitement over an idea. It's not like I hadn't had ideas before. I mean people are walking around everyday with ideas, but for whatever reason and that day and that I'm in all those little experiences that built up I just felt it.

3 (14m 6s):
So, what'd you do? Did you like run home and and start like writing things down or drawing pictures or or did you just kind of mull it over for a while for a while?

1 (14m 15s):
So I ran down the mountain. I got a notebook and I started writing down ideas. And then when we got back to Denver, I thought how can I take fruit nuts and spices and and turn them into something. We're really exciting and I would get ideas from pies and cookies and cakes. And I think okay, how do I take Cherry Pie and make it just in my Cuisinart basically a raw raw unprocessed food and make it taste like cherry pie or apple pie or banana bread or what? Have you did you

3 (14m 51s):
immediately think hey I can turn this into a business or was it more like I just want to try to experiment See if I can make this

1 (15m 2s):
snack. I did think I think I can turn this into a business. I don't even know I think it was like a day later and the next thing you know, I'm thinking I'm going to start this business and I'm going to do this in the next three months. I mean how naive is that think that you're going to start a business in three months? And I called my parents and everybody thought I was completely out of my

3 (15m 30s):
mind. Did they think it was like an early midlife crisis? I

1 (15m 35s):
don't know what they thought they just thought we've centered, you know to through private high school USC. She's graduated. She's 32 years old. Oh my God what's going on here? But it was actually great that people questioned me. I wondered why I was doing what I was doing and especially my family because it made me dig in more and recognize that I really did want to do it that I didn't need to get approval from anybody. But that I needed I had found something that was important to me and I just could not be stopped. I arranged to stay with another friend of mine moved in with her in Denver.

1 (16m 20s):
Yes, and then I would take these concoctions that I would. Come up with and with using the Cuisinart that I had had for years, by the way, I'd never actually used it. I didn't even know how to use the Cuisinart and for some reason I got the Cuisinart out and I would do what's called what they officially called a focus group. I didn't even know the name then and I would I created my own little survey and I would ask people. Why do you you know, what do you eat energy bars for? Why do you like them? Why don't you like them, you know all these things and people would fill them out and then I would give them. Concoctions and say, please tell me what you think

3 (16m 57s):
and so is that how you develop your recipes? Yes.

1 (16m 60s):
The interesting thing is the recipes came fairly quickly. I you know because I would sample my friends and they would give me feedback. Like I really like the Cherry but I don't taste cherry and every bite and I would go back to the drawing board and think think I need to add more cherries. How should taste cherry and every bite you shouldn't be searching for it. Then it doesn't taste like cherry pie, right?

3 (17m 24s):
By the way, how did you make like, how did you think of cherry pie? Like, what do you dried cherries and or and I don't know what

1 (17m 31s):
else? Well I so I would go to this natural food store because everything was less expensive there and I would buy dried cherries and dried bananas and dried apples and then I would come up with the idea of oh cherry pie. Okay. Let me see if I can make cherry pie with these cherries the dates and the almonds and they sold these tart and sweet and I will never forget they were the best-tasting thing because it actually are real Cherry without a bunch of sugar in them. Yeah, and then what is today l'arbre cherry pie is from these cherries. So I'm just imagining this

3 (18m 6s):
because I do a lot of cooking and you're in you're in your kitchen with your Cuisinart and I'm thinking you put a bunch of updates and like nuts in there and you're just gonna get this like ball rolling around the queen of the sticky like boom like sticky ball of a mass and Then you would like take it out with your hands and like I roll it out

1 (18m 28s):
with a rolling pin and then I got a cutter and I would like a pizza cutter and I would cut it out just in your kitchen and I would make samples. I mean batch after batch after batch.

3 (18m 45s):
And did you have any of your own do you have any cash to just to sort of ask your parents to help you out in that year while you were not? You know, we're getting a salary. How did you

1 (18m 53s):
pay her? Else within about a week I realized oh, I had a little bit of money saved up and then I thought I'm going to start this business, but I have to work. I have to get a job, you know. Yeah, so Whole Foods opened their first store in Denver at exactly the same time and I started seeing the building go up in the in in the neighborhood I grew up in actually and I thought huh. I'm going to get a job with them. I'm going to work in their Nutrition department doing what I love but I'm going to figure out the business and how it works and use it as a learning opportunity almost like a paid internship in a

3 (19m 34s):
sense. I mean that that's like incredibly prescient. Like that's really amazing planning reminds me we interviewed Ben and Jerry's and people think that they were just these hippies who but they actually like stood on a street corner with a counter to count how many people pass the street corner when they were looking for a location for their Ben & Jerry's, you know like that. Is a real planning moment you were you were sort of looking ahead and saying. All right. Well, if I'm going to do this business, let me alert at least learn natural foods and go like what be like a cashier at Whole

1 (20m 5s):
Foods. I got a job in the Nutrition department doing what I love which was working around all the nutrition products. So I thought okay. I'm going to enjoy myself but I'm also going to I'll have a first-hand view of what it's like to have a product in their store. And what does that mean? Mean from the standpoint of the vendor and it was one of the best decisions I ever made. So at what point did you think to

3 (20m 33s):
yourself? Okay, this is going to be really this is really going to be a big big deal. Like this is people are going to want one by these.

1 (20m 42s):
I'm not sure I ever thought that it was such a gradual progression. So I first, you know got my recipes together and I would give them out to friends and then friends would say I would buy those and that that little tidbit of asking me to buy it would make me feel so excited and motivated to get to the next place which was how in the world am I to manufacture these things? Yeah, where am I going to get dates and almonds and cherries? He's I didn't even know I'm buying them at a natural food grocery store in little baggies. Right? What do I know about almonds and dates and all that stuff? What do I know about manufacturing equipment and at the time I started questioning am I actually going to do this or should I just go to work for Whole Foods?

1 (21m 29s):
Maybe I'll just do that. And just just a clarify again. How are you? Just like sort of funding this business like bind the ingredients and stuff. And this was where you just using your own money. And you know, I had a job at Whole Foods and then I had a credit card and were you nervous or anxious at all? I don't know. I would have moments where I would be really gung-ho and I would get all kinds of great information and a month would go by and I would find out about a piece of manufacturing equipment or Just little things and I would be so motivated and somebody want to buy bars and I'd make them a batch of bars in these little Ziploc bags and a little Chinese takeout box.

1 (22m 11s):
And and I would they would pay me like $22 or something for a box of bars. And I would think wow and then another month ago by where I couldn't get anywhere. I felt like my feet were stuck in the mud and then I would just get really unmotivated and nothing would happen and this went on for For the three-year period between my idea phase and when I actually launched so

3 (22m 36s):
I'm trying to figure out how you maintained your your optimism and confidence about all this because I mean you're 32

1 (22m 45s):
you're divorced

3 (22m 47s):
and I'm imagine you probably have some emotional ups and downs of this point and I don't like was part of

1 (22m 53s):
you.

3 (22m 54s):
I mean, did you ever get the feeling that people look at you and kind of think? Oh, yeah. That's Laura. She's got this kind of weird side.

1 (23m 1s):
A lot of people thought that I mean, I would see people I went to high school with and they would come into Whole Foods and you know, they they're they're already climbing the ladder of big jobs and finance and all kinds of things and they say, oh, I didn't know you worked here and people would see me and even if I had those moments with people were I would notice the fact that I wasn't on that trajectory. I finally just said this is your path in life and you have to go for it and embrace it and make it

3 (23m 32s):
happen. When we come back, hello Laura embrace the uncertainty and slowly slowly figured out how to turn her kitchen project into a business. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible.

3 (24m 14s):
First to zip recruiter. Hiring can be a slow process Cafe Altura Co oh Dylan. Misko. It's needed to hire a director of copy. So he went to zipper Cooter posted his job and found the right person in just a few days find out why four out of five employers who post on zip recruiter get a quality candidate within the first day try zipper Cooter for free @ Recruiter.com built be uilt thanks also to wix.com how I built this tells inspiring stories about Founders and how their business has found success with Wix. You can create a professional website for your own business choose a template design for your industry and customize it to match your brand with Ascend by Wix.

3 (24m 60s):
You can connect with your site visitors capture leads and manage your customer relations from one place get started by going to Wick Dot-com Hib T to get 10% off. Happy Halloween nerds this week. Don't miss a special spooky batch of episodes from NPR's new daily science podcast shortwave. We're gonna talk about parasites that take over and control the brains of their hosts. Such like a podcaster does to Their audience. Listen And subscribe to shortwave from NPR.

3 (25m 41s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's 2001 lar American is working at Whole Foods and Denver and she's trying to figure out how to start a company but she still doesn't have a whole lot of money and she doesn't have any professional equipment or even a way to process and package her energy bars.

1 (26m 0s):
So eventually I went to a packaging company in Denver and they weren't even taking me seriously and they just saying to them you said

3 (26m 7s):
Hey, how do I make this something on a bigger scale?

1 (26m 10s):
What I said I need packaging and then they look at me and go, huh? I mean they couldn't take me seriously. I didn't even have a business and they give me a giant book that looked so tedious to read through and they'd say well read some of this and come back and we'll talk to you about packaging and then I would read enough that I would come back partially educated and then they they started realizing I was serious about

3 (26m 31s):
it that you want it you were looking for somebody to who had food-grade packaging the package your bars. Yes, and and meanwhile back at home. You're still using your queen. In art. Yes, I was using the

1 (26m 41s):
Cuisinart and I was trying to find a giant Cuisinart. I was trying to I didn't even know what that was called. It's called a vertical cutter mixer I learned and and then that led to some guy that they knew that had a piece of manufacturing equipment that lo and behold was the exact thing that I needed the the tank wiener. Yes, and so because I had the tenacity to ask and I wasn't afraid at a time when a lot of people questioned what I was doing I knew that I needed to do it it gave me the motivation to keep asking questions and to be curious and tenacious and so I'd call the guy with a piece of equipment and I'd meet him and then I talked to this guy and he said well, I'm not really using it if you want to use it you can and that's how it all kind of pieced together.

3 (27m 33s):
Yeah, and and did you and you had the name by that point

1 (27m 36s):
Larabars? Well, no, it was a different name. So I was going to name it Mana bar. And your Mana is your vital energy or your your how's that spelled? Maaaaan? A what

3 (27m 50s):
what happened to that name?

1 (27m 52s):
Well, the trademarking attorney called me at the 11th hour and we were getting ready to launch. It was the year 2000 to Summer and she said I think there's going to be a problem and she said there's actually Mana bread Ma nna and I think it could be Fusing Lee similar and I think you're going to need to change the name and I just thought you're joking right II don't I don't want to deal with this right now naming is one of the hardest things so I got the phone call finally came to terms with the fact that that was going to have to happen and a friend said, you know, once you come larabar, you know, they're you make them their your bars.

1 (28m 38s):
It sounds kind of like a good It rings larabar, you know, and I thought no way. I am not putting my name on this product. I don't want my name in there. I no way I'm not doing that and then I just kind of sat with it for a couple of weeks and I finally thought huh larabar, I guess that could work.

3 (29m 1s):
And by the way you had raised some money now, I hadn't raised any money didn't raise any okay.

1 (29m 5s):
Okay, I wrote it. So I wrote a business plan my dad help me write a business plan. a few friends and family interested and between the renaming of larabar Mana bar de larbre and Manufacturing issues I was going to launch in Fall of 2002 and that got delayed until April of 2003 and during that time all of my interested friends and family backed

3 (29m 34s):
out they because they got cold feet base it was

1 (29m 38s):
yeah it was just getting delayed yeah and all these people are starting to slowly back out because things Not happening. I've left working at Whole Foods. It's like mid-2002 and we're supposed to be launching but we don't launch and everybody's backing out because nothing's happening. So what you do? Well, I had to had to raise the money and my dad had decided he would let he wanted to get involved in the company. He had a great business background in the retail business. Yeah, he knew operations and how to run a company and he called me one day and he said hey, Would you would you want a business partner

3 (30m 18s):
and then how much money did you decide that you needed to raise

1 (30m 22s):
there really wasn't an amount. It wasn't really a specific. I think I think we came up the amount because I had to print packaging and we I had five flavors that I was launching with and each cashew cookie. Hey cashew cookie cherry pie apple pie banana bread and chocolate coconut chew, and there was a minimum. Print run of all of those and I actually printed at this company in Minnesota. And I remember it costing somewhere around, you know, a hundred hundred fifty thousand

3 (30m 57s):
dollars

1 (30m 59s):
and the manufacturing wasn't working at I had been to now for manufacturing places that did not work out and I had a giant vertical cutter mixer in the back of my old Land Cruiser that I would haul around to each facility whether it was two hours away an hour way. Two hours away what have you and that you

3 (31m 16s):
would have them install in their facility. Ideally you bought this thing. I borrowed it the giant the giant Cuisinart

1 (31m 23s):
giant quizzes 400 pounds. It was on a pallet and they'd have to fork lift it into the back of my Land Cruiser. So I was running around the state of Colorado trying to find somewhere to manufacture and when you're new to business, nobody takes me seriously. Yeah, they don't even know how to make your product. You know, they just want me to fit into what they're doing. And so I'm running around trying to find a place. Manufacturing all the additional investors have now backed out and I remember it was just like it dark night in January and my dad was getting discouraged. So I said to him, you know it I believe that this is going to work out. I really have faith and I think the right people will come along at the right time.

1 (32m 5s):
So I started talking to some other friends about it friends in yoga class friends. I worked with at Whole Foods and then all of a sudden a whole new group of people came that were just Thrilled like six six people and said, we'd love to invest

3 (32m 18s):
money in it. Yeah, and how much did you raise?

1 (32m 22s):
What was the total of $150,000

3 (32m 24s):
$150,000 and that was going to get you through some production and printing

1 (32m 30s):
more or less and then a little bit of extra just for operating costs, but we were operating out of a tiny duplex in Denver. So that overhead was extremely low.

3 (32m 40s):
Okay, so you have a manufacturing and the printing nail down, but how did you then? Find the stores to buy and then sell

1 (32m 48s):
Larabars. Well, let me let me backtrack to wear it when I was working at Whole Foods before I left. So one morning I was there because this is also part of what you're asking me. So I was on the early shift at 8:00 a.m. And one of the grocery Guys these said Laura the guy you need to meet. He's the regional buyer from Austin and he's he's the guy he's coming in. You know this next week. He's the guy You should talk to you about your product. So here I am. I'm taking trash out one morning. It's about 8:15 in the morning. And he walks across my path on the back doc of the store this the spire and he says oh hey, how are you?

1 (33m 30s):
What's what's new? You know, he just he was being friendly he'd seen me before he didn't know who I was and I in that moment. I thought this is my moment. And I said, oh hi, you know, this is what's new. I've been Hang on this product. I'm creating my own nutrition bar this and that and he literally kind of dead stopped and started doing

3 (33m 52s):
this complete moshus. I didn't really connect don't pinch me. Don't touch me. I didn't mean that and I'd like to run away from me right now.

1 (34m 0s):
And he said well, I'm only here for two hours. Do you have see apples? And he's just trying to get rid of me and I said actually I do have samples. I'm leaving in two hours. I said, well I can go home and get them and I mean I had an answer to everything he just tried to Yeah make me go away and I wasn't going away and he said okay bring me the samples and just kind of walked off. And so I said to my coworker I have to go home right now and take my break. And so I gave them to him and then like an hour later. He's sitting there and he goes Laura. This is the most Innovative product. I've tried in years. Wow, and I'm standing there.

1 (34m 42s):
I couldn't even believe my ears. You know, I knew I made a great product but he's a buyer. He's a regional buyer and he said when you are ready, here's my card. He said give me a call. Let me know he said dot your I's cross your t's I will let you bring it into the Colorado stores, huh? And that was just such a motivational moment for me. I bet I mean this is you know, two years in and I'm questioning what I'm doing and why I'm doing it. I'm tired. I don't What I'm doing and he says this and I think

3 (35m 18s):
wow. So what like a few months later you were you were ready to put Larabars out into the world, right?

1 (35m 27s):
Yes. I finally have raised all the money. We wanted to raise and found a manufacturing facility. It was the fourth one.

3 (35m 37s):
And how many bars did you have them make for the first big push the first launch. They didn't

1 (35m 42s):
make the bars. We made the

3 (35m 43s):
bars. Okay. How many did you make 500

1 (35m 46s):
Bars by hand? So I had roles of packaging in a vertical cutter?

3 (35m 51s):
Essentially it was you and a bunch of like friends and

1 (35m 55s):
it was me my father and then any friend that would help and it took us about 15 hours to make 500 bars because I had to hand cut each wrapper off of the rolls of film make the bar, you know roll it out with a pizza with a rolling pin and a pizza cutter and then stuff it in a package and heat seal.

3 (36m 18s):
And and then what you would take those those bars like Whole Foods and then like set up a table with with samples and try to to sell them to people who are shopping in the

1 (36m 26s):
store. Yes. So what I had learned working at Whole Foods in the three years that I was there among other things was when you sample products for free to people it's this kind of non risky trial. So in my mind the marketing plan for me was to do that is to stand in the store to talk to people educate them because what I was doing fruit and I mean everybody was afraid of a piece of fruit at the time the whole carb thing. The Atkins thing was very big and everybody thought like eating a carrot was a very bad thing. So I'm thinking what am I going to do with, you know curious and dates and then and then nuts have high fat in them, but it's good fat.

1 (37m 7s):
And so there was a lot to explain but I had to make it digestible and simple for people. So my whole strategy was to get in each store and as often as I could lunch and dinner demo my Product

3 (37m 21s):
cut it off and you were Manning the table and you were like saying. Hey, you want to try a larabar?

1 (37m 26s):
I was Manning the table. In fact, I have pictures of me doing all the demos and with into two weeks of being in Whole Foods because one of my friends still work there. He said Laura you have to go look at the movement chart upstairs. And I said what and he said larabar is the top 5 1 through 5 tell it selling products in the entire store right now it out cells olive oil and

3 (37m 50s):
water you. You are one of the five best selling products in that store within two weeks. Yes, that's insane.

1 (37m 58s):
I mean II knew I knew in my heart and from all the feedback I've gotten that people were excited about what I was doing. But I also on the other hand knew that there was going to be challenges and that was the I remember the day I got into the stores and I brought it after making those 500 Bars by hand and I remember standing there and I was just I was excited exhilarated. Jesus scared to death. I mean it was like putting a piece of art on display. What do

3 (38m 26s):
you think? I mean like what explains why it sold so well, like now you think about you know, so many people are paleo. I am on the Paleo and you know, people are doing Whole 30 and all these and that's a raw food. It's just kind of it's a lot more mainstream now, but in 2003, you know Atkins was still really big as you know, and so some of these ingredients We're sort of uncommon to a lot of people are they were they would think oh, well, I don't know if I all the nuts and the fat and this what explains how it took off so

1 (39m 0s):
fast, it was simple. Yeah 10 or less ingredients. You know, what these ingredients are almonds dates cashews cinnamon. I mean depends on the bar but cherries and you know what these things are and we've been eating these items and you know, they're grown on trees. We know what they are. It's not A question and then they were made to taste. I blended them to taste like something you want to eat. So I didn't feel like you had to sacrifice. So it's healthy but doesn't taste good. I wanted to blend both and I wanted make it something that you were so happy and excited to eat and there's

3 (39m 35s):
like two three four five ingredients in the average Lorimar right? There are

1 (39m 41s):
like my all-time favorite cashew cookie asked me to I love it. It ends two ingredients cashews and dates. It's so simple and I think that's Resonated with people as people had never seen something like this before which

3 (39m 56s):
is in that category is Chris because it's such a simple idea and so my means complicated but it's simple ingredients

1 (40m 2s):
even my dad asked me one day. How come somebody else hasn't thought about this. I said, I have no idea but I have and I want to this is why we're doing this. So

3 (40m 13s):
once you launch and Whole Foods and you realize that you're on the top five sellers in it's just that one Whole Foods Endeavor, right? Yeah, and the neighbor Denver. How quickly did did Whole Foods generally, you know the Whole Foods. I don't know Whole Foods company and say actually we want to we want this to go National

1 (40m 31s):
that took a little time. I mean it was over the next year that that started to happen. That wasn't as easy as it seemed but it but it did come together. There was a journalist in Denver. That works for the Denver Post and he wrote an article about me Memorial Day of 2003 and it literally put my company on the map just from that one article. I will always be grateful for that and from that the industry newspaper caught it and then all these stores from California started calling and so I started launching in California and it just started to build.

3 (41m 10s):
How are you making the bars fast? Fast enough

1 (41m 14s):
we were doing anything and everything we

3 (41m 16s):
could to make the party lasted until personally making them at that

1 (41m 19s):
point. I was my father started taking over manufacturing operations. And then we started just getting help you had to hire people we oh, yeah, we had to hire people and we were really writing a great

3 (41m 32s):
wave. You're already getting a lot of

1 (41m 34s):
attention. I mean we were two years in we were basically a national brand now in which the revenue and your to um, You're too I want to say like five to seven

3 (41m 46s):
million dollars. Yeah, if I see about five two years ago. We were jumping crazy growth. Yeah was your whole life from like mm to launch and then in the middle of this like 2005-2006 was will you working like crazy or by the time you're hitting five to seven million in sales? Where you like kind of kicking back and your dad sort of clinking champagne glasses and saying alright, we can chill out a little bit. Now

1 (42m 20s):
never the bigger. We got the more. I felt like we can never rest on our Laurels and I just felt like I had to work as hard as I could because I was leading our team and if I wasn't showing that I'm working hard and showing up every day then how could I ask people that did that for me? Yeah, you know, we're building a company we Can't say sorry. We're not available until Friday. You answer the phone any time somebody calls and you know, some of these big retailers would call in the most random moments

3 (42m 53s):
and say hey, we need more interested. We'd like to bring you

1 (42m 57s):
in can you come out and meet us at our national headquarters and have to go that's right. So as you

3 (43m 2s):
continue to grow you doing five seven ten. I don't know 20 million 30 million. How many employees did you eventually

1 (43m 11s):
higher? Fire we had about 26 in sales and marketing and then manufacturing had about 75. Yeah

3 (43m 22s):
you in 2008. I guess you were approached or a starting and maybe even earlier than that you start to get approached by big companies that were interested in talking to you. You did eventually sell to General Mills, which I want to get to in a sec, but they were not the only People approached

1 (43m 42s):
you they were not the first phone call. I got from a really large company was in early 2005. So like a year and a half in well, they said hey we want to talk to you. My one of my investor friends who worked for us was answering the phones and she said so and so from this companies on the phone and I went what and it was

3 (44m 9s):
a big huge company. Yeah. It's a

1 (44m 13s):
competitor of General Mills and I was in shock. I didn't I never occurred to me that I would sell my company or be approached by these big companies. It just it wasn't in where my - yeah, and then it became a distraction in the middle of growing the company and running it and and so, you know my business partners and I had to decide where we really going to be serious entertaining an offer or will read just because it's just too much distraction. Yeah. So we finally decided in 2007 that we would entertain an offer if it was the right company if we felt like it was the right company.

1 (44m 57s):
Cuz we didn't have to sell we were very, you know, financially stable company. Yeah, but for me, I was starting to get really tired and just I was it was getting worn down I bet and I mean you had

3 (45m 13s):
spent most of her Oliver see all of your 30s really just grinding this out. Right? And so presumably you wanted to kind of just focus on yourself a little bit

1 (45m 27s):
just I just wanted a little relief I think and and then we started to talk to some of these companies and then I met with General Mills and I just knew the day I walked in that building and how they approached me and the meeting we had I knew I felt that there was a connection in authenticity that if there were a company that were big that they would be a great fit. I felt like they understood my brand and respected it and all the brands. They'd have been around forever. So they're not just churning Brands out and putting them on the shelf and getting rid of them. I just felt this energy. I mean

3 (46m 7s):
almost nobody we've had on the show. I'm with some exceptions but almost nobody had on the show even thinks about money when they're starting their company. There's committed to a products are packaged as a passion of their the problem. They want to solve and then one day they find themselves with

1 (46m 23s):
this money in their financially secure. You start this thing. It's 30 33 really 3484 39 you sell it and all of a sudden you and your dad you have this money and this thing that you built did like, how did you wrap your head around it? It took awhile, you know during the sale process. I had to be, you know, we they had to do all of the kind of the research of our company without us. Telling our employees and that was very nerve-wracking.

1 (47m 4s):
So I had to have this very compartmentalized life for three months and I felt like I was gonna have a nervous breakdown, but because you don't know if it's going to come together until literally the day before so that was very stressful period for me exciting but also really unknown and then we put a deal together and that was the day before I turned 40 and And all of a sudden I had to go from running the ship to realizing that a whole nother team of people wanted needed to come in and do that and I needed to let them do that as a result. You know, I had a little boy I'm involved in his life.

1 (47m 47s):
I you know, I could to spend time pursuing other things important to me. Yeah and still keep my hand in the business and do the things that I love for it. But without all the stress. Yeah,

3 (47m 59s):
and and you go in any 7-Eleven or any Whole Foods or Safeway or Trader Joe's there there a lot of bars right by the cash register everywhere your name on this thing on this brand on this

1 (48m 13s):
product. I actually have I was in Target one day with my son is a couple of years ago. And you know, he's he was 6 at the time and we were you know wandering around buying what and then he saw the Larabars and he Did you make all these bars for the store and I didn't and I said well, yes indirectly. Yes, and you know, it was the first time the light bulb went off for him about what I had done and what larb, you know, he'd seen him at her house but to see him in the store and it was it was really exciting. It's really positive moment.

1 (48m 54s):
Has he ever had a

3 (48m 55s):
Snickers? Yes. He has had a snake and he does love them. Yes. Laura how much of of what happened to you is because of luck and how much because of your skill.

1 (49m 14s):
I mean, I feel lucky that I have opportunity in my life. And I and that I've surrounded myself with people that care about me and that you know along the way when people thought I was completely out of my mind for starting an energy bar company. I remember thinking to myself, you know, you need to surround yourself with People that believe in you, it's really important. And actually I remember thinking to myself. I have more to lose if I don't find out then I do if I try this and it doesn't work and I'm so glad that for whatever reason I had that in my mind because it compelled me to move forward and make Lumber happen.

3 (49m 59s):
Lar American founder of larabar by the way, if you've ever struggled with how to pronounce larabar maybe you've thought it was Larry bar. You can blame that umlaut above the a in Lara, you know, like the one used in Haagen-Dazs or Motley Crew which serves no real purpose or function Lara. Just thought it looked pretty cool.

3 (50m 39s):
And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things your building, but first a quick thanks to our 2019 lead sponsor of how I built this campaign monitor the radically easy solution to email marketing. Percent of retail professionals indicate email marketing as the highest driver of customer retention. Try it for free at campaign monitor.com. In 1987 dozens of federal agents surrounded a trailer park in Ozark, Missouri their target white supremacist threatening violent revolution. I have 18 the Freedom Fighters prepared to start a race war Nationwide agents fired teargas arrested him and found a massive Arsenal C4 plastic explosives hand grenades thousands of rounds of ammunition.

3 (51m 29s):
So years later, why did the FBI stop watching him

1 (51m 32s):
that story on embedded from NPR?

3 (51m 36s):
Hey, thanks so much for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and today we're updating a story that first ran about a year ago and it starts more than 20 years ago when Jerry Stellan Berg was a student at Virginia Tech and he and his friends would hang out at the student center. And there were pinball machines around the pool tables and all my friends while we were playing pool. They did they take a break and go over and play Pinball and I thought they were just throwing money away, but one night one of his friends finally talked him into playing a game. Just one game of pinball begrudgingly. I walked over and she's it must have been just a minute or two but have the time of my life and I kind of got hooked immediately and what he loved about it was that it was kind of a physical game.

3 (52m 18s):
You could manipulate the flippers to keep the ball in play, but Jerry was a tech guy of computer engineer and there was something about pinball that started to bug him while the balls rolling around this painted piece of wood. It's not doing anything other than Strolling which by the way has been perfectly acceptable for the legions of pinball players who've loved the game for decades, but Jerry couldn't shake the feeling that the game could somehow be reimagined and so in 2009 when touchscreen tablet started to get popular he got an idea. So I saw that technology and I wanted to figure out how to implement that in a pinball machine where we could take the physical pinball and have it interacting with Graphics in the same way that your finger does on a tablet computer should Jerry Set out to do just that so I started with one friend who's a mechanical guy and we connected with an audio engineer very popular audio engineer for it after 3 years working nights and weekends sure, he and his friends built a pinball game where you could use physical buttons and flippers to launch an actual ball over an LCD display.

3 (53m 26s):
So that the ball while it's rolling towards the physical devices could interact with these virtual objects and One of the games they developed is called rocks, which is kind of a riff on the popular video game asteroids where you take the physical pinball and as it's rolling around the Playfield surface. It's interacting with images of asteroids on the screen in mind you there's still a physical component this game. So the ball still rolling towards physical targets, but we enhance that experience with the virtual as their prototype got better and better Jerry and his team decided to show it off at a pinball Festival in Go, Texas, and so many people came to us and thought it was amazing people stayed there and played it for hours.

3 (54m 11s):
And what's kind of surprising here. Is that up to this point? Jerry wasn't really thinking about selling these machines he and his friends had been mostly doing it for fun. But I was fortunate enough to have an aunt an uncle who saw the early prototype and they called me actually after the show and they said hey if you want to try this and we're willing to give you some money to get started and so the very generous investment from uncle Gary and Aunt I am Jerry was able to quit his day job in Tech and pay a small team of Engineers to build the pinball machines. And in 2016 4 years after that show in Texas their company shipped out their first machines to a handful of fans. It doesn't need to be a billion dollar company to make me happy.

3 (54m 53s):
I'd be happy just selling a few hundred machines a year making it a lifestyle business and giving people something new and different and exciting. Jerry's pinball machine is called the P3. The company is called multi morphic and it's based out of Austin. Austin, Texas, and when we first ran the story Jerry's Hope was to get his machines and two bars and restaurants the same types of places where he discovered pinball. Well this year they're doing on-site trials at Dave and Buster's and they're also about to release their first online product a multiplayer pinball game to hear more about multi morphic or here previous episodes head to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org. And of course if you want to tell us your story go to Old npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week.

3 (55m 40s):
You can subscribe at Apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcasts. And while you're there. Please do give us review. You can also write to us at H IB T and p r dot org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or had Kyra's our show was produced this week by rumty narrow Bluey who also composed the music. Thanks. Also to Canada slim Julia Carney says Mexican floor leave a grant and Jeff Rogers are Intern is Sequoia Carrillo. I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this.

3 (56m 20s):
This is NPR.