2 (0s):
So really quick before I start to show we are coming back to Seattle and the San Francisco for to how I built this live shows details on the guests will be announced very soon in the next few days. It's so exciting. It's hard for me not to tell you but if you want to find out more about it, please follow us on Twitter or keep checking NPR presents dot-org to find out more tickets will go on sale later this week.

1 (27s):
We still continue to do trunk shows and we had Revenue goals for the month. And so if we weren't meeting or Revenue goals, then we would you know set up a trunk show stat, right but online it was just a totally different story. We could not sell or dresses.

2 (40s):
I have to assume your cash reserves or getting close to running out

1 (44s):
not only do we run out. It actually went into the negatives are bank account. I think at one point said like negative 2000 or something and I didn't know you could draw down. 0 so that was a wake-up call.

2 (1m 2s):
From NPR it's how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm guy Roz and on the show today how a Relentless morning routine inspired Sarah LaFleur to build a simpler wardrobe for women a multimillion-dollar brand called Mmm Lafleur. Back in 2004 and the American psychologist named Barry Schwartz published a book called The Paradox of choice berries argument and we've talked about it before on the show is pretty straightforward.

2 (1m 43s):
He concluded that having lots and lots of choices has actually made us more anxious and less happy. I mean think about it. Do you ever get anxious at Chipotle or In-N-Out Burger? I'm guessing you don't because they have very few choices burger cheese burger. Double cheeseburger Taco Burrito Bowl quesadilla, you get my point right having fewer choices actually decreases anxiety. Now imagine waking up every morning and agonizing over what to wear you go to your closet and you either hate everything in it, or you can't decide what would look good and I suspect this is not a thought experiment for many of you. In fact, this was how Sarah LaFleur started her day every morning as she went off to her corporate job at a firm in New York.

2 (2m 29s):
You and Sarah wasn't alone. The research is pretty clear on average women spend a lot more time getting ready in the morning than men. So Sarah decided to try and Tackle this problem by tackling the closet essentially by coming up with a line of clothing that was simple and elegant without too many options that would speed up the morning routine clothes that were well made looked great and professional and a more reasonable price, but like so many of the founders of Talk to Sarah had this ambitious plan and not the slightest idea initially of how she was going to carry it out for starters. She knew nothing about the fashion industry.

2 (3m 11s):
She had no idea how to make a dress or a pair of slacks. She just knew what she liked. But since she launched mm LaFleur it's grown into a business closing in on a hundred million dollars in annual sales. And a lot of the companies designs are inspired by Sarah's childhood in Asia heard. Dad was an American Diplomat and foremost of Sarah's childhood the family lived in Japan where her mother was from and Sarah grew up speaking both English and Japanese.

1 (3m 40s):
It was tough the the term that people use in Japan to describe biracial kids is half. I guess we say that to half Japanese half American but my parents always said you're not half your double you're both Japanese and you're also American and so I think they were really insistent on that fact, but I think on a day-to-day basis like I remember when I In Tokyo, I really didn't want to use my last name LaFleur, you know in Japan your last name really signifies whether you are Japanese or not so much so that Korean Japanese people are Chinese Japanese people. They will change their last name to signify that. They are truly Japanese. And so, you know, I kind of hid my American last name and I would say simultaneously when I came to the US I had the opposite experience especially around College.

1 (4m 23s):
I went to a school that was incredibly preppy and that prep culture. I had never seen before in

2 (4m 28s):
Japan. Tell me about about your mom. Did she did she work?

1 (4m 33s):
Yeah, she did and I mean really a huge inspiration. I mean, I would say the reason I started my business in many ways goes back to my mom. She is Japanese raised in Japan and you know, very very unusual person for someone of her generation. She worked throughout her life continues to work today. She loves her job. She runs a business selling travel jewelry out of Tokyo, which she Because I think in many ways it's tough being a diplomat's wife. You have to move every three to four years and I think the common assumption is that the wife usually gives up her career so that she can, you know be the diplomat's wife host receptions Etc. But she couldn't she always says I can't wait for Monday where the you know, your kids are like what excuse me like how about us on the weekends?

1 (5m 20s):
But she just she loved going to work and I think that was a real inspiration for me and my sister, you know, we never assumed that we would not get Get jobs. That was the only thing we

2 (5m 30s):
assumed so, I mean looking your mom as as this kind of inspiration for how to be an entrepreneur. Did you I mean, I can't imagine as a kid you thought I'm going to be an entrepreneur or did you I mean, oh God. No.

1 (5m 44s):
Yeah. No, not at all. I mean she didn't hide how hard it was trying to start the business with her friends having her friends leave the business all of a sudden out of nowhere Financial struggles. Just Hard personal conversations that she was having with her business partners and I remember as a kid. I would come down the middle of the night to grab a glass of water and I would see my mom's sitting in the armchair with a light above her head sipping whiskey on the rocks and I just remember thinking wow, it is

2 (6m 19s):
hard. So when it came time for you to go to college you went to Harvard. So I mean must have been pretty good

1 (6m 27s):
student. Yes, I know. No, I think I never fancied myself to be this super smart person. I knew I was a really hard worker and my mom always used to say, you know, this is in Japanese Dojo Cano Sriracha, which means like you're the kid who tries hard and so my mom meant that in an encouraging way, but I never in my mind thought like well, you know, I'm going to be the smartest person in the room. I've actually I probably never thought that in my life. I just knew that whatever I wanted to do. It would have to be through sheer willpower sheer determination.

2 (6m 59s):
Yeah, I mean when you when you graduate it, what did you think you were gonna do with your life? Did you think? Okay, I'll get a job and go work somewhere and figure it

1 (7m 9s):
out. I should take a step back and say it like basically from the time. I was in high school. I wanted to become a refugee camp officer. I wanted to be a logistics officer and I started researching Refugee issues got really really passionate about it. And I thought gosh, that's what I want to go do and so the summer between my Junior and Senior year. I I had this opportunity to go volunteer at a refugee camp in sambia.

2 (7m 34s):
What you did this you did this while you were still a student.

1 (7m 37s):
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, you know, I think if I can point to one life-changing experience that I've had that would definitely that would be the one I mean this refugee camp boys. I think like 10 hours from Lusaka which is the capital of Zambia. So we would drive to the small town. I was two hours away and I would buy random pieces of furniture layer, and then we would paint this building that we fixed. I mean it was It was basic stuff. It was it was basic stuff. But I think I also think simultaneously I realized the powerlessness of it of myself really being in that space. I would have people come up to me just as I was, you know, walking back to the dorm where we were staying and he would say I would I have AIDS.

1 (8m 17s):
My wife has died. I have one kid who's dying? Is there any way you could help me I like this, you know, and that's what just happened on them daily. If not hourly basis and it just Mentally changes the way you see life and I went with this nonprofit organization and one day the leader asked me. Okay, so we are were short on money. And so we're going to have to make a trade-off we can either continue to buy lunch or we can continue to spend on fuel and I was looking at him being like wait, we have to choose between lunch and fuel. What kind of choice is that? Like, how are we supposed to work like that? And then I came back on campus senior year I had.

1 (8m 59s):
Add all these friends who are coming back from their Investment Banking internships with $5,000 $10,000 signing bonuses, and I just couldn't believe the like, you know, that was more than the money. I had raised all summer and it sparked some sort of curiosity I think for me and then a mentor that I had who I've been with at the camp at the time. She was someone who had worked in Investment Banking and she said to me, you know, Sarah it's never a bad idea to go learn how to work with the big boys. Kind of hate that expression big boy. Yeah. Yeah, but but I knew what you meant and and the money I just couldn't believe that you could sign a piece of paper and you could have five thousand dollars in your checking

2 (9m 39s):
account. Yeah, and I guess you kids were sort of got drawn into that because after college you went into into Consulting like you went to work at Bain. Yeah. And what did you do

1 (9m 50s):
there? I was what was called an associate consultant and you are working on a case which I whew At a company like beIN it's usually for a Fortune 500 company and you are trying to solve a problem that the company presents to you, which might range from, you know anything from we're trying to enter a new market. How should we do that too? We have to cut costs. How should we do

2 (10m 14s):
that? Yeah, I mean a lot of the, you know, a significant percentage of people who've been on the show. I'd say more than 10% work in Consulting for a couple of years early in their careers where you you're basically paid to learn everything about a business in order to give them advice. S4 how to be more efficient or to run a better operation and yes and then oftentimes these you know people who were in Consulting are sitting around saying wait a minute. I think I could do that better and they go on and they start a business but it is actually really useful. I mean super helpful in kind of training you and giving you expertise in an industry that you otherwise would have known nothing

1 (10m 53s):
about it's so true. You know, I mean, I didn't know how to do really basic things like Didn't know how to write a business email. I didn't know how to do PowerPoint that moment. That's like that's a life skill, but they whipped me into shape. So it really I think said a certain standard for me that I knew I had to meet if I wanted to be taken

2 (11m 14s):
seriously. So you I guess you stayed a band for about three years, which is I think the sort of the average length of time unless you know for people who decide that they want to make a career out of it. Yeah, and you got this opportunity to go to To work in South Africa. You must have been 25 or 26. What did you what did you do there?

1 (11m 35s):
I worked for a nonprofit called technoserve. So that was started by a bunch of former Mackenzie partners. And the idea was that South Africa had a really really interesting challenge having gone through apartheid. You have this dual economy. You have the white economy and essentially the black economy and the to operate incredibly differently and the question was how can we get the the blacks out? Frickin Farmers to plug into this incredibly successful super market economy. That was that was what I was working on. And so I ended up spending over a year with them I

2 (12m 11s):
guess and I mean did you was the idea to just to be there for about a year and then do something else?

1 (12m 17s):
No, actually this was this was the moment where I you know, I kind of I think that was the moment where I discovered nonprofit wasn't for me. It wasn't the mission of the work the mission of the work is so important and I And it to be worth getting out of bed for in the morning, but my personality was wholly unsuited for it. Yeah, I think what worked me was the amount of delicacy and diplomacy that's really needed to push projects through in the nonprofit sector. It's a really admirable skill and you need to have it to be successful in that world and it was not something that I naturally had. Yeah. I mean it's

2 (12m 56s):
interesting because you are the child of a diplomat. And like had aspirations to work and in refugee camps, but the combination of where you are in life and you're sort of wanting to move quickly just wasn't the right fit at that at the time for that job. Yeah you 2011 you come back to the United States and you go to New York and get a job at a private Equity Firm.

1 (13m 20s):
Yes. Yeah, so you can see how I've been following my career. You know, that was actually what a lot of my colleagues at Bain ended up doing they'd rather go. Go to business school or they're going to private equity and I had gotten rejected from business school. I was on the wait list. I was just I didn't really have a clear reason for why I wanted to go to business school. Maybe they saw through that or maybe you know, I just wasn't a good enough candidate. But either way I was on I was on the wait list and then they released I think the the final candidates and August and they said no, thank you and just just a pause recycling today. Obviously. This is

2 (13m 55s):
a for a variety of reasons a badge of honor but back then when You embarrassed by

1 (13m 59s):
that? Oh my gosh, totally. I mean, I don't even know if it's a badge of honor. Now. A lot of people are like, oh you got a Harvard MBA, right and I'm like, no. No just I just went to college. So yeah, I didn't get it. I don't know. Yes, and now I think I'm more comfortable talking about it, but I wasn't for a really long time.

2 (14m 21s):
All right, so you so you go get a job with a private Equity firms called Starwood capital and this is going to be like the beginning. Beginning of your you know, the next phase of your career, you're still in your 20s at this point and private Equity is intense and you're looking for companies to invest in and must have been exciting and you get to New York. And what was

1 (14m 43s):
like, well, I will start by saying it was it was this might be weird after saying that my dream was to work in non-profit to say this was my other dream job, but it really was I thought what they were doing was fascinating and when I got the job I took it and I started gosh January of 2013 and I thought this was going to be my dream job. This is January of 2013 20. I'm sorry January

2 (15m 7s):
2011. Sorry. So January 2011 you get to New York and you were just there for four months which seems Seems like something happened and it just seems unusual. What what happened? Why were you there for such a short time? Why'd you leave?

1 (15m 24s):
You know, am I loved the job but the short of it. It was that it was a terrible cultural fit for me. I was one of two female investment professionals. I think out of dozens if not hundreds. The company culture was hyper-masculine aggressive swaggering which all looks very cool on TV, and I'm sure there's a part of me that idolized it too. But the truth is it was terrible for me. I was I think I professionally I perform just fine. But internally, I mean I started hyperventilating at work. I developed a weird tick it was Very clear. I think from week one. I was like, oh I made a

2 (16m 1s):
mistake. What was the breaking point? Because four months is it's a short time and there must have been something that happened at you. You just said I can't come back here anymore

1 (16m 13s):
Breaking Point with me just like a crying uncontrollably and calling my friend being like I don't wanna go to work tomorrow. I just generally felt like a loser. I mean here was I spent three years I've been in and I moved to South Africa thinking that's gonna You can be my thing and then you know after your decide, okay, it's not for me. So let me let me give this thing a try and I'm I'm there for four months like the narrative I have written for myself was that I was a loser and so it was it was really it was just a devastating time for me

2 (16m 46s):
when you told them you were leaving. We're they

1 (16m 48s):
shocked. I think my boss was surprised. I think private Equity is filled with a bunch of people who are incredibly determined and want to climb the ladder and here I was saying like, I've been here for months. And I'm out and I remember the first thing he said to me was don't you want to become vice president here? And that's honestly the last thing I want to do and so you start to have real moments of doubt about who you are as a person and yeah up until that point. You're always like Sarah who goes to college, you know, Sarah who works at Bay and Sarah who blah so much of my personal identity was tied up in the job that I had and toe. So to go from Sarah who works in private Equity who flies on private jets.

1 (17m 28s):
To Paris to Sarah who doesn't have a job and is worried about how she's going to pay her Cobra payment next month. That was a that was a sucker.

2 (17m 38s):
So at this point, you're like 2728 maybe yeah 20th and think you would rather leave without a plan then to stay. Yes, and I would say

1 (17m 49s):
would is a that's a strong word. Like I felt like I had no choice but to leave without a plan. I just needed to get out.

2 (17m 56s):
So I still remember that feeling.

1 (17m 58s):
Like took the Metro North on my last day back into the city. You can see out in front the railway in front of you and I

2 (18m 8s):
just remember thinking oh my gosh

1 (18m 9s):
Freedom I'm free again. And so yeah, I left without a plan. I like cried for a

2 (18m 15s):
month.

1 (18m 17s):
It started seeing my psychiatrist about a few months into a couple months into that job because I was you know, I was a nervous wreck. And so, you know, I spending a lot of time actually in her office. I think I was probably going like Maybe sometimes even three times a week just to feel normal again. Yeah, and that was around the time. I had always had this idea for starting a clothing company for working

2 (18m 40s):
women wait, you you always have this

1 (18m 43s):
idea or yeah. Well, I should say always as in like when I when I was working management consulting because I could never find good clothes. And so actually I remember at my HBS interview they ask you what do you want to do with your life? And so I suddenly want to go work in refugee camps and they're like, okay. Well if there's if you had to go do something Else, what would it be? And I said, well, you know, I really think someone should go start a work where company for women because clothing out there is just terrible and I remember the interviewer left and you like tell me more about that. I think I think a lot of women can relate to that. So so I had always had that idea. I guess since working abandoned since needing those clothes myself, but it's just this idea. Yeah idea like we all have ideas right like the exactly

2 (19m 22s):
exactly somebody needs to make a better pickle or a I should break pickles, but whatever it is, I say we all All have these things and this was your thing. It was like but it wasn't really a serious but you weren't sitting down at night and weekends writing a business plan for a clothing company. No, I mean I was just like what fashion

1 (19m 40s):
like, I'm not even interested in fashion. I just I was like, but however, I am a consumer of clothes. Yeah. I have to wear clothes everyday I care about looking good and gaining the respect of my peers and my clients. So I'm going to put effort into it but God it is so hard.

2 (19m 57s):
Yeah, but so this Like the spring of 2011 you quit your job and now you've got time which sort of like one if we're like watching one movie on this you've got time and then you get you know, you're excited. You think now I can start this business but there's another movie which is you're going to see therapists. I have to assume that you were experiencing some depression from you know, leaving that job that can be a hard time to get motivated to feel like right. Did you just take some time to just kind of be sad and depressed or were you thinking I'm gonna jump into this next

1 (20m 35s):
idea. I remember being terribly sad and depressed and unwell, and I also remember thinking I need to get moving or else I'm going to get stuck. And so I only remember this because I remember the dates that I signed a certain contracts. I signed for a we work office starting May 1 back when we work was still very small. I think they had like two buildings in New York, and then I officially registered as a LLC. See June 1 in Delaware. So I just I have records of those contracts which makes me think like okay, there was a part of me that that kept kept pushing myself.

1 (21m 16s):
Yes, but then I also remember going on a run and stopping the middle of the run because I had to like cry for 30 minutes and I think that is mid-july right? So it was it was kind of a it was a parallel process. I wasn't like, okay now I'm done being sad and I'm going to go start my company. It was it was I was working through both things at the same time.

2 (21m 35s):
So as you started As a kind of the gears in your head start to turn more and more about this idea of professional clothing for women. Did you have a sort of a solid vision of what that would be or was it still kind of abstract and in the spring of 2011,

1 (21m 51s):
you know surprisingly my my vision for the product was very clear my mom before she started her her jewelry business had worked in high-end fashion. And so I think through her I got to see and touch a lot of these beautiful pieces of high-end clothing that she would bring home not because she bought them but you know a samples or is this gift and I think she dressed also in that way incredibly tailored and Polished and I think my big question I was starting this business was why aren't their clothes like this for regular working women, you know, the clothes that I was shopping for at the time. It was always ill fitting it would rip a lot easily.

1 (22m 31s):
I would always have to get it tailored. It just it would wrinkle easily. I mean So many things that were wrong with it and I was spending so much money trying to dress professionally for work. So I knew exactly the kind of clothing that I wanted to create which is really like I wanted to sell dresses that would sell for $2,000 for a fraction of the price and I wanted to work with a luxury designer because I wanted my customers I wanted regular working women to wear luxury quality

2 (22m 57s):
clothing so you so you register an LLC and I mean what like if I said to somebody, all right, let's go start a clothing company like I would have No idea what to do. Okay, I register the LLC and then and then what first of all you need money, right? So how much money did you have at the time to start this

1 (23m 16s):
thing? Very little I had about thirty five thousand dollars saved up which is not very little but you know in the context of starting a business it does not get you very far.

2 (23m 26s):
Right, but you would save this money over the course of your time at Bain and I mean private

1 (23m 30s):
Equity Firm my entire life. Yeah. It was like the piggy bank that I

2 (23m 34s):
kept. Yeah and what like What's $35,000 going to gonna do I mean, it's Gonna Last?

1 (23m 41s):
Yeah, it doesn't it doesn't go very far which was the short story my parents also. Let me 35,000 so they said oh

2 (23m 47s):
she got

1 (23m 48s):
70,000. Yeah, so I started with $70,000.

2 (23m 51s):
And by the way, the idea was to see how far you could go and then eventually fundraise or did you think I'm gonna go for fundraising right away?

1 (24m 0s):
Yeah. I always it was I mean I didn't I couldn't even think about fundraising like I knew Through the Grapevine, you know the bonobos Founders where we park our Founders both worked at Bain and so I think I mean in some ways they served as great role models you kind of saw from afar that maybe it was possible to fundraise. And so I think in those initial days it really it wasn't like this is the business plan. Let's go raise some money. Let's go start this business. It was like does anyone know anything about making clothes because if you do I'd like to talk to you.

2 (24m 31s):
Yeah, I mean when you know, we've had conversations with Founders who at this point the first Do is start to reach out to anybody who will talk to them? They you know, they'll send the like cold emails and cold call people for advice. And is that is that who you who you are? Like is that your personality to? Is that what you

1 (24m 50s):
did I would say I was more organic again. I didn't know anybody who worked in fashion. So I remembered that there was a woman who was a couple years ahead of me. The college. She had gone to RISD to study interior design and I think textiles Interior design and I was like, well, that's that's one step closer to Fashion. So I reached out to her and I was like, hey, do you know anybody who works in fashion? She was like actually I do know one person from RISD who went into fashion. So let me put you in touch with her. So she was the one fashion designer that I knew and she put me in touch with her five Headhunters in fashion. Most of whom had no time for me. You know, they're like what beIN like never heard of it.

1 (25m 30s):
Don't care like please come back when you're serious. I've got Calvin Klein on the other line. Yeah, but one of those Five Headhunters decided to take a chance on me. He you know said, let me see if I can help you out and help you out with what recruiting

2 (25m 44s):
recruiting 200 so this Headhunter, so he said let me see if I can help you find somebody to join

1 (25m 49s):
you as a buddy as a

2 (25m 50s):
co-founder is you could not you felt like you couldn't do this by yourself. You didn't have the understanding or the knowledge the industry.

1 (25m 57s):
Yeah, that's right. And I think it's not only that I couldn't do it. I didn't want to do it. You know, I wanted to design the most beautiful dresses in the world and I have not trained as a designer. Yeah, and so it was really important to me that I had a high-end fashion designer. I had other designers who said you know, why don't you just you can do it yourself? Like you can just copy these designs, you know, add a sleeve, you know add whatever and sell it and I was like, nope. Nope. That's that is not what I want to do. I don't I don't want to create more of what is already out there. I want to fundamentally actually create something

2 (26m 28s):
different. So there's this guy's a Headhunter and he agrees to kind of help you out and he identifies somebody. A fashion designer, you know who you should meet. Her name is Miyako Nakamura. Who was she what was she doing at the

1 (26m 44s):
time? We are go at the time I think had just left a composer and she was their head designer. She was known in the fashion industry and you know, she we were just in totally different worlds. I think that was actually my other kind of surprising moment, you know, I thought I understood when New York was about but it was one of those moments where I was like, wow, I literally don't know anybody in the fashion world yet. Like the capital of fashion is New York City. The Garment district is in New York City and in our circles did not overlap at

2 (27m 12s):
all. So I so you meet Miyako and what's your pitch to her? Like you say? Hey, I'm starting this company. I want to make really beautiful, you know clothing for professional women that is you know, relatively affordable is was that how you described it to her? Yeah. Basically she

1 (27m 31s):
was like what you know, she the way she described it to me and she says I thought everything The world that needed to be designed had already been designed and I think she herself at that time was going through a kind of career crisis where she didn't really understand the point of design anymore because she thought it's all it's already been done like why bother so this

2 (27m 53s):
is what I'm curious about. You meet Miyako. She had been the lead fashion designer for Zac Posen major fashion brand, you know, designer brand you've got Eighty thousand dollars in seed money between you and the blown even if you have zero experience obviously are intelligent but no experience in fashion. You've got this kind of harebrained idea to start a company and that's pretty much in a we work hard disk. Like why? Why would she say? Yeah. Sure. I'll go work with you. I'm just yeah. Wow, why would she agree to do this?

1 (28m 29s):
Well, I'm I'm just irresistible in person. No, I'm totally joking. I every investor. I've ever spoken to I mean frankly like every anybody I have ever spoken to about this in any sort of detail. Their follow-up question is usually like what was she thinking and why would she come and work for you? Totally fair question, you know, I I don't want to answer for her but I think for her it was it just it was so different. It was so unlike anything else that had ever been proposed to her this idea of Designing for a group of women that she didn't even really know about working women this idea that she always says I never actually seen My clothes on a real person that means a non-model.

1 (29m 11s):
I've never actually seen my clothes on the street. You know, she designed Oscar gowns. I think she designed a gown ones for Natalie Portman. You know that was kind of the world she was moving in but she said there was no practical element to the beautiful designs that I was making and I think that was that was a big question mark for her.

2 (29m 29s):
I mean, I that I understand the creative side of it, right, but you could even offer her like a steady income you You could offer her partnership, but like she was going to be she was not gonna have an income for who knows how

1 (29m 43s):
long yeah, I mean, I think I mean all of your questions are fair. I'm sure this could have played out very differently. I think the only way to describe it is that we had some sort of connection, you know, I was actually going to go with a different designer. I had met someone else who had been the head designer for of another very famous brand and I actually wasn't even going to meet Jakob I had told a Headhunter, you know, I really like this other person like she feels like the right person like, you know, I don't really even care to meet with another candidate and he was like, no no just meet with her because I think you guys are going to really hit it off and even when we first met and I you know, I was telling her about the kind of women. I wanted her to design for I said, you know don't you know those women they they walk to work and their flats and they have their heels in their bag and once they get into the elevator they change out into their heels and she was like no I've never met anyone like that and it's like wait.

1 (30m 36s):
What world do you offer a ton just like everyone I know walks to work in heels and stays on their heels all day, but at that point like I didn't even know what was involved in designing clothing. I share the story just to level set just how Elementary my understanding of clothing manufacturing was I remember Miyako early on said to me we're going to need to find a pattern maker and I was like, oh no, no, don't worry. We're not going to do any prints were only going to do solid colors. She started laughing. Laughing in my face because a pattern maker to the uninitiated in fashion manufacturing is like the architect of the

2 (31m 13s):
dress. Yeah, the problem cuts out the

1 (31m 14s):
shapes exactly exactly the person who designs on a white piece of paper how the different pieces of fabric are supposed to be laid out in cut and I thought pattern she meant like floral patterns or checkered pattern flag refined. Yeah, exactly. I thought that's what a platter make so like don't worry. We're just gonna do like navy dresses. And so that is that

2 (31m 36s):
Is how much I didn't know? When we come back how Sarah got a crash course in dressmaking how she tried and failed to raise money and how she and Miyako discovered what it means to have a bank account with a minus sign stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible first to LinkedIn jobs hiring. The right people is one of the best ways to help grow your business, but it shouldn't take time away from your other priorities LinkedIn jobs screens candidates with the hard and soft skills you're looking for so you can hire the right person fast find the right person for your business today with LinkedIn jobs.

2 (32m 32s):
You can pay what you want get the first $50 off. Just visit linkedin.com built terms and conditions apply. Thanks also to Microsoft teams. We all know meetings struggling to pay attention files seem impossible to find and if you're not in the room, you're not in the know welcome to the new way to work together Microsoft teams where you can contribute to meetings from anywhere chat with coworkers. So you're never out of the loop and find all your files and even edit them in real time in one convenient place. When you're ready to unleash the power of your team open teams, learn more at microsoft.com teams.

2 (33m 16s):
Celebrity chefs aminos rat will not do events anymore. If she's the only brown person speaking and often like I have at the ready list of names because a lot of times excuses like confine couldn't find one the stories behind the celebrities every Tuesday on it's been a minute from NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this. I'm guy Roz. So it's 2011 and Sarah's teamed up with a well-known designer named Miyako Nakamura and they begin to imagine what? New line of clothing for professional women could look like

1 (33m 49s):
I'm embarrassed to say that I once bought 20 somewhat odd thousand dollars of clothing from a luxury department store, which really only mounted like seven pieces because each one was so expensive because I wanted to show Miyako the kind of clothes that I wanted her to design. And by the way, I did

2 (34m 8s):
return it you return them. Yes, right.

1 (34m 10s):
Yes, but I was at the scariest 24 hours of my life where the 24 hours where I had those seven dresses. In my possession in my apartment. I was like what if we have a fire but I you know, we and then I just started showing her. I was like, you know this style. It's so beautiful. It would actually be perfect for work, but it cost

2 (34m 27s):
$25,000 and describe the style like clean lines dark blacks graze. Like what would they look like

1 (34m 35s):
it was tailored? And I think most importantly the fit was good. And when I say thus it was good. So I have since learned a lot about pattern-making. And fitting clothing most brands, if you're lucky the designer will fit the Garment on a real fit model once before it goes into production. If the fit on something you buy is off. It's probably because it wasn't fitted correctly or it went into production before all of the errors were corrected luxury Brands can afford to do three or four fitting to really perfect the fit whereas lower price Brands. They might be fitting at once or maybe He never they might just go straight to production.

1 (35m 18s):
And I mean there are so many things that are involved in good fit. But that was really one thing that I wanted her to understand is the way your body feels when your what wearing a well-fitted Garmin. It's magical and you just can't get that at most of the price points that are out

2 (35m 34s):
there. And who did you tell her to imagine she was designing for like, oh, honey. And what was the job it was a it was a woman working doing

1 (35m 43s):
what you know, we had always Last one was called the taxi tests. So if you're climbing into a taxi, can you jump in without ripping your scheme, right? The other one was the bend over test which is if you if you bend over can the person sitting opposite from you see your cleavage or your bra, right? Because that's strike two and then strike three was can you see underwear lines every morning while I was working at Bain or private Equity. I've always turn around and check the mirror to make sure that my underwear lines weren't actually showing through whatever I was wearing and those were the three tests and so with every garment that we were making I said, I just want you to make sure that those three bases are covered and so I would just move around and every single garment that she made to make sure that it meant those things and I guess this

2 (36m 31s):
is a good place to kind of talk about confidence in a work environment. Right? I mean, it sounds like you were like you were looking to design something that would make women feel more confident in the workplace is that More

1 (36m 45s):
or less right? Yeah, that's I mean you put it perfectly. I just didn't want women to have to worry working women have to worry enough. Yeah about whatever it is that they're doing. The last thing I want them to worry about is the clothes that they're wearing and I'm sure men can relate to this too when you leave home that morning and you're not quite confident and whatever it is you're wearing like maybe your sweater has a hole in it, or maybe your pants are a little bit dirty, or maybe there's not Not quite fitting right and it's always in the back of your mind a little bit and I just wanted to do away with all

2 (37m 22s):
that. So once you have sort of the the first prototypes are agreed upon designs. How did you get them made? Where did you get the made

1 (37m 31s):
in the Garment District of Manhattan? I didn't realize the extent to which manufacturing is still very much alive in New York and you know, just when I was working at Bay and I was working right in Times Square and I Believe that, you know, these factories were literally two blocks three blocks south of me and you open the elevators and it is just rows and rows of sewing machines and I just didn't even know this industry existed, but that is where we made our first round of dresses and make it sound easy, but it wasn't at all most factories are not willing to work with a no-name because I mean small designers come and go and so I didn't realize like I was like, well, I'm willing to pay you money and they're like, it doesn't matter she willing to pay us money.

1 (38m 15s):
Any like we need sustainable businesses. So if you're not going to be around in a year, which was true of most fashion brands than we don't want to start this partnership. And so, you know, we had to beg our first factory to make the dresses for us. And at this stage they were just sampled. We weren't even doing Factory runs, but I think Miyako is experience was everything so they trusted us because we ARCA was doing it, you know, and I was just the woman who signed the checks

2 (38m 43s):
and so you got a factory to agree to Just a few samples of each item.

1 (38m 48s):
Yeah, that's right. So, you know the other thing that's scaring retail businesses inventory and because we only had 70,000 dollars, I didn't want to tie up my cash and inventory and so we decided that we would do trunk shows and we would bring samples and we will bring one of every size and we would have people try them on and based on that. We would Place orders

2 (39m 8s):
right and a trunk show is literally like bringing a trunk and going to someone's apartment or some Small space and hopefully people will show up inviting people to

1 (39m 18s):
come. That is correct. I think we did gosh a dozen or so in the first year and it was hard work. You know, you're lugging around suitcases. I was looking around fabric rolls of fabric on My Shoulder Through the Garment District. It's a very physically intensive

2 (39m 34s):
experience and who did you invite to the trunk shows? How did you even get people to show up

1 (39m 40s):
friends and former

2 (39m 41s):
colleagues coming to where

1 (39m 43s):
we rented this hotel suite we And the bathroom into a dressing room the shower stall into a dressing room. I think we created one more makeshift one. And the first two trunk shows. I think you know legitimately. It was really just my friends and friends of friends coming to be supportive. But I think by the third trunk show, I hardly knew anybody there and what what started happening was that women would be telling each other at the workplace. We had zero money to spend on marketing. So, you know, it wasn't like we were inviting editors or taking out ads or any of that. It was women just Seeing other women remember there was a group of women from goleman at our third trunk show and I was like, how did you hear about us? And they were like, oh, well, Jenny saw so-and-so wearing this dress and she asked her where she got it and here we are and most products that people make you rely on editors magazines ads to spread the word.

1 (40m 35s):
It's essential for your business. And I think one thing I didn't quite realize, you know women they're not looking to fashion magazines to tell them what to wear to work their turn. To each other they're asking each other. Where'd you get that? Where'd you where'd you shot for that? And so that was that was hugely beneficial in the early days.

2 (40m 52s):
And so you and Miyako would just be at these trunk shows describing the clothing or was it just

1 (40m 57s):
you ya know, so it was me my other co-founder Nuri, who is someone I worked with at Bain

2 (41m 5s):
you you brought her on because you needed somebody with a different skill set that

1 (41m 11s):
though. It was actually the opposite of Miyako. I needed someone who who could do what I was doing. Because at that point I was getting stretched too thin I should also share probably at that point. I was you know, I wasn't taking a salary I was tutoring to make ends meet so usually every day from you know, I would wake up and then I would work I would be running around the factory the pattern maker the factory the pattern maker and then from 4 to 7 p.m. My apartment would turn into a tutoring facility and I would be teaching the SATs or 5th grade math or 7th grade English. Well and then Start working on my business again evening. I had when I just had no time to attend everything that I needed to Andre was someone who I worked with she was actually the first person I managed at Bain and so, you know I said I want to take this company to the next level.

1 (42m 1s):
Do you want to come and she said sure and she she also didn't have a salary I couldn't pay her salary so she started tutoring to and that's how the two of us made ends

2 (42m 11s):
meet. All right. So in 2012, you're doing Trunk shows and You're getting some people to show up. But I mean, you can't sustain a business doing Trunk shows. Right? And I have to imagine that you guys were not making any money in that

1 (42m 26s):
first. You know, I think I was after we did our first set of trunk shows and and by the way, we sold out. I mean that was made about $50,000 at that point. And we said, okay, this is a quote unquote proof of concept. We're gonna go raise money

2 (42m 41s):
now so already in 2012, that's where you sit right now is time. Go out and raise money.

1 (42m 46s):
Yeah, that's right. I was like, you know what not only do we have product we have made money now. So yeah this raising money think it's gonna be a piece of

2 (42m 55s):
cake. Yeah really made money because your money was bright you have expenses and you had to pay for the

1 (42m 60s):
fabric. Yeah generated Revenue, you know, I think I was a in the fundraising World they talk about pre-revenue companies and post trauma room companies, right? So I was like, well, we are a post Revenue company and okay. We said, you know, I don't know if we want to raise him. Million dollars two million dollars and

2 (43m 18s):
so who did you or did you reach out to

1 (43m 20s):
we started with friends and family? This is a trick that I pass on to other entrepreneurs who are trying to raise money in the very early stages because a lot of people I think women especially tell me they feel bad about asking for money. They feel nervous. What if I lose their money, etc, etc. And what I tell them is rich people get asked for money all the time. Yeah, it's you and 500 other people asking for their money and One phrase that I developed which I started using an all my e-mails is if you or anyone, you know might be interested. Please let me know. I think the you or anyone else, you know gave the other person An Elegant out if they weren't interested, you know, they could say like yes, I'll think about who I know or if they're interested.

1 (44m 3s):
They'll say like actually I'm interested or they really might connect you with someone else.

2 (44m 8s):
Were you able to raise any money that in that in 2012?

1 (44m 12s):
I raised so contrary to you know, when we thought we wanted to do which was like, I don't know 1 million or 2 million raised $400,000 and it took me nine months.

2 (44m 24s):
So then what you continue to do these trunk shows because that's not going to write us not going to cut it you've talking about other companies like bonobos and Warby Parker and these are e-commerce companies, right? They've got websites where people can can order stuff. So

1 (44m 40s):
yeah, that's right and around this time. This direct-to-consumer was becoming a thing and so online was I was at and I think I foolishly had this notion that if you launch a website your customers come in the shop and you become millionaires. Yeah, of course, I think we have all learned since then that that is not the case. But at the time there was such a media frenzy around these new DTC businesses and I just thought like wow, it's so easy. Like let's launch a site and so we did can never forget this three am of January 1st 2013. That was the official launch of Our e-commerce site. Mmm Luther.com

2 (45m 17s):
and and the name mmm. I mean obviously the floors your last name. Where did that come

1 (45m 21s):
from? Oh, it's my mom's nickname. Her nickname is many which is a child's way of saying eyes and Japanese and she has really big eyes. And so that was her nickname and initially actually it was called mem a LaFleur but men met in French means Nana. So after a while I realized like Nana flower doesn't actually have the best ring to it. Like maybe we should change that and so we took the initials of men. Which is mmm and made it. Mmm LaFleur.

2 (45m 48s):
All right. So 2013 you launch the e-commerce site and it was the same kind of model people would order something and then you would have it made in the factory.

1 (45m 57s):
No at that point. We did decide to hold

2 (45m 59s):
inventory. How many of you have made

1 (46m 1s):
Let's see. We probably did a run of 54 each because I think that was the minimum. So we probably have 350 dresses. So threatened 50 dresses sitting in my apartment

2 (46m 9s):
all sitting there apartment you put up the website sit back you're like waiting for the orders to come in.

1 (46m 15s):
And and crickets crickets is the short of it

2 (46m 21s):
like no one is clicking on the website and

1 (46m 24s):
like I don't know maybe we got like 10 15 orders on the day of launch and then afterwards we get like three to sure there were days with zero I

2 (46m 36s):
mean and those three or two it might be $200 or $400. It's correct and you thought just putting up a website people would find you. Yes, that

1 (46m 47s):
was my very naive

2 (46m 48s):
assumption and you personally did you didn't have money to to do a lot of

1 (46m 52s):
marketing and no I mean, yes, we was really still continue to do trunk shows. We had Revenue goals for the month. And so if we weren't meeting or Revenue goals, then we would you know set up a trunk show stat and try to make some money off that in the trunk shows actually were always quite lucrative. You know, we knew that when our customers actually tried on the clothes in person they love Loved them so often women weren't were buying multiple dresses. But online it was just a totally different story. We could not sell or dresses.

2 (47m 24s):
So I read that in that first year 2013, you did $300,000 in sales, which on one level sounds really impressive but on another level 4 and apparel business where the costs and expenses are High. I mean, that's not that's not a whole was that did you meet your goal your

1 (47m 41s):
targets? No, we did not I think actually the for the first year mine. Was like a million so we felt quite short of that and in 2013, we had hired three other people

2 (47m 52s):
and presumably you couldn't pay them a whole lot. No,

1 (47m 55s):
you know, we were paying ourselves very very little and we've only raised $400,000 at that point. So, you know, we're watching the cash dwindle.

2 (48m 5s):
All right, so that first year you're doing a third of what you were hoping to do you get into 2014 and I have to assume your cash reserves or getting close to running

1 (48m 15s):
out not only do we run out it actually went into the negatives are bank account. I think at one point said like negative 2000 or something and I didn't know you could draw down Beyond zero. So that was a wake-up call and I had to go out and fundraise again.

2 (48m 31s):
Same people same seed folks. No, no.

1 (48m 34s):
No. I knew I couldn't go back to them because we haven't done what we said. We wanted to do on the on the cash that we had raised at that point. So I had to go out and fundraise again and the most Amazing part of this story is meeting Bob. And and who's Bob Bob Deutsche ba was a CFO at these two insurance companies. I had gone to meet my husband friend's father who was a very successful entrepreneur for some advice secretly. I'm also hoping maybe he'll invest but he said, you know, you got to meet with my former CFO Bob, but Bob and I have started two companies together, they sold both incredibly successful.

1 (49m 15s):
And I go and meet Bob and I say hey Bob. I'm just having a really hard time trying to raise money. Can you please give me some guidance? And he said well, you know, the first thing we should think about is how much should your company be valued at? And how much do you want to give up and I was like, I'm willing to have my company valued at anything just to keep right the business going out. Yeah, exactly and he's like no no like Step 1. Let's go do this and so he essentially gives me a homework assignment

2 (49m 44s):
a homework assignment. To help you figure out what what you think the company's worth?

1 (49m 47s):
Yeah, and and how much I should be raising and I go back to Bob and he says this is really interesting. Like these are the facts that you need to go out with when you go and talk to these VCS. None of the VC conversations actually go anywhere but armed with this information. I'm able to say my company. We've already generated Revenue similar companies when they were at my size were raising this amount of money at this valuation. Can we talk?

2 (50m 15s):
So what did you value the company at the time?

1 (50m 18s):
Oh gosh, it was a six million. Maybe

2 (50m 21s):
when you you are out of money and you've got to raise money and Bob is helping you kind of develop a pitch and you went to VCS. And what was their response when you pitch them on this

1 (50m 35s):
company, their response was the same response that I would basically here for the next three to four years, which is congratulations. It looks like you started a real Right Niche business for

2 (50m 46s):
yourself, but we're not interested. Was

1 (50m 48s):
that a yes? Yeah. Niche business is essentially its code word for this is small potatoes. And I know I'm thinking myself. Like what about working women is such a niche business, you know, there are 30 million women aged 25 to 45 who work in some sort of corporate environment and these women spend on average for women making 75k and up four thousand dollars a year on clothes to wear to work. And so that's roughly a hundred. 220 billion dollar market, you know to me nothing about that was Niche,

2 (51m 20s):
but where are you? I mean or are you mostly pitching to men? Yes. Yes, and not to I don't want to you know pile on it. But but I have to assume they didn't quite you know, they were not gonna be able to relate to this is maybe they didn't fully understand the

1 (51m 33s):
opportunity. Yeah, there was a lot of that. I'm sure you've heard this from your other Founders, but there was a lot of oh, I'm gonna have my wife who is a stay-at-home mom. Try it, you know, nothing against her, but she's been at home for 30. Errors and probably has different needs for what she wants to wear every single day or you know, I'll have my my 17 year old daughter tart. Try it but just just kind of lumping in all women into the same category. You know, the most honest thing I heard was I had an investor call me after we did the pitch and he said to me we really like you we really think there's a lot to like about the business, but it's just so early and we're four guys sitting around the room and we just can't Get a gut feel on the product.

1 (52m 18s):
I've repeated that elsewhere in people like oh my God, I can't believe he said that how sexist but to me it was it was a relief. That was like the first time where someone said to me like it's actually not you it's it's us not being able to understand the product but then I think the part that I didn't share was that Bob after seeing me go through a couple of these VC meetings, you know, I think he's seeing how determined I am to raise this money. He says, What I'm willing to write a check, which I honestly at that point wasn't expecting because I he's more coaching me through this process. He was like, you know, I'm willing to invest 50 maybe a hundred thousand dollars, which is a lot of money for us at that time.

1 (52m 60s):
And he says to me and are you interested in raising maybe a little bit more money from me and my friends and I said, you know, absolutely and he says, okay, give me give me 24 hours and so 24 hours later. Bob calls me and he says oh Okay, Sarah. I put together four hundred thousand dollars for you. Wow. That is the quickest any single investor has put together around like that for me and I think Bob has these very close connections with other business people well-established business people and and they do deals together all the time. I think they pass each other deals and they move together they talk to each other they invest together and I just never saw that with any of my other female angel investors.

2 (53m 50s):
Here's a question now, right? Yeah, because I think a lot of people who start businesses. This is a challenge, right? You've got to balance, you know, your Independence and your vision and what you you know the ownership you want to retain but you needed money. Yes, so I have to assume at this point you were willing to pretty much give up what you need to give up to keep the business

1 (54m 10s):
afloat. Yes. It's so true. And I think you're actually you're pointing at something really. In there and I catch myself doing this to now and I really try to stop myself from doing it which is telling other entrepreneurs. Like don't just take anyone's money or be really careful who you take money from. That's all of well and good when you've got cash in the bank. Yeah when you don't it's really unhelpful advice because it's true. You really want to make sure who you take money from but you also just want to keep your company

2 (54m 39s):
alive. So you had you were in that position in 2014, which means that You know, you have to be willing to give up, you know, quite a bit of your of this company that you started.

1 (54m 51s):
Yeah, that's right. You know, I think that's where I mean meeting Bob and he ended up being a phenomenal partner, but Bob could have also been someone terrible. He could have really screwed me

2 (54m 60s):
over. Yeah kiss everyone seen shark tank with their like I'll give you $25,000 for 70% of the company,

1 (55m 7s):
you know, I was just like I can't watch that show anymore because every time I'm like walk away walk away. But um, yeah, Yeah, $75,000 when you've got negative two thousand dollars in the bank is pretty precious.

2 (55m 19s):
It's a lot. Yeah, it's alright. So you get this money 2014 your saved from Extinction, but meantime, you've got a website and no one's going to it and you've got inventory piling up which is not a good place to be in because at some point designs are going to change your tastes are going to change and that you're going to end up shredding all that

1 (55m 38s):
stuff. Yes, you know, we had moved into a really humble office in the Garment. On 35th Street, it was above a methadone clinic and I would just walk into this tiny room and I would see it's flowing to the ceiling in an inventory and I would think to

2 (55m 55s):
myself. Oh my God, we are going to die

1 (55m 56s):
under a mountain of dresses. And I think that was the point where I was like I saw the dresses and I said what if we just sent our existing customers an email asking them if we could send them a box of dresses because we somehow have to physically move these dresses out of here. And so we sent our I think we had like a thousand customers on our mailing list at that time. And we said we'll send you a box of products that we think you will like and if you like them you can keep them if you don't you can return them. And so that was the

2 (56m 26s):
pitch. So this was more like a now like we're going to send you a box of stuff and what you want you keep and you pay for and what you don't want you return to

1 (56m 34s):
us. Yeah and 18 percent of customers responded to that email saying sure send me something. I don't have time. It would be so great if you chose it for Me and we ended up sending those hundred 80 boxes out and making more money and that one week than we ever had in any month

2 (56m 54s):
leading up to it. I mean that model was starting to be out there right? There was a literally company called Trunk Club and Stitch fix and some of these companies that we know to and you guys were not doing that picking outfits for people sending them and letting them pick and then send stuff back.

1 (57m 10s):
No, we were not. You know, I think we we just Thought it was actually it was interesting because even when I suggested this initially to my team, there are a lot of when I say a lot of people there were more people who said like, oh, no, I would never want someone else to pick out what it is that I should wear. Like I want to choose for myself. Why would I want someone else to pick for me? And you know, I kind of had to say Annie Annie was my CMO and he and I were in the camp of, you know, we're not fashion lovers like if someone else Who understands fashion better than we do told us what we should be wearing. Like that's actually a pretty amazing surface.

1 (57m 51s):
So we launched this because you can call it beta in February and operationally it was a total nightmare. I mean we sent the wrong size to people some people were like, why did you send this to me? I don't understand there were a lot of those things but the numbers really spoke for themselves. We there was more demand for that that service than we had ever seen.

2 (58m 13s):
I'm trying to figure out I mean, how did Do you even know what to send to

1 (58m 16s):
people for a good number of those a thousand customers we had met them through trunk shows and so they had already purchased something with

2 (58m 22s):
us. See it some data about them.

1 (58m 24s):
We had some data about what they had picked and we knew their size and then actually that was a really brilliant Moment by Annie who said, you know, I wonder if we should try this with new customers. And so she said, you know, why don't we email a group of people who have never shopped with us before and asked them to fill out some basic information about themselves and based on that? Why don't we tell them we're going to send A box of dresses

2 (58m 45s):
to and you call them Bento boxes,

1 (58m 47s):
right? Yeah, we did we didn't call them bento's back then but when we launched it and it's an official form later that year in the fall we call them benthos

2 (58m 57s):
and that really actually started to move the needle right like it. You actually started to see real Revenue coming in that will seem to point in the right direction.

1 (59m 7s):
Yeah. That was the moment that Silicon Valley calls finding your product Market fit. We launched its official. Warm October 2014. We suddenly went from not being able to pay rent to tripling our Revenue, you know oftentimes month over

2 (59m 23s):
month and by the end of the year 2014. Did you do remember what your your Revenue was?

1 (59m 29s):
Yeah, it was eight million, but we had made more than half of that in the last 12 weeks of the Year.

2 (59m 35s):
Wow. So I mean, I mean obviously that model right like the choosing and sending people clothing was working. But it still doesn't explain to me. Why would just like explode in the last 12 weeks of the year?

1 (59m 51s):
Yeah. I mean, I think when you walk into a clothing store prices may be one of ten things that you're considering when you decide you want to buy that thing, you know, do you like the field you like how it fits on you? Do you like how the salesperson is selling it to you? Whereas when you're shopping online. First of all, it's really hard to tell what what products actually look like and when you See this like really simple black dress. It's not going to jump out at you and you're thinking like am I really going to spend a hundred ninety five dollars on a pair of black pants and I think what Bento did in many ways is it took that decision paralysis away because we were getting our products into our customers hands and only once they tried it on where they really understanding why these pants cost a hundred ninety five dollars, you know, and then they start to say.

1 (1h 0m 40s):
Oh, okay. I get it. I get it I get why this costume to $50 I get why It's worth it, but it is really hard to make that case online and in Commerce and it I think things have changed a lot since then people are buying $2,000 Peloton bikes online. So I think that that sentiment has shifted a lot but back in 2014. It was a really tough

2 (1h 1m 2s):
sell. So I want to touch on a slightly sensitive topic which is cost, right? Yeah, some people might look at your clothing and say, you know God, you know, I get it it's not Designer. This is not Chanel but still You know, so our two hundred and forty dollars for a address or you know, $225 for a pair of trousers. What am I getting out of this that I can't get from Zara or hm?

1 (1h 1m 28s):
Yeah, we hear that all the time and we were actually briefly briefly talking to a department store. I love Drew department store. And you know, they said to us you could sell these dresses for $700. That's what we would sell it for and we said exactly but the point is we sell it for For 250 that's that's the point but it's little details that I think most fashion designers wouldn't care about and I think that's really that's really where we set ourselves apart and and try to justify the price point, you know, does it have pockets it? Can you zip it up yourself? Easily. We're always checking to make sure that you can zip up yourself because you might be traveling by yourself and be in a hotel room by yourself, you know, does it does it feel comfortable on the skin because you're going to be spending 14 hours on it.

1 (1h 2m 14s):
It's my incredibly. We practical nature wanting machine wash ability and wrinkle resistance and comfort and everything that I wear and then Miyako really saying I spent 20 years training to deliver the best designs in the world. So let me figure out how I can do that for for working women and I think the place where those two things meet. That's mmm

2 (1h 2m 36s):
LaFleur. Hmm. Alright, so as you really started to to see traction presumably your biggest Market was in New York. And then and then where were you also like what other markets were you seeing traction? And you know by 2014-2015

1 (1h 2m 54s):
New York was always number one still is number one, but when we saw ourselves growing into other markets, which was DC, right? And then the other one being San Francisco and DC was fascinating, you know, we have a lot of congresswomen a couple of senators who wear our clothes and staffers to you know, I was a on Capitol Hill few months ago and I walked into the Congressional building and immediately saw a number of our customers and then on the other end. We were seeing customers in San Francisco, which became our third largest market and these women were saying to us, you know, I don't actually want to go to work in jeans and a hoodie. I make money. I want to wear nice clothes and at the same time if I dress too nicely people think I'm interviewing.

1 (1h 3m 35s):
Yeah and in some ways the dress code is even more nebulous. Can you help me figure out what to wear and so we actually started working on what we're calling power casual a power casual line for them. Where it's much more relaxed, it's a lot of pant baste it baste offerings, but it's a more dressed-up version of the jeans and the hoodie and so we have a really loyal fan base out in San Francisco as well.

2 (1h 3m 59s):
So once you started to get like members of Congress wearing your clothing and women in DC and San Francisco and did it in at that point become easier to raise more money.

1 (1h 4m 10s):
I don't think it had anything to do with who was wearing it. You know what we started to see Was was traction in revenue for years into its around 2017 a VC investor approached us and he said hey, we're just interested in learning more about you. Could you tell us and I think at that point I had a big big chip on my shoulder because we had had total failure trying to raise from from these

2 (1h 4m 33s):
four years in and you had not raised any money from VCS at that point. Yeah. That's right.

1 (1h 4m 37s):
Wow, and so I was like, you know, we're going to we're going to do this without feces. Like that's just the way it's going to be at that moment. We met this with him. Ambassador who was just really wonderful and his wife was a customer. He said to me, you know, I know nothing about women's clothing, but I'm a good student and I'm willing to learn so will you teach me and just came out it so differently, which really got me thinking about VC's in a different way up until that

2 (1h 5m 3s):
point. And so they did invest at that point. Yeah, they

1 (1h 5m 6s):
did and because up until that

2 (1h 5m 8s):
point the first four years all your money came from friends family and then like family investment. Firms or you know, not right and and and you know, I'm sure that was frustrating that VCS were not you know throwing money away. I have to imagine that that was a huge Advantage because VC money can be a real double-edged sword as we've learned from previous guests on the

1 (1h 5m 30s):
show. Yes, you know, I got to hold on to a lot more of my company because we couldn't raise for a while, but the result was, you know, we were I think in a position we could we where we could Better absorb those financial resources. So there wasn't risk of other investors coming on and saying like wait a minute. Wait a minute like you gotta change your your product because this isn't

2 (1h 5m 57s):
working. I'm assuming that your financials are not public because you're not a public company, but the last number I saw was for 2017 where you you did 70 million Revenue. I have to assume it's higher now. Do you at this point? Point out do you know how much money you've raised in

1 (1h 6m 17s):
total? Yes, I do. Yes, I do. We don't disclose it and it's so funny because I'm I think there's a real there's a real dark side to talking about how much money you've raised and I think what happens often startup culture is that that is what you become known for.

2 (1h 6m 33s):
Oh you're at your legitimacy your exactly to this means how much you've and that's your

1 (1h 6m 38s):
status. Right? Exactly exactly and

2 (1h 6m 40s):
sounds like you you were you believed in that for a while like when these feces weren't giving you money. Maybe you thought that they that money would give you this veneer of legitimacy.

1 (1h 6m 50s):
Oh for sure. It's a if you can't tell already there's this is like a constant process of self-doubt and me thinking that I'm a loser and trying to you know, navigate throughout this process and and not being able to raise from VCS repeatedly when other DTC companies are raising money, it just makes you question a lot. But I think the result is like what I did was I ended up just spending a Time with my customers. Yeah, internally. We call our customer Samantha. But you know, where is Samantha working? How do we make her happy? How do we make make products that she really loves? And so by the time we took in that money that precedent was already set like investors, you know while I'm so grateful for them and very thankful for them.

1 (1h 7m 33s):
They don't direct the future of the company

2 (1h 7m 35s):
when you think about how hard it was to convince people that this was going to be more than a niche business right and you know, And your business school reject and not with utmost respect. I wear it proudly. Yes. You should wear proudly. Yeah. Do you are all just part of you kind of feel like see I told you so

1 (1h 7m 59s):
I feel that way the I Told You So when it comes to working women not being a niche category. I feel very strongly about that. But in terms of you know feeling like I'm the business school reject no longer. No, not not really I think You know, I feel like I'm always being tested. I've never really had this moment where I've felt like I've showed you. I feel like I'm the startup world as a way of always putting you back in your place. Yeah. Sure. Yeah, I think that's that's the way I would describe

2 (1h 8m 32s):
it. I mean, you know, this is a company that's doing now. Let's say close to maybe more maybe less than a hundred million dollars. Do you now are you able to kind of just take a breath and I'd say all right, we've made it like nothing to worry about anymore or do you still have anxiety about you know do other things that still keep you up at night?

1 (1h 8m 55s):
Of course, I mean the the whiskey on the rocks in the middle of the night that never ends. I feel like I'm running a different company every two years and this stage of the business brings a whole different set of challenges that that the first two years did, you know, I will I will qualify that by saying the first Is were by Heart by far the hardest two years of I think my life. I was it was just incredibly lonely incredibly hard getting this business off the

2 (1h 9m 23s):
ground when you think about your journey, how much do you think about that? You know that this all coming as a result of your hard work and skill and and versus luck. Oh,

1 (1h 9m 34s):
it's 99% luck. I always go back to that experience. I had in Zambia. It is mostly luck being born to the right parents at the right time even just like watching how different my mom's Journey was as a female entrepreneur in Japan versus me born, you know, 37 years later and the benefits and the funding I'm able to get in a way that I know that she was never able to that is all luck. And yes a lot of hard work

2 (1h 10m 1s):
to Thats Sarah LaFleur. She's the co-founder and CEO of mmm LaFleur. And by the way, a word of caution try not to confuse her with the other Sarah LaFleur one of the weird things that happened when I was doing research. The first thing that came up was a Canadian actress named Sarah LaFleur.

1 (1h 10m 22s):
No, I feel like I have to just reach out to her because he had gotten script sent to me. I'm sure can you do

2 (1h 10m 28s):
voice work for a forest? I read her bio. I know all about her now to I How I built this you shut your like the work is done. And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from one of our sponsors square space dedicated to helping you turn your cool idea into a modern website visit squarespace.com and use the offer code NPR to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

2 (1h 11m 13s):
Many of us have imaginary friends as children, but for some of us these invisible companions don't go away. She was as real to me as my friend next to me this week on hidden brain from NPR. Hey, thanks so much for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that my name is Taylor Mali. I live in Brooklyn New York and I invented a product called metaphor dice Taylor created metaphor dice after Decades of working in schools and in writing workshops teaching young people how to write poetry. They've complained that most students have when they're told today. We're going to read a poem is I don't know what to write about. So Taylor would try all these different strategies like, you know, tell them to start with a simple.

2 (1h 11m 58s):
For and build out from that but a lot of times he would just get a blank look but then about four years ago. I had this girl and I'm in my class who called herself more of a math science person and I said, well, that's okay because a metaphor is really just an equation between an idea and a thing and she was like, oh, I I think I actually could do that. So Taylor gave her a menu of different nouns and adjectives she could use to get started and she came up with my father. ER is a broken mirror and he can still remember the poem she wrote. He's been shattered into a thousand pieces. But even in the smallest sharpest pieces, I can still recognize my own reflection the intensity of this poem stayed with Taylor for days and he starts to wonder why isn't there a way to help students write poetry just by generating a whole lot of metaphors really fast.

2 (1h 12m 56s):
So Taylor started to brainstorm ideas. And he eventually came up with to the first idea was to make dice printed with nouns and adjectives you'd roll the dice and whichever words turned up would help you build the poem. The second idea was a smartphone app, which would do the same thing only digitally, but since Taylor had no idea what to do next. He called up a former student named Oliver who happened to have an MBA and asked if he'd become his business partner. We had a lunch and I've sort of pitched him the physical Dice and I I pitched him the app and he said, you know, the world doesn't need another app. Oliver basically said go for the dice.

2 (1h 13m 36s):
He said, you know, you know what you want to start a Kickstarter campaign. So you got to pick a number that's you know, just Within Reach so he said his Kickstarter goal at $20,000 and within five days his project was funded which gave Taylor enough working capital to order the first 5000 sets of Dice from China. You want your me to roll a

1 (1h 13m 56s):
couple.

2 (1h 13m 58s):
Okay. So here's how it works. You get 12 dice in all in three different colors. The red dice are printed with Concepts or ideas the mind hope love the white dice have a vegetable flawed sad glorified and Raghu dice more nouns Songbird curveball thunderstorm you pick one died of each color and you've got the building blocks for the first line of a poem love. Of is a flawed thunderstorm. Your mother is an ill-gotten kiss social media is a flawed experiment. Well, that's not really a metaphor.

2 (1h 14m 39s):
It's a maybe some of the word combinations might work better than others. But Taylor says lots of teachers are now using these Dice and I've told them that their students really like them early on. I had a teacher say that usually the toughest part about writing a poem is getting started, but with metaphor dice, I find that it's harder to get Students to stop so far Taylor and Oliver have sold about $80,000 worth of metaphor dice there on Amazon and even in some museums and game stores across the country. And by the way, even though they didn't want to make an app metaphor dice is now an app an app loaded with hundreds and hundreds of Words, which means thousands and thousands a million of metaphors a million possible metaphors and it's it's a lot of fun.

2 (1h 15m 25s):
That's Taylor Mali if you want to find out more About metaphor dice or here previous episodes head to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org. And of course if you want to tell us your story go to build got npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe at Apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcasts and why you're there. Please do give us a review. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or add guy Roz our show is produces week. By JC Howard with music composed by rumty narrow blue-eyed. Thanks. Also to Canada slim Julia Carney Sequoia Carrillo Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers.

2 (1h 16m 7s):
Our intern is rainy toll I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this. This is NPR.