0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

1 (9s):
What if the greatest tragedy of your life was just covered up? I have never seen any, anything like that before or after. This is the story of the worst Marine on marine friendly fire in modern history. A story kept from the public. It's like, what did y'all have to

2 (24s):
Hide? Listen to NPRs embedded podcast and its latest series taking cover.

Upwork (30s):
How I Built This is pleased to have Upwork as our presenting sponsor. Visit upwork.com to get hiring. Upwork has a message for you. Everything you know about business, it was made up by a bunch of guys a hundred years ago. Don't stay bound to their antiquated rules like the nine to five workday commuting to an empty office building, or only hiring full-timers. Embrace a new way of working with Upwork. It's a portal to the future of business and it's disguised as a website. Go to upwork.com. There you'll see the light. And also find talent for projects of any size. From simple deliverables to complex projects. From short-term help to full-time hires, you can finally let those old business titans and their tired ideas rest in peace. This is how we work now. Visit upwork.com to get hiring talented professionals today.

Discover (1m 19s):
I just learned discover credit cards do something pretty awesome. At the end of your first year, they automatically double all the cash back you've earned. That's right. Everything you've earned doubled all the cash back from eating at your favorite soup dumpling restaurant. Doubled all the cash back from that trip where you sort of learned to snowboard also doubled. And the best part, you don't have to do anything ridiculous to get it. Nope. Discover does it automatically. Seriously though. See terms and check it out for yourself at discover.com/match.

0 (1m 57s):
Hey, it's guy here. You know, we hear a lot about pivots on how I built this, how a simple change in perspective can create a whole new opportunity. And this made me think of a conversation I recently had with Keenan Thompson, who's the longest running cast member of Saturday Night Live ever 20 seasons. And I asked him, what if one day, instead of performing on snl, you were given the keys to run snl? You will definitely want to hear his answer. Check out my interview with Keenan Thompson over on my other podcast. The Great Creators just search for the great creators with Guy Raz, wherever you listen to podcasts. And now onto today's show, you're selling one product.

0 (2m 42s):
It was a black yoga mat that was, it was designed to be the one yoga mat you will ever need to buy. Yeah.

4 (2m 50s):
As I started to ramp this business up, I, I actually, a friend of mine was a business consultant and I hired him. I said, here's the business model, an indestructible product lifetime guarantee. He said, you're insane. There's no built-in obsolescence. There's nothing, it's a dead end. Don't do it. And I said, here's your money. Thank you for the advice, you know, and then I moved on because I knew that it was filling a void.

0 (3m 19s):
There was nothing like it.

4 (3m 21s):
There was nothing like it.

0 (3m 29s):
Welcome to how I built this, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz, and on the show today how Peter Stereos discovered yoga in college, then grew it into a passion and a business with Manduka and now multimillion dollar yoga accessories brand. So let me start with the elephant in the room. Yes. I'm a bit under the weather, but the show must go on. So bear with me through this introduction.

0 (4m 9s):
I did the actual interview, you will hear before I came down with this cold, so it should sound just fine. Okay. Onto today's topic, yoga. Yoga is big business. Americans alone spend more than 12 billion a year on yoga related activity. Brands like Lululemon and Athleta and Allo have built entire businesses on it. And by the year 2025, the total value of the global yoga industry will exceed $200 billion. Not bad for a once obscure Indian practice that was popularized in the West by b k Sengar in the 1960s and seventies.

0 (4m 51s):
Today yoga is far and away the most popular form of group exercise in the us. But up until around 20 years ago when it was just starting to explode, most people who did yoga wore sweatpants or aerobic skier. That is until an entrepreneur named Chip Wilson's on opportunity to sell them yoga specific apparel. He founded Lululemon. And if you haven't heard that episode of how I built this, it's worth scrolling back to find it. Anyway, another problem in the earlier days of yoga was the quality of yoga mats. But in the mid 1990s, a man named Peter Stio noticed a visiting yoga teacher using something different.

0 (5m 33s):
Peter was living in San Luis Obispo in California. He was an architect by trade and also a faithful practitioner and teacher of yoga. In fact, at one point in his life, Peter studied in India with the great BK Sengar himself. But we'll get there. Anyway, that day Peter noticed his teacher had a map that was thicker, more durable, heavier and with a better grip. Now, it's very likely that if Peter could have easily bought a mat just like it, we wouldn't be telling you the story of Manduka. A brand that today is one of the best known manufacturers of yoga mats, accessories and clothing. But at the time it was very hard to buy that, Matt.

0 (6m 16s):
The materials it was made from were actually for an entirely different purpose. And here's the hint, think professional sports stadiums. Anyway, that one encounter with that special material would prompt Peter to leave his full-time job as an architect and start a business selling yoga mats. He built his business up slowly but consistently by targeting what he calls yoga stars, the best known yoga teachers in America. And it turns out they loved his yoga mats and happily promoted them. Peter grew up in a middle class family in Fresno, California. He first discovered yoga at college in San Lu Obispo where he studied architecture.

0 (6m 58s):
He was an avid athlete at the time, basketball, swimming, weightlifting. But even as a young man, he was starting to develop some issues with chronic pain.

4 (7m 8s):
The pain that I was experiencing was just the result of long hours leaning out over a drafting table with drawings. Right, right. And just the crazy hours that, you know, schools of architecture seem to demand of students. Just, you know, kind of the bragging rights of how many all-nighters have you pulled to get that project done. So it was physical abuse, self abuse in a way to the 10th degree. And it started to take its toll on me, especially at 19. I had severe arthritic pain in my neck.

0 (7m 48s):
Hmm. You were even diagnosed with moderate arthritis in your neck.

4 (7m 52s):
Correct. And it was like serious enough to get a specialist and say, you've gotta make some change.

0 (8m 0s):
Hmm. I mean, presumably this is like the, the late seventies, presumably at that time, I mean, physical therapy obviously has changed, but I, I'm sure you were kind of given like a regimen of physical therapy to do, but, but this is like really bef obviously when yoga is still really fringe. Was there a connection between your neck pain and coming across yoga or, or was that just like totally random?

4 (8m 26s):
Totally random. I was late. I'd been up till 4:00 AM went home, got a half an hour's sleep, took off to class that I was late to around nine o'clock and there's this door propped open. And for the life of me, I have no idea why I stopped, turned, pulled the door open and walked in a step to see what was going on. And it was the craziest thing for a, a kid from Fresno, no clue of anything other than kind of sports and, you know, family and friends to go into this room full of women and female instructor doing yoga with no context for what I was seeing.

4 (9m 14s):
Like it was like I was on another planet.

0 (9m 16s):
You had no idea what what like these, and it was oh, was all mostly, or all women in this class? All women and just like all women. And, and you had no idea. It was just like, none what you, you thought, this is interesting. I wanna try because most people might just keep walking. Right? Yeah.

4 (9m 32s):
I mean, I was embarrassed actually that I'd walked in while the class was in session and just right in the middle of the class I asked loud enough for the teacher to hear what is this? You know? Yeah. And, and that in that moment it could have been kind of a difficult situation. But the teacher turned to me with kindness and said, it's yoga. Do you want to try? You know, like putting me on the spot. And I was embarrassed. I'm, I'm sure I was, you know, turning pink and red my face. But when I looked around the room and everyone in the room, all the girls in the room were looking at me and, and smiling, like encouraging look on their faces.

4 (10m 17s):
And I thought, Hmm. And in that split second I said, sure, when's the next class? And then next week I showed up at this class to do yoga. And that's how it all began.

0 (10m 29s):
Obviously yoga's changed a lot. We're gonna talk about that cuz presumably this is like, I think people probably just had towels on the floor or, or you know, wearing like aerobic ski or whatever. But what did, what was that class like? I mean, you know, you were athletic, but, but yoga requires, not requires, but it's over time, you know, it's, it's about flexibility and, and stretching. Was it, was it hard?

4 (10m 55s):
It was one of the most difficult athletic things I'd ever done. And so for me, I, a good day bending forward, touching my knee, kept standing. That was a, that was a good day. Yeah. That's how stiff I was. So yeah, that, that first class was the, took me to a level of intensity, pain intensity that I really had never experienced before.

0 (11m 20s):
Yeah.

4 (11m 21s):
But the teacher could see that I was kind of overdoing stuff. She came over and gave me a few adjustments in this one pose. And then after that, sh the end of class, she laid us all down on the floor for the final relaxation. And this relaxation exercise that she did was only two minutes long, three minutes long. But where I went during those three minutes, I have no idea, but it was like all the pain in my neck was gone, my mind was refreshed. You know, I had had hardly slept the night before and I just felt fantastic.

4 (12m 2s):
So I was hooked. Huh.

0 (12m 5s):
Okay. So you, you start taking these classes and, and, and I guess when you graduate, you, you eventually wind up moving to, to, to Santa Fe, New Mexico. Right. And right. And, and you were able to get a job pretty quickly I think like working with another architect.

4 (12m 21s):
Yeah. But when the architect was ready to offer me the job, he said there was one condition and I said, what's that? And he said, you have to go out for the local rugby team. And I'm looking at him going, first of all, what is rugby? Yeah. He had no, no clue. And second of all, why is this a requirement? It turned out he was the captain of the rugby team. And as I had mentioned, the

0 (12m 49s):
Local like just Yeah.

4 (12m 50s):
Friendly. Yeah. Regional rugby team. Exactly. All no one was getting paid. And the, at that time I was still swimming, weightlifting and, you know, keeping myself fit. And he saw me and saw, oh, this is, this is a rugby player in the making here. And so I, I said, sure, happy to try. And and it turned out that I loved it. It, it was, it gave me that kind of competitive adrenaline rush that I was becoming accustomed to having in my life. Either through, you know, rock climbing or snow skiing or what, whatever it was.

4 (13m 35s):
It, it got that life force going in me.

0 (13m 38s):
That was what you were doing. So you were not doing yoga, you weren't like taking yoga classes and playing rugby?

4 (13m 45s):
Well, actually I was. So I sometimes would leave practice and go to the seven o'clock yoga class at this studio, but I couldn't tell anyone on my team that was going to yoga. That would've been kind of a, a mistake with the, the type of people that were on the rugby team. So I kind of kept it hidden.

0 (14m 8s):
But you were not, I mean, but yoga was just, it was like a side thing. It wasn't, it wasn't like a, a serious focus for you?

4 (14m 15s):
No, it's, it was cross-training. Yeah. Yeah. As a matter of fact, my goal with yoga was to loosen my hamstrings. That, that's how materialistic you might say I was in those days. It's

0 (14m 27s):
A perfect, I think it's a perfectly reasonable goal as somebody who needs to loosen his hamstrings would say. Yeah. But you were, I mean, you were had this job as an architect. You were on this rugby team and, and a few years in, you end up taking a trip to, to New Zealand, I guess initially to, to play some rugby there. But you actually decided to stay on, like, like you, you, you end up, you wound up living in New Zealand for like seven, eight years teaching architecture. Right,

4 (14m 60s):
Right.

0 (15m 1s):
And I think it's fair to say a huge turning point in your life happened during that time. You bet. This guy Shandor Rey and he's this guy, he's, he's still alive, I think, right? Yeah. And he's a really influential yoga teacher who, who kind of created this type of yoga called shadow yoga, I guess. Yeah. Tell me about him. How'd you meet him?

4 (15m 25s):
Sure. So Shandor is one of those powerful and also controversial teachers of yoga, western teachers of yoga who lived at the time. I met him in Australia and he would come to New Zealand twice a year. It was the first male yoga teacher I had met after, at this point, I'd been practicing yoga for about five years. It was amazing cuz he was an athlete. I was an athlete, but he did a yoga demonstration on the Friday night before the weekend workshop. That just athletically was some of the most incredible things I'd ever seen a body do.

4 (16m 9s):
Just, you know, pulling up into a handstand with no wall to balance on, you know, and just hanging out in a handstand like he's sitting on the couch, you know? Wow. And so that was a curiosity to me. How, how is this guy who's obviously athletic and muscular so flexible, I wanna know what his secret is. And so the weekend was profound. It, it, it literally, that weekend was the major course change in my life.

0 (16m 43s):
This was around what, like 1990 when you first met him? Yeah, yeah. 1990s. And he was a guy, he is I think originally from Hungary, but he ended up, he grew up in Australia. Yeah. And he, he was like, as you mentioned, like, I mean he had served in Vietnam like he was a a, a veteran. And so you, you don't think like, oh, here's a yogi. See? That's right. Yeah. Right.

4 (17m 10s):
That's right. That, that's the paradox of him. He was not only in Vietnam, he was special forces in Vietnam for the Australian army. And he saw things that he never shared. And I'm sure that he went through a lot of PTs d before they even knew it was ptsd. And he used yoga to create balance back in his life. And at, at that point, he'd been doing yoga since he was six years old with his father. And he meets this master yoga teacher in Puna near Bombay Mumbai now. And he studies with this, this master teacher for 25 years.

0 (17m 51s):
And what's the master teacher's name again?

4 (17m 53s):
B K S I n

0 (17m 54s):
Y. Oh b k s I. Okay. Yeah. I mean, wow. Like the Yoda of, of yoga

4 (17m 59s):
Kind.

0 (18m 0s):
So, so he was, I mean he, he essentially goes to the source like that's right. Sources. He comes back to Australia, New Zealand, and he's just doing clinics. But you really, you see this guy and you're like, wow, I need to become his student.

4 (18m 17s):
Yeah. And so when it was time for me to leave New Zealand, after eight years, I told him that I was going and he said, I really think you should go to India and meet Iyengar. Hmm. And I said, well, there's a three year wait list to get into those classes. And he said, don't worry about that, I'll write you a letter. No problem.

0 (18m 40s):
There's and, and understandably a three year waiting list to study with Iyengar.

4 (18m 45s):
That's

0 (18m 45s):
Right. But Shandor kind of lets you skip the line cuz obviously he was a, an important student of Iyengars

4 (18m 52s):
Big time. He's part of the family. Yeah, he, he was family. So I, I show up at the institute and I had written a letter, but

0 (19m 0s):
They is the Iyengar Institute.

4 (19m 1s):
Yeah. The Iyengar Institute. And so the school secretary looks at me and he said, well, we're closed this whole week because it's Iyengar our 70th birthday. You're welcome to come and participate in the demonstrations and the lectures. So it was really an amazing time to show up for the first time. And yeah, the very last day there was afternoon session where all the major newspapers of India and International magazine photographers and writers all showed up for this special last program just of Iyengar talking about his life of yoga.

4 (19m 41s):
And the first question is from a reporter from Mumbai, young guy, probably 25 or 26 years old. And he says, here's his question, why do you do yoga? Now Iyengar had just spent four hours talking about why he does yoga. And he had this reputation of being really a fierce, demanding kind of person. And you could see on his facial expression that he was angry by the simplicity of that question. So as I'm watching him, all of a sudden his face softens and his answer is just as brief.

4 (20m 21s):
He says, I like the way it makes me feel. And he moved on. And so I realized what he meant by that answer. He, the obvious answer is like most people's experience, the first couple times they go to yoga, it feels fantastic. But there's a depth to that answer. I like the way it gives me more ability to feel. I like the way it makes me feel. What yoga does is it makes you, it opens you up to possibility and gives you this sensitivity and intimacy to feel where you maybe are in a state of contraction because of stress.

4 (21m 9s):
So Iyengar's answer was, I like the way it makes me feel. I have now this heightened ability to feel these places physically that I'm holding stress. And that has informed my life as a yogi. And frankly it's also informed by life in business.

0 (21m 31s):
Hmm. But I mean, did you, were you able to get into the program? I mean, did you, I mean, I know that you would go back and forth for some time, but did, were you able to actually stay and Yeah. Participate?

4 (21m 46s):
Yeah, so on the last day of this ceremony, I went to the school secretary and I said, I have to leave tomorrow, but I'd really like to stay. And he said, listen, I'm gonna make an exception for you and I come back and see me again tomorrow and I'll have the right permission, let's say for you to attend classes. And so I showed up the next day for that first morning class at 6:00 AM So for six days a week, Monday through Saturday I was at 6:00 AM yoga class, which was two and a half hours long. Wow. And then in the afternoons I would, Iyengar had a personal library downstairs that he allowed students to go down and use.

4 (22m 35s):
And so the afternoons were spent in the library reading. And then I would, after reading, I would go up and do my own practice. And that was, for me, that year of doing yoga six days a week in India was what transformed me. You know, like it changed my intensity, let's call it, I, I joke about this sometimes. Before I started doing yoga, I was a type A, or actually I'm a, I was a type aaa, you know, like beyond a, and what that year in India did for me was completely transform that mentality of doing, and in a way reminded me of the power in being and being present in particular.

0 (23m 29s):
Did you actually study with Iyengar? Was he the teacher?

4 (23m 33s):
Yeah.

0 (23m 33s):
Yeah. So you, you got to know him a little bit.

4 (23m 36s):
Oh, he, he would, I have pictures in my album of he would use me as a model sometimes in the morning classes. Wow. And he would, would make adjustments on me cuz my body at that point was pretty pliable. And, and so that was another one of those moments where I felt privileged in a way that I was being picked to be a model.

0 (24m 1s):
All right. So you, you wind up staying at, at the AE Ungar Institute for I think about a year. Yeah. And then you return to the US and, and come back to, to San Lu Obispo, which is where you went to college and you get a job there at an architecture firm. And, and at this point you're, you're also pretty seriously into, obviously into yoga practice. And so I guess what are, are people start to ask you to teach like to to teach yoga to them?

4 (24m 28s):
Yeah. The word got out that I'd been to India and so people started like contacting me and saying, Hey, when, when are you gonna start teaching? So I ended up, okay, I'll, I'll rent this senior center. They had a hall that we could do yoga. And in the city rented it to me Wednesday night class, five 30 to seven. And the first couple weeks I had like eight, 10 people show up. And it was nice, but within a month I had like 40 people showing up

0 (24m 58s):
And you would just, it was just in this community center and people just like pay you 10 bucks or something paying that's,

4 (25m 3s):
Yeah. 10 bucks. Okay. 10, 10 bucks. So, you know, making $400 to teach a yoga class and paying $30 rent, it was like, yeah, let's do this

0 (25m 13s):
Rent for the Oh, for the hour or two hours that you had.

4 (25m 15s):
Community community center. Yeah. Yeah. So, so this, this class kept growing and then this one friend of mine said, Peter, it's time you get a space, you know. Hmm. And I just happened to be walking downtown San Louis and I walked by this building and I looked upstairs at this two-story building, old brick building. And it had these huge 10 foot tall windows. So the ceilings up there must have been high. And it turned out it was the first odd fellows hall in San Luis Obispo that had been empty for 12 years because of a leaky

0 (25m 51s):
Roof. And oddfellows are like mason's I think. Right?

4 (25m 54s):
Something like that. Yeah. I didn't even know, to

0 (25m 56s):
Be honest. It's kind of a,

4 (25m 57s):
Yeah. But it was 2,500 square feet and I thought this is the perfect size for a yoga studio. So the landlord was skeptical cuz he said, what business are you gonna put up there? And I said, yoga. And he, he says, what's that? You know, so it was that whole kind of fringe thing. Yeah. But he said, listen, you're gonna probably be out of business in six months, so I'll just rent it to you for $400 a month. And it was a hit.

0 (26m 22s):
So you were basically working, running the architecture office, architectural firm in the daytime and then beginning in the evening you were teaching classes.

4 (26m 30s):
Correct. And on the weekends

0 (26m 32s):
This was your, this is your life.

4 (26m 36s):
Well that's, it was part of my life. The, the other part in those days was that I started writing for yoga journal. And so I'm writing a monthly column and at that time I had been married for I think two years. And then I was also traveling a lot as shandor's kind of, what would you call it? Step, step in when his travel schedule was too busy to go to all the places he got invitations for.

0 (27m 9s):
You were his protege?

4 (27m 11s):
I was his business manager.

0 (27m 13s):
Okay.

4 (27m 14s):
I basically organized his calendars in North America, including Canada and Mexico every year that he would come and he'd be in the States for two months, usually a month on the road. And then three weeks at, at my studio teaching intensives.

0 (27m 32s):
So one of the things I remember when I first tried yoga, maybe in the late nineties, was how painful it was for me to sit cross. Like it still is 25 years later, but, but, but less so. But it was really, in part it was painful because the sides of my feet just on the, the pressure on the floor was painful. And I would take two yoga mats and I would stack one on the other. And that gave me a bit more cushioning cuz yoga mats were like, and to this day many, I still are like this. They were just like these very thin pieces of, you know, I don't know, they're made out of some kind of poly styron plastic or something. Plastic, yeah.

4 (28m 12s):
Just some vi version of plastic. Yeah.

0 (28m 15s):
And I guess you saw that shandor, he was using a different kind of mat that was not the one that I'm, I'm describing. It was, it was thicker. It was, it was a different material.

4 (28m 31s):
Yeah. His mat, the one year he shows up at my house in San Lu Obispo and he has this black mat and I go, what the heck is that? And he said, yeah, it's this black mat from Germany. And I said, how do I get one? But

0 (28m 46s):
What was different about it? It was thicker, thick,

4 (28m 48s):
Black, you know, like yoga at that point was still kind of new agey. Yeah. And the colors tended to be pastels,

0 (28m 57s):
Purples and Yeah. Yeah.

4 (28m 59s):
Purples and pastel blue and pastel green and blah blah blah. So here's this math that's double the thickness. Two inches wider, six inches longer. And heavy standard yoga mats about a pound. This mat was seven pounds. Hmm. So here's what was revolutionary about it. It was a performance mat, high performance mat. The o other mats were just carpet under layman. That was better than nothing. This mat was engineered as the backing for AstroTurf to be durable and to have a certain amount of stretch, but not too much stretch and a certain amount of cushion, but not too soft, not too cushiony.

4 (29m 43s):
And in the same factory that, that the carpet under layman was coming from out of Germany, they also made a material for AstroTurf

0 (29m 53s):
Under AstroTurf.

4 (29m 54s):
Yeah. The underlayment for AstroTurf. And so it was the perfect, you know, accidentally, it was the perfect composition for a yoga mat.

0 (30m 4s):
So you see this mat that he has and you want one And how did you get, I mean, presumably you just ordered one from the company?

4 (30m 13s):
No, there was no company. There was a guy in Germany selling them out of his garage

0 (30m 19s):
Because these were not made as yoga mats. So some guy was just having them cut them up into like yoga mat length. Exactly. And he was selling them as yoga mats.

4 (30m 30s):
Correct. His friend's in and around Europe. And so I said, Shandra, how do I get one? He says, here's Klaus's phone number, his name was Klaus, here's Klaus's phone number, let's call him. And so we called him right there from my kitchen in San Luis Obispo and I said, Klaus, how do I get one of these? And he says, no problem. You know, where do I send them? And I said, here's my address. And I said, how many can I get? And he said, well it's not, how many can you get? It's how many do you need to buy for me to send them to you? And I said, well, how many do I need to buy? And he said, $25,000 worth.

0 (31m 5s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment, how that seemingly ridiculous offer leads to a very serious business. Stay with us. I'm Guy Ross and you're listening to How I Built This

MasterClass (31m 24s):
With Masterclass, you can learn from the world's best minds anytime, anywhere and at your own pace. You can learn about philosophy from Cornell West, improve your comedy skills with Steve Martin, or learn Gymnastics with Olympian Simone Biles. With over 180 classes from a range of world-class instructors, that thing you've always wanted to do is closer than you think. I love to cook. So one of my favorite classes to recommend is the one taught by the chef Alice Waters. She's the founder of Shea Pennis and the pioneer of the Farm to Table movement. Her class teaches the art of home cooking with amazing insights on selecting seasonal ingredients, building a home pantry, and essential tools for the kitchen. I learned so much from this legend, and you will too. I highly recommend you check it out, get unlimited access to every class. And as a How I Built This Listener, you get 15% off an annual membership. Go to masterclass.com/built now. That's masterclass.com/built for 15% off masterclass.

Burrow (32m 27s):
Once a company knows what they do best, where do they go from there? Well if you're Burrow the furniture company known for reinventing everything you thought you knew about furniture, you go outside. That's right. Burrough's new outdoor collection just launched with a strong chip resistant, galvanized steel frame and easy to clean fabric. Burrough's Outdoor collection is built for everyday use and to withstand the elements, the modern sleek look and quick drying plush foam cushions bring the comfort and style of indoors outside and the easy to remove cushions make for easy storage when you need to put it away. It's also customizable. Choose from 19 different configurations and purchase individual pieces or bundles to fit your seating needs. And as always, get free shipping on every order, which can save you up to $100 on large items like the outdoor furniture in this collection, how I Built this, listeners can get 15% off their first order at burrow.com/built. That's Burrow b u r r o w.com/built for 15% off burrow.com/built. One more thing before we get back to the show, please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. It's usually just at the top of the app and it's totally free.

0 (33m 53s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 1997 and Peter has just learned that if he wants to get one of those thick black yoga mats from Germany, he'll have to buy a thousand of them, like $25,000 worth because Klaus, the guy who makes them isn't looking for a customer, he's looking for a business partner.

4 (34m 15s):
Yeah, well he wanted a distributor in the United States. He wasn't interested in shipping from Germany and I just felt like this relationship was one of those moments. He's offering me an opportunity to start a business. And so in from that moment I thought, okay, I've got a decision to make. I'll get back to you. Yeah.

0 (34m 36s):
Were you still running the architecture? Yeah. Office. Okay. Yeah. So you've got that going. You're teaching yoga. I

4 (34m 42s):
Had a yoga studio, I had an architecture office and I was remodeling our house, major remodel where we were living out of a single bedroom with one bathroom and the rest of the house was

0 (34m 53s):
Gutted. Got it. And this guy saying, I'm only, the minimum order is 25,000. So I'm trying to understand from from the end of that phone call with Klaus in Germany where he is like, you gotta order 25,000 to, I don't know, maybe a week later where you're like, okay, I'll do this. What did you start, tell me about your thought process. Like you, how do you connect the dots to him saying you gotta order $25,000 worth of it to you thinking well maybe I can actually sell these and make money off of this.

4 (35m 22s):
The thing about making money off it was instantaneous because even in the short time in San Luis Obispo, every student that saw his mat wanted one. So all of a sudden the, the wheels inside my head were spinning. So that that was, it was more where am I going to get the money? And I, we were remodeling our house $80,000 in debt with credit card debt. And the way I was funding the house remodel was at a time when credit cards had these things called convenience checks where you could get an advance of 10 to $20,000 for minimum zero interest actually if you paid it off in time. And so I just thought, well shit, I'm already doing all these other credit cards, I'll just get a few more, 25,000, it's two more credit cards and I'll just purchase it and then worry about paying the cards off when I need to worry about it.

4 (36m 17s):
Yep.

0 (36m 17s):
Alright, so you decide you're going to get this cash advance and then use that to buy the $25,000 worth of yoga mats and then you would just, yeah. Presumably the plan was you would sell them in your yoga studio. Correct. It's a risk, but you, you have a pretty good idea that you could sell them. You put the order in and I have to assume it's gonna take a, I dunno, a month or two before they get there, thousand yoga mats arrive. Did you have like a, a warehouse or, or, or a place that they got to?

4 (36m 49s):
I naively believed that I could put the mats in my garage. Just the garage seemed big enough to hold, you know, small container worth of mats and, and so I just figured I'd cross that bridge when it happened and sure enough, I overestimated. And so I had to basically clear out everything that was in my garage to make room for the mats.

0 (37m 13s):
They, they show up to your, what, like a a UPS truck or like, I don't know, a moving

4 (37m 18s):
Truck, not a small container,

0 (37m 19s):
A container,

4 (37m 20s):
Small container

0 (37m 21s):
Full of And what they, they just like a forklift just like drops it on your driveway?

4 (37m 26s):
Yeah, they came on pallets, 18 boxes per pallet. The neighbor kid that I hired would help me move it into the garage stacked floor to ceiling.

0 (37m 39s):
Alright, so you can't this full shipment and you've got a thousand yoga mats and so, but you have a yoga studio so you can sell them there. But still selling a thousand just out of your studio, I have to imagine would be hard.

4 (37m 53s):
It wa it was impossible. It wasn't, it was the, when you started a business without a business plan, you have this passion that you can solve any problem. And that was my mentality. That's the way I grew up. That's what my dad taught me. That, you know, problems are opportunities. That was one of my dad's favorite things to say. And so that's the mentality that I'll deal with that when it happens. And there's so many personal things that happened during those times, including divorce, that freed up space in my house where I could use parts of the house for warehouse as well.

0 (38m 34s):
So yeah. So you were going through a divorce and starting this business and

4 (38m 38s):
Yeah.

0 (38m 38s):
Yeah. Cause I can't imagine it was an easy time, but, but what was the, I mean the name Manduka, how did you, what ha I mean did cuz they were just pieces of material for AstroTurf. So how did you decide, I mean, it makes sense, you wanted to differentiate them if there were gonna be other yoga mats. So how did you decide to use that name and to come up with a logo and, and then to brand them?

4 (39m 7s):
So, because Shandor introduced me to the mat, I, I wanted to find a name that kind of gave a little bit of acknowledgement to the roots of the map. And so when I thought about words that Shandor used Sanskrit words that might make a, a great word for a yoga mat company, especially a yoga mat company that has excellent grip and, and obviously a frog came to mind and I thought, well, what's the Sanskrit word for frog? And there was a, a word called Becca. And unfortunately at that moment there was a company that was starting to offer product called Becca Yoga products.

4 (39m 49s):
And so that name was out and the other name was Manduka for Frog. And the reason I liked Manduka, and when I realized it, that was it because Shandor's Hungarian, and when he says the word manduka with his Hungarian accent, it was so funny to hear it. It was just this, my Hungarian accent isn't very good, but man Vuca. And so every time he would say that I'd giggle, and I don't, it was subconscious, I don't know why he was giggling sometimes he even called me on it. He's like, what are you laughing at? Not so funny. And so for me, yes, this is the perfect

0 (40m 24s):
Word and frog because it was a grippy like a, I don't, yeah.

4 (40m 29s):
Yeah. And then I, I obviously did some research on the symbolism of frog and it's quite an auspicious animal, especially in yogic terminology. And to me that was really a perfect word for this company. Yeah.

0 (40m 47s):
I I have to assume that, that it was clear in 1997 that the, even though yoga was growing, I mean the market in San Lu Obisbo would've been too small to kind of get, get these sold there. How did you, so I mean initially, I mean you were obviously you'd studied with Yenga, you were, you know, writing for the yoga journal at this point and knew some people or knew, you know, probably a lot of people in the yoga community. How did you just create awareness about the product or this thing that you were trying to sell initially?

4 (41m 21s):
The connections that I had through Yoga Journal, there was a network of what I call celebrity yoga teachers that I was getting to know at these conferences where we'd sit around and eat and I'd meet, you know, some big names in those days were already making a hundred thousand a year as a yoga teacher. Yeah. So there was, there was money to be made there and I wanted to associate with those teachers and I would go outta my way at these conferences to kind of rub elbows with and they became my friends in a way. And so that first shipment came, I gave 75 mats for free to every celebrity yoga teacher I knew.

0 (42m 4s):
Wow. You gave it to them and said, Hey, you tried this. And when you say celebrity yoga teacher who, who, who are what are, who

4 (42m 12s):
Are some Bar Baptist?

0 (42m 14s):
Oh wow.

4 (42m 15s):
Shiva Ray

0 (42m 16s):
Shiva. Ray Patricia, very famous yoga teacher.

4 (42m 19s):
Patricia Walden. Eric Schiffman in la

0 (42m 22s):
Eric Schiffman who had massive following. Massive,

4 (42m 25s):
Massive. And and I have a funny story about this guy Eric Schiffman, this last guy that I described in the early days of orders, all we had was an answering machine at our yoga studio to take orders. And I, this pattern started showing up that on Monday morning I'd have 25 orders from Tulsa or 25 orders from Oklahoma City. And I'm like, what is going on in these Midwest towns? And then I realized, I suspected it was Eric and I checked his schedule on his little, little bit of web presence that he had in those days. And sure enough it was where he was teaching weekend workshops.

4 (43m 7s):
And so he was at the end, we custom built Eric's six four, we custom built him a mat that was a hundred inches long instead of 72 inches long. And so he was an easy guy for me to develop this relationship with because he was doing it for free. Like he was an influencer before influencers got

0 (43m 29s):
Paid. And he was just, and and, and these were also different cuz a yoga mat was just like this afterthought, but this was heavy already. It was unusual. Like people probably noticed them. Yeah. Noticed these celebrity yoga teachers using them. Yeah. So in, in, you know, the other thing that I'm curious about is in 1997, these were very expensive compared to, I mean, yoga Mat was like, yeah, you go to Target or no, maybe not Target then, but you go somewhere and get one for like 20, 25 bucks. Oh, cheaper, cheaper.

4 (44m 1s):
You, you get 'em for like 15 bucks.

0 (44m 3s):
Yeah. And these were like $60,

4 (44m 5s):
$65 was the advertised price.

0 (44m 8s):
I mean that is, you know, already that, I mean, there's an argument to be made that because the price point was so high, it did attract attention. Right. People are like, well wow, if it's so expensive it must be really special.

4 (44m 20s):
I think it worked. The one, as I started to ramp this business up, I, I actually, a friend of mine was a business consultant and I hired him. I said, listen, I want to hire you. I want to, to get your expertise. Here's the business model. And I said, an indestructible product lifetime guarantee, you know, one color heavy. He said, you're insane. Don't do it. Hmm. There's no built-in obsolescence. There's nothing, it's a dead end. Don't do it. And I said, here's your money, thank you for the advice. And you know, and then I moved on because I knew that it was filling a void. I mean, for years, first three years I was the only person in that space.

4 (45m 5s):
Yeah.

0 (45m 6s):
And there was nothing like it.

4 (45m 8s):
There was nothing like it.

0 (45m 10s):
And, and I guess you, I mean, once you started to see how people responded to that first shipment, you what, like, you went to to, to Germany, you went to that, that factory in Frankfurt that it was essentially making mats for AstroTurf, but you Yeah. Kind of what you went to them and said, Hey, could you, could you actually on your line like make me mats specifically for, for fitness and yoga?

4 (45m 38s):
That's exactly what we did. There were a couple, you know, customer issues that we were starting to see, we had to address. One of them was the weight that these mats were heavy, which created some problems for smaller people like carrying them. And we, you know, just worked with it in a way. We, we didn't back away from it. We did eventually, two years after we launched the black mat, we came out with this alternative mat that wasn't black and it was half the weight. We also had a problem with slipping. And so the early mats weren't designed tactily on the top surface to resist sweat, you know, to resist slipping.

4 (46m 22s):
And so we, I went on that trip, one of about six trips to Germany over the years just to meet and maintain relationship with. That first trip was addressing weight, color and slip.

0 (46m 38s):
Cuz it was black and it was seven pounds and it, and, and if you sweat it slipped. It was

4 (46m 43s):
Slippery. Yeah. So, and we solved with that one trip, we solved all those problems. And we even, I anticipated a problem that, that I thought would be happening once they started to be used as studio mats by creating a texture on the bottom surface of the mat, which was this dot pattern that you see in shower mats and things like that that helps the mat stay put on a hardwood floor or a stone floor. So that was that first trip. It was a very productive

0 (47m 15s):
Trip. And that was about a year in or or less

4 (47m 19s):
About two years in.

0 (47m 20s):
And, and now here's the thing, I mean, you you, you alluded to this a a couple minutes ago, which is when you talked to a business consultant in front of yours, which is you have, were you, you were offering a guarantee it was designed to be the one yoga mat you will ever need to buy.

4 (47m 34s):
We weren't, we weren't offering the guarantee at the start, but we had a tagline. The tagline was good for a lifetime. Right. Or two. Wow. We had this little or two lifetimes as a joke. Right. But we didn't explicitly do the lifetime guarantee until about year eight.

0 (47m 55s):
So, but even then you, the, the the, I mean you were selling a product that you knew most people would only buy one of.

4 (48m 1s):
Correct.

0 (48m 2s):
And in the late nineties, you know, it wasn't, today it's a 40 billion industry, but in the late nineties it wasn't. But did you have a sense that something was changing in yoga? That, that it was starting to, there was kind of like this boom happening.

4 (48m 20s):
The boom was definitely happening in terms of the growth of yoga studios.

0 (48m 26s):
Yeah. Because this is still pre Lulu Lululemon. I think it's

4 (48m 29s):
Pre Lululemon. Yeah. Yeah. So the, the products and especially the clothing products hadn't really in those days been realized. Yeah. So I didn't know what the extent was, but I didn't believe the business consultant that it was limited. I just figured that whatever the United States is doing, it's gonna track internationally at some point. And that's what's happened that, that the growth started happening in the strangest of places, especially in Taiwan or, and Japan. And then I realize that that's where Shandor teaches in Taiwan and Japan.

4 (49m 11s):
And when he would be traveling with his mat there, people in Japan would say, where do you get 'em? And he'd send them to us. So we started to have, within three years we had a international business going as well. And especially when we made those technical adjustments to the grip and the textures, it increased the price to 75. But it, the, the performance just easily paid for that additional money.

0 (49m 39s):
And, and this is obviously pre like Instagram influencers and, and Correct. And social media marketing. This is the, you know, late nineties, early two thousands I saw there's an ad that you put in yoga journal, like a print ad and it's just like, this is manduka and then it's just a list of like the most prominent yoga teachers. And that presumably an ad like that at the time would've had a significant impact.

4 (50m 3s):
Yeah. The, the first week that ad ran, we doubled sales and then three weeks later we're still doubling every week our sales. And it got to the point where that first year, I think we were on back order for three months out of 12 just because we couldn't keep up and there was a two month lag time between the order and the delivery. Well

0 (50m 25s):
Because you were probably a tiny part of this Frankfurt factory, this German factory's business. Correct. Their main business was AstroTurf.

4 (50m 32s):
Well it was Carpet under Layman and AstroTurf. Yeah, exactly Right. It was a huge factory. And so the production cost from Germany was high, but our costs, our sales price was high. And we managed that and we never sold the big box stores in the early days. We, we tried to maintain our studio relationships and our individual retail customers and big box was only a thing that came later.

0 (51m 0s):
And, and so what, what I'm trying to figure out, cause from what I gather reading about these early days was that you constantly had cash flow issues. Like you were constantly not able to make payments, but, but if they were like flying off the shelves, if you could not actually, I mean if it was just, you know, you were growing like by a hundred percent every year, what was going on? Was it just, you just weren't managing the business? Right.

4 (51m 27s):
Well the problem in those early days is we didn't have a fi finance department. We didn't, we didn't have, it was me.

0 (51m 34s):
It was just like five of you. You and for what

4 (51m 36s):
I had, I had a warehouse guy, I had a marketing gal, I had an office manager who dealt with customers and I had a kind of a outside sales rep who was basically a guy that just made commission and would travel a lot and we didn't really have anyone managing the money. Yeah. Where we would get into trouble is when we'd send a shipment to yoga works who had, at that time, you know, beginning to have seven, eight franchise yoga works

0 (52m 7s):
On this chain. Yeah. Yeah.

4 (52m 8s):
So, and they wouldn't pay us on time. The retail business was perfect, but the wholesale business would catch us literally with our pants down sometimes. And then, then we'd have to hustle. Yeah. Cuz in the early days I had to pay half at the time of order and half at the shipping date. So basically I had to pay a hundred percent of that inventory before it even left Germany or on the day that it left Germany

0 (52m 37s):
Because they, because obviously cuz your terms were not gonna be great because

4 (52m 41s):
I was a, a business that was tiny. Yeah. And, and because the, as a, as our orders grew, the business was like a little, the factory was a little cautious. Like what if we send all these mats, but with track record and a relationship from that first visit, the second visit was how do we change the terms? And so we changed it. Thank Yeah. Thankfully 25% up front, 25% when it ships 25% after the first month and the balance after the second

0 (53m 15s):
Month. And that allowed you to basically function sustainably.

4 (53m 20s):
Yeah. That was, that was the key.

0 (53m 25s):
When we come back in just a moment, why Peter eventually decides to sell Manduka and how he then has to learn to let go of it. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This. If car designers can make cars look like anything, why are there so many boring cars? Nissan dares to design what others won't by approaching each project in a completely different way. Nissan Design gives you everything from the adventurous frontier to the Z's iconic sports car styling to the futuristic aria all in one brand. Each Nissan vehicle has its own story and identity.

Nissan (54m 5s):
Nissan knows that thrill isn't just about zero to 60 thrill should start the moment you see a car from the arc of the roof to the way the headlamp meets the grill. Every detail of a Nissan vehicle is designed to get your heart racing before you ever press start. Nissan knows what thrill looks like because they design it into every vehicle they make. Learn more about the 2023 lineup@nissanusa.com.

Byte (54m 29s):
If you've been wanting a straighter smile but are put off by the thought of the endless trips to the dentist or the high cost of races, then I know just what you need. Bite, bite offers clear teeth aligners that allow you to transform your smile from the comfort of your home. Bite. Clear aligners are doctor directed and delivered right to your doorstep. Just take an impression, mold of your mouth, preview your 3D smile and order your all day or at night aligners. Yes, it really is that simple. Best of all is that their thousands lesson braces have monthly financing options and even take insurance. Spring is a time for new beginnings. Start Your Smile Journey today, go to yt.com and use code wondery at checkout to get your at-home impression kit for just 1495. That's code wondery@bite.com for over 80% off your impression kit.

0 (55m 17s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this. So it's the early two thousands and Manduka is still just a five-person company, but it's starting to make some money and even turn of profit. And after specializing in just one product, that heavy black yoga mat manduka starts to branch out first to lighter weight mats and then to other yoga accessories.

4 (55m 40s):
You know, bolsters blocks, straps, eye pillows, all sorts of creative and useful tools. So I went out and I sourced materials that were organic cotton or whatever it was. We even did some air inflatable yoga bolsters to experiment with lighter weight things so students could travel with them. So I just, I didn't look at the, the balance sheet, the spreadsheets and say, okay, this is gonna cost too much to make. I just said, this is a product that studios need or individuals at home need. And they all sold reasonably well.

0 (56m 16s):
Yeah.

4 (56m 17s):
And, and so that was growing the bottom line for us. We, our international business was growing, everything was growing. But to that point where I could manage it all, I was starting to see something's got us shift

0 (56m 33s):
A and, and at that time, I mean, I think Gaia or Gaia, I, I Gaia I mean that I think, which is the biggest, probably one of the biggest yoga brands in the world was already out there. Did you see companies like that as like a competitor or sort of like, th we wanna be like them or big or bigger than them?

4 (56m 51s):
No,

0 (56m 52s):
No.

4 (56m 52s):
I just looked at what my intuition led me towards and also what I was listening to studio owners and friends of mine, what was needed, what was lacking. And as a studio owner myself, what was needed and lacking in my own studio.

0 (57m 7s):
I, I guess the other, I mean another thing that was going on while, I mean, cuz you start Manduka in 97 and you know, you obviously you're selling one mat and then you start to have the factory change the formula and then you're, you go to two mats, sort of a lighter mat, something else happens, which is your mentor, you know, this guy that you practice with, right. Shandor I guess at a certain point he kind of pushes you away. He says you've gotta go on what happens, like, I mean, you're his student and what he encourages you to, to stop practicing with him.

0 (57m 50s):
What, what, what happened.

4 (57m 53s):
So after 20 years of being his student, but also at 10 years as being his North American business manager, you know, the relationship with solid, he was the best man in my first wedding. But I, I mean there were signs that things were changing and I was not really paying attention to them because I thought our relationship was solid. What I see in hindsight now is he realized in maybe my personality, something lacking and this devotion to the guru, and maybe it was even starting from my Catholic upbringing, there was something broken in that way of relating to myself.

4 (58m 46s):
And I, in a nutshell, I think what he gave me is now what I consider the ultimate gift. Because ultimately in yoga and in business, frankly, in a way we all have that moment where we confront the, let's call it the inner teacher. Like who knows what's best for our lives. It's not outside ourselves, it's within ourselves. And if I'd have listened on a business level, if I'd have listened to the advice that I was getting from these experts, I would've never started manduka.

4 (59m 27s):
Hmm. And likewise, if I'd had been a follower of Shandur for the last 20 years, I wouldn't be here talking to you, I don't think, to be honest.

0 (59m 36s):
But what explained it, he, I mean it seems odd. Do do what I mean he was mad at you for some reason. It's weird. I don't know what do, did you ever understand why he was angry or,

4 (59m 50s):
I don't see it as anger, but that state of confusion lasted for a year maybe, maybe two, because simultaneously I was, my wife had already left, but the divorce wasn't final. My dog probably the only real friend at that time in my life that I felt close to my dog died unexpectedly from a brain tumor. So you couldn't have piled in more stress into a life and still running all these other businesses and things.

0 (1h 0m 26s):
Hmm. Tell me what was going on in, I mean, I know that you obviously went through a, a number of really huge challenges, the divorce and the fallout from your, from the end of your partnership and friendship with Shandor and then you had a, a kind of a scary health diagnosis. I think it was a a was it a tumor that was found? Yeah. Yeah. It turned out to be benign, but it was still scary. Yeah. Must have been really scary.

4 (1h 0m 54s):
Yeah, it was, it, it was one of those moments that, you know, life can gift you with if you, if you kind of make it to that realization where you decide what's truly important. And this is where my, you know, at that point, 25, 30 years of yoga practice really overlaid into my personal and professional life as a, as a business owner. And that was a gift from this diagnosis. The, the diagnosis, which initially was cancer, and it turned out after they removed the tumor to be benign.

4 (1h 1m 39s):
And that was after four years of treating it holistically, naturally,

0 (1h 1m 45s):
And

4 (1h 1m 45s):
Wow. Yeah.

0 (1h 1m 48s):
So all of this is, is is the backdrop for a decision you make in 2007 to step down as a ceo, your company, your business, you didn't have, yes. You owned it, it was yours. Were you, I I'm assuming you were feeling just overwhelmed that you just couldn't do it anymore. You didn't wanna run it anymore.

4 (1h 2m 8s):
Once I made the decision to sell, I didn't feel overwhelmed, but leading up to that, yeah, yeah, of course. It's like saying goodbye to a child, you know, th th this, and even to this day guy, you know, like Manduka is still part of me. And yesterday I get this email still from Manduka that's celebrating 25 years. Yeah. And they acknowledge me in the email, which is just, of course, I'm, I'm, it's part of me.

0 (1h 2m 37s):
Tell me, tell me about the decision to sell 2007 2008. This is obviously the beginning of the financial crisis. Yeah. You guys hit about two, two and a half million dollars in sales. So you're still very small. But I mean, fast forward today, Manduka, it's a really big company. Tell me, tell me the motivation for selling. You were just tired, you were just done.

4 (1h 3m 3s):
I was at a crossroads and looking at the second half of my life and the second half of my life, I wanted to be different than the first half of my life. And that the, the fatigue wasn't so much the issue as the quality of life. And I made the choice for quality of life over some legacy of corporate success. And I, I, when I made that decision, I had a sales trip down to YogaWorks and I was talking to their buyer and I say, Hey, by the way, if, if you know anyone who wants to buy a yoga mat company, I might want to talk to 'em.

4 (1h 3m 47s):
And the buyer, who's this guy? You know, I didn't know that well, said, well, I actually, I think I know someone. And I go, who's that? And he said, me and I, I laughed at him and I said, well, that's wonderful, but I think I'm probably gonna ask more than you can afford. He said, oh, well I know people and you know, I can introduce you and I want to be a part of it. And that's how it started. I didn't have to go find anyone to go find someone. Well, I just started in a yoga works warehouse

0 (1h 4m 19s):
And eventually this person sort of organized the, the, the funding, the financing to buy it.

4 (1h 4m 27s):
This person introduced me to a venture group in

0 (1h 4m 31s):
New York. This is Channel Stone Partners.

4 (1h 4m 33s):
Right. And, and so he made the introductions and part of the introduction, like he didn't want to finder's fee, he just wanted a job. And he was the COO chief of operations for the new company.

0 (1h 4m 47s):
Wow. So basically it was a fairly quick acquisition. They, I mean, you, you sort of put out your price and they agreed to it. No, no.

4 (1h 4m 56s):
It took a year from that moment in the warehouse to the day we signed on the dotted line. And it was unbelievable timing cuz a month after we signed, the whole economy collapsed. And that was a bit worrisome for me. A little bit. Yeah. But, but no, it was, we negotiated over a year and, and they were new at this and, and there was a little bit of haggling over price, but I, I basically told them we were under capitalized, understaffed, and we still produced, you know, two, two and a half million in gross sales. The potential for this company is 10 to 15 x what you're getting it for.

4 (1h 5m 38s):
So, and they, they said, yes, we agree. And in the end, that's how we came to a price.

0 (1h 5m 45s):
So you signed an agreement with them to, to stay on for I think five more years. Yes. And in the press release from that time, you're quoted as saying, you know, this is great. We're gonna maintain our core values. A lot of, you know, we had, these are the right partners, they share my dedication to this vision. They have the best interest of the company and our customers at heart. And that's normal. You know, you see that in any acquisition press release. Did that, was that, did that come to fruition? Was that actually how it played out?

4 (1h 6m 15s):
You know, appearances and what actually is the reality is sometimes quite diverse. And I would say that the first, I mean the, the first decision which I was against was to move the company from San Luis Obispo to Los Angeles. And the reason I was against it was the quality of life issues. And we had this perfect working model of what I was concerned about, which was Patagonia, where Shinard sold it to Venture Group and they moved it, I think somewhere in southern California. And then he, he bought it back and moved the company back to Ventura because it was close to a, a beach break for all his surfer employees.

4 (1h 7m 2s):
And he had a quality of life for his employees that was more valuable than the bottom line. And so that track record of Patagonia was fresh in my mind. And, and I was saying, listen guys, yes, it's gonna cut costs for shipping and it's gonna get a bigger labor pool and bigger access to customers, but I guarantee you in another five or 10 years, San Luis Obispo is gonna be the place you want to have your headquarters cuz you'll be able to attract people here. And they didn't listen. And that, that was kind of the first heads up for me that, you know, the press release is one thing, the reality is another.

4 (1h 7m 42s):
And within a couple years of this employment agreement with them, they would pay me to create ideas and develop products, and then they would act without any regard to my recommendations. And they learned some painful lessons without even acknowledging that in, in a way I was correct. But at, at the end of three years, they stopped communicating with me. And the last two years of my employment with them, they paid me and they never called me, which is the way it, it happens I guess sometimes. Yeah. But the brand has definitely strived to present itself as honoring its roots and the, the different generations of owners.

4 (1h 8m 31s):
I think there's been four generations of different venture capital groups now. They've all in their own unique ways tried to maintain that reputation of manduka.

0 (1h 8m 44s):
You know, I I'm curious what you make of where yoga is now because it's, it is what started out, at least in the West as a sort of hippie-dippy spiritual thing. It was, you know, I think first came to the US in the twenties or something, like one of the world's fairs and then, you know, really kind of kicks, kicks off in, in, in the Bay area, San Francisco in the fifties. And today it's not, I mean it is a massive part of the fitness industry is a, is a, I mean in 2016 it was like 17 billion in the US alone. Yeah. So the global, I think the global yoga market's like 40 billion and that, that's like, that's a significantly huge market.

0 (1h 9m 26s):
I mean, you're talking about, it's not the beauty industry, but it's like, it's really big. Yeah. And you know, the things that Manduka sells, the accessories and the, there's Lululemons and all the other brands out there that have really be, become multi, you know, million, billion dollar businesses on the back of this. What originally began as this spiritual practice in, in rural India. I mean, of course it's inevitable, it happens with, with so many things, but I don't know, do you have mixed feelings about, about that?

4 (1h 9m 58s):
I, I don't, I mean, I played a major role in that, you know, corporate transition of the traditions of yoga into a western environment. And I felt my place was part of a lineage of innovators to make yoga more accessible for people with bad ankles on the floor. You know, bad knees on the floor, what whatever to be able to get down to the floor and practice yoga and then stand up and feel safe with balance and stability. So the legacy of Manduka is that it was built by yoga teachers.

4 (1h 10m 40s):
I didn't have a sales department until year six, I think. Hmm. So to me that was something that I to this day feel really good about

0 (1h 10m 52s):
As you sort of recount your story and where, wait, so quite a story, right? From Fresno to, to Santa Fe and New Zealand and Pune, India. Yeah. India back to San Lupo. And this brand that you built, that you, that you, that you created, it is now, now one of the big biggest brands in yoga. How much of, of where you are today do you, do you attribute to how hard you worked? And how much do you think has to do with just chance and luck and just serendipity, coincidence?

4 (1h 11m 29s):
I would say the title of my book is Gravity and Grace. And you know, everyone has a relationship to this word grace, whether it's a spiritual or a religious meaning, or just, you know, appreciating nature, you know, where we feel this non-physical connection to things or energies, et cetera. And yeah, and I wanna maybe finish this with a story. About nine years ago I was in Spain in this little fishing village called CaTECH on the eastern coast of Spain. And so I took a train up the coast and then I drove to this little village and I get terribly lost.

4 (1h 12m 15s):
And now I'm starting to worry because the rental car to get back to the train station, I can't remember where I parked the car. So I'm standing in this maze, there's people and merchants and little shops, and I look down right at the window of the shop and here's a manduka sticker Hmm. On the inside of the glass. And I'm like, oh my god, I I, the door's locked. I look in and it's this tiny little yoga studio and that feeling of being lost and then having this little logo that I drew on a napkin in a restaurant, you know how many years ago that

0 (1h 12m 60s):
Frog, you drew that

4 (1h 13m 1s):
Frog on a napkin? I drew that frog on a napkin and that frog symbol has survived, you know, four venture capital groups and I'm seeing it in some little village in Spain that, that to me is such a gift to my life.

0 (1h 13m 21s):
That's Peter Stereos founder of Manduka by the way, even though he fell out of touch with his former mentor Shandor Remedy, they did have an unexpected reunion about four years ago when they ran into each other at a farmer's market in San Luis Obispo.

4 (1h 13m 38s):
It was awkward in a way, but it was also beautiful because for the first time since the breakup, he exchanged a hug with me. You know, like he walked over to me, we embraced like brothers and it was like, how are you? And we had a moment of just exchanging as to people, not teacher guru. And now it is confirms for me this wisdom that he provided me by saying goodbye and it was beautiful.

0 (1h 14m 10s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please do follow our show so you never miss a new episode and it's free on Apple and Spotify. Just click the follow button at the top if you wanna contact the team. Our email address is hiv t id.wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at How I Built This and mine is at Guy Raz and on Instagram, I'm at Guy dot Raz. This episode was produced by Kiki with music, composed by Rameen Arab Bluey. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Katherine Cipher. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Hermann, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, Sam Paulson, and Carla Estevez.

0 (1h 14m 55s):
I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey Prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear@wonderyshop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.

9 (1h 15m 37s):
What's it like to grow up to become world famous crew's? Amazing Life is a podcast for kids and families each week experience life through the eyes of someone who changed the course of history. You might be Walt Disney dreaming up crazy characters or Naomi Osaka winning gold on the tennis court. Maybe you'll be a famous spy or a Supreme Court justice or a basketball star in the nba. But for now you're just a kid facing challenges that'll shape you into who you are. Listen to whose amazing life on Amazon music or wherever you get your podcasts.