0 (0s):
It's Sky Ross here on the Wisdom from the Top podcast. I talk to leadership experts and some of the world's greatest business leaders about how they lead, innovate, and transform the people around them. If you're trying to make it in business or just wanna think more like a leader, this show probably for you. Listen now to the Wisdom from the Top podcast. From Luminary and npr r The world needs entrepreneurial leaders and we're educating them at Babson Gain. the skills to lead, motivate, and inspire through Babson College's MBA program. Available full-time, part-time, and online experience. An, action oriented hands learning approach that helps you find opportunity in every challenge.

0 (41s):
whether in your own venture or as a leader within the business. Babson offers What. if thinkers a path to change the world and the way it works with the tools and mindset, you need to stand out among your peers and solve real world problems. In any career you pursue When. you come to Babson, you join a thriving network fueled by passion and innovation at the school. Ranked number one in entrepreneurship for 30 years by us News and World Report applied today at Babson dot edu slash mba. The Spark Cash plus card from Capital One helps you earn Unlimited 2% cash back on every purchase. And with no preset spending limit, your purchasing power can adapt to meet your business needs.

0 (1m 24s):
Jorge Gaviria, founder of NDA, reinvests his 2% cash back to help grow his business with new products. And I really love the idea behind nda. It's a supply chain company connecting Mexican heirloom corn farmers with restaurants, chefs, and consumers. And while Maciando is connecting more people to the culinary and cultural richness of the Mexican kitchen, it's also elevating traditional heirloom farmers that work in areas that live below the international poverty line. Imagine what the Spark Cash plus card from Capital One an Unlimited 2% cash back on every purchase could do for your business. Capital One, what's in your wallet? Find out more at Capital One dot com slash spark. Cash plus terms and conditions apply.

0 (2m 5s):
Maybe you've stayed in an Airbnb before and thought, thought to yourself, this actually seems pretty doable. Maybe my place could be an Airbnb. It could be as simple as starting with a spare room or your whole place when you're away. You could be sitting on an Airbnb and not even know it. Maybe your kid is heading off to college in the fall and you'll have an empty bedroom. You could air Airbnb it and make some extra cash while they're away. Or, if you have a vacation plan for this summer, that could be a good time to Airbnb your entire place. Whether you could use a little extra money to cover some bills or for something a little more fun, your home or spare room might be worth more than you think. Find out how much at Airbnb dot com slash Host.

0 (2m 48s):
Hey, before we start the show, you know, we hear a lot about pivots on How, I, Built This, how a simple change in perspective can create a whole new opportunity. This made me think of a conversation I recently had with Seth Myers. He told me about the moment he realized that he could find success and fulfillment on Saturday Night Live, not as a performer, but as a writer. Check out my interview with Seth Myers over on my other podcast. It's called The Great Creators. Just search for The Great Creators with Guy Raz wherever you listen to podcasts. Or go to the great Creators dot com. And now onto today's show.

2 (3m 32s):
I was in a women's healing circle, and so I went to my group and I said, you know, we need a name. And one of the women said, it should have your name in it, and it should be something like Mary's Cracking Up or something like that, which we thought was funny. And then my other friend said, yeah, Mary's gone Crackers. And that was it. The the, the angel started singing, the Sky opened up, and that was clearly the name.

0 (4m 3s):
Welcome to How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs idealist, and the stories behind the movements they

2 (4m 12s):
Built.

0 (4m 15s):
I'm Guy Raz. And on the show today, Mary Waldner solved her gluten sensitivity by creating a cracker she could eat and others would love, and grew it into a snack food worth millions. Two of the greatest entrepreneurs in history were older than you might think. Sam Walton was 44 when he launched Walmart. Ray Crock was 52 when he stumbled across a hamburger stand and turned McDonald's into a global powerhouse. Experience matters. And the research bears this out. A Harvard Business Review study found that when you measure for growth, most successful businesses were started by people with the average age of 45.

0 (4m 59s):
Mary Waldner wasn't just older when she started her business in her fifties, but she was also an accidental entrepreneur, someone who really didn't ever think about starting a brand for 20 years. Mary worked as a psychotherapist in the Bay area. That was her job. But Mary also had a problem, a lifelong struggle with her health, especially her digestion. So she had to change her diet and the things she baked. And one of those things were Crackers, basically a mixture of seeds and gluten-free grains. And as these stories go, her friends wanted them and then their friends wanted them. And then, well, a business was founded, Mary called it Mary, has gone Crackers.

0 (5m 41s):
And today it sold in tens of thousands of stores across the US including Walmart and Target. And the idea for the Crackers only came about because of a diagnosis later in life. As a child, Mary was always in pain, especially after meals.

2 (5m 59s):
My mother decided that it was emotional because doctors couldn't figure out what was wrong. So that was kind of what they did. You know, they, they couldn't find anything wrong. So it must be, in my head, I did have a lot of allergies, so they gave me allergy shots, but, but I wasn't, this isn't an allergy, so it didn't show up on any tests. And back then, at least where I was living, doctors didn't think about celiac disease. Hmm,

0 (6m 30s):
Right. So it it, it wasn't until you were 43 years old that you were, you were diagnosed with celiac.

2 (6m 36s):
Yeah. Finally. Yeah.

0 (6m 39s):
A and when you got that diagnosis, it, it must have been like a, a relief, like a validation of ev everything that happened.

2 (6m 48s):
Oh God, yeah. It was wonderful. I mean, it's funny because I've met a lot of people since then who get diagnosed and they're really bummed out, you know, and not, that wasn't the case for me. I was ecstatic to, to have something specific that I could do to make myself feel better, which was pretty quick too,

0 (7m 13s):
Because you presumably were consuming bread and we Oh, yeah. Yeah. I mean, you just ate those things and

2 (7m 21s):
It's everywhere. Yeah.

0 (7m 23s):
And so when you got that diagnosis, you must have thought, my god, 43 years of the, of not knowing this thing and I cannot, so I have to assume immediately you changed your diet and your lifestyle. Yeah,

2 (7m 37s):
Yeah. What's interesting is that the, the diagnosis came from my chiropractor. Again, doctors never figured it out. A lot of my symptoms were structural. So my back would go out and I would never, it would be really hard to hold a chiropractic adjustment. So like, cuz I had muscle weakness and it also was seeing an acupuncturist, and she and her whole family had celiac disease. So when I discovered this, I had this incredible resource that most people don't have, which was incr amazing. So I just, you know, went home and emptied out my kitchen and started to learn about ingredients.

2 (8m 25s):
And through my acupuncturist, I learned that there was a big, there was actually a celiac disease association. And so, you know, I got the newsletter. I just, you know, went gung ho and started learning about different ingredients. And, you know, the joke I said was that I could live without bread, but I couldn't live without my Auntie Ns brownies. So that was the first thing I made that was gluten free.

0 (8m 56s):
So you, the, the moment you went gluten free, how quickly do you remember feeling the effects on, on your, on your health?

2 (9m 5s):
It was, I would say maybe three to six months. I was noticeably different. And I remember going out to lunch with somebody who hadn't, I hadn't seen in, in a few years actually. And she took one look at me and said, she almost didn't recognize me because I look so different. So, wow. I started getting that kind of response from people, you know, you look at yourself in the mirror every day, you don't see any changes, but when people who I hadn't seen in a while saw me, they were stunned. So. Hmm.

0 (9m 42s):
Pretty soon after you were diagnosed, you started to like, mess around with recipes for things that you could, you could eat, right? Right. Yeah. What, what were you making?

2 (9m 50s):
Well, like I said, brownies, sweets, because that was my issue. Brownies, cookies, any, I, I started playing with different flowers to make a blend that would work.

0 (10m 4s):
Were you always a baker, a home baker? Yeah.

2 (10m 7s):
My, me and my grandmother. Yeah. I

0 (10m 9s):
Always And so baking was a big part of your life?

2 (10m 12s):
Yeah. Yeah.

0 (10m 13s):
Wow. So flour, like wheat flour was like a part of your life.

2 (10m 18s):
That's that's right. Definitely.

0 (10m 21s):
And all of a sudden you could not use wheat flour or rye flour. Yeah. So you had to, you had to switch to rice flour or potato flour or

2 (10m 28s):
Rice, tapioca, tapioca potato. Yeah.

0 (10m 31s):
And, and how were, what, how were the results of like the brownies?

2 (10m 36s):
Well, you know, If, you put enough eggs and butter in something and sugar,

0 (10m 40s):
You're good to go.

2 (10m 41s):
And sugar, it's, it's not bad, but, but trying to bake things where you rely on gluten, things just fall apart, you know, they're just, just puddles. So there was a lot of just disasters for a long time. And

0 (11m 0s):
This is when, I mean, the mid nineties, like gluten freeze, I mean, now doesn't exist.

2 (11m 5s):
Doesn't exist,

0 (11m 6s):
Yeah. It's not a thing. Yeah. So you really had to make your own stuff. And so tell me, what, what were some of the challenges that you faced when you knew that you could not eat bread anymore and you were living in a world where everyone around you was eating bread?

2 (11m 20s):
Eating eat bread. Yeah. Yeah. And pizza and stuff. So imagine going to a restaurant and they bring you a, a basket of bread and ev and you're hungry and everybody's diving in and filling themselves up and you can't eat any of it. And so many times when I would be sitting in restaurants hungry and then order a bunch of appetizers or try and fill up that, it was a really unpleasant experience. So that's when I thought, I really wanna make something that I can bring when everybody's eating bread and butter to have something. Hmm. Cuz so I'm not starving.

0 (12m 0s):
Hmm. So, yeah. Yeah. So, so what'd you do?

2 (12m 4s):
So that was when I started. And again, remember I'm, I'm a, a hippie food nut. Yeah. So I wanted something whole grain. I wanted something healthy. So I had the idea for the, for the ingredients. But it, it wasn't gonna be a cracker in my mind, it was gonna be some kind of a biscuit or something chewy, you know? So Yeah.

0 (12m 30s):
I want like more bready.

2 (12m 31s):
Yeah. More bready.

0 (12m 32s):
Yeah. Like, like Ezekiel bread or something.

2 (12m 35s):
Yeah. Or like a, like a biscotti kind of thing too. That was so Right. I wanted something really, you know, I'm hungry. Yeah. I want something to chew on. Right. Like

0 (12m 44s):
A gluten-free breadstick.

2 (12m 46s):
Yeah. Yeah. Wouldn't that be good? Yeah. Yeah. So that's what I started to play with. Brown rice, quinoa, flax seeds. Flax seeds were really big then. And sesame seeds.

0 (12m 57s):
Yeah. And, and you would take, you would take like brown rice flour or like cooked?

2 (13m 1s):
No, the whole cooked brown rice. No, it had to be whole grain.

0 (13m 4s):
You took brown rice, you cooked, it, cooked. So it was soft cooked.

2 (13m 7s):
Cooked the quinoa.

0 (13m 8s):
Cooked the quinoa. Okay.

2 (13m 9s):
Yeah. Put it together with these seeds

0 (13m 12s):
In, in like a gloopy. Gloop, like I'm thinking Exactly. You like mashed it with a masher. You just mixed it around.

2 (13m 18s):
I put it eventually I put it in a food processor. Okay.

0 (13m 22s):
Yeah.

2 (13m 23s):
I'm giving away secrets here.

0 (13m 25s):
It's, it's, it's not a huge leap to figure this out. Okay. The food processor pop part, but I got you. So you, yeah. Okay.

2 (13m 31s):
Going and then I wanted, then I would make it, you know, bake it, try to bake it.

0 (13m 36s):
Wait, so you would take this, you would just take these whole grains, the cooked whole grains. Yeah. And then the quinoa and rice, and then throw some flax seeds and sesame seeds and put in the Cuisinart. Right. I got it. And then you would just spread it on a cookie, like a cooking sheet?

2 (13m 52s):
Well, no, I tried to make it into little

0 (13m 55s):
Blobs. Oh, okay. Like, like little dot, like, like you would do with cookies, like drop cookies. Yeah.

2 (13m 59s):
Or a little bigger, like a little like a roll size.

0 (14m 2s):
Okay. I gotcha.

2 (14m 3s):
And of course that didn't work at all

0 (14m 5s):
Because what, what happened?

2 (14m 6s):
Well, the outside would get done and the inside would be raw. Right. Because it was, so eventually what happened is I just kept flattening them and flattening them and flattening them to the point where I had a thin, and that was the only way they would bake through.

0 (14m 26s):
Because you would basically take, so you would still drop them on cuz like, like a meringue or something. But you would just Yeah. Or a cookie, but you would just push them down into a flat

2 (14m 35s):
Disc. Yeah.

0 (14m 36s):
And, but these, these are like sticky. I imagine this would be super

2 (14m 40s):
Sticky. Well, okay, so here's another trade secret. So what I did was I got Yeah. They're very sticky. It's like, you know, it's like glue. Yeah. And so I got a glass that had a flat bottom on it. Yep. And I put a piece of saran wrap over it. Yep. And then I put, I had a paper towel with some oil on it, and I wiped the bottom of the glass on some oil. And then I flattened the blobs into, into Crackers with that. Got it. Okay. and it didn't stick.

2 (15m 21s):
And then I'd wipe it on the paper towel each time. And that's how I, that's how I was able to make it into a cracker.

0 (15m 27s):
Got it. All right. So it's like a smash burger except for a cracker. Yeah,

2 (15m 31s):
Yeah.

0 (15m 31s):
Yeah. That's how I make my smash burger. It's not with a glass.

2 (15m 34s):
Very labor intensive,

0 (15m 35s):
Very labor intensive. You gotta take the whole sheet pan and each, you know, a tablespoon of this, this gluey stuff. And you would just put, and then you would bake 'em and, and they came out like Crackers.

2 (15m 48s):
Yeah. They would release from the pan. Yeah. Because it was amazing. Yeah.

0 (15m 54s):
All right. So you, this is 98 and this is like the little fun kind of thing that you've come up with and, and you what you started to just like, bring them with you wherever you went? Yeah,

2 (16m 4s):
I had them in little baggies so that when I went to restaurants or parties, I had something to eat. Yeah. And yeah, it worked.

0 (16m 14s):
Alright. So you're making these Crackers, this is not, there's no nothing in the horizon that's saying this is gonna be a business, this is gonna be what? Right. Let me just pause and ask you for a moment why you were, why you had your practice. Cuz running a psycho, a psychotherapy practice is a business. I mean, you had to do accounting, you had to do accounts payable, and you had to pay your quarterly tax, whatever it was. Right. You, you were running a business. Did you ever have any visions or daydream about maybe starting a business at some point in your life? Never.

2 (16m 45s):
None ever, ever, ever.

0 (16m 46s):
You, no. You had not a single entrepreneurial bone in your body?

2 (16m 50s):
Well, not, other than being a therapist that no thought. Yeah.

0 (16m 53s):
Yeah. That you thought you, you didn't think you did. No. Yeah. It was like you were ha I mean you were content Yeah. Being a therapist that this was, yeah.

2 (17m 3s):
It was what I imagined myself doing. My life for my life. Yeah. Yeah.

0 (17m 7s):
And, and financially, were you struggling or were you making a perfectly fine living?

2 (17m 11s):
I was doing okay. It wasn't great, but, but you know, having a kid and I wasn't getting much support, financial support.

0 (17m 23s):
So from your son's father?

2 (17m 24s):
From his, yeah. So it wasn't, I did okay. But it wasn't great.

0 (17m 30s):
Yeah. Alright. So no thought at all about a business, but you're making these Crackers and, and I guess eventually there are other people who try them or friends of yours who try them and like them. Well,

2 (17m 45s):
That's what happened is, you know, that's the other, the other piece of information is that I love feeding people. I always have. So I would never just make enough for me. I would always, I just kept making them and I would bring them and people would taste them and Yeah. Everywhere I went and the response was just kind of unusual to me.

0 (18m 11s):
So what, what do you mean?

2 (18m 13s):
Well, people just loved them. It wasn't like, oh, these are good, or, but they would go, oh my God, these are amazing. Where did you get these? Oh my God, give me more. Give me more. So I started, you know, it got to be a joke where I was just working and making Crackers. That was kind of became my life because they were, it took me a long time to make the Crackers, like I said, they were very labor intensive. I bought a new oven so that I could have six racks in the oven instead of the normal two or three. And the most I could make were like 240 Crackers at a time.

2 (18m 56s):
But, but that's what I was doing because everybody I knew wanted them. You

0 (18m 60s):
Were doing like, just like multiple sheep pans in your oven of the Crackers. Yeah. And, and, and I have to imagine, I think you probably cook. I'm a, I'm a baker too. You you cooked it on a low temperature for

2 (19m 13s):
Like a long time. A long time. Yeah.

0 (19m 16s):
Yeah. I mean, making them for people and you know, people responding to them and then crossing the Rubicon, so to speak, to saying, well, maybe I should sell these. Is, is of course, it's a, a moment. Not everyone gets to, but tell me how you Right. Even got to the moment where you start to think about that.

2 (19m 39s):
Well, it was, this is another kind of typical experience in my life where I just woke up with a very clear voice in my head that said, I have to manufacture these Crackers. I mean, it was just so clear that everyone loved them. I, I think what happened was I went to my cousin's house for dinner and she had a friend who had a two-year-old there. And every, all the adults loved the Crackers. But when the two-year-old loved them, that sort of did it for me.

0 (20m 15s):
When we come back in just a moment, Mary realizes that lots more people would love her Crackers if she could only figure out how to make them on a much bigger scale. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

Miro (20m 38s):
Hey, I've got a quick request for all of you. Could you please let me know the very first time you discovered How I Built This and what kept you coming back For more, you can just add your answers to the How I, Built This Community Miro board. It's super easy. Just head on over to Miro dot com slash built. That's m i rro.com/built. And I can't wait to read your responses. Miro is actually sponsoring this episode. And If, you haven't heard of Miro. It's the most incredible visual collaboration tool. It basically serves as your team's online workspace becoming a canvas where you can build on each other's ideas and create something great together from anywhere. While you're leaving us your answers, please feel free to play around with Miro. You can pick from thousands of templates to get started, like a quick brainstorm, an icebreaker or a flowchart. I really look forward to seeing what you'll add to our board. Go to Miro dot com slash built to leave your thoughts with sticky notes, comments, reactions, and more. That's Miro dot com slash built Miro dot com slash built.

Burrow (21m 44s):
Once a company knows what they do best, where do they go from there? Well, If, you Burrow the furniture company known for reinventing everything you thought you knew about furniture, you go outside Burrow's new outdoor collection just launched with a strong chip resistant galvanized steel frame, an easy to clean fabric. Burrow's outdoor collection is built for everyday use and to withstand the elements. The modern sleek look and quick drying plush foam cushions bring the comfort and style of indoors outside. And it's also customizable. You can choose from 19 different configurations and purchase individual pieces or bundles to fit your seating needs. And as always, get free shipping on every order. How, I, Built This. Listeners can get 15% off their first order at Burrow dot com slash built. That's Burrow B u r O w.com/built for 15% off Burrow dot com slash built. One more thing before we get back to the show, please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And it's totally free.

0 (23m 4s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 1999 and Mary Waldner is living in the Bay area with her husband Dale. And she's discovered that her gluten-free Crackers are a hit. And that gives her an idea.

2 (23m 19s):
I went to Dale and I said, you know, I think we have to manufacture these. And he said, okay. I mean that it's, it's great because if he hadn't done that, I obviously nothing would've happened or would've taken a long time. Yeah. But also because neither one of us had a clue what that meant.

0 (23m 42s):
Dale was, I think he had a job as a general contractor. He built homes. Yes. Mainly

2 (23m 47s):
He had, he was really the entrepreneur. He grew up, his dad was a, had a lumber yard and they build fences. And so he grew up doing that and he became a general contractor and he worked for himself a lot. He also started a data business. It was called, he called it Profit information services, where he collected data. This was again the very beginning of, of the internet and of technology. And he put together construction data and then would sell it to people in the building trades that wanted data, new construction data.

2 (24m 31s):
So he was very entrepreneurial.

0 (24m 33s):
But how did you test out, I mean I know you, your friends liked it. Yeah. But, but how did you even test, you know, prototype the idea, you know, beta test, the idea that maybe these would sell in a store. Did you at least make some and bring them to a store to sell to see if people would buy them?

2 (24m 48s):
That's what ended up happening. This friend of mine owned the local health food store and I brought her a bag just personally to taste them, to see what she thought. And instead of eating them, what she did, she opened up the bag and put them on the counter by the register. And I went shopping in the store and then I hear all this hubbub and people are eating them at the register going, oh my God, where can I get these? I want some. And by the end of, you know, that half hour or whatever I was in the store an hour, she came to me kind of sheepishly and said, you have to bring me more of these.

2 (25m 32s):
And so that's how that got started. So then I was making bags. We, you know, handmade, we had a, I bought a bunch of coffee, ba brown coffee bags with a window in them and I made them by hand and brought them to the store and she sold them.

0 (25m 48s):
Yep.

2 (25m 49s):
And so she kept running out and she would call me every few days and say, they're gone. You have to, you know, so this is, this was nuts. Cuz then I was making, literally doing nothing but making Crackers and working.

0 (26m 4s):
Just working at your, at the clinic with patients and then making Crackers. Yeah. And, and obviously the name s Gone Crackers, it's a little bit of a nod to what you did professionally. Was it kind of

2 (26m 16s):
Yes. Well I was in a women's, a women's group that I started and I was having a hard time coming up with a name and Dale said, you know, you have to find a name, you have to find a name, it doesn't matter. And I said, oh no, it matters a lot. And so I went to my group and I said, you know, we need a name. And one of the women said, it should have your name in it and it should be something like Mary's Cracking up or something like that, which we thought was funny. And then my other friend said, yeah, Mary's gone Crackers. And that was it. The the, the Angels started singing, the Sky opened up and that was clearly the name.

0 (26m 56s):
Wow. Alright. So you are selling them at this little health food store in Lafayette and clearly people are buying them. You are working full-time with your patients as a psychotherapist. But you've decided, you and Dale have decided to pursue this as kind of a side project, right? He's still doing general contracting, you're still doing, working with patients. And the idea was to figure out how to mass produce this recipe you came up with and then get into the, into the food business I guess. And did, did initially, did you guys think, well maybe we can just like license the recipe to a another company or something?

2 (27m 35s):
I thought of that. I, I thought of putting the recipe in a cookbook. I thought of a lot of things. First of all, I knew nobody would make them. It was too hard. Yeah. If I gave you the recipe, you wouldn't do it. And then, and the same thing for licensing because there were a few gluten free companies by then, but not really. And yeah, I knew it wasn't gonna happen. You know, and again, we learned enough in, I don't remember the order of things, but we knew that most food is co-man manufactured. Right?

0 (28m 9s):
Yeah. Most food is not made right by the companies. Well, except for the huge big companies. But most things you see at Whole Foods are are not made by Right. That brand, it's made in a co-packing facility that makes tons of things for other people.

2 (28m 23s):
Yeah. And so you give somebody the recipe and you know, you supervise that process, but somebody else has the equipment, somebody else has the expertise, all of that. And I, you know, this was a big point of contention in the beginning because Dale thought that we had to manufacture them ourselves. And I kept saying, no, that's impossible. We don't. And

0 (28m 45s):
Expensive. Right.

2 (28m 46s):
Yeah. We don't know what we're doing. Neither one of us. And, and he said, well then find me a cuz I bought, there was a book about, you know, with a list of co-packers and of course nothing was gluten free. But

0 (29m 2s):
You contacted these, these manufacturers. Yeah. And you called them and you would say what? You'd say, Hey, I've got this recipe. What would you gluten free, like what would you say? Yeah.

2 (29m 10s):
Well also what kind of equipment is even gonna make these? We didn't know. Yeah. So that was part of the process too,

0 (29m 18s):
Just calling and asking questions and trying to figure it out.

2 (29m 21s):
Yeah. What kind of equipment do you have? Most cracker places use a pretty standard dough machine that rolls out the Crackers and cuts them and that wasn't gonna work.

0 (29m 33s):
Right. Cuz it's too, too g gluey.

2 (29m 35s):
Yeah. So I mean we, what ended up happening is I took, now in the Bay area, there were a couple of food manufacturer facilities. And I would, I took big bowls of dough to a couple places cuz there's another process that's like a form and fill where they would put the dough into these molds and you know, drop it out onto the tray. But again, they didn't, nothing's gonna drop. Right. Yeah, exactly. It was too, it was too, too gluey.

0 (30m 5s):
Yeah.

2 (30m 6s):
So one guy helped me and he was a, a real equipment, a specialist. And

0 (30m 12s):
This the guy in the Bay area.

2 (30m 14s):
Yeah. And he, I gave him a bowl of dough and he said, let me play with this for a while. And he worked on it and decided that one of the machines that's a cookie depositor could be adapted to at least get the blobs onto the pan. And then what ended up happening is we had to invent a machine that would flatten them because that was the challenge. So we got the blobs on the pan, but then we had to create our own piece of equipment that flattened them.

0 (30m 52s):
All right. So you start this process of trying to find a, you know, a way to make these, and, and this is gonna take I think roughly five years, more or less, right? Right. And, and while you're doing this, cuz you're still running your business and Yeah. You know, you're, you're meeting with patients and Dale's doing his work. Did you have any money at all to finance this? No. How were you? I mean, I guess it, you know, he was just taking trips to these factories. But yeah. If, you had to buy equipment. How were you gonna do that? Did you,

2 (31m 22s):
Well, so I was, I was working more on this on the manufacturing side of things and Dale was working on the business plan. Yeah. We were both thinking about who to start approaching for money.

0 (31m 37s):
How, how much money did you think you would need to, to, to get this off the ground?

2 (31m 41s):
Well, our original raise was 750,000 and, and we thought it's just the whole thing is so funny when I think about it. But we thought that would be enough. Yeah. That, that's all we would need.

0 (31m 54s):
And how did you approach people? Who did you, who did you go to? Did you go to friends?

2 (31m 58s):
Well, again, remember now everyone and their brother has tasted these Crackers. Yeah. And everyone loves them. One of my close friends who was in my women's group, her cousin loved them and she was married to a very high level person at Bechtel Corporation. This was where Dale got a PhD in business, in, in business plan writing and in finance. And so this guy was not gonna put a penny into it until that business plan was perfect. Yeah. And until he could sell it to his friends. So he ended up becoming a lead investor and he brought in a lot of a few other Bechtel people and other people that he knew that he brought in half the money.

0 (32m 47s):
Wow. Did you, I mean in in that business plan that he, that Dale wrote, was he also talking about the growth of the gluten free sector? Because we're now talking about the early two thousands and this is just as it's starting to really Right. Right. It's not gonna blow up just yet, but it's on the cusp.

2 (33m 9s):
Right, exactly. We were on the wave and it was so hard to see. Obviously we had no idea how huge it was gonna be, but we knew something was happening and Dale, I remember one point him saying, you know, we're gonna miss the window. We're gonna miss the window. You know, cuz cuz everything took so much longer than we thought it would take. But, but we knew that there was, there were something like 400 celiac support groups all over the country that we knew about. We knew they were like me. They were very loyal to, to food that you find that you can eat.

2 (33m 49s):
They read the labels, they also go to the stores and make sure if there's a product they want, that store will carry it. You know, they're, they're huge advocates for themselves because they have to be. So we knew that existed.

0 (34m 6s):
So. So as you're really diving into all this, I mean you're going to, you're meeting with potential manufacturers. You're doing all of this research. At what point, cuz this really starts in 1999, how were you able to manage your day job and how was Dale able to manage his day job? Were you just, was it like, was it a slow creep of like reducing your hours and reducing your hours?

2 (34m 30s):
Well no, it, it, it was, it was the year before we started the actual manufacturing that Dale quit his job and I was still working cuz I had more flexibility. But otherwise, up until then, yeah, we were both working and doing this.

0 (34m 50s):
Alright, so you're trying to figure out how to get this done. But really, I mean the, it, it seems like the ultimate goal really, Dale was really focused on making it yourself. He, he, he was still committed to that, that, you know, this idea that you guys would manufacture the Crackers yourselves and not work with a co-packer, but to get this off the ground, was that, was that even possible?

2 (35m 21s):
No, I, I, I didn't think so. And so what this is, where, what ended up happening was, like I said, I had gone through all the co-packers and nobody could do that. And then I started pulling products from my cabinet and my freezer to look at who was making gluten-free food and where were they and could they help us. Mm. And that's when I found this, this company that was making this rice crust pizza. And they were in California, they were in Chico. I told them what I was doing and I asked if they had room and if they were interested and they said, yeah, they thought they could probably do it.

0 (35m 59s):
And they were making rice crust pizzas.

2 (36m 1s):
Pizza. Right. Frozen, frozen rice crust pizzas.

0 (36m 4s):
And they were game for working with you somehow, but you presumably would have to supply the equipment.

2 (36m 10s):
Well, when we went up there, we saw that they had one piece of equipment that we needed, which was this huge rice cooker thing. It's hard to describe, but it, yeah. and it, it was kind of the combination of the food processor and the rice cooker and everything that would make the dough.

0 (36m 30s):
So like, so what else did you need to get to the next step? Because you've get the dough, but then you've gotta actually get the right, get some machine to automate it so you can make them quickly.

2 (36m 40s):
Right. So how do you get that, the dough out of that, that into these cookie depositor things?

0 (36m 46s):
And there was nobody who could answer that question. Right? No. Because nobody was making anything like this. No, no wonder it took you five years to figure this out. Yeah. Okay. So, so how did you, how did you solve that problem and how did you, who, who had the answer to that?

2 (36m 59s):
Well, this was, again, a lot of experimenting. They had, they had experience with this hot gooey dough and when they followed the proportions of my recipe, the dough would get stuck in the, in the machine because it wouldn't flow through the stainless steel tubing. Yeah. And, and that my recipe wouldn't, it wouldn't flow. It was too dry. And that kept saying, you have to add more water. And I kept saying no, because that's not my recipe. You know, this went on quite a while. Yeah. And eventually what I did was I said, okay, we'll make some your way with wa with more water and see what happens.

2 (37m 45s):
So anyway, we made a batch with more water and then we did a, a blind taste test and everybody liked the ones with more water better than my handmade ones. So that's what did it, that's what allowed me to add more water to my recipe.

0 (38m 2s):
So when you, when you, I mean, when you were ready to go and while you were doing the, the sort of laying the groundwork, right? Because you were focused on figuring out how to make these at scale. And Dale was focused on the business plan. But there are other things to do too. I mean, there's, there's branding, there's

2 (38m 23s):
Right. Packaging design.

0 (38m 24s):
Packaging design, and then where to sell them. Right. So were you, did you start to go to food con conference conventions and things?

2 (38m 31s):
We did that before. Yeah. We, we had started going to food shows

0 (38m 36s):
And you would just, what were you, you were looking for presumably connections to, to, to, to stores.

2 (38m 44s):
Well, there was so much to learn. I was looking for packaging equipment. What kind of boxes did we want? We spent a lot of time in grocery stores buying cookies and Crackers and looking at packaging and calling lots of cold calls. So I have all the people that I was making cold calls to, you know, for packaging, for ingredients, supply for design. We found, we found a graphic designer before we got our money, which was just a huge boost to have somebody like that who was amazing.

0 (39m 22s):
And she designed the, the logo and the look for Mary's contractors.

2 (39m 26s):
Yeah. Sh yeah, she helped. It was the two of us. You know, she and I were a great team and she made us look so much more together than we were.

0 (39m 38s):
So how did you find, I mean, even before you did your first production run, did you have a store that was on board, like ready to go on, on deck to sell them?

2 (39m 52s):
No, you know, in the food business, it's, you don't sell to stores, you sell to distributors. And there was one distributor at the time that specialized in gluten-free stuff. So, but our strategy was different. We wanted to get the Crackers into people's mouths because we knew obviously by that time that anytime anybody ate them, they would love them. For example, the gluten-free distributor, we gave them little sample packs and they gave them to their truck drivers. And so the truck drivers would taste them and they would, they would deliver them with whatever they were delivering.

2 (40m 35s):
And so again, we knew these Crackers were gonna get into the hands of the buyers, which is what we wanted. We s we sent out our samples to those 400 celiac support groups for the same reason. We got the list of, you know, U N F I is the largest natural food distributor back then it was divided by regions. Now it's, it's all one all over the country. But we got their top 100 stores and we sent a package of our Crackers and a letter from me to an in a nice box cuz we had a great logo and we had a, had great packaging and we sent them to the, all the grocery buyers of those top 100 stores.

2 (41m 25s):
So we were just going directly to the people that we knew would love these Crackers and would want them

0 (41m 30s):
In, in those first two years. Where, where was your product sold? What what, like what markets?

2 (41m 36s):
Well, this was mostly little independent co-ops, independent health food stores. Tho those were the guys that liked us.

0 (41m 46s):
And how did you get people to, to find out about it at these, cuz you know, you go to a health food store, there's hundreds, thousands of products in there.

2 (41m 56s):
Well, we, we did have, we did demos. It was all, you know, we, we tried everything. It was really, there were events, like outdoor events where we would set up a booth. It was a lot, a lot, a lot of sampling.

0 (42m 13s):
Tell me, in in, in that first sort of first two years after launch, I, I've read you talking about you were stressed out, super stressed out about, about money. You guys were in debt and, and some, some serious debt, personal debt yourselves. Right. Why, by the way, why were you in personal debt? I mean, you had taken on $750,000 and

2 (42m 36s):
Well we, we spent a lot of money before we raised that money to get, to get there,

0 (42m 47s):
To get equipment, to get

2 (42m 48s):
Well, to do, to do everything we had to do to get, to raise money. Even so we didn't have, we weren't, we didn't buy equipment on our own, but, you know, the graphic designer or going to trade shows or, you know, all the things that we were doing, you know, we, we were probably, probably about $150,000 in debt.

0 (43m 17s):
And meaning you took a loan out?

2 (43m 19s):
No, we just were using credit cards.

0 (43m 21s):
I see, okay. Yeah. And, and did that make you nervous?

2 (43m 25s):
Yeah, it made me nervous. So Dale and I would talk a lot about if it, you know, if this didn't work, how long would it take us to pay this off and could we do it? And Yeah.

0 (43m 35s):
Yeah. So you, you you've got this initial funding and, and, and I have to assume you were still majority shareholders even with the, the seed money you raised.

2 (43m 46s):
Yes.

0 (43m 48s):
But you get to the point, I think about two years in where you need more money.

2 (43m 55s):
Right.

0 (43m 57s):
And this is around 2007 and you guys decide to seek that money out. Tell, first of all, tell me, is that, is that true? Like you needed more money to expand?

2 (44m 7s):
Well, okay, so in 2006 we moved up, up there.

0 (44m 14s):
You moved up to Chico?

2 (44m 15s):
Yeah. So that's when I closed my practice and we moved up to, in that area because we opened up our, we moved out of that co-packer and opened and got our own space. Cuz we were growing really quickly.

0 (44m 29s):
Yep. So you own, now you own the, the

2 (44m 32s):
Production facility, right? Well not the building, but everything in it. Yeah. So we needed more money to do that. That was with, with our original investors. We raised more money. That was another, a whole other stress because mostly because they didn't understand the food business. And they were engineers, a lot of them. And they thought we were, we should be profitable by now. And so they were giving us a lot of pressure in telling us we were a failing company. These

0 (45m 1s):
Are the friends and family round that you did? Yeah. The, a lot of the, the becktel engineers, they were saying, Hey, why aren't you profitable? This is

2 (45m 8s):
Failing. We should, you should, you should wind up close down the business. Yeah. The food, the, the food world was telling us we were an incredible phenomenon. That nothing happens like this in the food world. And our board was telling us, you know, shut it down.

0 (45m 24s):
Why were they saying shut it down because you were, you weren't,

2 (45m 27s):
We weren't profitable. We were, you know, because we were growing so fast and the more you grow, which I didn't understand, I don't think Dale did either, that you need more cash because you have more, more product, you know, in the pipeline and you're not getting your money back as quickly and you know, you just need more and more cash as you get bigger and bigger. And then on top of that, we had to move in into our own space. We never could have grown at, at the rate that we needed to grow in the co-packer. They, we almost went outta business with them because they just didn't, they just really didn't care and they were very sloppy and we needed to take over.

2 (46m 13s):
So in 2006 we moved up there, I closed my practice and did that.

0 (46m 18s):
So, but you did raise them, you did raise additional money, but, but not from everybody. Some of some of 'em dropped out.

2 (46m 23s):
So half of the people were our friends and they were always, they were always supportive and the, the people who were on the board were the larger investors and they, they did help us raise money. They did invest, but they gave us a really hard time about it and kind of made us wait until we were, you know, terrified that we wouldn't be able to continue. It was, it was just very stressful.

0 (46m 55s):
So you needed to raise like significant cash, right? Yeah. Like in the millions. And how much did you think you needed to raise?

2 (47m 4s):
Well, I don't know how much we thought we needed to raise, but once we moved up there, what we wanted to raise a million.

0 (47m 12s):
A million? Okay. Yeah. And you needed institutional money for that or some venture money for that?

2 (47m 16s):
We probably didn't need to, but that's what we thought. Yeah. That's who was courting us. Let me put it that way.

0 (47m 23s):
And, and who and what the a a particular venture firm was courting you that had heard about you, had met you at a trade show?

2 (47m 29s):
They'd been watching us for a while. Yeah.

0 (47m 31s):
Okay. And this is a, a, a venture group that I think specializes in investing in food startups.

2 (47m 37s):
Right.

0 (47m 38s):
Alright. And so you took a meeting with these, these investors, this venture, this VC group. And, and so how, and so how much did you end up raising from them?

2 (47m 49s):
We did get a million from them and more, I have to say more than that. They were gonna give us money. Is that they were gonna help us grow and be in the, be at the level that, you know, we were in over our heads by that time. Yeah. You know, to be, to be our own manufacturing facility, to to be this incredible fast growing company. There was so much, the learning curve was so steep. And to meet people who had done this before, who had been very successful in a variety of fields, who knew everybody and could, you know, we wanted some partners is really what we wanted.

2 (48m 34s):
Yeah.

0 (48m 35s):
With your new partners. And they, did they, and did they buy a majority share? No. Of the company.

2 (48m 41s):
God, thank God. No 14% actually it wasn't a significant share or we would've lost the company.

0 (48m 47s):
Alright, so 14%. And did they, were they helpful?

2 (48m 51s):
Maybe for a minute, but no, not really.

0 (48m 53s):
Well, what, what happened?

2 (48m 55s):
They had a very different agenda. I think it maybe took about three months where, you know, we had a little bit of a honeymoon phase where they did connect us with a better sales force and better manufacturing expertise and things like that. But it was very soon that it became clear that what they wanted was to take over the company.

0 (49m 20s):
When we come back in just a moment, Mary draws on years of experience as a psychotherapist to try and keep her company from going off the rails. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This.

Caldera + Lab (49m 42s):
You know, I have to say, in recent years I've been kind of vigilant about wearing sunscreen every day, even in the winter. And also just kind of making sure to take care of my face as I get older. Fortunately, incorporating skincare into your daily routine can be effortless. And that's where Caldera Lab comes in with their products clinically proven to reduce wrinkles, fine lines and signs of aging. Caldera Lab proudly stands as a leader in men's skincare. The regimen leads off their product lineup. It's a twice a day routine to transform your skin. Inside this bundle, you'll find the clean slate, the base layer, and the good. The clean slate is where you start your day. It's a balancing cleanser that uses gentle plant-based cleansing. The base layer is a nutrient dense fortifying moisturizer that hydrates your skin and absorbs it fast. And the good is your go-to at night before bed. It's a serum that helps your skin look tighter and smoother. Get 20% off with this exclusive link, Caldera lab.com/built. That's 20% off by going to Caldera lab.com/built experience. A whole new level of health and skincare with Caldera Lab.

Squarespace (50m 54s):
I talk with so many business leaders who use Squarespace as they're all in one platform for building their brand and engaging customers online. Squarespace lets you easily create a dynamic website and sell anything your products and services and even the content you create. Squarespace makes it really easy to get started with best in class website templates for all types of businesses that can be customized to fit your specific needs. Squarespace also provides the tools you need to run your business smoothly, including inventory management, a simple checkout process, and secure payments. And with Squarespace email campaigns, you can build a community of email subscribers and customers. Start with an email template and customize it by applying your own brand and ingredients like colors and logo. And once you send built in analytics, measure your emails impact, check out Squarespace dot com slash built for a free trial. And when you are ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain

2 (52m 1s):
. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's around 2007 and Mary and Dale have partnered with a venture capital group to help grow the company, but that investment has come with an unexpected burden. Neither Dale or I in the beginning had a clue that, that this is what it meant to take money from a vc. They, they started undermining, especially Dale, questioning everything, accusing him of things, just it started to get hostile and then Dale started to study what it meant, what VCs, you know, what their, what their dynamic was, especially back then.

2 (52m 46s):
And, and started looking at how they had treated other companies and it became very clear we were so naive.

0 (52m 54s):
What did they want you to do? They wanted you to, I mean presumably I I'm just, I I don't know. Obviously it wasn't in the room, but I have to assume they're, they're making recommendations based on what they think will be best for the health of the business.

2 (53m 6s):
They said, just don't worry about the money. Don't worry about the money, just grow. But what that meant was the faster we grew, the more money we needed and they had set it up that we couldn't get more money beyond a certain amount without their approval. And so they would, they almost did it. They didn't do it because Dale was smarter than them. They wanted us to be dependent so that the money would cost us more and more.

0 (53m 40s):
In other words, you would, you would lose more and more equity in the business

2 (53m 44s):
And more and more board seats. Yeah. Which is more important to them.

0 (53m 49s):
They wanted more board seats. Yeah. Because they wanted you, you felt that they wanted to eventually take over and control the business.

2 (53m 56s):
Absolutely.

0 (53m 56s):
So, so when you started to, to when the tension began, well, what did that mean? Did you, did you stop to com stop communicating with them? What, what started to happen?

2 (54m 8s):
No, we never stopped communicating with them. They just had this kind of party line that, that everything we were doing was wrong. So the first thing they did was, so Dale and I had always been co whatever, CEOs, co-presidents, partners in every way. The first thing they did was they said Dale had to be c e o because someone had to be financially responsible. Right. So they made Dale c e o and what did they want me to do? You can be whatever you want. You can call yourself whatever you want. So it was very demeaning. They were really demeaning to me.

2 (54m 49s):
And that, and that was a, a, you know, this kind of divide and conquer mentality of, so they would question Dale's mental health at one point. They just undermined everything.

0 (55m 5s):
I'm just, I'm confused, I'm confused. How did they even have that kind of power if they had 14% of business? Because

2 (55m 12s):
We, we trusted them. You know, these are really experienced business people. I don't remember the details of their contract, but they, they were the preferred, you know, shareholders and everybody else was common. So that gave them certain privileges.

0 (55m 29s):
I see. So they had the right under the agreement to make certain demands of you guys.

2 (55m 35s):
Like we had to become a Delaware corporation instead of the L L C that we had been, you know, they started changing the structure. Well

0 (55m 43s):
That, that's, that's not abnormal. That happens. No. Right. And obviously there's, you know, there are conditions that come with taking outside money, but Right. But it doesn't sound like they did anything that was out of the ordinary from what VCs tend to do. I mean, they want to see quick growth, they wanna see fast growth, they wanna see a return on their investment. They usually wanna see a 10 x return and you know, they're putting in a million bucks. Right.

2 (56m 9s):
But we didn't know any of that. We didn't understand that. That's not what they told us. There was nothing, nothing verbalized ever about what their agenda was or what their plan was other than to help us grow and to partner with us. But

0 (56m 24s):
A again, I mean, I don't know the, the circumstance, I don't know the people who are involved and they're not here to defend themselves. But I mean, it, it, it, it can't just be a story of the evil VCs versus the, the pure founders here. I mean, you guys did take the money and they were making an investment and you know, in their defense they, that means you wanna return on that investment and you wanna get it as quickly as possible.

2 (56m 52s):
Well see the quickly as possible. We didn't know the return on investment was fine. We were, we were a hugely successful, fast growing company. We, I still to this day think that if they had really partnered with us and had helped us grow instead of battling us, which is all they did really, they really never helped us grow. That we all would've made out much better than what ended up happening. But they were so desperate to, to just get rid of us and do it the way they thought it had to be done. F

0 (57m 31s):
Forget for a moment about, about wanting to get rid of you guys, but was there a difference in view on branding and where to sell the product and No, because No, that was all, you were all lined there.

2 (57m 40s):
No, they, it was, we had great conversations about the vision of the company and they, they really had their recipe and we were not allowing them to do that. And then, then it became a battle between them and us personally where they, they just hated us because we kept beating them at the, at this game.

0 (58m 2s):
Beating them at what game?

2 (58m 4s):
Well, the game of trying to get rid of us. They were, you know, we were older. We weren't in our twenties because of our friends. Not because of us by that time, but because of our friends. We still had a majority share of the business because they voted with us anytime we asked them to.

0 (58m 23s):
And so basically, I mean, I have to imagine that, you know, three months into to getting this money, you guys realized it was a mistake from your perspective to take the money because these were not the partners that you wanted. Right. They probably realized maybe they had made a mistake because you were not the founders that they wanted. And so I have to imagine, you know, this, this is gonna last for a long time. You guys were still gonna be in the same business together for a while.

2 (58m 54s):
We asked them if we could buy them out. They refused.

0 (58m 58s):
They they would not take it. Okay. They, no, they, they didn't even accept an offer. They wouldn't even,

2 (59m 3s):
No, that's why I say I think it felt like personal by that time, you know? Hmm.

0 (59m 11s):
So while this is going on, I mean you're juggling running a business and trying to grow the business and also this like constant, you know, sort of low hum of legal issues in the background Always. How are you just personally doing? I mean, you are a therapist, so your job is to help other people figure out how to cope. How are you doing?

2 (59m 37s):
Let's see. So when we moved up to Paradise, which is near Chico, the first two years, so between 2006 and 2008. So we took the money in 2007. And so now we're running the factory full time. We're up, you know, Dale's up at four in the morning and he's on the factory floor. I'm there pretty much right behind him, but my body starts to give out. And by 2008 I decided that we now have a toddler business on our hands, not an infant business. And with toddlers you can start hiring babysitters, you know?

0 (1h 0m 19s):
So at this point you could start hiring other people. Yep.

2 (1h 0m 22s):
Yeah. So I decided that I was gonna, I had to take care of myself and I decided not to go in first thing every morning. I would not go in into the office until, you know, 10, 11, even 12 sometimes, so that I would have time in the morning to do yoga, to walk, to breathe, you know, to feed myself all the things that I had stopped doing. Yeah. So I'm good at that cuz I had learned what I needed and, and I'm good at that. Dale, not so much. He's, he's just really good at pushing and that's what he kept doing.

0 (1h 1m 0s):
He was working, working, working. Yeah. And dealing with the illegal issues. Right. But despite all this, you're growing, I think by, by by 2012. And this is like, you know, you are, you're still in the midst of, of legal battles with, with these investors. And at the same time you guys were growing I think about 40% y year over year. I think by 2012 you had like 250 or so employees.

2 (1h 1m 25s):
Yeah. Yeah. I think we were at 30 million as a company then. Wow.

0 (1h 1m 30s):
And you were in, in every whole Foods by that point. And even Yeah. Supermarket chain. So you really, I mean the product had kind of, had really kind of just grown and, and sold itself because right. By that point, you're everywhere, you're four 30 plus million dollars in revenue, but still have this thing hanging over your head, these investors. And so were you constantly thinking, were you and Dale constantly thinking, how can we get rid of them? How can we get, how can we figure that, figure out a way to get, get them out?

2 (1h 1m 55s):
They really wanted us to sell the company cuz that was the only way

0 (1h 1m 60s):
That they could make a profit.

2 (1h 2m 1s):
They could get out that they were willing to get out. We, like I said, we asked if we could buy them out earlier and they refused. So, so it was us holding on as long as we could and them pressuring us to sell. And a couple years before that, we had been approached by this Japanese company that wanted to buy us way before we were ready. But they, being the Japanese, they're very patient. Time is not the same for them as it is for us companies. And they hung around

0 (1h 2m 40s):
And they, this is a company called Comida.

2 (1h 2m 43s):
Comida. Right.

0 (1h 2m 43s):
And they are, I think the biggest, like, they, they like sort, kind of own the Japanese rice cracker market.

2 (1h 2m 50s):
Yes. They're the largest rice cracker manufacturer in Japan. Yeah.

0 (1h 2m 54s):
And they have a US subsidiary. And that, that subsidiary made an offer that you guys accepted at the end of 2012.

2 (1h 3m 4s):
Right.

0 (1h 3m 5s):
And so in the end, they bought, I think a little less than 80% of the company for around around 45 million. And, and, and basically at that point, everyone's off the cap table. It's just you and the remaining shares you and, and Dale owned. Right. Right. And so what did that, I mean, presumably that was a, a, you know, both a relief, but, but maybe a bit bittersweet. I mean, on the one hand, you, you don't have to deal with those investors anymore. Now you've got this massive multinational, huge company.

2 (1h 3m 39s):
Yeah. And they knew how to manufacture for the first time we were gonna, well they, they already, you know, the first two years they were there, they brought people from Japan, they're manufacturing experts right away to clean up our, I mean, there was so much room for improvement, but they also made the commitment to we needed an automated line. Yeah. And they were willing to do that.

0 (1h 4m 5s):
And so you and Dale both had a, to your commitment you would become chairman. But I think not too long after the acquisition, your marriage with, with Dale ended. Right.

2 (1h 4m 18s):
Let's see. He moved out around the same time that two year period was up. So it was probably a, it was probably about a year after the acquisition that it Yeah. I mean, things had, obviously the issues were there all along, but it was really clear to me after a year that he couldn't stop, you know, I wa I was ready to celebrate. I wanted to take, I wanted to relax, I wanted to stop traveling as much. We didn't have to do what we did up until that point. Yeah. And he didn't want to, he wanted to keep going. And we were on very different paths by that time.

0 (1h 4m 56s):
I mean, I imagine just the toll of the business too was gonna have an impact on your relationship.

2 (1h 5m 2s):
Yeah. You know, I guess it was funny because Dale used to say, when I would ask him to stop, you know, to take some time off, and he always felt like he was in way over his head, which we both were. But, but he was on the front line way more than me. And I understand that, but I also know that you can only do so much and taking some time to yourself would, would only make things better. And his, he would say things like, you know, if this business fails, our marriage won't work. You know, he, he would, that was his big fear. And that was not my fear, but, but the irony, which was that when it succeeded, it was when it failed because our marriage failed because he couldn't get off of that, that merry-go-round.

2 (1h 5m 58s):
I think he enjoyed it on some level or he was hooked on it or whatever.

0 (1h 6m 5s):
So he, he fulfilled his to your commitment and left and was able to sell his shares you Right. Fulfilled your, to your commitment. But then you signed on for another four years?

2 (1h 6m 13s):
They wanted me to stay. Yeah.

0 (1h 6m 15s):
And as a, like a, a consultant and sort of slash brand ambassador.

2 (1h 6m 20s):
Well, in the beginning when I was still full-time, I, I became a consultant the last two years. But there were, there were two more years in there that I was full-time and I was there, yeah. I was still in that area, but, but I wanted to make new products. I had a lot of ideas and that was really why I stayed.

0 (1h 6m 43s):
You left, I think in 2018 finally. Yes. And there's something that you said in an interview a couple years ago, and it's, it's interesting you said, I wanna read this to you. You said, when I look back on this journey, it, this was not a generally joyous experience for me to do this business. There was very little joy on a day-to-day basis that, that sounds like part of me is like, God, was it worth it? You know, like when I, when I hear that, when I hear, hear you say that,

2 (1h 7m 22s):
Well, what was joyful for me was how many people loved my product and, and how many times I would go out into the, the more of the public domain and, and be told that not only do they love my product, but they love me because of how the product saved their lives. And so that made it worth it to me because I understand that it saved my life too. And I was, I, I was surprised by the response, but I shouldn't have been because it was, it was what I was going through.

2 (1h 8m 8s):
So that brought me and still brings me incredible satisfaction to know that, that I helped a lot of people and, and still do.

0 (1h 8m 18s):
And all that went into, I mean, five years of just r and d and uncertainty over money and, and, and then the, you know, the, the another, you know, seven years of, of challenges, legal issues growing the business, but travel, trying to get it on store shelves, dealing with people who were not always straightforward still worth it.

2 (1h 8m 45s):
Yeah. I would say yes. I think, I mean, I'm obviously a different person. There was a point in there where I said to myself, and I said to God, you know, why am I, why am I having to learn this in my fifties? You know, why am I having to deal with people who lie and look you straight in the face and lie and wanna steal? And you know, I, my other joke is that I never dealt with crazier people at and as a therapist, I stopped, you know, until I stopped being a therapist and went and started this business, you know, so I, and I wondered, you know, why am I lived all these years without having to deal with people like this?

2 (1h 9m 30s):
Why am I doing this now? And, you know, I don't exactly have the answer. I think part of it is this kind of venue where I get to talk about it and where I get to where I, you know, I've spoken a lot over the years where I get to warn people about starting businesses and, and what you know, what to look out for and I'm not sure about what my development, you know, like I said, I'm put everything in the context of my own growth and my own development. And obviously I'm a a different person having gone through this.

0 (1h 10m 8s):
Yeah. When you think back on, on this journey that you took, you know, and, and you were therapist until you were, you know, really in, in, into your mid fifties and that was your career. And then you kind of go in this quicksodic adventure, which turned out to be a, a good call starting this brand, which is available everywhere you can get at Walmart, Kroger, every, I mean, Mary's gone, Crackers are available everywhere. It's your name is, is on it. It's like we had Stacy Madison, Stacy Stacy's pita chips on the show a few years ago and you know, right. Doesn't matter. She can go to a Costco or, or Walmart, wherever she goes and Right. She's gonna see her name Yeah. On a bag of chips, in a chopping cart somewhere.

0 (1h 10m 49s):
She just knows it's her. And you're gonna see that, and you probably still see that. How much of, of your, of your story and what happened to you, do you attribute to how hard you worked in the, and the, and just your, the way you this and how much do you think had to do with, with luck?

2 (1h 11m 6s):
The way I look at it is that when you get a message from the spirit world or whatever you wanna call it, you hear a voice, you hear, you have an idea that really touches to your core whatever language you wanna use, and you don't honor that, that, that's a mistake because when you honor it, the the universe works with you and supports you. And yes, we worked really hard, but there was, there was a lot of magic involved. There were so many moments when it could have gone the wrong way and it didn't.

2 (1h 11m 51s):
And so I don't think of, I don't think luck is, is the word that I would use. I would think, I would say that we dove in a hundred percent and we made that commitment and the universe supported us. And it's always a team effort between what we do in this physical world and making sure that the message that we're sending to, to the other realm is that we really want this, we're really committed to it, and we're gonna do whatever it takes to make it happen. Because when you do that, the, the rest of the world, the other, the invisible realm lines up behind you to make it happen.

0 (1h 12m 39s):
That's Mary Waldner, founder of Mary's Gone Crackers, by the way, whenever Mary sees her Crackers out in the wild,

2 (1h 12m 47s):
It's fun. I saw a guy in the grocery store the other day and he was standing in line behind me carrying like four boxes of my Crackers. I said, oh, you're, you're buying a lot of those. He said, oh yeah, they're on sale. I didn't say anything, but it was just fun, you know.

0 (1h 13m 5s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please be sure to follow How I Built This. Just click the follow button on your podcast app. It's usually a plus sign right at the top so you never miss a new episode and it's totally free. If. you wanna contact our team? Our email address is HIBT id dot Wondery dot com. This episode was produced by Kerry Thompson, with music composed by Rum Arablouei. It was Edited by Casey Herman with research help from Sam Paulson. Our production staff also includes JC Howard Neeva, grant Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, Carla Estevez, and Liz Metzger. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This Hey Prime members.

0 (1h 13m 54s):
You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon music. Download the Amazon music app today. Or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If, you wanna show your support for our show? Be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

5 (1h 14m 21s):
The United States Border Patrol has exciting and rewarding career opportunities with the nation's largest law enforcement organization. Border Patrol agents enjoy great pay, outstanding federal benefits, and up to $20,000 in recruitment incentives. If, you are looking for a way to serve something greater than yourself. Consider the US Border Patrol learn more online at cbp.gov/careers/usbp. That's cbp.gov/careers/usbp.