1 (0s):
Kate really quick before we start the show the how I built this book is now a New York Times and Wall Street Journal bestseller. So thank you to all of you who ordered it and for your support of this show. If you haven't picked it up and you want to learn the secrets of how to develop an entrepreneurial mindset how I built

2 (19s):
this the book is for you. It's

1 (22s):
now available wherever books are sold and in most countries around the world or by visiting how I built this.com or

2 (30s):
Or guy Roz.com and thanks. We did have to go to The Vineyards and and find grapes that were available. And then we also needed to find a facility where we could make our wines and we also needed to get licensed to do so and then we also needed to get National Distribution ourselves. Like there was an

1 (54s):
immense in six months to do all this to

2 (56s):
six months. I mean we had to do that really in like 90

1 (60s):
days sounds absolutely. Buying exciting exciting. Yes.

2 (1m 6s):
It was very exciting thrilling.

1 (1m 15s):
From NPR it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm Gyros and on the show today how two sisters took their life savings taught themselves winemaking and shook up an industry with a brand designed for a whole new type of Wine Drinker and called it the I'd sisters

2 (1m 40s):
collection.

1 (1m 44s):
Okay, so I warned you last time this story is epic. Right and I am assuming you're here because you've already heard part one of this two-part Story how two half sisters who didn't know the other existed until both were grown up went on to launch one of the biggest black own wine companies in the world, but if you haven't heard part 1, please stop listening right now and go back one episode. Podcast cue to hear it as for the rest of you you've now had a few days to dry your eyes and recover from the first half of the story which means we are at the business building part of what would eventually become the McBride sisters collection.

1 (2m 29s):
Now the thing about Andrea and Robin McBride, is that despite both growing up in winemaking regions Robin in Monterey, California Andrea in New Zealand neither sister had any real connection. Into the industry and neither had any real money to put towards a business. They were also young women of color trying to break into an industry that's often been dominated by older mainly white men, but none of this mattered they didn't care they knew that they both shared a love of wine and that they both had a deep and Powerful desire to work together and there was one other thing they were motivated.

1 (3m 13s):
By a mission, they wanted to build a company that would make wine more accessible to disrupt and demystify the

2 (3m 21s):
sometimes intimidating parts of wine

1 (3m 24s):
culture grape varietals had a tasted Regional nuances ratings even how to read labels and when they first dreamed up the idea of starting Wine Company robbing, the older sister had been working at a corporate job and was married with three children. And Andrea was a college student at USC. I mean neither of you had a whole lot of startup cash. If any me, did you Robin did you I mean you had been working but you also the family. Did you have any savings?

2 (3m 56s):
I mean not much, you know, it was kind of a nearly paycheck to paycheck yet situation. You know, I got married we had recently purchased a home, but you know, we have brand-new twin babies and yeah an older girls, so there wasn't a

1 (4m 12s):
A lot of cash available and under am assuming given that you earn scholarship at USC in a college student. You probably were broke right? I mean I got my scholarship

2 (4m 20s):
checks, you know where you could get a job and you know make money, you know, that was it was what I did. So the

1 (4m 29s):
original idea was it sounds like what you guys settle on was let's just import wine and kind of put a label on it. Was that the initial

2 (4m 37s):
idea so we had this Grand Vision we felt like what was really a critically important was that we're incredibly passionate about wine. Yes students of wine, but we need to learn the business of wine and you know, we could get this license in California a federal importers license that was like fifteen hundred dollars. It was like our total life savings and we could import other people's wines and we started by reaching out to families in New Zealand and then we could we Learn the business and we went to them and basically said, you know, don't put all your eggs and our basket.

2 (5m 18s):
We think California could be a great Market to grow your Brand's and your wines and we negotiated really long payment terms so we could bring in the wine sell it click the cash pay the light bill and then pay them back and then as a part of like the process was every Harvest we come back and you Guys teach us how to make wine and you

1 (5m 46s):
Andre had obviously some connections in New Zealand because you're from there and your family. You've family Farmers.

2 (5m 52s):
Yeah. So when you first approached

1 (5m 55s):
these wineries in New Zealand of the agree to send you wine, how did that work? Like how many how many bottles of wine did you initially by and then where did you go to sell them?

2 (6m 7s):
So yeah, so it was crazy. It was at the time it felt like it. An insanely huge amount of wine and it was a pallet which is like

1 (6m 20s):
54 cases

2 (6m 23s):
like the minimum of what you can like put on a boat, you know, but for us it was just an insane and a case of wine, there's 12 bottles. So

1 (6m 33s):
right it just felt like a huge feat to be able

2 (6m 36s):
to get these licenses because you know the sale of alcohol United States is highly regulated. Yeah, and it's very strict.

1 (6m 48s):
And so just the process of

2 (6m 49s):
obtaining a license to import seemed and felt like such as huge rigorous process and then and then to convince

1 (6m 58s):
people,

2 (6m 60s):
you know to and Trust in us and in give us product and then to get it on a boat. Yeah, and then and then bring it into the Port of Long Beach at the time and then put it into a Really Bonded Warehouse because you can't just like bring that to your house. It has to go into a Bonded Warehouse. Oh my God, and then at the point like wow, okay, it's here. So we got to go sell it.

1 (7m 24s):
Yeah, you know and then literally

2 (7m 26s):
Googling, you know top restaurants and and Allah and and in San Francisco and getting some samples from the warehouse and putting them in a bag and and literally just walking into restaurants.

1 (7m 41s):
All right, so tell me how you did. Add that

2 (7m 43s):
like would you go with the two of you

1 (7m 44s):
go or would you go separately and here and we did so

2 (7m 48s):
specifically for so at the time Andre is still in Los Angeles. I'm another

1 (7m 52s):
link fill at USC. Yes, barely 21 at that point. I think like 22, maybe 21. Yeah barely legal. So

2 (8m 1s):
so what we did and you know, thank God we were so optimistic and so naive and in a sense that's kind of what saved our butts from a huge field much. Was that you know, we didn't we didn't play by the rules because we didn't know what you were. Right and so and because we didn't play by the rules. We actually you know, unknowingly gave ourselves some tremendous access to really great accounts, huh? Because we know we had a whole lot of confidence and no business experience. So we're doing all the wrong things. But what we would do is we would I would sit up and running California and you know, Google like top 10, you know highest rated, you know, Ray Toronto and Los Angeles and then I would just like like the most naive like dummy person of the world pick up the phone and I would see who is the wine buyer or the sommelier or the wine director or whatever was going on in the restaurant, you know just really stalk them and be really creepy and then I would find the phone number for them and then I would just cold call and I don't mean like one time.

2 (9m 3s):
I mean I would keep calling until I got to that person and I don't even know what you're supposed to say in those situations, but I would just say like hi, you know, this is Robert McBride. I have this amazing wine. New Zealand, I think you're going to love it it's going to you know be better than that like when can we come in and you know knowing what I know now that's ridiculous. But at the time I think people were just sort of set a back like are you serious? You're calling me on the phone, you know talking about this and I just was really really persistent. And so we got an appointment and there is a certain protocol where you know, you're just tribute or goes in and takes you

1 (9m 39s):
in and you set up cones and rice, you know this whole thing that you're straight. To

2 (9m 42s):
do we and we just didn't know that that's what you were supposed to do. But you know, they would see us because we were just so persistent because we didn't know we were doing the wrong

1 (9m 49s):
thing. Did Andrea did your like I imagine if you have a French accent and you go and you talk about the French wines are selling people kind of just psychologically think of you as may be legit. Did your New Zealand accent? Maybe kind of help you out?

2 (10m 4s):
No,

1 (10m 5s):
no. Okay,

2 (10m 9s):
because this is the thing with wine, is that it? When you think about the great wine region so starkly in the world, there are usually and what we call the old world, which is Europe, right? Usually France and very aristocratic very formal. There's a process there's guardrails around who does want it. So when you come from a place of where you just don't know what you don't know it's startling for people I think because there I think in their mind they think How dare you like the audacity, you know don't you know how this works and this industry type of sort of approach and when you think about the wine business on the one making side on the ownership side even within the higher ranks of Distributors, it's mostly older men.

2 (11m 4s):
So I think what was startling was and why my accent and helped me was because I was so young. I was a woman and I was a woman of color. Yeah at that time. The wine industry was was a very close-knit. Yeah closed off industry with a lot of deep tradition that we that we respect but at the same time not a lot of innovation not a lot of disruption and so we looked very foreign and These situations. What

1 (11m 44s):
was the first restaurant a client? Who said? Okay. Yeah, we'll buy a couple bottles.

2 (11m 48s):
I can cite one in San Francisco. That was a very it was a it was a learning moment for us, but ultimately became I think probably our first, you know, really notable account. Anyway where I was doing my my cold calling routine that I do and this particular person and this particular restaurant I called and He is a sort of famous kind of Psalm and winemaker that purchases the wine for this big Restaurant Group in California. And I called and he was completely in sense. I mean he out he yelled at me.

2 (12m 28s):
He said don't you ever ever call me during service hours now again a spot knowing what the rules were I said. Oh absolutely what exactly what time might that be,

1 (12m 41s):
you know so that I can tell you that. That and he just said, you know

2 (12m 44s):
before he said I don't know before you know, two or three I said, okay Absolutely, I'll call you tomorrow before two or three and he was like, he's groomed at me and he hung up the phone and I was like had to Google. I'm like, what is he talking about

1 (12m 55s):
service hours? Like what does this mean? And I was like, oh that fully makes sense because a restaurant, you

2 (12m 60s):
know begins prepping to begin serving their customers, right? But we had absolutely no experience. Right but whatever. I mean, you know, we don't, you

1 (13m 9s):
know see many things this failure was like, okay good now we know so going forward. We will never call these cells during service hours and that ended

2 (13m 15s):
up being as in San Francisco the main restaurant in San Francisco and that ended up being our first really large for us at the time restaurant account that had multiple locations.

1 (13m 28s):
But how did you convince him to eventually buy your wine because our wine was amazing and we don't take no for an answer. So

2 (13m 33s):
by the time that we called during a non-service hours and we you know after I'm not sure how many templates had but we ultimately were able to get in there and show them the wines. Which we knew were amazing

1 (13m 44s):
and that was luck. That was luck. Yeah felt like we'd made it made it. Here's a question. Right? Like now you run a wine list with like hundreds of wines, right? And you're a New Zealand wine competing with like probably rich people who are like going to buy burgundy's or whatever, you know, whatever it is. How do you at that point? How can you get the the Somalia is to encourage people to try your

2 (14m 10s):
wine? But this was a New Zealand solving. Log that I think was I

1 (14m 14s):
$24 a glass. Wow. It was an expensive wine. Yes. Yeah, I think

2 (14m 19s):
at the time what we had on our side, this was like pre 2008 and New Zealand sauvignon blanc. I think for the worldwide industry was this new kid on the Block that just exploded. So I think in terms of timing that was a star, you know in our portfolio and then we also had some really just beautifully gorgeous. Wines from New Zealand and so it was a really great time to be introducing people to something new.

1 (14m 51s):
So really it was a tube you would like working the phones and cold calling and just hustling and probably hearing a lot of Nos and and did those nose ever make you feel bad or I mean or how were you able to stay unflappable and to just keep pushing forward through those

2 (15m 9s):
nose? I think it comes down to again sort of what drives. Us and a little bit of DNA probably also that we might not be able to take credit for I'm not totally sure or maybe it's just the challenges of the backgrounds that we grew up in that we're a little a little resilient, you know, so I don't think we've ever interpreted anything that we've experienced as a failure

1 (15m 30s):
because it's all part

2 (15m 31s):
of, you know, a process of finding out what works and what doesn't work. We're always still learning and I think also too it was our goal was to found a winery and our mission has always been to transform the wine industry to lead by example most importantly to cultivate community that something that we saw that was like really

1 (15m 58s):
lacking. Yeah. Did you how long did it take you to sell that that pallet of wine that first shipment you remember?

2 (16m 6s):
I think it took us about six months, but then Within that six-month period there were so many learnings that then thereafter. The reorders happened a lot quicker in the cell through was a lot quicker

1 (16m 21s):
and you presumably your expenses were pretty low because you guys didn't have a physical office right and and you were just kind of living modestly like both of you will have a still going to pay your

2 (16m 32s):
markers and you're like it if

1 (16m 34s):
you and your light bill and the rinse and yeah, it sounds like initially because because New Zealand why 70 on blocks are like considered to be value-wise. Obviously, there are premium ones but generally value wines, but it sounds like initially you were focused on the premium right them some of the more high-end wines and you were servicing high-end

2 (16m 56s):
restaurants. Yeah initially and the wine industry premium. I know it's little bit like it doesn't make a lot of sense but premium is anything that's over $13 a bottle. So for the most part most like New Zealand sauvignon blanc is sort of over. That threshold and then you know, super premium. I think one is it like over $20? Yeah, that's

1 (17m 19s):
like ultra-premium. Yeah,

2 (17m 21s):
but we definitely were in the higher end part of the business and we're attracted to that because that is sort of the geeky

1 (17m 33s):
nature of us learning

2 (17m 35s):
about wind intricacies and everything that comes with it at the same time. Seeing very clearly the juxtaposition of what of this is an accessible to everybody. How do you democratize the one experience because it just seems like when you philosophically like when you think about wine it's you know, it's it's the bond of Nature and people and Community. Yeah that's been going on for like eight thousand years and that communal connection. It creates with food and humanity and love and friendship. Up, you know, I feel like you know wine is history and its culture and its optimism and a gloss in everybody should have access to that.

2 (18m 19s):
Not just the select few. Yeah, and we felt like it was a problem, you know for us to solve that wasn't being addressed anywhere else, which was how can we help more people experience wine and a better

1 (18m 32s):
way which I mean at every level makes sense including economic sense because you think about like these really expensive. And he's right from the chateaus and in France and you know, people will buy, you know a case of their wine for you know, they'll get on a list and they'll they'll get their allocation and they'll pay $1,200 for a case and they'll go and sell each bottle for $1,200. Right and those small winemakers who are producing small amounts of wine for very elite clients. They're not getting rich off the wine. They're not reaching and they're

2 (19m 6s):
reaching a tiny Elite group of wine

1 (19m 9s):
drinkers, right? I mean it makes it Infinitely more sense to reach a wider audience as a lower price point.

2 (19m 16s):
Yes, and that was that was I think we were paying very close attention to the different aspects of the winemaking process that translate to Quality and how could we cross these ones in a way and which by the end once it passes through importation distribution retailer once it gets the Our is still this really really high-end wine and product that over delivers and the quality. Yeah, but isn't going to break the bank, right

1 (19m 52s):
and the goal eventually in your minds at least was one day we are going to have our own we're going to make our own wine, or will you not quite there yet?

2 (19m 60s):
Yeah, I mean that was the eventual goal, but it was fast-tracked by 2008. And so when the financial crisis happens, you know the global Global economic financial crisis. We had a couple things going on. There was a bumper harvest in New Zealand. So very very large Harvest that created this huge surplus of wine all those fantastic restaurants, you know that had those the clientele with the the large expense accounts. They all dried up. Yep, and you know restaurants for the most part make a pretty good Revenue off of there alcohol in their wines.

2 (20m 40s):
So they After paying their bills and rub and I got to the point where we just said. Wow. This is really really hard trying to figure out how we're going to survive this and came to the conclusion that if we were going to keep on doing this we should do it for ourselves. And at this time it was like now or never and this was a time that we should make the jump

1 (21m 8s):
started one company. Naturally. I love this you're thinking hey, hey, you know what? Let's just let's just use this opportunity this financial crisis economic crisis to do actually double down on our business and and pivot. Yeah when you say it, it sounds so crazy. But yeah, that's exactly right like what we've got to do something.

2 (21m 26s):
So we're not just going to sit and be overcome by you know, this this crisis it's going on we have to be strategic and some way and so we felt like for the amount of effort and energy it was going to take to keep any business afloat right now. It might as well be our own foreign products

1 (21m 46s):
So, how are you going to do that? I mean presumably there's a glut of wine on them on the in New Zealand on the market was the idea that you would kind of take advantage of that glut and buy up some of that wine and then put your label on

2 (21m 59s):
it. Well, well we have that that problem from the beginning which you know is

1 (22m 4s):
Cash. Yeah. So so

2 (22m 8s):
for us it was looking at strategic Partnerships

1 (22m 13s):
so looking at this this

2 (22m 15s):
problem. There was this excess of New Zealand wine everybody at New Zealand wants to be in the US market. How could we partner with an already established wine company that had infrastructure had all the things that we couldn't afford to do and I could find a Synergy and then bleeping like the infrastructure us making the wine and then us now having the expertise not only to make the wine but also to import a distributed and sell it and The US

1 (22m 46s):
market who did you find? Who did you find a partner with

2 (22m 49s):
the company doesn't exist now, but at the time they're called the New Zealand wine company and in 2009 Rob and I made our first wine together under the ecole of brand. This is the brand that you created with

1 (23m 3s):
this winemaker. Yes. Yes, and just to clarify you were going to have a role in sourcing the wine and then this company was going to bottle and distribute it.

2 (23m 13s):
So like did you like did you go? To to New

1 (23m 17s):
Zealand and Sample a bunch of different wines that they were making or was it already made or did you like how did you decide which one you wanted to

2 (23m 25s):
so like the four years prior Rob and I had been sharpening our skills, you know and learning how to make wine. So we were very

1 (23m 34s):
particular. I'm going back and forth to New

2 (23m 36s):
Zealand. Yeah, so we were very particular in knowing exactly from a growing perspective what we wanted in informal. Winemaking perspective what we wanted the final product to be in Marlborough. We have the northern Valley called The Wider Valley and then we have the Southern Valley called Elwood City Ballet. And the wow is the older pot of Mulberry and it's much warmer and this the Elwood City Valley in the south is a lot cooler and it's more exposed and as a result and the wines and the northern part of the region you get one. set our have this more tropical flavor profile a lot of passion fruit a lot of Gooseberry and then also peaches and and also Red Grapefruit versus the the out City Valley is jalapeno Tomatoes stalk and Robert and I felt very passionately about producing a wine that had a very tropical spectrum of flavor and that's what We produced so you went down there and you knew

1 (24m 50s):
what the flavor profile was. And did you literally like wine like wine producers will literally tell you know, the vineyard pick the grapes now right now, like I'm tasting this great, please we want them right now. The sugar levels in the grapes are perfect. Where was it where you doing that at that point or not quite

2 (25m 8s):
absolutely and and something like the most amazing thing and this is really really specific 270 Blanc grapes, but You haven't yet Blanc grape and your mouth all the flavor just in general when it comes to Wine comes from the grape skin and and putting this grape in your mouth and just tasting like the flavor and the Skins gives you a vision of potentially of where it's going to go. Once you once you have us once you pick once the fermentation process starts, you really don't have a lot of control. How do you

1 (25m 41s):
ever this is just as a bit of a digression, but how do you because when you are Going at that time and you still do it now. But when you when you're going to a Vineyard and you're picking a grape and you're popping in your mouth, first of all, wine grapes are really sweet, right? The sugar content is much much sweeter than table grapes, right because you need all that sugar to create the the alcohol. How do you know when it's the right hour or day of the week to pick them? How do you know because it's going to taste different? Yeah the science you go and pick some grapes. Yeah, there's there's Chemistry Between so it's not it's not just like your palette in the magic.

1 (26m 22s):
I mean, I wish I wish my I wish my mouth could properly

2 (26m 25s):
calculate bricks in the grapes, but there is a way to go out and to you know, grab a baggie full of grapes and say come back into the lab and measure the sugar contents to see where it's at,

1 (26m 36s):
right? All right. So you partner with this one is young one company and they bottle this wine. And by the way, how much did you want to sell each? Bottle for this is 2008-2009. What was the idea? What was the price point you want it to have was that

2 (26m 51s):
16? Yeah. Yeah between 14 and

1 (26m 53s):
69 so not super inexpensive but before durable and how much wine did they did they how many bottles are cases did they end up producing and shipping to

2 (27m 4s):
you? So our first our first vintage I think it was 2,000 cases. It was nearly 3,000 cases. Okay, Robin Robins the keeper Keeper of the coin. Yeah. I'm The Keeper of the bus, but I think after the first year I was about twelve twelve thousand

1 (27m 20s):
cases and at this point because it's now your 2009 you're in the really heat of the financial crisis and really an economy that slowing down.

2 (27m 30s):
We're restaurants your

1 (27m 31s):
target or now. We're you shifting to targeting retailers

2 (27m 35s):
both. So we were still knocking on doors. We were still going to you know, restaurant accounts that survives and then we started to I knew there was a lot more sort of neighborhood wine shops also that we're coming around independent, you know retailers. What was

1 (27m 54s):
and and how many employees did you have at that point in 2009 to to

2 (28m 0s):
a mean me and her by to

1 (28m 2s):
yeah, and then maybe some have people like sort of working part time on yeah, I'll be something but it was Tiny operation. You were still primarily in California. Yes and La San Francisco. Yes,

2 (28m 14s):
and just literally

1 (28m 15s):
Going to swine shops and wine bars and personally like pitching this wine. Yep, and I think the

2 (28m 22s):
biggest breakthrough at that time somehow somebody tipped us off that at major corporations across the United States. Yes, and even within grocery there was a department called Supplier Diversity and the sole function of the supplier diversity. Was to identify women and minority-owned businesses to try and help bring them into those grocery stores. I think it was through Supervalu, right? Yeah.

1 (28m 57s):
So as Supervalu was a large grocery

2 (28m 59s):
chain and the middle of the country I guess and they had a Supplier Diversity director and we were like, what is this? What is

1 (29m 6s):
that? What is that you do?

2 (29m 7s):
Yeah, the person that I'm was a man by the name of Michael Byron and I so Robert and I flew into middle Minneapolis as far as Supervalu was based. I think it might have been like January

1 (29m 21s):
of January. It was 11 below and this is in like 2009 2010

2 (29m 27s):
10 11 something like that would have been January 2011 and really like giving us the lay of the land of like grocery retail like a roach education and then letting us know like that he was he was there to really help us. First and that customer and how we could be successful and even better was he said, you know, I'm going to help and I'm going to support you but we're else to where else do you want to sell wine? And I said I said and he said he said yeah, we got a whole network of us and like the next day he sent out emails to Target Disney to all the major like Kroger all the major

1 (30m 12s):
Fortune 100,

2 (30m 13s):
you know companies in America. I like getting us a seat at the table. Well, you know grocery is always been really important to us because we felt like that's where women shop and that's where we wanted to be. Right and so Cost Plus World Market wanted to put our wines into their stores nationally that then for the first time took us outside of

1 (30m 37s):
California. I mean that I imagine this was a huge like a huge breakthrough for the business, but but but I imagine it Still not you still weren't like, you know, we weren't rolling and doesn't know. Yeah, you are rolling in Korea. Did you I mean, it's interesting because in between 2009 and 2011 right financial crisis a lot of businesses go under but but I suspect that wine is one of those weird things it does. Okay, right because it's like it's a small thing that you know makes people feel a little bit better and it's a nice little luxury, right? Is that is that what

2 (31m 13s):
you saw exactly exactly? We it is I don't want to say it's recession-proof because the channels in which you operate definitely play into when a recession hurts for sure when it comes to the wind industry, but I would say for the most part you see that can consumption listens out and and restaurants and what we call on-premise Accounts but more consumption happens at home.

1 (31m 41s):
This is I mean you kind of alluded to this earlier but

2 (31m 45s):
That the whole like

1 (31m 46s):
winemaking world and it's changed a lot of course, but there is this

2 (31m 52s):
kind of culture right? It's still

1 (31m 55s):
you know, overwhelmingly made and produced by men. Most of those men are white

2 (32m 2s):
and

1 (32m 3s):
did you guys encounter, you know along the way when makers who are dismissive or who were I don't know a bit condescending to you or did you find more wine makers who are actually generous and really Want to share what they knew I

2 (32m 16s):
think there's two different set of side says I feel like for the most part people on the winemaking side. The growing side are pretty generous and welcoming in terms of time and information because at the end of the day as much control as you hope to have mother earth like dick takes what's going to happen and I definitely feel like there is a community a really big Community aspect to the wine the the growing and winemaking side of things

1 (32m 44s):
right because a Lot of wine a lot of wine doesn't winemakers don't grow their own grapes are grown by farmers who and people have plots on those right and they

2 (32m 53s):
are farmers and and wine is this I feel like it's one of those, you know, kind of old-school mentality just in the terms of you are open with information and with assistance to your neighboring Farm I think is a little bit different. However when you move away from the Ross I'd ever in the winemaking side and you get more into the business side when you're dealing with Gatekeepers when you're dealing with wholesalers Distributors and retailers. It's very different than the base of the winemaking and agricultural side. Did you ever come

1 (33m 30s):
across somebody who you you try to sell one too? And they're just like too terrible like was kind of snobby about it.

2 (33m 38s):
Well, there's a lot of really snobby people and

1 (33m 40s):
why yeah, but I don't think anyone's ever said to us. At least not to our face and our wine was terrible and quite

2 (33m 47s):
honestly, I don't think anyone would have a reason to because

1 (33m 51s):
we work hard to make sure that we don't make make terrible wine.

2 (33m 54s):
But I mean there's definitely you know, depending on what part of the wine world's you're in where you're definitely going to face some pretentiousness. You're definitely

1 (34m 3s):
going to face

2 (34m 5s):
all of the things that a lot of people really find intimidating and distasteful about wine and that's lessening I think, you know over the years, but it's been an unfortunate. Net an unfortunate side effect of being in the wine industry.

1 (34m 19s):
Yeah. I'm wondering because I think I think like right around 2015 you guys

2 (34m 26s):
entered into

1 (34m 27s):
another partnership with Diageo, which I think is either the biggest or one of the biggest alcohol beverage companies in the world and and again like you're sourcing the grapes and you're blending the wine, but it's still distributed by Diageo.

2 (34m 43s):
Right? Right and and

1 (34m 44s):
I'm just using this as one example of a partnership you did which makes sense because then you don't have to go out and raise a bunch of money and they have their well capitalized and you can have a partnership but I mean in this is a tricky question. Okay, because the wine you're producing is your idea it comes from your minds. It comes from your experience. It comes from your palate. It's your intellectual property, but I'm assuming that when you do a partnership, it doesn't work out that way. Is that right?

2 (35m 13s):
It's quite complicated honestly, and you know, there's a lot of ways that you can structure those kind of Partnerships, whether it's you know, a marketing and distribution relationship or production or what have you but at the end of the day no one is going to have the vision that we have right? I mean that's you know unique and specific and generated by by us for us. So even in the best situation, there's still going to be some element of where where A larger company in an entrepreneurial vision is not going to align and look like rub and I wear too much like we're the most for a lot, you know, like we don't sleep like this is our passion and then you know, then when you are partnered with a company where you know for a lot of people, you know, they aren't as passionate as you they were sleeping on the weekends.

2 (36m 10s):
It was

1 (36m 10s):
crazy. It was like not right. How do you do business like that? At and big bureaucracies there. Yeah. Yes and don't don't get us and

2 (36m 17s):
don't get us wrong. Obviously like it was a it was a short partnership, but we learned so much, you know, we're so grateful that we had that experience. But at the end of the day, we're still we're still Scrappy agile entrepreneurs with a very very strong Vision. Yeah, who be are like through our Rose a colored lenses the way that we see the wine industry is very very different if we were going to bridge the Gender gap that happens in the wine industry and make the wine industry more inclusive than we had to do that by ourselves because politically Within These strategic Partnerships, it was just too difficult, right and you know, we had to realize that you know, this is something that we simply need to do for

1 (37m 5s):
ourselves. So, what did you do? Like, how are you gonna

2 (37m 9s):
make that happen? So we went to lunch one day and And this is sort of at the time in which Rob and I are really heavily talking and thinking about like our future and you know, should we stay with Diageo and then we went to lunch with us fire and he said I get your vision.

1 (37m 30s):
I see I see what you guys are trying to

2 (37m 32s):
do. Have you guys ever considered just breaking off on your own and creating a McBride sisters completely like McBride sisters.

1 (37m 44s):
And your answer was yes, but of course since 2005 and what stories Inspire with by the way, so

2 (37m 51s):
it's Kroger Kroger's the company. Yeah, he was kind of like I don't

1 (37m 54s):
get it. He's

2 (37m 55s):
like I don't get it. Why are you guys making you know, all these things and quite honestly it just, you know, we weren't quite sure how much brand Equity there was and putting our own

1 (38m 6s):
name on the label, but your answer presumably was if I'm with you I don't like yes we want to do this, but we don't have money to do this. And so so we said

2 (38m 14s):
absolutely like yes, we want to do it. I just want to add like as any proper entrepreneur you say yes, and then you go

1 (38m 22s):
figure it out and you freak

2 (38m 24s):
out and you figure it out you figure out how to make it happen

1 (38m 29s):
when we come back in just a moment how that lunch with the guy from Kroger turns into a life-changing deal with a nearly impossible deadlines. Stay with us guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from TR Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsor we transfer and it's set of tools for transforming doubts into ideas. Collect is a mobile app that helps you save organize and share inspiration paper is a digital notebook that captures.

1 (39m 17s):
Your thinking paste is a presentation tool to make it easier to present your ideas. And we transfer is a modern simple file transfer tool the next time you doubt. Let we transfers set of tools help move your ideas forward learn more at tools to move ideas.com support for this podcast and the following message come from E-Trade. You want to invest your money, but there's one

2 (39m 44s):
problem. You're not sure where to begin. Luckily. There is E-Trade who offers more than just trading each rate simplifies investing without the financial. Jargon and has the people to offer guidance and support to make your money

1 (39m 56s):
work hard for you for

2 (39m 57s):
more information visit. E-Trade.com and PR E-Trade Securities, LLC member finra sipc Thanks also to TD

1 (40m 7s):
Ameritrade offering free education for investors choose from articles videos webcasts and in-person events to take your

2 (40m 16s):
trading knowledge to the next level visit TD

1 (40m 19s):
Ameritrade.com slash

2 (40m 21s):
education. On the next episode of louder than a riot the 20-year fight to clear the name of former No Limit rapper Mac

1 (40m 32s):
sips me and my brother was close the years that he lost. That's some of the best years of his life. He lost to me. It did his hurts listen now to louder than a riot the new podcast from NPR meter. And one more thing the New York Times best-selling book how I built. This is now available. It's a great read and a great gift for anyone looking for ideas inspiration wisdom and encouragement to have the courage to put out an idea into the world. It's filled with tons of stories. You haven't heard about how some of the greatest entrepreneurs, you know and respect started out at the very bottom check out how I built this the book available.

1 (41m 16s):
Table wherever you buy your

2 (41m 18s):
books.

1 (41m 28s):
Welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So before the break we heard how Robin and Andrea were about to end their partnership with the multinational company Diageo and launch their own independent wine

2 (41m 41s):
company and

1 (41m 43s):
right around the same time. The sisters had a meeting with a buyer from Kroger who told them he wanted to stock his grocery shelves with McBride Sisters wine, but the question was could they do At all by themselves

2 (41m 57s):
and this is September of 2016.

1 (42m 1s):
Right? And you know, he's

2 (42m 3s):
talking about going on shelf and March of 2017. And at this

1 (42m 9s):
point, you know,

2 (42m 11s):
we have no no significant. I mean we're talking about to do this as multi-million dollars to be able to pull this

1 (42m 18s):
off. How were you able to do that without going. I mean, I'm imagine that there are May have been investors were approaching you saying we want to invest in your business. Am I am I right?

2 (42m 33s):
We wish I mean, you know, you have to remember that in terms of you know, and investors and investment. So, you know black women are the least funded, you know of all entrepreneurs. So there was still you know, sort of a perception of some risk or something Surety, you know, black women aren't seen in this space as You know having a history of being successful if at all even being present, so no there weren't people beating down the door to invest in our company and and

1 (43m 5s):
basically this buyer for Kroger says arcade September of 2016 and the buyer says it will by March of 2017. We want this on our shelves. That's that's

2 (43m 13s):
insane. Yeah, that means that needs to be like shipping to their locations and January and February.

1 (43m 20s):
How much wine by the way it was. Did you have to make for that

2 (43m 22s):
order 25,000 cases of wine? That year for the first year and you didn't even have a brand yet. Correct, correct. You've got to get moving you've got to get this wine

1 (43m 32s):
made and bottled and a label design and slapped on that and ship to you

2 (43m 38s):
in six months. Yeah, you sound very

1 (43m 41s):
relaxed about this. I am I am really nervous. I am really nervous because we're on the other side of it now. So yeah,

2 (43m 50s):
but basically Robin and I had to go out to a bunch of people and say

1 (43m 54s):
trust us. In New Zealand and California wineries.

2 (43m 58s):
Yeah all over and it

1 (43m 60s):
was all going to be 70 on block. No.

2 (44m 2s):
No, this is for varieties. This is 70 en Blanc sparkling Brut Ros? a from New Zealand and then a Chardonnay and a red blend from Central Coast of California and just keep in mind that ninety ninety percent of the like 10,000 wineries in the United States make less than 5,000 cases a year. Wow, so so but this is

1 (44m 25s):
September so this is like the end of the Harvest Right in Cal heartedly it is it's right in his harvest in California. The Harvest in New Zealand is at the other side has a calendar right our spring. Yeah, and so you presumably you have to go to these wineries very quickly and find the the wine the Blends and make this wine and convince them to make this for you and

2 (44m 49s):
fast. Yeah, so we had to wait so we had to find what we call components. It's so we had to identify, you know wine that was already made find these components that fit. Our quality standards will end up all of these wines the same time negotiating contracts with Growers for the car, but the coming three

1 (45m 11s):
vintages. Yeah and basically saying to

2 (45m 14s):
these people we don't have any money, but we

1 (45m 17s):
promise that will like to pay you when we get paid and quite

2 (45m 20s):
honestly it was even more complex because we did some of We did have to go to the Nerds and find grapes

1 (45m 29s):
that were available.

2 (45m 30s):
And then we also needed to find a facility where we could make our

1 (45m 33s):
wines and we also needed to get licensed to do so and then we also needed to

2 (45m 39s):
get our when our domestic wine making team together. We needed to get our compliance and our operations and distribution team together. We had to get National Distribution ourselves. Like there was an informatics

1 (45m 51s):
months to do all this. I mean we had to do that really

2 (45m 53s):
unlike. 90 days

1 (45m 56s):
sounds absolutely terrifying exciting exciting. Yes. It was very exciting thrilling presumably your computer at this point. Like most of them want those grapes are spoken for most of those wine facilities are already they've already got contracts. You have finesse. Yeah, but you had I mean you had of course some relationships already and we don't listen, California and Did you have to beg and plead with some of these people?

2 (46m 23s):
Yeah, absolutely. But at this point, you know, we had a history. We did have a name for ourselves. We had a track record of success and we did have you know, the largest seller of wine at grocery in the United States saying, you know, we want to bring in your product. So that went a long way. Did you make the deadline?

1 (46m 46s):
Yeah, you did so by March of 2017 you were shipping. These were being shipped to Kroger. Was on the shelves we started shipping in

2 (46m 53s):
January. We started shipping January and February and it was on the shelf across the country by the beginning of March. I will say though. I think I lost like 40 pounds or

1 (47m 2s):
30 30. No, literally, I did crazy right? I lost some hair. I lost like 40 pounds, but we made

2 (47m 10s):
it happen. And so

1 (47m 12s):
did you how did you get get the word out was have the word get out about the y&z Kroger. Did they do demos today promote

2 (47m 18s):
it I think you know by this time. All of our packaging even though it's like very simple we know how most 99 percent of consumers label shop, you know, and so we were really very like very

1 (47m 34s):
particular

2 (47m 35s):
about building in these quality cues that we knew that if the people didn't know anything about us.

1 (47m 42s):
We knew that our price point was right when you that the packaging the

2 (47m 45s):
quality was right. We the varietals we chose a very specific to popular.

1 (47m 51s):
Else from the regions that we grew up and that would carry us a really long way. What are the labels look like? We created a family

2 (47m 59s):
crest, of

1 (48m 1s):
course because why not and so them it registers Crest is the combination primarily of of two animals at the top is a peacock. And so this peacock is

2 (48m 15s):
representative of our father because he definitely was the cocky gentlemen

1 (48m 22s):
and then the peacock is sitting

2 (48m 24s):
on the two letters Ms. Which is obviously for the McBride sisters and then on either sides of the MSR two lionesses in those lionesses are representative of either of our mothers

1 (48m 37s):
because they were Fearless, you know,

2 (48m 40s):
they ran the pride that are out working there out bringing home the bacon, you know taking care of the kids. And so we made our own family crest and we created Is Kristen

1 (48m 52s):
2005 with the

2 (48m 53s):
dream, you know over going to have a winery one day and so it wasn't just created and 17, you know, it was it was created back

1 (49m 2s):
then and this was the first time you could use it on the bottles. Yeah, how did the wind do at Kroger

2 (49m 8s):
exceptionally? Well, so in terms of being a new brand like into the stores we were the number the number one new brand and there's doors, you know at the end of 2017. Well

1 (49m 20s):
2018. Dean also a turning point, I guess you were from what I've read. You were invited to sponsor to be the wind sponsor for the Essence Festival, which is a cultural and music festival in New Orleans. And you decided to produce a wine that is now one of your most famous wines called black girl magic. Yes. Tell me a story about about that idea and how that came about.

2 (49m 42s):
Yeah, so we got invited to host the opening party for Essence Festival and every year you have 1 million black woman descend on New Orleans over a three-day period and during the day, you know, it's this empowerment sort of daytime conference and at night a music festival with Headliners like Beyonce and Janet Jackson and that year there was just so much black girl magic going on from women becoming judges to from a sports standpoint from you know, winning Awards and entertainment. The that it seems really obvious the best way to capture an honor.

2 (50m 26s):
Not only what was going on in the moment. But paying homage to all of the women that have paved the way for us to get to where we are today.

1 (50m 35s):
Yeah, it felt

2 (50m 36s):
like blackroll Magic by the McBride sisters would be something nice and

1 (50m 42s):
festive sort of to

2 (50m 43s):
capture the moment and then we decided that we wanted to make a Riesling. That was the Great Recession. Feelings of the world come from Germany and also from the else's research region in France. And so we were trying to bring our new world expression

1 (51m 0s):
of this and really elevating

2 (51m 2s):
and creating a very really super high quality off dry Riesling and we went to Essence Festival and you know, we were sitting up for the event and putting the wines out and it was just mind-boggling like we've never in our lives had people react to Wine

1 (51m 22s):
label little on the wine like we did it Essence Festival

2 (51m 27s):
in rub it and I just looked at each other and were like, whoa, you're like, oh

1 (51m 33s):
we probably should have made more probably should have had more and let's make this into

2 (51m 37s):
a ring. Yeah and most importantly I think unfortunately the wine industry has this really ignored black people when it comes to wine and so really we feel Feel like black crow magic is something a term obviously Robert and I don't own, you know, we are stewards of this Brands. Yeah in your free time. There's like a moment for black woman in which they can celebrate whether that's

1 (52m 8s):
you know, you got a

2 (52m 9s):
promotion you had a baby. You became a judge to become a ballerina like whatever it is like we just wanted to be able to be

1 (52m 17s):
there to

2 (52m 18s):
celebrate with her. What does

1 (52m 21s):
Like beautiful high

2 (52m 22s):
quality wines. Yeah you so you you're in retailers

1 (52m 28s):
and you've got your finally got your own label and then 2020 the year of crises and misery for so many of us pandemic. It's and that's the first challenge of this year where you guys worried that

2 (52m 45s):
your business would be here. Absolutely. We were very worried and we said really really quick measures everything that we could think of to secure our business to secure, you know to make sure that we didn't have to let go of the staff. We just reduce expenses. We buckled down, you know right away over the weekend because it was just too to unknown and did you see an instant drop in business and revenue? No, no for us because grocery has always been such an important channel to us. Our business wasn't significantly. Affected as other wineries. Unfortunately that you know, like 5,000 cases or less.

2 (53m 28s):
They're heavily dependent on the Cellar Door. And so one of the things that that Robert and I doubled down on at the end of 2019 was really putting together our e-commerce platform and really heavily investing into it with the goal strategically of slowly building it

1 (53m 47s):
direct to Consumer model. Yeah.

2 (53m 49s):
Yeah selling through our website.

1 (53m 51s):
Right not knowing that there would be a pandemic and you were just duress assuming I just I guess assuming that this is this will be a small part of your business this direct

2 (53m 59s):
model. Yeah, we thought that we were just laying the foundation that we were starting to put the frame work together to over time develop that sector of our business and then of course come the pandemic we were kind of like to our team who has started that work. We were like guess what it's go time. This is now the company's main focus. And then also coincided with our children. So with Robins daughter, who's who's the oldest we always said if you want to join the family business that's contingent on you need to go out and work somewhere else and identify of weight that we have that we don't do well and then come back and interview for a position and come and fill that void.

2 (54m 50s):
And make the company greater well and she got her degree and Communications and digital marketing and she went out and she worked

1 (55m 0s):
for digital marketing agencies

2 (55m 3s):
for two or three years. And then

1 (55m 6s):
finally, she said that she thinks she's ready

2 (55m 8s):
because you know, like Andrea said we were always like when you have something that you can add to the

1 (55m 12s):
company let us know so she felt she had enough expertise and here you are in the midst of a crisis where digital marketing skills are pretty Be crucial pretty critical

2 (55m 23s):
and I can tell you we would enter mean we had like a shopping cart, you know in an online platform with some wine for sale and I didn't even really pay attention to the revenue. I know that sounds awful. But you know, maybe it would do like $5,000 a week. I just you know, it was such a small number in comparison

1 (55m 41s):
thing minimal to our wholesale business and then she tells us she's

2 (55m 44s):
like I'm going to come in. I'm going to put together a strategy and then I'm going to execute on the strategy. And she's like and you Auntie and you mummy, you know,

1 (55m 56s):
just need to like let me do my thing.

2 (55m 59s):
I think I'm going to be able to deliver the results in the return on investment that the company needs and so, you know, of course for just like

1 (56m 7s):
okay. I was like, I doubt that

2 (56m 10s):
we'll see, you know, and then really from the time from the first week that the plan was in place. She took you know that revenue from thousand to like 30,000 and I was like, well I was like, whoa,

1 (56m 24s):
hold on

2 (56m 26s):
100,000 to 200,000 and and and and this

1 (56m 31s):
is like getting the word out through like Instagram and Facebook ads and digital ads and things like that. Exactly. Okay. So you've got this direct to Consumer model. We're all on this covid pandemic you you know, you are now finally reaching the customers that you felt were under surveillance. For so long and then we get to May June of 2020 and massive demonstrations against racial Injustice in America, the biggest demonstrations in the generation in the United States and you are I mean, you're black-owned winemaker, that's right.

1 (57m 13s):
And on top of this contending with the challenges of the pandemic your now contending with the emotional challenges of watching this all over the country.

2 (57m 23s):
Hmm. Yeah. It was I think originally it was like here we go again and feeling like exhausted and defeated and in one of those moments where I think for myself, you know, I'm the biggest Optimist in the world, but really in that moment just feeling like we go from here and I think I think you know, we had this opportunity for a light to be shown on black business owners with black out Tuesday and one of the things Robin and I had been working on since January was at National Grocery where the only a lot of the times were the only black owned company were almost time for the only woman owned company and one of the things that we were working on was You know, we shouldn't be the only one and so we started to kind of look around and think about how can we help other people get here as well and then we serve to try and figure out like is there a is there a list like is there a list of black Vintners, you know and

1 (58m 30s):
and we're talk about black fenders were obviously we're talking about not just the United States but in

2 (58m 33s):
France in South Africa, you know, you know wherever and we couldn't really find a really good comprehensive list that we started putting together a list. And then that night that we found out about what Tuesday, you know, we called everybody in the company and we said, you know instead of just talking about ourselves tomorrow. Let's Shine the Light on, you know black vent this list that we have like 6767 black fit nerves that we could find, you know, and the world like let's publish this list and shine a light on our community and I think at the time maybe we had 35,000 people on our Instagram we Had like thirty thousand likes on this post and it had

1 (59m 16s):
been re-shared like can't even tell you

2 (59m 20s):
how many times but most importantly a large percentage of the Vintners that we talked to were sold out of there in stages

1 (59m 30s):
and it just showcase for us

2 (59m 32s):
like the power of our community and I think the first time this like the power is really with us and our community the strength of community is so

1 (59m 41s):
important. You know, I'm right at this moment where we're talking your you cannot buy black all magic. It is sold out in this sister those responsible for making things happen in a timely fashion and actually bottling more today and for the next couple of weeks so we will have some available for everyone very soon. But it's a it's a sign that suggests that you saw a spike in your business. Oh significant

2 (1h 0m 9s):
significant and and my alone we gained 8,000 new points of distribution. Yeah, you know these places where you wouldn't expect to see wine being sold and differently at the price point and which black girl magic is. It's not so, you know, we have an awesome 7-Eleven and takes us that she was selling 3,000 bottles every three days or for the over the weekends.

1 (1h 0m 43s):
For a

2 (1h 0m 43s):
$24 a bottle of wine from 7-Eleven. She owns a 7-Eleven. That's insane.

1 (1h 0m 48s):
I mean, I know that and I know that you guys, you know, don't talk about your financials and and I totally respect that but is it fair to say you're selling many hundreds of thousands of cases of wine a year or you're on track to do that? That's how you

2 (1h 1m 2s):
fare. Yeah, that's accurate. I mean You have you guys have been

1 (1h 1m 8s):
grinding at this for 15 years? Yeah, right mean lot longer than that but really for 15 years. It's been a long journey and you're now a significant player in the wine business in

2 (1h 1m 25s):
America is correct.

1 (1h 1m 28s):
I know that throughout this interview, there are moments where he said, yeah, we made it, you know, and it was your kind of joking about it a little bit. But yeah, can you say that now do you feel comfortable? You're saying

2 (1h 1m 37s):
that I think honestly the same optimism that we started out with a we had a pallet of wine is very much. What drives us today at the same time. We feel that we have a long way to go. You know, I think some people might give themselves a goal of a certain, you know number of cases or a certain, you know dollar Revenue, but Andre and I we dream really bad and we always have is

1 (1h 2m 6s):
your ultimate goal. All to to have your own Vineyards in your own grapes in your own production facility

2 (1h 2m 11s):
has yep, one of that one of the things that we were we were looking at at the beginning of this year and last year is but still having a place for people to come and gather like a Tasting Room. Yeah, absolutely and to experience wine wine making Vineyards wine, you know lifestyle culture all of those things. You need to have a welcoming place for people to come and spend that kind of time.

1 (1h 2m 37s):
So that is part of the hope and dream to find a plot of land or you could have some Vineyards and a tasting room and a place where people can see how the wine is made. Yeah, and also a

2 (1h 2m 47s):
training places. Well, so if you're after a woman if you're a person of color this interested in the great growing when making or on the ownership side of the wine industry, this would be a place where you can come and feel welcome. Yeah, so it's like we would love to see more women as head winemakers. We would love to See more women that are the head of like viticulture and grape growing and then on the business of wine executive leadership at Distributors, making the purchasing decisions at retailers, you know, all throughout the business. So here's

1 (1h 3m 26s):
something that is going to happen in my experience on the show interviewing hundreds of entrepreneurs has different stories. You have already been or you will be at some point approached by a big company that wants to buy you because you are in a very very desirable market and growing very fast. And you've got a really strong brand. Is there a world where you could see an exit like that?

2 (1h 3m 59s):
I can't cool that like in this moment. I'm very attached to my name. I think I can never sit like no one's ever come to me and rub it and said here's a

1 (1h 4m 12s):
check for 500 million dollars. We don't know what that feels like, but I mean that could have happened. You know, I can't

2 (1h 4m 19s):
honestly sit here and say to you knowing that that's intergenerational wealth knowing

1 (1h 4m 25s):
just the basic

2 (1h 4m 27s):
principles of compounding interest at a very low interest

1 (1h 4m 30s):
rate of what that will do for the legacy

2 (1h 4m 33s):
of our children. Our grandchildren are great great great and also known tropically for the community that we want to

1 (1h 4m 40s):
support you can't rule that out. Yeah count it out. But I think that we can probably safely say well, I think it's hard for us to

2 (1h 4m 47s):
Envision one because or our personal name is not for sale. So that's that's a little tricky but also the brands that we create, you know, each of those brands has a very powerful message behind them and like Andre because if you don't that don't belong the tongue belong to Necessarily we see ourselves as the stewards of the purpose behind them. So if you know any exit or any acquisition, you know, there would have to be some very stringent stringent agreements behind that. I don't know that we can really think of any large wine companies that would be you know in a position to acquire what we think those are worth that would be able to uphold the mission behind each of those Brands not saying it would never would happen, but I would I would probably say it would be now or anytime soon.

1 (1h 5m 40s):
I can't stop thinking about your dad and and what he would think about all this me how you got to this place?

2 (1h 5m 50s):
Yeah,

1 (1h 5m 51s):
because so much of the story is unbelievable. I mean, you didn't know the other sister existed and then you know, once you're both grown up you eventually meet and then you form this incredible Bond and now you've built this high. You successful brand. I just have to imagine that that your dad if he was sitting here right now.

2 (1h 6m 18s):
He would just be blown away. Well quite quite honestly and now I'm speaking as a sister who never actually got to know him at all. But from what I know of him. I don't think that he would have expected anything less from us. I think that he also dreamed very big, you know, he came from a very very small. And I say small

1 (1h 6m 39s):
like 500 people or something and

2 (1h 6m 42s):
Country Town and Alabama, you know moved himself to Hollywood and became a part of that scene and actor and you know and everything that was kind of wild going on in Hollywood in the 70s and 80s and you know, my my understanding of him in my interpretation of him is that you know sky's the limit like you can and should do, you know, whatever you set your mind to so in my mind and I thought about that. For my mind, I think I don't think you'd be surprised. I

1 (1h 7m 12s):
think that if he was in our lives,

2 (1h 7m 13s):
he would have expected that we've done at least what we've done. Yeah, and I

1 (1h 7m 16s):
think I think the context of

2 (1h 7m 21s):
our family has family of his generation, you know, Camden, Alabama, you know, our grandparents are aunties and uncles are father picked cotton their sharecroppers, you know, and I know in their lifetime, Never thought that they would see a black president. I know that so like Robin said I think you know, he dreams really big expected this of us, but I think the expectation also comes from all of our family in terms of what they did during the 60s and the 50s and love the things that they fought for so that Robin and I could do what we do today.

1 (1h 8m 8s):
They must be so proud of you trust us

2 (1h 8m 10s):
Auntie. Anyway is very proud. You can't go to her house without her

1 (1h 8m 14s):
pulling out a magazine and telling you well, let me tell you anybody who listens you're not

2 (1h 8m 19s):
challenged her about her nieces, but it is very true in our you know, our aunts and uncle are dad was the youngest of like 12, I think so it's a very very long Generations, you know, they grew up in rural Alabama just outside of summer. So, you know, they did they walked, you know, the Edmund Pettus Bridge they weren't Often the Civil Rights, you know demonstrations and movements and we're not unaware of how close we are, you know, and how our roots are so intertwined with, you know, all of this this history and that we're not far from where I live it started. So and we're and we're in agriculture

1 (1h 8m 59s):
or back in agriculture. Like the history of

2 (1h 9m 2s):
black people in America is grounded in in agriculture. Andre and I actually have a photo where able to go and visit the plantation house where our great-grandparents were enslaved and where our father was born in the back and they're in the small house in the back and I think that you know, like his journey in life to move on from a lot of that difficult history was for the purpose of of his children and Andre and I being able to do something like exactly what we're

1 (1h 9m 35s):
doing. How much of this story and the success of this business do you attribute to just your hard work and your intelligence and how much do you think has to do with luck first to you Robin?

2 (1h 9m 48s):
I would say 99% of it is our hard work and intelligence and then there's a small percentage that I think is what people might refer to as luck.

1 (1h 9m 58s):
But I really think it is your ability to recognize opportunity and take

2 (1h 10m 3s):
advantage of it same thing. I feel like it's Hustle, it's hard work but it's smart hard work and it's being able to identify opportunities when other people don't or maybe can't

1 (1h 10m 19s):
see those opportunities. Yes yet. Yeah, and then I think in

2 (1h 10m 23s):
terms of luck, I don't know if I believe in and

1 (1h 10m 27s):
luck. I think I think

2 (1h 10m 29s):
you you prepare yourself you're ready and then if an opportunity

1 (1h 10m 36s):
presents It sounds and you're the right person the right place the right time. Stay ready. Yeah, stay ready. That's a tray of a bride John and her sister Robin the bride by the way, in addition to the McBride sisters collection and black girl magic brand Robin and Andrea has launched a third brand. It's a collection of fork and whines arose a sauvignon blanc and a couple of spritzers. It's called she can and some of the money from sales goes back to a scholarship program for small businesses. Owned by black women Robin and Andreas a two of those wines are dedicated to their mothers and the other two to their daughters.

1 (1h 11m 25s):
Thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcast. If you want to write to us our email addresses HIV T at npr.org you want to follow us on Twitter or at how I built this or at guy Roz and on Instagram. It's at guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by Rachel Falkner with music composed by rumty. Narrow Bluey. Thanks also to Liz Metzger Gareth Gales JC Howard, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Sarah Safari, I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this.

1 (1h 12m 10s):
This is NPR. Voting is proof, and I don't give a damn Miss representative

2 (1h 12m 32s):
democracy a new series about voting in America from NPR's through line. Listen now.