Planet Money (0s):
Sometimes the economy can be a scary place. The market's down further right now, Skyrocketing constantly. That is where planet money. Summer school comes in. We are tackling the big questions every Wednesday, till labor day on the planet money podcast from NPR,

AT&T (19s):
When building a business, there are tons of moving parts. One that's often overlooked is having the right network, thankfully with at T and T business, you can pick the best wireless plan for your small business and offer your employees the features they need. Plus the best at and T business plans include nationwide 5g. Wherever business takes you@andtbusinesshasthefeaturesyouneedvisitatt.com slash B I Z U Y w. 5g requires a compatible plan and device 5g may not be available in your area. Visit att.com/5g for you for more details.

2 (53s):
Hey, it's guy here and just a couple of things before we get to the show today. First, I've got something very cool to share with you all after months of hard work and even some electronic sweat and tears. I can finally say the, how I built this shop is now open. Check out this curated collection of products for every idealist and innovator out there. In fact, I'm holding my, how I built this travel mug. As we speak, you can get your own@wonderyshop.com where you'll also find t-shirts and hats and notebooks, and a bunch of cool how I built this stuff. So if you are a supporter of the show, if you love the show or, you know, somebody who does check it out, wondering shop.com to find all of your, how I built this gear.

2 (1m 37s):
And later this week on how I built this lab, we'll be talking to the founders of board API club. You might know them from their collection of NFTs, worth millions of dollars. The company that they built to make those NFTs Hugo labs is now valued at over $4 billion. You'll hear the founders talk about how they built that company, the art, the allure, and the culture of NFTs, which people spent more than $22 billion on in the last year alone. So look for that later this week, and for today's show, we're sharing an episode from April of 2019 with a guest who has an amazing story and a truly amazing voice enjoy.

4 (2m 23s):
I knew that something wasn't right. And the next day they said that by unanimous consent, they decided to replace me and George we've put your furniture in storage. And I remember thinking my furniture and my knick-knacks 40 years of stuff that I had accumulated in 50 cartons were put in storage. And in the moment it felt like, well, damn, if all these people who are my friends don't want me as their leader anymore, then why do I want to be their leader?

2 (3m 7s):
Welcome to how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Ross and on today's show how George simmer turned discount suits into a multi-billion dollar empire called men's warehouse and the bitter battle that forced him to give it up. So in retail fashion, there are three main categories of customers. And obviously this is a slight oversimplification, but it goes a little like this.

2 (3m 47s):
There are products for the top end of the market. So think like a Birkin bag by air mass. It costs around $20,000 in air maze knows it's only going to sell a small number of them a year. You sell 500 Birkin bags a year, that's $10 million in revenue. And then there's the lower end. So old Navy, for example, a huge number of consumers can afford to buy their clothes. And so they sell a lot of stuff. T-shirts jeans, button downs for like 20 or 30 bucks a piece, and there a clear strategy with each approach, but where fashion brands can really hit the big time is in the middle range. So imagine a Venn diagram of a person who might pop into J crew or mainwell now and again, but also pick a few things up at target that is the customer.

2 (4m 36s):
Most fashion brands are hoping to attract the value shopper. Who's also discerning. And while this all might sound intuitive and obvious that wasn't always the case. If you wanted a suit, for example, in the 1960s or seventies, you had to shell out a lot of cash or settle for something that looked and felt well cheap. And this was the insight George simmer had back in the early seventies, when he was a young suit salesman, a good suit was out of range for a lot of men. And by the way, George also thought with some justification that men generally hated shopping for clothes. And when they did, they wanted to do it once, maybe twice in a year.

2 (5m 19s):
So what if there were a place that solved this problem, a place where you could get a pretty solid suit at a good price, but also a place that made it super easy to get in and out fast, a place where while you were trying on your suit, the sales person would come back to the dressing room with a stack of handpicked button-downs ties, socks, and shoes to go with that suit and a place that would do all the alterations on site. This was the idea behind men's warehouse. And what started out as a single shop in Houston would eventually turned into a multi-billion dollar clothing with hundreds of stores across the U S George became the face of that empire.

2 (6m 3s):
You probably remember those commercials of him back in the day, George would look at the camera and say, you'll like the way you look. I guarantee it. But over time, his personality, his charisma, his vision, it created tension with the management and with the board. And as you will hear, they threw him out and it was ugly, but we'll get there. George Zimmer grew up in Scarsdale in New York. His dad worked for a discount men's clothing company called Robert Hall. So obviously that had a huge influence on George, but it was his mom who really played an out-sized role in his early life.

4 (6m 42s):
My mother was a truly remarkable woman and she had both amazing strengths and qualities that made us all proud. And then she had her own demons. Many of them connected to having been an orphan, which does carry its own baggage. But what she did for me, which is something that I didn't appreciate when she was alive, but what she instilled in me was this notion that I was a special boy and I would be able to do anything I chose to do in life.

4 (7m 27s):
And I must say I've been a legend in my own mind for decades. And as I think we all know now confidence is a positive quality.

2 (7m 40s):
And I mean, you say your mom instilled this idea in you that you were special. Did you feel that when you were a kid, was it something that, because she said it, you started to believe that

4 (7m 51s):
The truth is that I did not, but I think that because of her consistency in the way she handled this issue, that it did enter my subconscious. And by the time I got to college and certainly after college, I felt very confident about almost anything I tried.

2 (8m 14s):
So you, in 1966, he go off to college, to Washington university in St. Louis. What do you remember about Washington university at the time? I mean, this is like the height of the free speech movement at Berkeley and student activism and the antiwar movement. And what was it like at wash U?

4 (8m 35s):
Well, it was fantastic. I've often felt that the time that you spend in college, if you're fortunate enough can be the most positive years of your life. For me, I went to college as a sheltered young boy from New York. And because of what was going on in the streets, I became much more politically aware and sophisticated,

2 (9m 9s):
So, okay. So you're at wash U studying economics, I think. Right? Right. And meantime, back in Scarsdale, your dad's business, making clothing, how was it doing?

4 (9m 22s):
Well when I went to college, his business was in its ascendancy, but he never really mastered the art of making a profit in business. Although he did make small profits, he never really, in my opinion, took advantage of what he might have been able to achieve.

2 (9m 45s):
What was, what was your dad making? What, what kind of clothes was he making?

4 (9m 49s):
Inexpensive boys' outerwear, like what we called snorkel jackets out here. They would be called ski jackets, nylon shells. He also made more of an upscale boys raincoat. And when John, John Kennedy was standing at his father's funeral in that famous photo, solutes, he's wearing my father's raincoat.

2 (10m 18s):
Wow. Amazing. I mean, anyone listening can picture that image. That's right. Presumably he was manufacturing all this in and around Scarsdale. This is like the pre make your stuff in China, Europe.

4 (10m 31s):
Right? Well, he ended up asking me in late 71, since I had not gotten a job of any note, I was substitute teaching. And my father, I think recognizing his son was in danger of drifting away to become a permanent hippie said to me why don't the two of us go to Asia because he wanted to look into manufacturing there instead of the greater New York area. And when I came back to New York to make that trip, he informed me that something had come up and he couldn't do it, but he wanted me to go in his stead, which I did.

4 (11m 20s):
And really that's the beginning of my business experience.

2 (11m 25s):
So 1971, he says, Hey, I want to think about making my stuff in Asia. Can you go there? Where did you fly to?

4 (11m 34s):
Well, I flew to Osaka was my first stop. And we get to what was known as Idlewild airport back then,

2 (11m 43s):
JFK. Right?

4 (11m 44s):
It was called Idlewild then. And it was Pan-Am one flying from New York through Fairbank's Alaska to Tokyo. And then I was switching and flying down to Osaka.

2 (12m 1s):
All right. So you fly, you get to Osaka by the way. What are you, I mean, are you, you're 23 years old and where you like a presentable where you, you know,

4 (12m 13s):
I was presented BL I told my father when he told me he wasn't making the trip, that I didn't really understand his business well enough to do this on my own at which he said, George, they're going to love you in Asia because you're my eldest child, your number one son. And they're going to love the fact that you're doing this because I can't. So I would get up every morning at about five o'clock in the morning and start studying, because I literally didn't know much about the manufacturing of clothing.

4 (12m 53s):
And I would study from usually five to eight, including going to the breakfast restaurant in the hotels, which were quite glamorous. And he was right. A lot of people were very excited to talk to the number one son who had made such a long trip because his father could make it.

2 (13m 19s):
And you were there on a fact finding mission, right? You were looking for potential factories to work with. Yeah.

4 (13m 25s):
My job was to find factories, give them samples to make right. And then send them back to New York and be sort of the middleman, got any, he was making the decisions. Of course it was always about negotiating a price, the exact fabric. And I lived there for about six months. Oh wow. I ended up settling in Hong Kong.

2 (13m 53s):
So did you find a factory that you decided this is the one that's going to work?

4 (13m 58s):
No, I did not. I found many factories that made samples, which I do to flee sent back to New York, but we didn't find any factory that we could make a deal with. And so after about six months I came home and when I got back to New York, it was the 72 presidential election. And I actually got a job in the McGovern campaign, working in Chicago in the summer of 72 in charge of what was called grassroots fundraising.

4 (14m 38s):
And I remember I moved to Texas on election day, 1972, why my father offered me a job in Dallas wrapping his line in Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana.

2 (14m 54s):
So you get back to the U S you work on the McGovern campaign for a brief stint. And then your dad sends you to Dallas to represent him and his clothing company. Why Dallas? What? I mean,

4 (15m 9s):
The, the rappy had there had quit.

2 (15m 12s):
So he had reps all over the country and they were what they would, what would they do go to department stores or stores?

4 (15m 18s):
The department stores, specialty stores. By this time he had a thriving business and he was doing well. And I thought it was an opportunity to continue my apparel career. And I liked living in Dallas. It was, it was fun.

2 (15m 38s):
So you moved to Dallas in 72 and what you start going, make an appointments and try to say, Hey, you know, we were making these raincoats or these jackets. And, you know,

4 (15m 50s):
For six months I traveled the territory, Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana, and the largest account in my territory was in Houston, which is where I ultimately started men's warehouse.

2 (16m 5s):
What was the account

4 (16m 5s):
Called Foleys? It was a, a federated department store. And I went in and sold the boys buyer, some sport coats that were not in my opinion, the correct sport coats, he should have bought, but I was too new in the job to speak up and let him make the order because it was an order. And then when they didn't sell, he told me that he knew my father was the owner, and he'd like to return the coats. And I said, well, we don't take anything back. And he reminded me that I could pick up the phone and call my father and get it done, which I did.

4 (16m 53s):
And we took back about 400 sport codes. And he'd promised that he would give me a large order going forward. And when I came in to get that order, a few months later informed me that they were dropping me. So I had about a five-hour drive from Houston back to Dallas. And I decided that day didn't really understand how to retail apparel, not only in Foleys, but throughout my territory. I didn't think that they understood the idea of discounting, which was really more in the Northeast and to some degree in Chicago, but had not gotten into the south.

4 (17m 40s):
And so I had decided to relocate from Dallas to Houston and open the first men's warehouse.

2 (17m 49s):
Oh, let me, let me wind this back a little bit. Yeah. Cause it can't have been that quick or maybe it was, I I'm trying to, I mean, you are your dad's rep in Dallas

4 (17m 59s):
For six

2 (17m 59s):
Months, for six months and you lose an account. And at some point you say, you know what, I want to open up my own place. How, how did that happen? How did that idea even come to you

4 (18m 14s):
Tell you that the having been a student activist in college and having been somebody that did not believe that capitalism was the end all be all to what we needed. I did not light BI idea of having to execute, not just my father, but the sales manager's vision. And so the reason I, the primary reason I opened men's warehouse was that, that it was a way for me to become my own boss and create my own destiny, follow my dreams.

2 (19m 4s):
Okay. So you are roughly 25 and what was her younger. Okay. And before you even opened up men's warehouse, what was your idea? Why did you think that suits was the right thing to get into? Well,

4 (19m 17s):
Suits was what I knew, but

2 (19m 19s):
How was it that you knew suits? I mean, was, cause I, my understanding is that your dad's primary business was making clothing for boys.

4 (19m 27s):
It, he had expanded so that his product assortments were outerwear, like snorkel jackets, these raincoats that had zip out linings that were fairly upscale. And then he started a line of inexpensive suits and sport coats.

2 (19m 48s):
Right. And did you wear suits yourself

4 (19m 51s):
By almost never wore a suit until I went to Hong Kong.

2 (19m 56s):
And why don't you think that Houston was the place to go? Yeah,

4 (19m 60s):
Well, I was living in Dallas and going to Euston every month. And the way I explain this is that Dallas was old money. Houston was new money. So that for a young upstart, like myself, trying to create a business, the chances were much greater in Houston. And in fact, since I didn't really know anything about the retail business, when I opened men's warehouse, the only reason that I was able to make it was because the city's growth was so extraordinary that it covered up for what I didn't understand.

2 (20m 42s):
Okay. So you decide you are going to open up a, that sells discount suits in Houston in 1973. Did you start the company by yourself or did you do it with somebody else?

4 (20m 57s):
Well, no. I, the way I started it was Harry Levy had been my fraternity brother and was from Dallas and I called them up and said, would you like to move to Euston and do this with me? And he said, well, what's in it for me. And I said, well, I gave you a third of the company for three grants.

2 (21m 21s):
Nice. And how did you guys get the money to open that first store?

4 (21m 25s):
So I got my inventory from my father. He became my financial partner

2 (21m 31s):
And the inventory wasn't suits. It was just slacks and shirts and jackets.

4 (21m 36s):
That's right. And the way that worked was that I had only $7,000 when this all began. And that basically went to first and last month's rent. So there was really no money as the company got ready to open. My father sent us several thousand suits and sport coats and slacks as well as 80 raw steel rolling racks, which is what we used for a store fixtures. And the first store.

2 (22m 15s):
How big was that place?

4 (22m 16s):
It was 6,000 feet.

2 (22m 18s):
Big place. Yes. Rent in Houston was a cheap,

4 (22m 21s):
Well, it was a 3,500 a month.

2 (22m 24s):
Got it. All right. So 1973, you and Harry opened the store. Men's warehouse had to go.

4 (22m 30s):
Well, I remember the first Saturday we were open for business. We ran an ad in the Houston Chronicle and in the Houston post, we were selling sport coats for $25 slacks for $10 and did not carry suits or shirts or ties or F tailoring. In fact, our first cash register was a mechanical, old style NCR that you would push the buttons and it would come up in the window, no sale. I mean, that was how we started.

2 (23m 11s):
And w was it a hit right away?

4 (23m 14s):
Well, we did 3000 the first Saturday, and then Monday we did $60. And so I would not say it was a success right away.

2 (23m 26s):
Wow. Where are you guys freaking out about that Monday?

4 (23m 28s):
No, because my mother had always promised me that these things would work.

2 (23m 36s):
So you, you guys are running this place and it doesn't sound like it was pro. I mean, aside from that first day, it doesn't sound like you guys were really the bank, you know, doing, you know, just crushing it. And those first two years,

4 (23m 51s):
We weren't, we lost money and each of the first two years, and then we opened a second and a third store in Houston.

2 (23m 60s):
But how, why explain this to me, you're losing money on the first store, but she go and you decide to open a second and a third store thinking that those will help you make more money.

4 (24m 13s):
The marketing expenses in a major urban area are so high. You can't really run a single location. You need multiple locations.

2 (24m 25s):
Did you expand into jackets and ties and suits and belts and things like that.

4 (24m 31s):
We started to get into a broader product assortment in the mid to late seventies. We first went right to suits and we had a salesperson. He was the EVP for art Shafter, and Mark's based in Chicago.

2 (24m 50s):
That was a, what

4 (24m 51s):
They were America's largest clothing manufacturer. And he came to see us. And I said to him, they had the line Nino Cerruti. And I said, we'd like to buy that line from you. And he said, forget about it. I sell Foley's I sell. And I said, well, let me tell you the whole story. We want to buy the line without the label, but we want a 20% discount.

2 (25m 22s):
So it'd be a white labeled men's warehouse, Nino Cerruti suit. But you would put your label on it. Correct. And he said,

4 (25m 29s):
He said, why would I do that? And I said, you know, Kenny, why don't we play a game of a basketball? And if I can beat you, you'll give me that deal. And if you be me, I won't bother you again. The rest is

2 (25m 46s):
History. You beat him in the game.

4 (25m 48s):
I beat him. And we got Nino's Rudy suits, white labeled, but at a 20% purchase discount, which enabled us to sell them moderately profitably at 1 99, when everybody else in America was selling them at 2 99, that was the essence of the business.

2 (26m 13s):
So I guess it was a way for our chapter and Marsha or any of the clothing manufacturers to sell more of their suits if they white labeled them, even if they were selling at a lower price.

4 (26m 23s):
Exactly.

2 (26m 25s):
When did you first expand outside of Houston?

4 (26m 29s):
In 1980, I came out to the bay area on a vacation and we were planning on opening up in Dallas as our next market. And I walk into a, either ruse Atkins or some other bay area store

2 (26m 48s):
Department store.

4 (26m 49s):
No, it was a

2 (26m 50s):
Men's

4 (26m 51s):
Clothing store and there was not a regular priced, a hundred percent wool suit for under $300. And we were selling a hundred percent wool suits for 1 99. So I went back to Euston and told my team that we could pick up Dallas later and we were going to go right to the bay area before things changed,

2 (27m 22s):
Where in the bay area.

4 (27m 24s):
So we started in the south bay. We opened in mountain view, San Jose, Fremont, and then we had one store up in Concord.

2 (27m 37s):
So this is in the early eighties. The tech boom is really just beginning. Presumably your customers were professional men.

4 (27m 47s):
Yes. Mostly professional men.

2 (27m 50s):
And you opened up there and what happened? Did people flock to it or, or was it kind of, again, you know, mixed results?

4 (27m 59s):
I would say mixed results. We were not really successful until the mid eighties, in my opinion,

2 (28m 8s):
What happens in the mid eighties to make men's warehouse really successful?

4 (28m 15s):
Well, we were put under duress, our bank in taxes called our loan. And so we were put in a difficult position.

2 (28m 27s):
They called your loan cause they were getting worried about, you

4 (28m 30s):
Know, it's in the early eighties, there was a general meltdown of all the banks in Texas and every bank, including our bank, which was the largest bank down there for city national, all of them were acquired by out of state banks. So we had to rethink our business model. So I looked at our inventory and by then it was on computer printouts. And I noticed that on about half of the inventory, there was a significant discrepancy between the ticketed price and the selling price,

2 (29m 14s):
Meaning, meaning what it was. The selling price was much lower than what the ticket price was.

4 (29m 19s):
Yes. Because of promotional activities.

2 (29m 23s):
In other words, you'd have a sale or

4 (29m 25s):
Correct.

2 (29m 26s):
And you had regular sales.

4 (29m 27s):
We did. So I made the decision to change the model and eliminate regular sales.

2 (29m 37s):
You, if you decide, we need to stop holding sales, lower our everyday prices and basically send out the message that we just w that we offer low everyday prices.

4 (29m 50s):
Exactly.

2 (29m 51s):
When you made the decision, did you have a year of slow sales, two years,

4 (29m 57s):
One year of slow sales?

2 (29m 59s):
I mean, it sounds like it was, you have a combination of a bank calling in your loan, really low margins. Sounds like this change in strategy was kind of a hail Mary.

4 (30m 11s):
Well, I think the toughest part of this was trying to persuade people that I knew what I was doing because they were questioning whether I knew what I was doing. But

2 (30m 23s):
How did you know that you knew what you were

4 (30m 24s):
Doing? I didn't. So to that degree, you could call it a hail Mary, but I had been in the retail business for a while by then. And I had instincts that this made sense. It made no sense to me, this constant barrage of sales. It was though everybody in retail thought that the American consumer was stupid. And actually they're not as stupid as those people thought.

2 (30m 60s):
When we come back in just a moment, George Zimmer's hail Mary paid off in a big way. And the origins of that iconic slogan,

4 (31m 8s):
You're going to like the way you look. I guarantee it

2 (31m 12s):
Stay with us.

4 (31m 12s):
I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this.

Notion (31m 24s):
Turning off work can mean turning on everything else in your life. Whether you're a busy parent, like me struggling your kid's activities, or maybe you're trying to plan a wedding work. Doesn't stop when you log off for the day. That's why notion makes it easy to toggle between your work and personal to do's notion is an all-in-one team collaboration tool that combines note-taking document sharing, wikis, project management, and more into one space that simple, powerful, and beautifully designed. Not only that, but notion can seamlessly transition from a workplace power tool into a game changer for your personal life. If you are dreaming, working, planning, or building at work or at home notion is the collaboration tool that you need. You can get started for free at notion.com/built that's notion.com/built to start for free that's notion.com/built to take the first step toward organized, productive work and life today

Audible (32m 30s):
I'm pretty busy. So I don't have a ton of time to do the things I want to do like reading, which is why I love audible audible, an incredible selection of audio books across every genre from best-sellers and new releases to mysteries and thrillers, wellness, and much more you'll discover exclusive audible originals from top celebrities, renowned experts and exciting new voices in audio right now while I'm cooking or doing other things I'm really enjoying. Listening to Michael Lewis is the coming storm. It's actually kind of terrifying, but it's amazing and brilliant. Let audible help you discover new ways to laugh. Be inspired or be entertained. New members can try it for free for 30 days. Visit audible.com/built or text B U I L T to 500, 500 that's audible.com/built or text built to 500, 500 to try audible free for 30 days, audible.com/built.

4 (33m 40s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this.

2 (33m 43s):
So it's 1986 and men's warehouse is trying to pull out of an economic slump. George Zimmer has just changed the business model to focus on everyday low prices and to get the message out. He decides to become the spokesperson, you know, the commercials

4 (33m 60s):
And his warehouse. You get all three service quality and a good price.

2 (34m 6s):
George standing in front of what looks like a classroom.

4 (34m 10s):
So what I did cause we had had training classes, which I would give a presentation to. I found I was very comfortable in those environments. So I said set up a fake training class and bring in three cameras and film me from different angles. And we will just bring in random office employees to ask me questions. I will answer them

2 (34m 38s):
Saying what

4 (34m 39s):
Saying that we've got rates suits and sport coats. Here's why and oh, by the way, they're priced. Right.

2 (34m 49s):
And why did you think that would be compelling? I mean, that sounds like the most boring, old commercial

4 (34m 54s):
And we'd come back to my mother's words. It never occurred to me. And I could say this about two dozen things in my life that most people would say, didn't it occur to you that that might not work. And I go quite frankly, not really.

2 (35m 19s):
So at what point did you utter the very famous phrase?

4 (35m 24s):
I think I uttered it in 86.

2 (35m 26s):
And how did that happen?

4 (35m 28s):
It happened as an ad-lib and as I was, ad-libbing the commercial, I'm having an inner dialogue with myself while I'm speaking. I didn't have much time since I was in a live recording. And all I could think of was I guarantee it. And the beauty of, I guarantee it was not so much the words, because the words are as hackneyed as you're going to find. But I, when I started walking around in my regular life, people were saying to me, Hey George, I guarantee it.

4 (36m 9s):
And I knew a that that was catching on, but I also have known something else, which is as long as people are calling me, George, I think the companies that I'm involved with will prosper. If they start to call me Mr. Zimmer, I'll be worried.

2 (36m 28s):
You essentially, almost overnight become like the mascot of men's warehouse.

4 (36m 34s):
I did. And it, it, the benefit is that when you are a spokesperson for your own business, of course you're doing it to affect the external world. You want more business, but what happens is that, and we were in a retail business with hundreds or thousands of employees. The workforce loves the fact that the boss is on TV.

2 (37m 3s):
I know,

4 (37m 4s):
I know

2 (37m 5s):
George George,

4 (37m 6s):
And it was a great part of the company culture.

2 (37m 11s):
So by the late eighties, you are still in Houston and the south bay.

4 (37m 15s):
No we're in, we have a 15 stores in the bay area. We're in Seattle, Portland, Dallas, Sacramento,

2 (37m 25s):
And Houston. And what I'm still trying to figure out is why didn't a bigger company, try and undercut you. I mean, clearly you've got this thing going where you're selling Nino Cerruti suits. People would find open secret that you were selling them for a hundred dollars, less than a branded Nino Cerruti suit without

4 (37m 42s):
The

2 (37m 42s):
Label, without the label. But if this was an open secret, why wouldn't some other company come in and like Macy's or some big company and try to do the same thing?

4 (37m 50s):
Well, I think that the answer is that many did, there were people that tried to mimic what we did, but you know, part of it is, and I'm very proud of this. I did all the training originally at mans. And I used to say to our employees, men look at going into a clothing store, like going to the dentist's office. So their wife says to them, I made you a dental appointment. And it's like the worst thing that the man can imagine. So they put off coming in to a clothing store until they can no longer differ in any longer.

4 (38m 34s):
And from that intuitive understanding, we developed what we called tshirt stacking so that when a man purchased a suit, while he was in the dressing room, we would put together shirts, pies, belts, shoes, everything that would make the outfit really jump. Then we would present it to the customer. And we were not in my mind pushy, but we were not passive salespeople either. And the result was that our customers thought we had great service because they perceive this as service.

4 (39m 15s):
And it drove a lot of revenue.

2 (39m 17s):
So basically men, the thinking was men don't want to spend a whole lot of time shopping. They're generally buying stuff when they have to, they're going to go in, they're going to try on the suit and the, and the pants. But while they're in the dressing room, we're going to bring them like a pink shirt and a blue shirt and a white shirt. And we're going to say, Hey, these look great with a suit. Here's some great ties. And, and they would say, thank you for making it easy for me. I'm going to buy it. I'll take it all. And they'd walk out.

4 (39m 41s):
Exactly.

2 (39m 42s):
Wow. So 1992, you guys go public. And I guess the IPO brings in a red, like $13 million.

4 (39m 50s):
That's correct.

2 (39m 51s):
I mean, it doesn't sound like a whole lot for an IPO.

4 (39m 55s):
Well, I was never trying to a mass, the greatest fortune that I could. And it turns out to have been, I think, a very good decision because although we had an IPO that only raised 13 million, we then add four or five secondaries. Each secondary was at a higher value,

2 (40m 21s):
Secondary

4 (40m 23s):
Stock offering. They're kind of like IPO's,

2 (40m 27s):
I think the 1990s really was when you blow up, right. You're riding a really strong economy. What else is going on? Why? I mean, cause you now are going to cities all across the United States, right? So what's going on that allows this expansion. Why are our consumer habits changing?

4 (40m 46s):
No, I mean, first of all, with the money that we got from the IPO and secondaries, we started opening 50 stores a year or a store every week. So if you can imagine each store costs about a million dollars in inventory. Wow.

2 (41m 7s):
In cities, all across the country,

4 (41m 9s):
Right? All 50 states,

2 (41m 11s):
You hit, I think a billion dollars in revenue in 98. And then in the early two thousands, the expansion continues 1999. You start to rent out tuxedos. How did that happen? Why and why?

4 (41m 25s):
So when we were at a training class, one of my regional managers had dinner with me and said, you know, Georgia, I went into a few tuxedo stores. He was in Seattle and he said, you know, this is exactly what we do. Fit people in clothing. Why don't we do this? I said, let's try. And he had 12 stores up there. And the first year we did $1 million,

2 (41m 54s):
Wait, hold on. He, he opened like a mini tuxedo rental shop within the

4 (41m 58s):
Store, inside the

2 (41m 60s):
Store, inside the store that just cordoned off a section. And it just said, tuxedo rentals here,

4 (42m 6s):
Okay. Everybody in my organization hated this idea.

2 (42m 10s):
Why are you doing tuxedo rentals? We got

4 (42m 11s):
Salary time, you screw up a wedding, you lose a customer. You know, this is not a way to build a clothing business. Yeah. So we rolled it out into our stores, a third, a third, a third over three years. It took five years before the employees in the company stopped complaining to me about being in this business. And I used to say to everybody, and it was, it got to be a redundant where I would say, Hey, look, this is going to take a while to develop. But when it does, it's going to be amazing.

2 (42m 55s):
And I guess there was a point I read that something like one out of five suits in America was purchased at men's warehouse. Correct?

4 (43m 3s):
That

2 (43m 3s):
Is astounding. So I'm going to fast forward to one particular chapter, because this is going forward to 2011. You stepped down as CEO of men's warehouse. And Doug, you are becomes the new CEO and you picked Doug. You are right.

4 (43m 20s):
I did. I had been, you know, I didn't want to retire. And Doug had been my COO and had been doing a great job. So I said to him, you know, Doug, our offices were next door. I said, I'm not retiring. I'm going to come to work every day. But you're running things day to day. And I'd like you to get credit for that.

2 (43m 45s):
You then become a chairman of the board.

4 (43m 48s):
I had been chairman, I became executive chairman to indicate that I was still working.

2 (43m 53s):
Just, just a reality check. After you made that decision to step away from being CEO, did you really disengage? I mean, it was your company, you founded it, you started, did you really back away?

4 (44m 6s):
I never told Doug what to do after he was made CEO. I said to him, Doug, you're the CEO. It's your decision. You make it the way you see it.

2 (44m 18s):
Okay. Now this is a moment where I guess there begins to be considerable tension between you and the board. What started to happen? What kind of, sort of differences of opinion did you start to have with board?

4 (44m 32s):
I don't really know exactly what happened because as it got closer to my termination, I was cut out of more and more of the discussions that the board was having. But I'll give you a simple example. We owned a division called K and G and K and G did 400 million. We had a hundred stores and it was a Superstore. And the sign said it was 25,000 feet and it was men's and women's, and the price points were below men's warehouse. And I said to the board K and G provides a unique opportunity for an offensive and defensive strategy.

4 (45m 21s):
And they didn't quite understand what that meant. And so what it means is men's warehouse stores were able to raise the gross profit percentage by a full 10%, which is a thousand basis points over a decade because K and G was protecting our opening price point position. And at the same time, because K and G was a significant national presence. It prevented other stores from realizing that investing in low price clothing, the way I had done in 73 would make sense.

4 (46m 10s):
So the board and Doug wanted to sell K and J and I told them that I would support them in selling it, but I didn't agree with it. So it was that type of decision and the board represented it in their public relations releases as though I was unwilling to cede authority. And I never understood what they were talking about because I was totally explicit in explaining to Doug that he was the guy.

2 (46m 46s):
All right. June 19th, 2013.

4 (46m 49s):
Yes.

2 (46m 50s):
You're fired from men's warehouse. As the executive chairman was thrown off the board. This is the company that you founded in Houston in 1973. What do you remember about hearing that news?

4 (47m 5s):
Well, it wasn't that long ago. So I remember everything. I remember that the lead director who I had put in the position six foot seven stood up, which made him quite intimidating and said to me, you know, George, the board by unanimous consent and went on to talk about getting rid of me. But it, when he said unanimous consent, I'm in a room of friends

2 (47m 34s):
Who you

4 (47m 34s):
Knew and I'm going inanimate. Me and I have Deepak Chopra, as well as people that you don't know. And I can't believe that it is unanimous because I have done so many favors for all of these

2 (47m 51s):
Pieces by unanimous consent, we're asking you to step down.

4 (47m 56s):
Well, at first they said to me, we'd like you to become chairman emeritus. And I said, what is that? And they explained it and it was a figurehead position. And I said, when do you need to know? And I said, by 10 o'clock, and the reason why was that we were meeting as a board in advance of a annual shareholder meeting. And so they wanted to get me off the perspectives as chairman of the board. And they said they could do it if I notified them by 10 o'clock that night. So we were in a hotel. So I was just by myself, in a hotel in Fremont.

4 (48m 39s):
And I remember being in my room and thinking, you know, my lawyer was the company's lawyer. I had very few good friends outside of the business. I had nobody to really talk to wow. Deepak came up to my room that night and led me on a guided meditation because he was concerned that I wasn't taking into account my legacy. And he was right. I wasn't valuing my legacy. And, and what I was valuing was two things. Number one, I said, look, I know I told you that Doug would be a good replacement, but after a couple of years, I was wrong.

4 (49m 28s):
He's not qualified to run the company. And that wasn't what Depok wanted to hear. And so the next day they said that, you know, by unanimous consent, they decided to replace me. And they said to me and George, we've put your furniture in storage. And I remember thinking, you've put my furniture in storage. I mean, my furniture and my knickknacks, 40 years of stuff that I had accumulated in 50 cartons were put in storage. And in the moment it felt like, well, damn, if all these people who are my friends don't want me as their leader anymore, then why do I want to be their leader?

4 (50m 17s):
Obviously there's something not right here.

2 (50m 24s):
When we come back in just a moment. How after leaving men's warehouse, George stops and smells. The roses in his backyard for a few months gets really bored and decides to start another clothing company stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this

6 (50m 56s):
Business. Wars is a podcast from Wondery that shares, entertaining an eyeopening stories about the fights, feuds and boardroom backstabbing behind the world's greatest business rivalries. The stakes for these companies, couldn't be higher. The winner goes on to transform their industry and help shape the world. As we know it, the loser gets a footnote in the history books in business. There's no prize for second place. The newest season of business wars explores the bitter fight between two entertainment giants over ownership of paramount pictures in the nineties. QVC wanted to combine forces with paramount pictures to create the first ever retail and media empire, but not if Viacom had anything to do with it. The clash between the two CEOs resulted in a grudge match where friends became enemies, billions were spent and the cable TV landscape was changed forever.

6 (51m 44s):
Check out the battle for paramount pictures from business wars on apple podcasts, Amazon music, or wherever you listen. You can listen one week early in ad free by joining Wondery plus an apple podcasts or the Wondery app.

2 (52m 4s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's 2013 and every single member of the board at men's warehouse has just voted to fire George Zimmer from the company he founded, where you hurt by, by the book the board said to you by by your friends, essentially rejecting you too. Did you feel personally hurt?

4 (52m 28s):
Well, I I've in this may not be a satisfactory answer, but it may be more about that as a, a trained CEO. I don't get hurt the way you mean it.

2 (52m 43s):
No, wait, did it depress

4 (52m 44s):
In some way, there was, there was a

2 (52m 46s):
Hurdle,

4 (52m 47s):
But I did not get depressed. I did not go into this poor me. And I'm a victim. The subtitle of my book is how overcoming obstacles became a habit. I am completely comfortable in my skin almost all the time. And I feel I have a lot of respect from people I care about. I see what happened at Mannes as really an example of a capitalism run amok, not a one.

2 (53m 28s):
So, so, so to say, you didn't take it personally is not really true.

4 (53m 33s):
Oh, well, if I feel that I'm a great friend. And so when you hurt me, the only way I have to get even is to withhold my friendship and say, that's it, we're no longer friends and I no longer want to speak to you.

2 (53m 53s):
That's a normal human reaction.

4 (53m 55s):
Yeah. Now it could be that, you know, under some sort of therapy, it would be discovered that I am really quite hurt, but I don't feel hurt. I, I got divorced after this happened for the second time. I have a great relationship with my children. I'm, you know, watching politics in the evenings, but I, I don't feel, I don't know. I think being hurt is very close to feeling like a victim. And I just reject that.

2 (54m 35s):
Okay. So after you left, it cleared the way for men's warehouse to make a couple of significant decisions, including acquiring Joseph a bank for $1.8 billion that turned out to be a bad decision. Yeah.

4 (54m 50s):
And the reason is because men's warehouse thought that the Joe bank customer and the men's warehouse customer were different because of shirt stacking, we were more aggressive in the selling process. When you walk into a Joseph bank, they leave you alone to browse. And what I found was that you do a lot less business with that strategy than if you have a knowledgeable consultant who is genuinely interested in helping the customer in whatever the customer's lifestyle is,

2 (55m 37s):
The company is, how would you describe the company today from the outside

4 (55m 41s):
Struggling?

2 (55m 42s):
Do you own any shares anymore? And do you feel a sense of satisfaction that they are struggling since your departure?

4 (55m 50s):
Yes. And my new business is although we're very small relative to them, we are competitors.

2 (55m 58s):
So I want to talk about your new business a sec, but you leave men's warehouse. You're rich. You can do whatever you want. You can go to Hawaii, you can hang out with your kids, wherever, wherever you want to do. Did you think about that? Doing that for some time

4 (56m 13s):
I tried for four months, I sat in my backyard in Piedmont, beautiful flowers. It was the summer and I thought, gee, this is dull and boring. My kids are in school. My wife's got her own life. And I'm sitting in my backyard, looking at the flowers. Didn't make sense.

2 (56m 37s):
So I guess pretty soon after this, you come up with an idea for a new business, which was an online tuxedo rental company called generation tux. And you launched this in, I think what? September of 2015. And when the people from men's warehouse found out about it, w w w what did they did? They, was it like a cease and desist letter? Was there any, like, I guess, I guess you didn't sign anything cause you, right. You didn't,

4 (57m 2s):
You didn't

2 (57m 3s):
Play out or you didn't pledge not to get fired.

4 (57m 5s):
I tell you, you know, what men's has done men's is afraid of me is what it must be. Because after I was fired, the first thing I tried to do was buy K and G from men,

2 (57m 19s):
Which was that retail company that they own. You try to buy it from

4 (57m 22s):
Them for $90 million.

2 (57m 24s):
Okay.

4 (57m 25s):
Well, at first they wouldn't sell it to me at all. Then they said, all right, if you give us a four year non-solicitation and I said, what do you mean by that? And they said, you can't hire our employees for four years. And I said, are you kidding? I'll give you two years. But four years is an eternity deal. Never happened to this day. They still can't find anybody that would offer them half of what I was going to pay them. Then I had a relationship with Macy's and we were going to provide Macy's with the tailoring, for their online business, not their stores, their online business.

4 (58m 16s):
And as a Lark, I asked my local guy, if they would have any interest in doing a tuxedo rental thing with us. And within a few months, my team and I were in New York, in Terry, a LUN grins office, the CEO of Macy's making a deal to be the

2 (58m 42s):
Tuxedo

4 (58m 42s):
Talk, CDOT rental. And we had to deal, it went to legal review. And while it was in legal review, men's warehouse stolen because I could not get Macy's to agree to a no shop clause. So

2 (59m 1s):
They shopped it around. I don't

4 (59m 2s):
Know how it happened, but the next thing I know, Terry called me and said, I'm very sorry, George, but we're not doing it well. And I said, who are you doing it with? And he said, he didn't want to tell me at first. And then he said, men's warehouse. And I went, you gotta be kidding me. And it doesn't make me a vengeful or revengeful. It, it just makes me more determined to do what I know how to do.

2 (59m 37s):
What is the status of generation tux now? I mean, you started in 2015, it took you over

4 (59m 41s):
Your first year of profitability

2 (59m 44s):
Because it started out. It took a long time for men's warehouse to get to, well, to really get to major problems.

4 (59m 49s):
This is much better.

2 (59m 51s):
And you go online and you get a tux and you just put your measurements in and it comes to you and then you wear it and you send it back.

4 (59m 59s):
Exactly. And we do things like if you want a, a free home try-on, we'll do not only one to free arm, dry ons. We do free swatches. You know, we do a lot of things that make our business strong. And it's right now, it's starting to really fire on also wonders.

2 (1h 0m 21s):
George, do you feel a sense of, I don't know, vindication that you were right about certain things, you certainly were wrong about certain things everyone's wrong over the course of their career, but I guess you were right in, in certain ways, you, you did not want men's warehouse to acquire Joseph a bank in like that model. They did, it hurt them, does being right. Is that important to you?

4 (1h 0m 47s):
I think so.

2 (1h 0m 48s):
Why?

4 (1h 0m 51s):
Well, I'd like to think that I'm right about many things and wrong about a few things, but yeah, I think that, you know, that there is a, a real problem in America. I think that capitalism, which clearly won the battle over communism and even socialism is need in need of modification. And I'm a capitalist, what the hell I've spent my life making money, but there are a few adjustments to capitalism that would make it sustainable, which aren't fortunately, I don't think it is sustainable.

2 (1h 1m 31s):
One of those adjustments be shifting the focus away from shareholders.

4 (1h 1m 35s):
Exactly. That's what it's about

2 (1h 1m 38s):
Because it's always about short-term profit. Yeah. George, when you, when you look over the course of your career, the ups and downs, how much of your success do you attribute to your hard work and your intelligence and skill, and how much do you attribute to luck? Just being lucky, riding a lucky wave.

4 (1h 1m 59s):
Well, I think they go hand in hand. In other words, I think you need luck, but you also need the talent and the intelligence to know how to take advantage of luck. I think that what happens in life unfortunately, is a lot of people have the opportunity to be lucky, but don't know how to take advantage of it.

2 (1h 2m 28s):
And you did.

4 (1h 2m 29s):
And I did.

2 (1h 2m 32s):
That's George Zimmer, founder, and former CEO of men's warehouse. By the way, the company that now owns men's warehouse, tailored brands was hit hard during the pandemic and filed for bankruptcy. Two years ago, it's closed hundreds of stores, but hopes to reinvent its business model and stay in business. Meanwhile, George is still running the two other companies. He founded generation tux and Z Taylor's. At some point, I'm going to make you say it, you know that, right?

4 (1h 3m 0s):
I'll say it right now. You're going to like the way you look. I guarantee it.

2 (1h 3m 6s):
I think it would to put that as my phone ringer,

4 (1h 3m 9s):
When I was at man's warehouse, I would go to a charity auctions and auction off doing that for $3,500.

2 (1h 3m 22s):
Wow.

4 (1h 3m 23s):
I would do it for you for nothing by the way. So

2 (1h 3m 26s):
Thank you. Thank you very much. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you want to contact the team, our email addresses HIV T it id.wondery.com on Twitter. We're at how I built this. I'm at guy Roz on Instagram or at how I built this. And I am at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by Deba motor shop with music composed by REM team Arab Louis. It was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Candace Lim. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, Liz Metzger, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung, Josh lash, Sam Paulson, Catherine cipher, Elaine coats, John Isabella, Christmas Eve, and Carla <inaudible> I'm guy Roz.

2 (1h 4m 10s):
And you've been listening to how I built this. Hey everyone. So I wanted to make sure you knew of all the different ways you can listen to how I built this. The show is always free and available wherever you listen to podcasts, whether it's Amazon music, apple podcasts, or wherever you're listening right now. But if you want to listen to the next episode of how I built this today, one week early, you can do that on Amazon music, or you can listen to it early and add free by subscribing to Wondery plus in apple podcasts or on the Wondery app.

2 (1h 4m 51s):
So please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded and get your, how I built this merchant gear@wonderyshop.com. Another way to support the show is by filling out a survey at wondery.com/survey. And thanks.