1 (0s):
Hey everyone. So I have a request if you value this show if you value the stories the lessons the wisdom and inspiration we bring to you if you think of me as your friend, which I am because even though millions of you are listening. I'm actually talking just to you right now. I need you to be there for me as well. And you can do that by supporting what I do and buying my book how I built this it is just out now and available everywhere and it It doesn't cost more than a few cups of coffee. And it's filled with wisdom and stories and ideas that will have you feeling inspired and fired up to Take On The World.

1 (41s):
So please if you love this show and what we do for you do us one back and pick up how I built this wherever books are

4 (48s):
sold.

1 (53s):
Okay onto Today's Show and just so you know, our team has been working frantically to crank out a new episode each week for most of this year. But each episode we make takes months to produce from the huge amount of research. We do to the fact-checking to the very long interview to the editing and then more editing and even more fact checking and than more editing and then scoring the episode with Original music it takes a lot to produce a single Monday episode of How I built this. So this week we're taking a break and bringing you one of our very favorites from the archive the story of method cleaning products a multimillion-dollar company that came to be because two old friends just happen to run into each other on a cross-country flight.

1 (1m 42s):
Hope you

4 (1m 42s):
enjoy

1 (1m 47s):
I read it at one point Eric that to prove

2 (1m 49s):
that this really was non-toxic you actually drank it. Yeah, so I was in

3 (1m 54s):
London, you know, I love the British press is so

2 (1m 57s):
skeptical

3 (1m 58s):
and she said is it, you know safe enough to drink I was like sure so we both took a shot the toilet bowl cleaner. Okay, and then I immediately text Adam finally got back to me. I was like, hey just drink the toilet bowl cleaner. I'm going to be okay, right?

2 (2m 20s):
From NPR it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm Gyros and on today's show how to friends in their mid-20s mixed up some household ingredients to make soap and detergent and then took on and eventually outmaneuvered some of the biggest companies in the

4 (2m 44s):
world. old

1 (2m 47s):
If you're looking to start a business in the late 1990s, you probably didn't have to spend a lot of

2 (2m 56s):
time convincing friends and

1 (2m 57s):
family that it was a good time to go into Tech. This was the height of the.com bubble and it seemed like the future was literally being written by companies like Google and Yahoo! And eBay and Amazon so it can be kind of hard to imagine why to 20-somethings who? In San Francisco in the 1990s would survey this promising landscape and say, you know what the world really needs right now soap soap that will do a good job cleaning your kitchen counter or your toilet, but that won't destroy the planet in the process. And that is exactly what Adam Lowry and Eric Ryan set out to sell in 2000 the

2 (3m 41s):
very year the.com bubble burst and the company they founded mess. Method with its Sleek bottles and products smelling like cucumber or bamboo. It actually went on to compete with some of the biggest soap companies in the world. But before they went into business together, Adam and Eric were actually childhood friends they met when they were kids maybe 12 or 13 years old because they were both super into sailing and both of their families worked in the Auto industry. Which Adam says was pretty much what everyone did where they grew up. In Grosse Pointe Michigan

3 (4m 19s):
almost everyone that I can remember their families were involved and I think Eric your family. Yes a my great-grandfather dropped out of pharmacy school and moved to Detroit to work for Henry for five

2 (4m 31s):
dollars a day. And then ultimately

3 (4m 34s):
Henry Ford. However, I've had some Ford stock that was bought when Henry was still running the company by my my great-grandfather then my great-grandfather and grandfather together started a machine and stamping if you ever see like 8 childless giant presses that come down so they would make a lot of parts that went on the Automobiles. And so I kind of grew up in the shadows of my great-grandfather and grandfather being these entrepreneurs who created something from

2 (4m 60s):
nothing. Adam and Eric both went off to college. This was in the early 90s Adam went to the West Coast. He studied chemical engineering at Stanford and Eric went to the east coast and studied business at the University of Rhode Island. Both of them were actually recruited by the University's sailing team. They were serious Sailors and to be clear in college Adam and Eric didn't really keep in touch. They were the kind of friends who were happy to hang out and catch up. Just whenever they were back in, Michigan. So after Dating Adam stayed in the Bay Area to work for the Carnegie Institute of science. He was doing research on climate change and Eric got a job in advertising and eventually he made this way out to San Francisco as well and shortly after that.

2 (5m 46s):
They both just happen to run into each other on a

3 (5m 49s):
flight. I think it was Thanksgiving if I'm not mistaken one year, maybe 97 98. I walked on the plane. I see her and I didn't know that he was living in San Francisco. He died you'd only move there. Couple weeks a couple weeks earlier prior, right? And so there was an open seat. I ended up sitting next to him on the plane. We for five hours got all caught up. It turned out we were living on the exact same block just out of pure coincidence and I was living in a flat with four other guys from Stanford and Eric was living by himself in a one-bedroom. And so when one of those guys rotate it out, we invited Eric to move into the apartment and then we were

1 (6m 30s):
released when you could actually live in San Francisco for a reasonably low amount of

3 (6m 36s):
rat. I paid $600 a month in rent. Oh my

1 (6m 38s):
God, this is 1997-98 amazing. So you move into this group house doing what you do in your early twenties or whatever and and the house was just like a six guys in a presumably not super clean.

3 (6m 51s):
It was exactly as clean as you would expect it to be

1 (6m 54s):
got it. All right, and I mean did either of you at that time in your minds were either of you thinking Business or you just kind of grinding away doing your day to day jobs.

3 (7m 7s):
I mean for me personally, I I knew since the third grade. I wanted to be an entrepreneur obviously annoying neighborhood kid who is constantly selling buttons or anything else I could so I just I always knew I wanted to start a company and I loved I fell in love with advertising and branding but I knew it's pretty uncommon as an entrepreneur. Your first company will be successful. So I kind of wanted to build a little bit of a safety net of a career, but I was constantly noodling. Ideas for me personally just coming up with the right one. That would eventually take a leap

2 (7m 36s):
for Adam

3 (7m 38s):
for me. You know, the journey to entrepreneurship was less predestined. My parents are both entrepreneurs. They started their business in

2 (7m 46s):
1981. What's your business? It's an automotive

3 (7m 50s):
sales rep business representing Parts suppliers in the automotive industry. But when I was 6 7 years old mom's making chili for the week four. Myself and my older brother and my older sister and I watched them build the business and do it in a way that was much higher risk than the risk that Eric and I

2 (8m 10s):
eventually were so

3 (8m 11s):
young. We Were Young we didn't have families. We didn't have mortgages any of that. So while Eric kind of always knew I'm going entrepreneurs as soon as I can for me. I'm motivated by creating some sort of good change in the world and I'm a big believer in that. You don't need to figure out what you need to do with your life. You just need to figure out what you want to do

2 (8m 34s):
next. So what were you noticing in 1999 that eventually would lead to cleaning products what was going on around you?

3 (8m 46s):
I was working on a project for Colgate. So I spending a lot of time in the grocery store and I just started looking at the cleaning aisle and saw that it was such a big category but a sea of sameness like everything looked and smelled the same the brands. Were pretty dated and so that was kind of clue of dig here.

1 (9m 5s):
But I mean you're 25

2 (9m 7s):
now I get you're

1 (9m 8s):
working on an ad campaign for Colgate. So that makes sense. You start to get some exposure to that industry but like it could have been anything. I mean, it could have been chewing gum like you could have what was it that that made you think wait a minute cleaning supplies?

3 (9m 23s):
Well, we're really I think with any idea you start off from this absolute place of insecurity. Like when I mention this my mom, she's like I've never seen you. Make your better you sure you're the right person to start a cleaning products business. So I hid the products underneath my bed because I didn't is pretty dorky. I didn't want anybody to know I was even thinking about this category and Adam I were both back in Michigan and we were driving up North early morning to go skiing and being close friends. I felt like Adam was somebody I could share an idea

1 (9m 56s):
with just the winter of 99 presumably going skiing. Mmm and even know they were skiing in Michigan, but keep going Why

3 (10m 2s):
it is technically it's okay. Yes, and I mentioned that hey, I think there may be an opportunity in this space and I remember Adam looks over at me as he's driving and goes, you know, I have a degree in chemical engineering. It's like that would be useless and then we just it was sort of one thing leading to another that and I said, well, you know, not only these products really ugly. But did you know they're super toxic as well, right? Yeah. And that was kind of where one idea gets added to another and it kind of goes from there. But anyway, the one point to remember is we got there to go skiing and we went up the first chairlift and we did a couple runs and we realize you're more excited to go work on this idea that we were to keep

2 (10m 48s):
skiing. So paint the picture for like cleaning supplies and products in 99, like if I'm going into Safeway in 1999, I'm gonna get 409. I'm going to get clean. Mr. Clean, right really strong sense. There was kind of like eat of your eyes weren't watering. It means it wasn't cleaned.

3 (11m 9s):
It knows it was a pretty toxic category and to Adams point. That was the thing that he brought that really opened my eyes as like, you mean like you actually Pluto when you clean and you use poison and make

2 (11m 20s):
Healthier and at this point Adam. This is like the winter of 1999. What are you still working at? The Carnegie Institute?

3 (11m 28s):
I stepped down from Carnegie's quick. I did there is an important detail here. I quit my job in September and in October was the Olympic trials for the 2000

2 (11m 40s):
Olympics and you want to sail and you wanted to go. Yeah, and and I

3 (11m 44s):
had been training with the u.s. Sailing team. I was on the u.s. Sailing team for seven years. We did not win the Olympic trials. We got third in the Olympic trials and so that period of time for a couple of months there. I just finished the Olympic trials. I was doing a bunch of interviews with product design firms and looking for a job engineering firms. Yeah in the Bay

1 (12m 6s):
Area. So right then and there at that moment you both it was almost a perfect storm for you Adam because you are kind of in this transition phase Eric you were work still work at the Ad Agency, which actually was giving you this. Incredible experience. It was like some opening your eyes to this entire world that you hadn't been exposed to right?

3 (12m 26s):
Yeah, it really understanding like understanding consumers and this was really kind of driven by so you go back to 1999 Ikea was just arriving in America home and garden television was just taking off. So it was a time where people were starting to think more about their homes as a reflection of themselves instead of thought was well, what if we designed these products so they were like pieces of decor and Oh, hey, if a spray cleaner was beautiful enough to lead on the counter versus hidden underneath the sink out of sight out of mind. He might actually use it more and I love the phrase like there's no such thing as low interest categories just low-interest Brandt's so our thought was how do we take boring cleaning and not make it boring.

1 (13m 9s):
So what happened after that Christmas trip to Michigan you come back to San Francisco and you do

3 (13m 16s):
what so, you know, I was in the middle of the job search and I said, You know, I'm gonna look for some jobs, but I'm going to start doing some research and trying to figure out these categories and do some of the digging that Eric had a full-time job at his ad firm. Yeah didn't have a ton of time to do and I said I'll start to do this. And so I actually at one point had a desk in error 2 bedroom where I would work on some of this stuff while I was kind of continuing my job search and we were writing the business plan together. I was doing a lot of research and at night we kind of put the pieces together.

2 (13m 50s):
So you already decided let's make a go at this.

3 (13m 53s):
What was is really I think you know, the hardest thing was starting a company is we are really insecure about this idea.

2 (14m 0s):
You're 25. I mean

3 (14m 2s):
sure 2025 and we're going to take on not only some of the largest multinationals but the world's first multinationals in the form of Proctor and Unilever who have a hundred fifty year Head Start and have really, you know own distribution,

1 (14m 16s):
but was that your vision

2 (14m 17s):
in 1999, or did you just think let's just make this. Who buys it that we I mean we said from the beginning like go big

3 (14m 24s):
or go home go big we want to disrupt an industry, but are we didn't feel very secure getting there. So one of the first things we did was we created what we call the concept book. And so we brought to life the idea gave it to the 20 smartest people. We knew and asked them shoot holes in

2 (14m 39s):
this and these were what professors friends

3 (14m 42s):
family got everything from you know, people who actually found some former Clorox employees lawyers a few. So from a finance background advertising just like tell us why it's going to fail and nobody could come back with a reason other than if it's so good. Why is nobody done this before? Yeah, or they'd say the reason it's going to fail is because they're big and you're small

2 (15m 5s):
which we didn't

3 (15m 7s):
that's not a reason so

2 (15m 9s):
let me understand this. This is still the before the.com crash. Okay. This is a.com right on top of it in

3 (15m 15s):
April. I remember it well, but this is a

1 (15m 18s):
time when most people your age At that time we're moving to this area to get involved in a tech company today we say

3 (15m 26s):
so what are you doing? Oh my God. Everybody says like why aren't you going into Tech? Everybody said that right? We had friends who are raising 40 million dollars on 40-page business plans and bragging about a million dollar per page for a raise or doing these lavish lunch parties, which seems so ridiculous now to spend funds on a launch party. But yeah, this was San Francisco at the turn of the century and money was being thrown around in Tech. And here we were showing up pitching soap and idea that was hot a hundred twenty years ago.

1 (15m 55s):
So when do you actually mix stuff together and get it get like a was it hand soap was a dish soap. Was it cleaner? What was the first thing that you decide to

3 (16m 5s):
work? So yes right around that time sort of mid 2000. It was mostly me mixing those things. Like now. What are you mixing? Well, you can make cleaning products out of very standard things that you can buy in the grocery store like, you know, As I can yeah, of course water vinegar baking soda. These are relatively simple chemicals that don't require a professional Lab in order to mix them together. Yeah, and the best part is I came home one day and Adam was mixing things in beer pictures, which we're gonna kill one of our roommates here. Luckily. This stuff is

1 (16m 41s):
non-toxic. What do you remember mixing?

3 (16m 44s):
Well, I think there's different soaps and different detergents, you know, you can make soap from um, basically a base and an oil so vegetable oil and a base you bring those together to make a soap for solvency. You can use things like vinegar or some of the acids that are in present things like orange juice very common everyday mild chemicals that you formulate in different ways to achieve a certain cleaning function and you mentioned, you know, dish soaps hard surface cleaners that kind of thing and were you

1 (17m 19s):
like I'm trying to imagine what Look in your room or in the kitchen of this group house like with a pigeon bucket, like pouring in my

3 (17m 27s):
imagine sort of 16 ounce jars, maybe of plastic or glass containers of orange oils and baking soda and and then I would just experiment and try different formulations and I would make experiments the way that a scientist does so that you you know, you kind of have a control and an experiment and you you know, it was just an iterative process. Assess to getting to something that worked really

2 (17m 52s):
well. So Eric while Adam was sort of looking into the category and looking at potential ingredients of what were what were you

3 (18m 0s):
doing? So our plan was to create our first four products which were the surface cleaners and get them in the local stores. So Adam was working on basically doing everything in the bottle and I was doing everything kind of around the bottle and this that joke was style and substance. And so what I started doing was we We did have a lot of you know money to do custom tooling. And so I started looking for stock models combining. I really liked scientist camping water bottle from Norway that I had found just a really simple kind of bullet design with these nice elegant shoulders and had his very utilitarian. But the same time with look almost like a vase sitting in someone's home.

3 (18m 44s):
So we use that as the basis for the first bottle

2 (18m 47s):
and and how are you paying for the cleaning, you know the oils on the so I guess it wasn't that expensive right now. It wasn't very expensive.

3 (18m 55s):
But out of pocket. We paid We've ran the business out of pocket for about two years.

2 (18m 59s):
How much money did you have at the beginning to how much money did you put in?

3 (19m 4s):
We each put in forty five thousand dollars

2 (19m 6s):
and that was all the money each of you had

3 (19m 8s):
yeah, my grandfather passed away and left be with that money. And so we put it right into

1 (19m 14s):
method and you split it 50/50 as a beginning. Yep, put it down on paper and you called it method.

3 (19m 20s):
At the time yeah, we had think we had the name by then. We wanted a name that represented a technique a new approach to doing things and Adam and I were both brushing her teeth at the same time sounds very

1 (19m 30s):
weird. Well, you've lived in the group house. I mean probably had one or two bathrooms,

3 (19m 34s):
right? Yeah. Basically one that looks over goes. How about method? I like that's it.

1 (19m 40s):
How did you come up with a name?

3 (19m 42s):
I don't know. I just thought of it.

1 (19m 45s):
You mentioned he had these bottles that you really liked. We're where you just buying these off the shelf somewhere.

3 (19m 51s):
No we did. I mean design was so important a big chunk of the dollars. We had went into tooling. We just can't afford that actual design but tooling and you design the bottle know, we basically took inspiration from this bottle. I found in Europe and then had a supplier kind of do the engineering of it. Yeah, and then build the bottle molds which ate up most of the investment most of that 90,000. Yep, and then we had the bottles and we were making product at home with like funnels and paper towels,

2 (20m 22s):
right you were filling the bottles yourselves. You were bringing them to your apartment with a funnel and just pouring it in and closing it up. Yep. Okay, and

3 (20m 29s):
we wanted we wanted to feel very different than everything else out there. But also to really show it was, you know safe to be around you think about when most people would clean they would put on that, you know that old team building exercise sweatshirt from 1998 and the rubber gloves because you don't want the stuff touching your skin. So our first labels were very different. They actually showed people on the front of it. And of course we didn't have any money so we would go to Home Depot and buy a sink and photograph Adam holding the sink probably return the sink to get our money back. Wow, if you're fast forward to late February of 2001 by now Eric and I have product prototypes and we were taking these prototypes around walking into grocery stores unannounced and Cornering the store manager and trying to get them to buy a product.

3 (21m 18s):
And so we got a grocery store at the end of February to say yeah 2001. Yeah, it was actually February 28 2001. So we had bothered this store manager enough that he said fine guys. I'm going to give you space but you have to get the product here today. This was in Burlingame in sort of the mid peninsula of San Francisco Bay area with the store called Molly Stones. Yeah. So essentially what we need to do is get a proof of concept. So we decided the first step was to try to get into all the independent grocery stores in the Bay Area. These are the places where that manager can make the buying decision. So you gotta show up at 6 a.m. This guy's always really grumpy and I think essentially they just agree to take your product because they know you're going to keep coming back until they say,

1 (22m 2s):
yes, but were you going to the storm Burlingame and you went there multiple times? And and the first time you went there the manager was like I'm not

3 (22m 9s):
interested. I mean imagine doing this six o'clock in the morning with a with a store manager they are not Interested first of all store managers don't take sales calls, right? So that was just that's not how you get a product in grocery shelves, but it was the only way we knew how so they weren't used to seeing that and so there was a lot of

1 (22m 28s):
drove up to the store in Burlingame and you got out of the car and and Yaga product and you knock on the glass of the store. It's closed going through the back door the back door and said, can I talk to the manager? But we

3 (22m 40s):
waited till they were open. Yeah, but they're stocking the shelves. So like all the trucks are coming in doing the delivery. Avery's busy. Yeah, it was the best training because we didn't know how to sell and you have 30 seconds to pitch and so it really helped you learn how to sell the product.

2 (22m 54s):
How often were you rejected

3 (22m 57s):
and every time until that day my multiple stores. Oh sure doesn't

2 (23m 2s):
I mean after a full day of going around pitching this thing using a lot of emotional energy. Would you come home feeling like dejected that a nobody a bit

3 (23m 11s):
depending on the day? You have to remember sometimes like today? Shower in the morning, like how what am I doing? I'm doing is

2 (23m 17s):
selling cleaning products. Really, right? Yeah. It's and it's hard. I mean I can

3 (23m 21s):
say for me personally like just the the cold call was a hard thing to learn how to do and yeah, sometimes you know, we get a bunch of rejections. It's a little bit too moralizing but you know, we got it going before we got so demoralized it would quit

2 (23m 41s):
when we come back how a long shot email to a famous and Industrial designer and a big bet on dish soap landed method on the shelves of Target stay with us guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

1 (24m 16s):
I'm Rodney Cole Michael Anthony Madden

2 (24m 19s):
and on our new podcast louder than

3 (24m 21s):
a riot. We traced the Collision of rhyme

2 (24m 24s):
and Punishment in America.

3 (24m 26s):
We were haunted by police. We were literally physically honey. We stand on the Corner Drug Squad pull up everybody run new from NPR music listen to louder than a

1 (24m 38s):
riot. And just one more thing the how I built this book is now available. It's a great read and a great gift for anyone looking for ideas inspiration wisdom and encouragement to have the courage to put out an idea into the world. It's filled with a ton of stories. You haven't heard and have some of the greatest entrepreneurs, you know and respect started out at the very bottom check out how I built this the book available wherever you buy your books and please if you What I do on the show, you can show that support by picking up how I built this the book and

4 (25m 17s):
thanks.

2 (25m 23s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's 2001 and Adam and Eric get the first method cleaning products into a grocery store in the Bay Area and pretty quickly. They realized that they couldn't just make all this stuff in the kitchen of their San Francisco group house.

1 (25m 44s):
So they start to think about building a supply chain to make

2 (25m 48s):
more of the product but meanwhile day in day out there showing up at different. Stores trying to convince customers to try out method soap.

3 (25m 58s):
We didn't have marketing dollars to what we had to do. We would offer demos. So we did that and of course we had in having to do a demo so that would be would be me. You can go

2 (26m 6s):
there what into the grocery store. I'd like

3 (26m 9s):
to set up a table and I was wearing a lab coat which is comical look back years later and it's kind of funny. I look at these photos and I was standing in the wine aisle, and I think I just realized that people shopping for wine were way more interesting to talk to than people shopping for cleaning products. But we were really big Believers that the packaging would have to be the primary marketing vehicle and you would see it on shelf because of the design you would buy it because the unique fragrance is you get home find out it works turn the bottle over and realize it's good for you and good for the planet and that would serve to create a following and if you talk to most Americans at that time, they would say green doesn't clean. The only way we're going to make this work as we had to get the mainstream into a green product and we

2 (26m 53s):
A

3 (26m 53s):
lot of it as it's a trojan horse for good. We had to put our green credentials on the back of the bottle and almost kind of hide them.

2 (27m 1s):
So

1 (27m 2s):
after you got into Mali Stones, what was the next step? How did you get into the next or same process talk to the manager? And

3 (27m 9s):
the first step was that I believe there were 10 Molly stones at that time. There's I think more than that now then there were other similar chains of Premium high-end more Gourmet focused grocery stores that we went to in the Bay Area, but what we did Did we built up these 30 stores and we call that our paper route. So every morning we take turns driving to each store counting how many you sold replenishing it writing up an invoice and it was a way for us to really understand the grocery business. I think the Big Moment of Truth came through when you know, we didn't have a customer service number. So my cell phone was on the back of every bottle and I remember getting this first call from this person who just wanted to call to say how much they loved our cucumber bathroom cleaner.

3 (27m 52s):
And of course, I thought was a friend Just playing a joke about us but these calls started coming and we realized like we really struck a bit of an emotional chord and a category that traditionally is so low interest in so boring

1 (28m 6s):
and it's just 24/7. You guys are just working all the time on

3 (28m 11s):
this. Yeah. I mean the challenges, you know, then he start up a particularly in this space momentum is your friend and then to raise Capital you need to show momentum. So yeah, you always felt this race against the clock to grow as fast as

1 (28m 23s):
Possible and I guess pretty soon into this thing and they're in 2001. It becomes clear that you've got a raise money. You've got to get it because ninety thousand bucks is only take you so far. So, how did you what was the next step? How did you get the money

3 (28m 39s):
that's available? Oh, wow. That was a that was a saga. I mean we're constantly running out of cash. And so we were getting 5 Grand 10 grand here from every friend family person. That would give us Money and did that for about almost two years to run the business and all told there was maybe a couple hundred thousand dollars that we got that way before we were able to raise our first professional money. They're people who believe in you more than they necessarily believe in your idea. And I also found it. So motivating because is one thing like for add my to, you know lose our own money or fail, but when you're taking money from people you really care about our roommates Grandma my Sterling's parents, you don't want to let them down and I always encourage entrepreneurs to

2 (29m 29s):
take money from family

3 (29m 30s):
because I think it's the best motivation to ensure that no matter how hard things get

2 (29m 35s):
you're going to find a path forward. Yeah. So you are, you know funding this any way you

1 (29m 42s):
can at what point are you able to or what point do you

2 (29m 45s):
decide? Hey, we got to go to like real money people big money people and get an infusion of real egg.

3 (29m 53s):
Well, I decided that really early on but it took a long time to get it done. So it was probably I mean even by mid-2000 we knew we were going to need

2 (30m 2s):
to get Capital run the

3 (30m 3s):
business but took another year at least before we were able to get a professional investor to sign on the bottom.

2 (30m 10s):
Where how much did you raise in

3 (30m 12s):
that round? The first round was a million

2 (30m 13s):
dollars and it was from one investor for this one

3 (30m 16s):
firm one investor and we were scheduled to sign the term sheet on what turned out to be September 11th. Wow. And so in the months that followed we were stalled because of course nobody was doing deals with the uncertainty in the world particularly in a premium priced cleaning product. And I remember we finally closed in November and you always have a closing dinner when you raise capital and we went around the room to pay the bill afterwards and between Adam and I none of our credit cards work. Luckily. We knew the person who owned the restaurant and we asked them if we could pay him next week after week. Lowest and because we had run out of money.

3 (30m 56s):
Yeah, so all of the business, you know, we had inventory and orders and stuff like that and all of that was on credit

2 (31m 2s):
cards are maxed them out, you know, just

3 (31m 4s):
maxing him out on the faith that we would ultimately get this investment. That was a scary time for both of us.

1 (31m 12s):
By the way. What was your your pitch to these investors? Like what did you think convince them to give you their money?

3 (31m 18s):
I'm a big part of our pitch was showing what we have proven locally and regionally. And the argument that we were going to go get Target next and that we needed Capital to be able to close Target and start the scale nationally.

1 (31m 32s):
But how did you even how could you even say that where you talking to Target before you had any money to make this product?

3 (31m 39s):
No, not at all because we wanted to be able to get the capital. But what we started doing is we're working with Karen Rashid who is a very famous industrial designer, and we wanted to create a line of products working with carom. That would make a real statement.

1 (31m 53s):
In the marketplace just to pause recite Karim Rashid is like a huge industrial designer like he's made products for his design Pepsi bottles and iconic furniture and like perfume bottles. Like you guys are in your mid-20s. Like how did you connect with this guy? And why would he even answer your

3 (32m 13s):
call? We were huge Believers in the power of design and great industrial designs. We put a list together of the top industrial designers and Karen was at the top of that list, so I figured Just work down the list until we finally got somebody to agree to work with us and I shot

2 (32m 28s):
carom in email. You just want to like Google and typed in his name and

3 (32m 33s):
the studio Sean email cold to him. Okay and said, you know, here's our pitch we want to work with you to redesign the dish soap and object that sits across every sink in the landscape of America. Will you work with us and he wrote back within 20 minutes and said yes. Well, I do remember I think when he first met us for the briefing he he said to Josh handy who we work with at the time. He's like maybe try to get some of the payment up front.

2 (33m 2s):
Yeah, I mean, I mean, how did you how are you gonna afford to pay him?

3 (33m 6s):
Yeah, we were able to convince him to do it for a lower fee because he really believed in the project but also with equity and gave you no got him to have skin in the game with us. So He agreed to do it. So you agree to do it, which was absolutely amazing. And they the time Target was working with Philippe Starck and we knew they had an interest in working with caramel. And so what we did was working with Karam. We are able to use kind of carom as the carrot to get a meeting with Target marketing who then invited the buying team. We did a big dog and pony show with Karen kind of spent pretty much our last dollars kind of went all in on this and ultimately know this company would have ever Went on to exist if it weren't for the risk.

3 (33m 50s):
We took on our dish soap and Adam pulled miracles

2 (33m 57s):
to get the first

3 (33m 58s):
prototype of the dish soap. It arrived moments before the

2 (34m 2s):
presentation actual

3 (34m 4s):
soap. Yeah soap in the bottle. Yep. And what was unique about this product that Karen had designed is that it was upside down. So the dish soap came out of the bottom. It was on this inside that everybody, you know, you always turn it over its a weird experience. Kind of shot out of the bottom this beautiful sort of sculptural shape. Now I this is an important detail. I was not actually at the meeting because as Eric mentioned to the you've literally the very last moment we were putting together the product I was in the factory doing that 24/7 for weeks in preparation for this meeting. So I was like sleeping on the factory floor and doing that whole thing and then I FedEx this thing first overnight to Eric for the pitch.

1 (34m 48s):
This is like a make-or-break meeting.

3 (34m 50s):
So it was I mean, I was starting to work on my business school applications just as backup because all right Lee. Yeah, I mean you knew that if we could not get a national retailer behind it. The economics weren't going to make sense. I mean we're competing against people who you know, they own their own plants. They've had a hundred fifty years to figure out efficiency and we were charging initially like $5 a bottle way to keep bringing the price down to make it more competitive. So

2 (35m 14s):
you were losing money on every bottle you were

3 (35m 16s):
selling. Oh sure. Yeah. Yeah early on so we need to scale and we need it

1 (35m 20s):
fast. So so what happened at that meeting they said we'll do a

3 (35m 25s):
test marketing stood up at the end and said this is right for our guess. It's you know designed forward on Trend and so Target gave us a 90 store test to basically prove ourself out to sell

1 (35m 38s):
dish soap and Surface Cleaner and surface cleaners. And do you remember how many units they bought

3 (35m 45s):
they bought initially? Out 25,000. That's a lot of Tears a lot of soap. So it was yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well you'd like

2 (35m 56s):
jumping up and down and you call Adam and say we made it. We're in Target

3 (36m 1s):
not really because we knew if we failed that test we were out of business. It was make or break. There was I mean to be fair that was when I got there was a triumphant like yeah, we've got this test which was great. But I mean, I remember that moment vividly because my heart sank because You know I had to then make sure that we could get 25,000 units made with perfect quality and all of this and how

2 (36m 23s):
long I mean it was only about

3 (36m 25s):
eight weeks and that includes things like long lead times for making bottles and you know, all this type of stuff that it never should have been able to be done in eight weeks. I still to this day don't exactly know how we got it done but we you know, there's a theme that always ran through our business that when you hit a roadblock, you know, you get out the paper clip and the chewing gum and the Irv, and and you figure out another way around and you know, making 25,000 units was just another sort of MacGyver moment, you know, if you're going to build a business any

2 (37m 0s):
business

3 (37m 2s):
it's hard and you've got to be incredibly resourceful and for us that was very real because it was born from all of these times where we went the path you were supposed to go and adore got slammed in our face and we had to figure out another way.

1 (37m 18s):
So mid-2002 you are in 90 Target stores and you've got to hit a certain Target for them to expand out further. Yeah. How did you do that? How did you create awareness around the product where we

3 (37m 33s):
didn't hit that Target as it turns out with the person first thing we did was there's a set date and so we had to make sure we got on shelf as fast as possible. So we started driving store to store go in if it's not set up you go to the back room you pull it out yourself, you take whatever. And Chef off and you get your product on shelf quickly, but we start, you know, first week looking at the numbers. We're missing the number and then we had a problem which was the dish soap that we did which was the first ever inverted dispenser. So it comes out of the bottom.

1 (38m 5s):
Yeah. I remember that

3 (38m 6s):
consumers would go to smell it because the fragrances were really unique at the time and they would pull off the bottom in a way. It wasn't supposed to really come off so meant didn't really go back on and thinking we were great Merchants. We put that on the Top shelf so we would walk in a stores in there's just dish soap raining down our entire display. It's hard to sell a product when it's covered a dish soap. Yeah, and it's really hard to clean up dish soap in the aisle of a store. But how were you I mean

1 (38m 36s):
you had to hit this Target and you you didn't so what happened? Why did Target keep keep carrying It

3 (38m 44s):
ultimately it was while we weren't hitting the number of units of sell-through. They gave us for a well-known brand on promotion and all that we're doing reasonably well and fortunately a buyer at Target realized that it wasn't just the number of units that we were selling but the type of people that were buying our products and the other types of products that they were buying in this store. Who were they, you know, they were they were people that were sort of the millennial equivalents of the day right? There were young. They were more Dynamic more slightly more urban. A higher-end audience. These are exactly the types of Shoppers Target calls them guests that they wanted to get in their store.

3 (39m 28s):
They knew that that was a highly valuable chopper for that think that's the Paradigm. We really broke and I guess we'll take credit for it because we haven't found anybody did it before us but eco-chic and traditionally green products didn't look beautiful and beautiful products weren't necessarily green and I think a lot of it is just coming down to our own dumb. Look of a Passion for sustainability mine for designed as I Target made so much sense because we just needed that bigger platform to drive

2 (39m 56s):
change. So after Target at that point it becomes easier to get into other big box stores and other retailers.

3 (40m 5s):
Yeah, I wouldn't call it easy. But what I would say is every next retailer every next financing around gets incrementally easier and that's really that's momentum right if you build It really at the end of the day, I believe that business is about starting with a really small that's a small success and build it into a slightly larger one. And if you do that a couple of times whether it's going from direct store delivery Ali stones to some Regional Grocers to a test at Target. You only have to do that a number of times and you can build a pretty big business.

2 (40m 38s):
It's not easy.

3 (40m 40s):
But the more you do it it gets easier to get bigger and bigger

2 (40m 43s):
wins. It's interesting that you started really with Target because we've John Mackey on the show we've had other products that really started out at Whole Foods that were non-toxic and environmentally friendly and organic and so on. I read that actually you had a hard time getting into Whole Foods at the beginning. Is that true?

3 (41m 3s):
Yeah, they I mean, you know oddly they didn't like that. We were already in a mainstream retailer and we were just very upfront. That's listen. We think that we've got a product that your Shoppers really going to enjoy we just didn't look like it. Green product. We didn't we didn't wear the uniform of green. We wanted to change that because we those weren't the people we want. We wanted people to buy our product would never consider buying a green frog. Yeah it it's important to note here. Like I think it's totally pointless to make a green product for a green people, right the only about 5% of products in the in the US market that are sold are green products. And so if all you're doing is preaching to the converted in the 5% like what are you doing?

3 (41m 45s):
We want to create a product that that appeals to everyone. Rap and not just people that are only going to shop on their environmental

1 (41m 52s):
credentials. I read it at one point Eric that to prove that this really was non-toxic you actually drank it like you drank. What did you do? What did you drink? Which one did you drink?

3 (42m 4s):
So I was in London and you know, I love the British press is so skeptical and I was talking about our products that they're non-toxic and safe and she said is it, you know safe enough to drink I was like like sure and it was a toilet bowl cleaner. Hmm. And so we both took a shot the toilet bowl cleaner and then I immediately text Adam is still you know, he was still sleeping here and finally got back to me. I was like, hey just drink the toilet bowl cleaner. I'm going to be okay, right he writes back. Well would have been my first choice. But thank you Captain Obvious. We've both had to dry. I ended up on Japanese television a number of times drinking a lot of methods still

1 (42m 47s):
here. So How quickly when did you actually become profitable when

3 (42m 54s):
case is about five years in so 2005 we became

1 (42m 58s):
possible. This is after your in targets all over the country and it still takes some time before you turn

3 (43m 4s):
a product that's actually relatively fast for a consumer products business to go from nothing to profitable in about 5 years pretty

1 (43m 10s):
quick. How much money did you have to raise before you could stop raising money and just

3 (43m 15s):
fund the Cub 25 million

1 (43m 17s):
25 million

3 (43m 18s):
dollars. We felt we had to grow fast both to keep startup competitors away. But also all the Legacy Brands were starting to copy

1 (43m 28s):
us. I'm sure right clothes because you guys had this people were like, I love this product, right? They

3 (43m 34s):
did try to crush us and there were a number of brands that were launched by large

1 (43m 40s):
cpg like Clorox and all of those

3 (43m 43s):
guys, but what was interesting is it was so funny and Eric predicted this To his credit he predicted that they wouldn't be able to get it right and what they launched, you know, invariably was sort of the same old like pistol grip bottle with the finger grooves in it that happens to run down their lines already with like a different label on it and then in slap a flower on it with some sort of like name. It just was like come on, you know, and they did throw a lot of money at that stuff believe me. It was really scary

1 (44m 15s):
for us get it cut into your

3 (44m 17s):
absolutely. Only in the short term it did but because you know, they weren't authentic products. They weren't interesting products. They were just sort of, you know, people would try them once and they got promoted so they could capture Shoppers that way but

1 (44m 33s):
then just the product didn't perform like Procter & Gamble like the big

2 (44m 38s):
companies all of them all of them did some version of it. So I guess around 2008 you decide to Branch out into personal care products. This is what was the name of the label block a you say that in a very matter-of-fact way. This was shower gel and hair shampoo and stuff like that.

3 (45m 1s):
The original idea was actually this really kind of beautiful organic shape, but it didn't stand up

2 (45m 7s):
shape of bottle.

3 (45m 9s):
Yeah almost imagine like a seed we want to still keep that kind of object approach and we ended up with square and then it's like a plane crash. It's not one thing that goes wrong. It's like 10 things that go wrong. It's exactly that we did there from kind of walking away from our core vision of it to not getting the tooling. Right and one of it is we were always a little bit more conservative of you know, we believed in fail fast, right? So you get products out there limited number of retailers, make sure it works the just lunch and learn. And everybody loved the design of it, so he went really

2 (45m 44s):
brought. Everyone said this is going to everyone's gonna have this in her bathtub and a shower Costco loved it

3 (45m 50s):
grocery to everybody got behind it. And it's essentially was nailed to the Shelf. It did not move and it's expensive to launch a new product. It's really expensive to discontinue because when you see something on shelf that's being discounted for the store to get rid of it the manufacturers funding

2 (46m 9s):
it were you So you just got rid of all the stuff like what how what happened to the excess

3 (46m 16s):
stuff inventory. We have any we ended up actually just recycling a whole bunch of

2 (46m 21s):
bottles that you still have a garage like a

3 (46m 26s):
product. We did hear some of it was sold the prisons.

2 (46m 29s):
Wow. So how big of a hit did you guys take on that to domesticate?

3 (46m 34s):
You know, I don't remember exactly in dollar terms, but it was you know in the low millions of you know, and

2 (46m 41s):
That

3 (46m 41s):
basically an amount of money we lit on fire. But the bigger thing though is just product failures or reputational risk, and it's something that you need to recover from the customers meaning for us a customer was a retailer. Yeah, they were

2 (46m 56s):
not excited about that, you

3 (46m 58s):
know something you have to dig yourself out of

2 (47m 1s):
so I'm curious because at this

1 (47m 3s):
point you've had obviously had lots of success with with method cleaning products, right the company is profitable and then you have this failure with block. Walk right? Yep, and was there was there any tension between the two of you around that? Like, how was your relationship going?

3 (47m 18s):
Well marriage. Yeah. Yeah. It is like a marriage. I mean, I think Eric and I are super good friends, you know, we obviously know each other incredibly well because we've been in the trenches together there was a time for a couple of years where we were at each other's throat why you know Eric and I approach problems from very different angles. And that is a huge asset but it also can be a huge rub when you know, I see a problem from this direction and you see the problem from another direction and you can butt heads about that. And you know that what it requires is it requires a lot of open-mindedness.

3 (48m 0s):
It requires a lot of self-awareness. It requires a lot of listening. These are all skills that I'd say that we've learned but early on. You know, I don't know a lot of 25 year olds that have that level of sort of experience and maturity and have those skills. Well on Wicked,

1 (48m 19s):
I mean many many Partnerships breakdown. It's unusual for partners to create a company to scale it and then to stay friends after you know and good friends. I mean, how did you guys get through that those tens times?

3 (48m 34s):
I think we just over time, you know, we knew how to be friends, but we didn't know how to be colleagues and partners to go ha and Started to learn each other's different styles professionally. My instincts is the just engage and run at it. Adam needs a little bit more space to kind of think it through. He's our server time an introvert.

2 (48m 53s):
Yeah, we really learned each other is working Styles

3 (48m 56s):
and we were able to find a better Rhythm together. And I mean it was a very very conscious effort to say like Screech on the record like we got to work on this right or this is going to end badly. I mean at the end of the day it was mostly about us doing it individually and working with one another to figure out you know, when Eric says XYZ and I feel like it means this actually that's not what he means. He means something else and I can separate the two.

1 (49m 29s):
You guys sold this company method

2 (49m 31s):
to eek over and 2013. Why did you decide to do that you built this from the ground up.

1 (49m 39s):
Was it a point where you kind of had had to do this had to sell it.

3 (49m 43s):
Yeah. I mean we are approached by a private family out of the UK and they had owned the Eco brand which was really the Pioneers from the 70s of green cleaning. And so the pitch to us was an opportunity to really allow all of our investors have been it for a long time to see a nice return. We're big Believers that you you build businesses sort of for posterity to endure and businesses change ownership. And so the question isn't will it it's if it does will the business be better afterwards. And in this case of selling the business to eek of are actually the greatest example of that is we were able to build what's probably the most sustainable manufacturing facility in the whole world in the inner city of I'll go immediately after we sold the business.

3 (50m 30s):
So there was an example of like deepening and enhancing the mission and building something that helped us grow the business much better rather than what other people fear would

1 (50m 40s):
happen. So you'll both of you moved on in round 2 2015.

3 (50m 45s):
Yeah, we're still still involved with the company at a light touch,

1 (50m 48s):
but you have no ownership at all any more of her method. That's correct. So I asked this question. I'm too pretty much I want to come to the show. Just start with you Adam how much of the success of method do you think has to do with you know your intelligence in your

2 (51m 4s):
skill and and how

1 (51m 6s):
much with luck?

3 (51m 8s):
Well, I think there's other factors other than just those two. I think that it certainly isn't all because of me. I'd like to think that I contributed an amount to a group of people working together to create something really awesome. I think perseverance was a huge huge key to the quote-unquote luck. That method had and yeah, you know was there 20 percent luck in there?

1 (51m 32s):
Absolutely, Eric. What what do you think?

3 (51m 35s):
I always say an entrepreneur can never have an ego because luck is always a factor and I agree with that and with enough for assistance luck always look how he shows up. Yeah. I mean we made so many stupid mistakes and kind of had near-death moments that luckily the ball Just Bounce the right way to Keep Us

1 (51m 52s):
Alive. Is it strange to go into a Target or a Whole Foods

2 (51m 57s):
and see this bottle you designed this soap you designed this thing that you were making in a San

1 (52m 4s):
Francisco group house called

2 (52m 6s):
whatever you want and it's not yours anymore.

3 (52m 11s):
It's still are but motional attachment and every time I see any walk into a random restaurant bathroom, and there's our teardrop handwash sitting there and you see it and you can think of The store is the creation of it and it's so much a part of our identity like whether or not we own a couple of shares or not has nothing to do with it. It's still ours.

1 (52m 34s):
That's Adam Lowry and Eric Ryan the two

2 (52m 37s):
co-founders of method by the way, since selling the company. Each of them has launched their own new Ventures Adam founded a company called Ripple foods, which makes plant milk and other dairy free products from vegetable proteins and Eric has launched two companies Ali which sells nutritional supplements and Welly, which sells first aid kits and in an interview last year. Eric said the idea behind welli is simple. Injury is actually the trophy of a well-lived life. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcast.

2 (53m 17s):
You can write to us at HIV T at npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter. It's at how I built this or add guy Roz and on Instagram. It's at guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by Casey Herrmann with music composed by R Mt. Narrow Bluey. Thanks also to Candace limb Derek Gales JC Howard, Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers are Is there a safari I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this. This is NPR.

1 (53m 54s):
Billie Holiday helped shape American music with her voice and unique style. But her Legacy extends Way Beyond music with one song in particular how strange fruit became an unexpected hit and brought on serious consequences for Billie Holiday listen now to the through-line podcast from NPR.