0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

1 (9s):
One year ago, a white man came to a supermarket in Buffalo, New York.

2 (14s):
He just walked around and shot all the black people.

1 (16s):
How do you make sense of something this terrible when you're a kid?

3 (21s):
I think it was all my fault.

1 (23s):
Listen now to the latest series from NPRs Embedded podcast.

Indeed (30s):
These are our hiring goals. They say they're very aggressive, but when everyone looks to you, you're calm. Why? Because you know you don't need a miracle. You need indeed. Indeed is the hiring platform where you can attract, interview and hire all in one place. One of the things that I really appreciate about Indeed is that it helps you easily schedule and conduct virtual interviews and not just that. Indeed's matching tools really make it easy to find quality candidates. In fact, on Indeed, over 85% of employers find quality candidates whose resume matches their job description the moment they sponsor a job. Start hiring now with a $100 sponsored job credit to upgrade your job. Host at indeed.com/built this offer good for a limited time claim your $100 credit now at indeed.com/built. This terms and conditions apply.

The Great Creators with Guy Raz (1m 23s):
Hey, it's guy here. And before we start the show, I wanna share something I heard recently from Steven Colbert. It's about learning from failure. He told me an incredible story from way back when he was doing improv in Chicago and how he broke on stage one night, which he initially thought was the worst thing ever, but it actually changed his life and his approach to comedy forever. To hear my conversation with Stephen Colbert and other incredible creative people. Listen to my other podcasts, the great creators just search for the great creators with Guy Roz, wherever you listen to podcasts.

0 (1m 57s):
And now onto today's show,

6 (2m 7s):
We didn't really have a good understanding of like how to run a business. So we were literally spending and not monitoring like what was going out. Yeah, we had to learn the hard way and it really humbled us. Top line was great. The company was growing like so on the outside looking in, like, you know, it looked amazing. Yeah. But when you lift up the hood and you looked underneath the hood, everything was jacked up.

0 (2m 38s):
Welcome to How I Built this, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealist, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz and on the show today how Monique Rodriguez walked away from her nursing job to pursue her hair care hobby and built a multimillion dollar beauty brand in less than a decade. My Inorganics is a hair and skincare brand. It started out like so many companies we profile as a solution to a problem The founder had, Monique Rodriguez wanted healthier hair after years of chemical treatments and she wanted a product that was natural and organic, a product that would work on her textured hair.

0 (3m 31s):
So after doing some research, she started to coat her hair in things like eggs and bananas and avocados. Sometimes it worked, sometimes it felt like she had a smoothie poured on her head. But eventually her experiments got more sophisticated. She'd use mint extracts and almond oils and other ingredients to see how it affected her hair. And of course she would document it on her Instagram account. This was back in 2014. At the time Monique had a few hundred followers, but many of them had the same hair challenges and they followed Monique's experiments closely. Now, before I continue, I should mention that at the time Monique was a nurse.

0 (4m 12s):
As a kid growing up near the south side of Chicago, most of the women she knew who had steady good paying jobs were nurses. But Monique was dreaming of something different and was always searching. She attended multi-level marketing courses. She tried selling Mary Kay and Avon cosmetics. She sold jewelry online. None of it worked, but there was something about her home experiments with hair care products that just clicked with her small band of social media followers and they wanted to buy them. The options for women with textured hair, mainly women of color were limited. And Monique seemed to be onto something. Now, I won't give away how it happened, you'll hear the story in a moment, but in less than 10 years, Monique Rodriguez and her husband Melvin, would go on to build a huge brand that would eventually be acquired by Procter and Gamble.

0 (5m 4s):
In 2023, the first black female founded beauty brand in p and G's portfolio. But before all of that, Monique, as I mentioned, grew up in Chicago and then later in a suburb called Riverdale. She first met her husband Melvin in middle school and they started dating Monique's senior year of high school. Monique's mom worked as a secretary in hospital and she remembers watching her mom work very hard and struggle to make ends meet. But something Monique also remembers is how her mom wanted her to understand, even as a little kid, that she could aspire to do more and have a better life.

6 (5m 42s):
So growing up, my mom was basically like a single mom trying to raise her kid. She, it was me and my brother, my dad, he suffers from drug addiction. So you know, he was present in the household but not necessarily present to where his kids needed him. Yeah. So I grew up seeing my mom pretty much struggled to take care of me and my brother, she worked at University of Chicago Hospital and because she worked in the hospital environment, she had a lot of nurse friends. So I remember being a little girl and she had one of the, this nurse friend and we went over to her sister's house for like a barbecue or something. And it was just like this big home.

6 (6m 22s):
I thought it was a mansion n you know, now that I look back, it wasn't, it was just a regular house. Yeah. But it was bigger than our house. And you know, she had a daughter and this, her daughter had a pool and her room was just so beautiful like a princess room. And I remember at that moment telling myself like, wow, when I grow up and I have kids, like I wanna live like this. Like I want my kids to live better than me and have something like this. And my mom, I don't even think she realizes this, but that instance planted a seed in me to start thinking differently and, and wanting more for my life than what you know, I was given or how I was brought up. You know, I always like to say that I didn't have to go to dare or you know, learn about not doing drugs in school because I learned it in my own household.

6 (7m 7s):
Like yeah. How it rips households apart, like how it affects your lifestyle, your body, your health. And I said, I'm gonna do something different and I'm gonna change my family's trajectory even at a young age. So yeah, that's how I grew up. My mom, she just, you know, worked very hard to provide for us and I'm truly thankful. Hmm.

0 (7m 27s):
And, and I, I guess your interest in, in beauty started in your childhood too. Like what? When you were a kid. Tell me about that.

6 (7m 36s):
Yeah, because I've always been like a girly girl and my mom she'll laugh to this day and like, you are always in the mirror. You're always in the mirror doing your hair. I remember being obsessed with my grandmother. My grandmother had long hair and she, she used to use main and tail shampoo and that's how much I paid attention to it because I knew exactly what shampoo she used

0 (7m 56s):
For horses and humans.

6 (7m 57s):
Yes. Yeah. Yeah. And so I was always curious because of my grandmother, because my grandmother was like, you know, very fancy and you know, always kept her hair nice. And she always made sure she went outside and had her lipstick and, and so like that was my passion. I, I enjoyed sitting down with my grandmother, brushing her hair, playing in her makeup. So beauty was always something that just was very intriguing to me. And I, I also remember being young and like looking at women and I would just look at a, a lady and I would just rearrange her whole look and give her makeover in my mind. Hmm, wow. Because I'm like, oh, if she had her hair like this or if she put this makeup on, if she wore this, like she would look so cute.

6 (8m 39s):
Like I would just give people different looks just using my imagination. So it was just always like my thing. Yeah.

0 (8m 46s):
I guess growing up, I mean you mentioned your mom worked at the hospital and, and your mom I guess encouraged you to, to think about pursuing nursing as a profession because it is is a great stable job.

6 (8m 57s):
Of course it's a great job and it's recession proof, but yeah. So I think that parents also have a very unique way of manipulating their kids into getting their kids to do what they want. I think that my mom was like putting me in situations like, look, if you go to nursing school, this is what you'll have. Like look at all my nurse friends. Yeah. So, you know, I, I was a good kid. I thought that was my only route to be successful because you know, I didn't grow up seeing women entrepreneurs, let alone like black women that were running in operating business. Like that was non-existent when I was growing up. Yeah. I saw women that struggled and took care of their families and the black women that I did see that were successful were in entertainment.

6 (9m 43s):
They were models and actresses. Yeah. Yeah. And so growing up, you know, I thought that I can be a model and yeah, I used to like drag my mom to take me to pageants and go to like different model calls to model for like hair companies. And my mom, she never said it, but it was like her actions show like, you're not gonna make it in this beauty space. And so my dreams of what I wanted to do of being in the beauty industry, I just kind of like put my dreams to the wayside and did what my mom told me to do. Yeah. And so I went to nursing school and became a nurse at the age of 22.

0 (10m 20s):
So let's talk about nursing. I mean, what was that life for you? You were, I imagine a typical day was just 10 and 12 hour day is just, just day in, day out.

6 (10m 29s):
It was not enjoyable to say the least. I started in a labor and delivery because as a young 22 year old nurse, I said, I wanna work with women because I can relate to women and I think I'll be a better nurse working with people that look like me. So what I enjoyed the most about nursing was serving and helping people. Yeah. Like getting to know families and you know, just meeting people. Like that's what I enjoyed. I enjoyed the thrill of, you know, when a patient comes in and we have to run into the OR and we have to hurry up and start IVs, like I enjoyed like the adrenaline rush of being a nurse and like saving lives.

6 (11m 9s):
Like I did enjoy that, but it was just like the day-to-day taxing the hours because I worked nights because I had my first daughter and you know, I didn't trust anyone to watch her. So my husband and I, we would rotate shifts. And so I worked the night shift and it was, I still look back to this day and I'm like, I'm so thankful that I don't work nights. I appreciate and value my sleep so much. Yeah. Because it was so taxing on my body. I remember days having to drive home and having to pull over on the side of the road to go to sleep so I don't fall asleep on the expressway. Yeah. It just really got to me and I felt burnt out very fast after like one year of working as a nurse.

0 (11m 52s):
Wa was it clear to you pretty early on this was not what you were gonna do with your life?

6 (11m 58s):
Yep. Very clear. I remember like when I first started and I stepped on the floor of labor and delivery, I dealt with more senior nurses and senior personnel that worked in the hospital that were not too friendly. They're not nice. They were mean quite frankly. And you know, I would ask myself, why is everybody so mean? Yeah. And it dawned on me very early, like they're mean because they don't like being here. And I just told myself then I was like, this is not what I wanna do for the rest of my life. I have to find other things to make money so I can get out of this career. Like, that was my mindset. Would

0 (12m 36s):
You go home and, you know, I mean you come home in six in the morning or something and Melvin is probably asleep, but when both of you were awake and talking, would you sort of say, what can, I've got ideas or things I want to do? Would, do you remember having those conversations with him?

6 (12m 50s):
So the funny thing is, even before I became a nurse, I've always had this spirit of independence, autonomy. Like I've always been a visionary, a dreamer. And before I even became a nurse, Melvin and I, we had, you know, we got sucked up into the direct sales, the

0 (13m 8s):
Multi-level marketing stuff.

6 (13m 9s):
Yes.

0 (13m 10s):
Would you go to the the seminars and, and and learn about them?

6 (13m 15s):
Yes. Yes. Like we, I was probably like 19 or 20 in nursing school. Yeah. And I remember the direct sales company that we were sucked into was called acn. It was like a cable company. Yeah. And so we would go to these seminars and I remember it was this husband and wife couple and they painted this visual like all direct sale companies do. You're gonna be rich overnight and you're gonna live this amazing lavish lifestyle. Yeah. If you just sell all of whatever we were selling at the time. Yeah.

0 (13m 49s):
It was cable subscriptions.

6 (13m 50s):
It was cable subscriptions. Correct. And I remember we would host theses like parties Yeah. To get people to buy into these subscriptions. When I tell you no one bought into those subscriptions and we were like, what is this? Like I did not sell any cable subscriptions. So, and I did not become a millionaire overnight like they promised.

0 (14m 9s):
I know that you also did like Mary Kay or Avon or some of that at a certain time.

6 (14m 15s):
When I tell you I did like so many direct sales because they were always sell me with the life that I wanted. Yeah. And I thought I would get it by, you know, buying into this direct sales business. And it was cheap. So I didn't have a lot of money. Melvin didn't have a lot of money, so Mary Kay was like a hundred dollars or $200 to join. And so that was my second encounter with direct sales. So I would host like Mary Kay parties and I did that for a while and I just knew I was gonna get the pink Cadillac. Yeah. I was going to be the, the national sales director of my region. That was my goal. And I think at that time I was probably like 21.

6 (14m 56s):
Yeah. Did that for a while and you know, that never got off the ground. I did probably sell like a few more lipsticks than cable subscriptions, but it wasn't anything that could pay my bills.

0 (15m 10s):
What, what was, what was Melvin doing by the way?

6 (15m 12s):
He was, he worked at ups. So he started at UPS when he was 16. So he started as a, the guys that packed the boxes and put 'em on the truck. I don't know what they're called. Yeah. He started there, but he, before he came onto my, he was a project engineer, so he went to school and became an engineer and he just worked his way up. Wow. And so they're saying that UPS is like, they bleed brown. And when I tell you like that was his saying like he bled brown because he really thought that he was gonna climb the corporate ladder and be like the VP of u p s one day. That was his like goal to do.

0 (15m 49s):
I'm curious about something which is, I read you described yourself as that naturally you're not a salesperson. Like you don't feel comfortable going up to people and selling things. But I, and so what was that like doing Mary Kay or selling cable subscriptions? Like did you have to like break out of your shell and fear of doing that? How did you do it?

6 (16m 12s):
Yeah, that's a great question because I'm not a talker. I'm an introverted person by nature. Yeah. But I force myself to come out of my shell in order to get a job done. And I do credit that to working as a nurse because I had to deal with so many different patients from all different walks of life. And I learned very early on how to develop like rapport with people and how to connect and engage with people and make them feel very comfortable with me. And I took the same skillset of making people feel comfortable from nursing and I applied that to business. So I learned how to push myself to talk more and to be more interactive and engaged with people at a level where I'm uncomfortable, where it scares me and I know that if I'm scared that I'm challenging myself and you can only grow from those type of challenges.

0 (17m 6s):
Yeah. Those were not the only businesses you tried out. You tried a few more out, including at a certain point you thought maybe you would start your own nursing agency, like home care agency and I think you even did the paperwork to start that business, but that sort of didn't go anywhere. What, tell me what happened.

6 (17m 24s):
Yeah, so as I mentioned, I got burnt out after a year of working as a nurse. So I stopped working at the hospital and I decided to start working agency. When you work agency your pay is also more. Hmm. So I'm like, okay, this nursing agency, they're paying me this and they have these contracts with US hospitals, I wonder how much they're getting paid.

0 (17m 47s):
They're getting paid. Yeah.

6 (17m 48s):
Yeah. And so that was my thinking and I'm like, I think I can do this. Let me start my own agency. Yeah. So I started googling like, you know, what are the steps that I need to take to create a nursing agency? So I did the whole business plan myself and then I realized like, how am I going to establish contracts with the hospitals? That was the part I couldn't figure out. Yeah. And so I easily, I quickly got discouraged and I'm like, okay, this is not for me. Like who am I to think that I can like start this company? Like, you don't know anything about business. Why don't you go back to like what you know, and that's working as a nurse. Right. You know, I think it's just a fact of like, you know, you can't be what you don't see.

6 (18m 30s):
And I'll be honest with you, like I thought that being a business person or business owner, entrepreneur or whatever, like I thought it was something for like white men. Yeah. Like, I didn't even think that like black women could even do this. So it was like the negative voices in my head were always telling me like, this is not your lane. Like what are you doing? You have no experience, no knowledge in this. Like I will let the thoughts of doubt and fear be louder than like the faith and believing in myself.

0 (18m 58s):
Were you, it sounds like you were still practicing as a nurse and trying out these different things that weren't working, but it, it, what I think what's so cool about what you were doing at the time, and maybe it was just, I don't know, a combination of perseverance or just energy or just dreaming, but you kept trying things.

6 (19m 19s):
Yeah. Still kept trying. And then at even one point I said, okay, well if entrepreneurship is not something for me, let me go back to school and let me try to further my nursing career because then if I advance my degree in nursing, I can open up my own practice as a nurse practitioner. So in 2009 I enrolled back into schools to advance and get a master's degree and become a nurse practitioner. And in 2009, that's when I got pregnant with my second daughter and she ended up coming like two months early. So I don't know if you know this, but both of my daughters were born on my birthday. Wow.

6 (19m 59s):
Yeah. That's like our, our fun fact

0 (20m 1s):
That's a one out of 365 chance. Twice.

6 (20m 5s):
Yeah. Twice. Yes. Wow. And they were both early. So Mia, she was only a month early. And then Mackenzie, who's my youngest, she was supposed to come in January and she was an emergency C-section and she, when she was born, she was a fighter. She's a tough one and she's still tough to this day and, but she stayed in the hospital for two months in order for her to grow and just develop. She

0 (20m 28s):
Was, she was little when she was born,

6 (20m 29s):
She was a preemie. Yeah. She was two pounds, seven ounces. So she stayed in the nicu. So of course I'm in school and I'm like, okay, I'm not gonna focus on school. So I dropped out of the program. Yeah. And then, you know, when she came home and she was a baby, I still wanted to watch her closely. So that's when I transitioned to being a home health nurse. Yeah. When she came home,

0 (20m 51s):
I, I know that your, your next pregnancy in 2013 was a a, a traumatic experience. It started out as a high-risk pregnancy. You were eventually rushed to the hospital and, and I'm sure it's hard to talk about, but I know it, it was an important turning point in your life. Can you, can you tell me what happened?

6 (21m 16s):
Yeah. And you know, I don't mind talking about it because honestly like when I talk about it, I feel that like I'm honoring my son and because, you know, he's the reason why obviously God sent him to be my angel, but Mayel wouldn't exist if it wasn't for what I went through. Yeah. And so in 2013, got pregnant and we were not trying, so it was a, a surprise and I was already nervous about the pregnancy because of how high risk Mackenzie was. And I remember the doctor told me when she saved Mackenzie's life, she said, I cut your uterus up and down.

6 (21m 57s):
That's like for emergencies. And usually when you have a C-section, the cut on the uterus is like transverse. So it goes across horizontal I guess. And so she told me, she said, because I cut you up and down, if you have a subsequent pregnancy, make sure you tell your doctor because you'll be at risk for a uterine rupture.

0 (22m 19s):
Oh wow.

6 (22m 20s):
And so he was scheduled to come in September and unfortunately it happened, the uterine rupture happened on August 9th at, in the middle of the night. My husband had to rush me. He had just came home, thank God he had to rush me to the hospital. Wow. You know, I didn't live by any like, high risk hospitals and I think my doctor was at home and so it took him forever to get there to the hospital to do the emergency C-section. So because it took him so long to get there, my son's heart rate continued to drop and you know, he continued to lose oxygen to the brain. So when he was born, there was no brain activity.

6 (23m 2s):
And you know, it was just, it was just devastating. And he, you know, we didn't let go right away because we held onto our faith and we said we're gonna continue to pray that God brings him through. But unfortunately we had to deal with God's will. And my son, he stayed on life support for six months because that's how long we, it took us to really come to terms with the fact that he was no longer with us. And you know, it was just, it was a terrible like moment because we would watch his, like he would grow like in the physical, like his body would just grow. But you know, there was, he was lifeless.

0 (23m 43s):
Did you, I mean here you are still a young mom with two girls who still need you, you're their mom. Yeah. You know, they weren't probably your older daughter kind of knew what was going on, but they still need mom. Yeah. How did you just work through the, the depression and you know that, you know, that you experienced?

6 (24m 7s):
Yeah. And that's the thing, like that's looking at them because they were three and seven. Yeah. I knew they needed me to be their mom even though I was hurting, I was sad. Like I still had to show up. Probably the hardest thing was like explaining to them, seeing their mom leave them with a big belly, but then to come home with nothing. When we've talked about, you know, this baby and you're gonna be a big sister. Like that was the hardest thing to like tell them. But our faith was what we had to hang onto. We were not churchgoers before.

6 (24m 47s):
Yeah. But during the time that he was on life support, we were at church at the altar every Sunday and we began to be at peace with God's decision. And even though we didn't understand it, we didn't understand why, but it wasn't for us to question. And, you know, that pain, that situation ultimately led me to a higher purpose. And I tell people this all the time, like, yes, I have a hair company, I sell shampoos, conditioners. But ultimately I'm very vocal about how my vision of starting mayel came from God deciding to put God first is when I had the vision to just go on social media and just talk about hair.

6 (25m 31s):
It was just me getting my mind off of like, you know, the loss of my son and finding a routine that like kept me busy, like doing things that I loved is what kept me from being depressed.

0 (25m 46s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Monique's beauty hobby wound up planting the seeds of what would become her own new business. Stay with us.I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

ZipRecruiter (26m 7s):
You know, I love running a production company. I produce five podcasts for adults, some for kids, but another thing that I love to do is to cook, to make food. And sometimes I dream about maybe having a diner or a restaurant, you know, something small, but I know that I wouldn't be able to do it without a lot of help. And whether you are starting a new business or growing one, if you wanna be successful, you need the most talented people on your team. That's where today's sponsor ZipRecruiter comes in. And right now you can try it for free at ziprecruiter.com/built ZipRecruiter's powerful matching technology finds highly qualified candidates for a wide range of roles. And if you've got your eye on a few people who'd be perfect for your job, ZipRecruiter lets you send them a personal invite so they're more likely to apply. Let ZipRecruiter fill all your roles with the right candidates. Four out of five employers who post on ZipRecruiter get a quality candidate within the first day. See for yourself. Go to this exclusive web address to try ZipRecruiter for free. That's ziprecruiter.com/built. Again, that's ziprecruiter.com/b U I L t. ZipRecruiter, the smartest way to hire.

Allbirds (27m 17s):
Okay, hear me out. I have some pretty good ideas for how you can make shoes from things in your own backyard. Like if you take the grass clippings from your lawnmower and mold them around your feet with tree sap. Well there you go. But you know, if that's a little too rugged for you, you might be interested in today's sponsor Allbirds, which has actually perfected the process of making shoes out of natural materials. In the Allbirds Innovation Lab, they research how to make the most out of sustainable materials like leather from plants, sugar cane and tree fibers. I actually have a pair of the plant pacers, which are made with 100% plastic free vegan plant leather. And I absolutely love them. They're super stylish, they're incredibly comfortable and durable. Basically everything you'd want in a shoe. Allbirds has many more options as well, like the tree dasher, which has eucalyptus tree fiber for a light and more responsive shoe. And then there's the super light, which are shoes made from sugar cane. They're allbirds lightest shoe by weight and carbon footprint. Allbirds is making shoes better than natural. They're supernatural. Find your perfect pair@allbirds.com today and use code built for free socks with a purchase of $48 or more. That's a L l b i r d s.com code built. One more thing before we get back to the show, please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And it's totally free.

6 (28m 47s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz, so it's 2014 and Monique is coping with the death of her son and she finds that it helps to stay busy. So she starts to get on social media and share hair care tips and Monique says she wasn't really thinking about her beauty hobby as a potential business, at least at first It was a way to just like creatively express myself. Yeah. And I was expressing myself with like, you know, hair, this is this hairstyle I made today. Like I'm making this concoction, I'm, I'm mixing together like some avocado, banana, some oils, and I'm gonna put this conditioner on my hair. Like let me know what you guys think.

6 (29m 28s):
You

0 (29m 28s):
Would take like literally an avocado and bananas and mash them up. Oh,

6 (29m 32s):
Of course. And I would do a lot of researching because I had heat damage hair,

0 (29m 37s):
Heat damage from straightening it

6 (29m 39s):
From straightening my hair. Yep. So from the age of like 12 until like my late twenties, my hair was always straight. Like I didn't wanna embrace my curls and I would figure out and read online like, okay, what ingredients are great for like restoring the curl pattern or helping seal the hair cuticle or the structure and the strength of the hair. So I would just like literally sit on the computer and just order like different oils and like test it on myself and I would just like post about it on social media. And I found so much joy in doing that because women were like asking more questions because they were dealing with some of the same hair challenges and hair issues.

6 (30m 19s):
Yeah. And so that's why I tell people like I wasn't planning on creating a product line because I would actually share like the different concoction recipes. I would post it on social media to help other women. And when I see people are just like so happy and they're amazed with their results, like that makes me happy. That gives me joy.

0 (30m 37s):
At that time. Was Instagram, could you put videos on Instagram or was it still just static? It

6 (30m 42s):
Was just pictures. Yeah, picture it was just pictures. Yep.

0 (30m 45s):
So you would have a picture of you, I'm assuming. Yep. And then maybe in the description you describe what you use and what and how you made it, which is, which really is the best of social media. Like I love that. Like I follow all these cooking people cuz I look at what they're cooking and then I wanna make it And essentially that's who you were doing offering up recipes.

6 (31m 3s):
Yeah, I was offering up recipes to whoever, whoever wanted those recipes. So it wasn't to the point where like I even had like a formula that you can actually market and sell. So for instance, I would make like, because I knew my hair needed protein and so as I was researching I'm like, okay, egg has a lot of protein and so I would make conditioners and I would mix egg into that conditioner. You're

0 (31m 30s):
Crack an egg into it.

6 (31m 30s):
Yes. And then I would put it on my hair. Yeah. And so this is like trial and error and women were actually making the exact recipes and trying it and experimenting on their hair as well. And I was like, that showed me at that moment like, oh I have influence. Hmm. They're taking what I'm saying and they're, they see value in it and they're actually like recreating it. So that was a light bulb moment for me to like show, are you gonna take this influence and use it the right way and grow and scale this or are you going to just look at this as a hobby and continue just having fun with it?

0 (32m 12s):
And you had but roughly how many followers at that time? Like

6 (32m 14s):
Oh like, like 500. 500 if that.

0 (32m 18s):
Yeah. And, and, but I mean even with such a small following, I mean that kind of positive feedback I guess helped you start to think about opening your own business, beauty business and, and I guess your initial idea was like a salon maybe featuring your own hair care products.

6 (32m 34s):
Yes. Right. I wanted to make my own products in this hair salon and so I had like put together like a plan of creating a hair salon and I remember telling my husband this and my husband would always encourage me too because I would have those days where I would just sit and you know, just probably stare at the wall and he's like, no, get up. Like get out your plan. What are you gonna do next? Let's do something. So he would always push and encourage me to, because he saw that when I started focusing on stuff that had to do with hair, my face would light up or I would be happy or I'll be focused. Yeah. And so when I thought of the idea for the hair salon, he was just like, okay, like we're gonna do it. Yeah. So I knew, I'm very self-aware, I understand my weaknesses, I understand the areas that I'm really good at in the areas that I'm weak, I go find help.

6 (33m 23s):
And I knew that I did not have any knowledge of business. I knew that I did not have any knowledge of how to build a brand, how to market on social media. So I would go online and listen to podcasts and how I built, this was one of the podcasts that I would binge listen to. I would find workshops that were talking about branding and marketing. Yeah. And so I went to one workshop and she was a famous celebrity hairstylist who's from Chicago and she was doing a workshop on how to build your brand on social media. And I presented my idea to her and I said, I'm really looking to like open up a hair salon.

6 (34m 4s):
And she's like, I think that what you're trying to do is really great, but you know, with you being a nurse and going into the salon space and having all of these cosmetologists work under you is really hard to get them to respect you because you don't come from their space.

0 (34m 22s):
Interesting.

6 (34m 22s):
And so when she gave me that advice, I didn't take it as like, oh she's hated on my vision. I actually thought about it, it was like food for thought. And you know, I appreciated her advice because it was the way that she delivered her advice. I mean, I wouldn't have started mayel and blew up how I have if it wasn't for me talking to her because I clearly wanted to start a hair salon,

0 (34m 43s):
A salon and she giving you this because you're right. I mean that can be really dispiriting, you know, you're thinking what am I gonna do now? But, but really what it did was instead of taking the left fork in the road, it forced you to take the right fork in the road. Right. Which was, which was to make,

6 (34m 58s):
To just focus on the products. Products. Yep. And the thought was, well if I can create products, I can just do that in my home, just make it and sell it and it'll be a happy day and I don't have to deal with anybody.

0 (35m 9s):
And the name Mayel, I think it's a, it's like a combination of your daughter's names and their middle names. Yes. Right.

6 (35m 16s):
Yep. Yep. So I have, my first daughter is Mia Gabrielle, my second daughter is Mackenzie Ariel. So they both have L at the end of their middle names. And I like to say that they're mines, they're my ills. But in actuality like it's really a combination of all my kids' names. My son name was Milan. Milan.

0 (35m 35s):
Yeah. So you knew that you were gonna focus on products, but what was the first product you were gonna try to do? How did you start to think about what that could be?

6 (35m 46s):
Yeah, so my first product was an oil because as black women we're always oil in our scalp. Yeah. And so one of the oils that I started with really focused on scalp and I knew that like the foundation of healthy hair is having a healthy scalp. So I decided to, one of the carrier oils was almond oil.

0 (36m 9s):
When you say carrier oil, it means the oil that you like, you put, that's like extraction in it's base. That's the base. Okay, got it. Got it,

6 (36m 15s):
Got it. Yeah. So sometimes if you put essential oils directly on the scalp it can burn and irritate the scalp. Yeah. Yeah. So you kind of have to like dilute it with something. And almond oil has a lot of protein in it and I decided to mix it with like peppermint oil because peppermint is an essential oil. And I wanted to use the almond oil as the carrier oil. And so with my first product, the almond oil, like I would show how my hair would be so shiny. Like I would show how I would use it in my hair regimen, how I would use it as like a hot oil treatment. I would literally, everything that I did on my hair using it, I would post like everything.

0 (36m 53s):
So you have this product, right? This almond mint oil? Yes. And how were you going to then sell it? Were you gonna make it yourself and put it in like little glass bottles with a tincture and kind of make a label for it or, or was that how you were gonna start initially? Yeah, so

6 (37m 9s):
At that point I knew that I needed to find a chemist because of course I have a science background but I'm not a chemist. So I knew that I needed to find a chemist that can help me actually to create formulas that work for the hair. And that's how I started. So I found a local manufacturer to bottle it, package it. And I think I started with like silk print at the time because I think it was cheaper.

0 (37m 34s):
Let me ask you about the economics of this cuz you were, obviously you were a nurse and you had a pretty good income and your husband was rising up the ranks at ups. But still like there is an outlay you have to put in probably a few, maybe 10,000, maybe more $20,000.

6 (37m 51s):
Yeah. And you know, and to get the business, like to launch the website, up until that point I had spent about $10,000

0 (37m 60s):
And this is just saving money from your job.

6 (38m 3s):
I like to say that it was like on leeway. So I, every time I got paid I would probably take the majority of my paycheck and pay for something. So if this week I needed to get my website done, okay. I would tell the web designer, well I get paid on Friday. If I owed my website designer 500, I would budget for to pay him or her $500. And if I needed to like order some more like inventory or products that would probably cost me like another, like let's just say $500. So I knew that by Friday when I got paid, I'm gonna be left with whatever and I'm gonna divvy that up on something else that I need and then pay my bills and take care of my kids.

6 (38m 45s):
Yeah. So that's kind of how, like up until I was able to gather everything that I needed to have in order to launch. When I launched in May,

0 (38m 53s):
May 23rd, 2014, your website goes live, you are still working as a nurse, which I think is really smart. Usually you're not gonna make any money right

6 (39m 1s):
Away. Correct. Yep.

0 (39m 2s):
So you would have people on Instagram, you would say go to the website to order

6 (39m 5s):
Yep. Go to the website. So I like built up so much anticipation and momentum that I was doing something. Yeah. And what I learned is to like really spark curiosity in people

0 (39m 17s):
In the post you were saying, I'm working on a product like you told people months in advance. Yep.

6 (39m 21s):
And I would take everyone, whoever was following me, I would take them on the journey of me creating this product. Yeah. So I made people feel like they were a part and people tell me to this day, like, I remember when you were testing samples in the lab because they felt like they were a part of it. So I mean, I would even ask like, what color do you prefer? Or like, which product looks the most enticing to you? Like I would ask questions and that's how I became curious to know like, you know, what does my audience want? Like what are they looking for? Like what are some of the problems and the issues that they're facing. Because if I could understand their problems then I know that when I launch a product, the product is going to be a solution to their problem.

0 (40m 2s):
And you didn't have thousands of followers, you had hundreds of follow. It wasn't like you were Kylie Jenner and not to pick on her, but she had, you know, millions of followers when she started her brand. So I mean you had like a few hundred followers.

6 (40m 14s):
Yeah, not a lot at all. And I just, you know, I didn't let that discourage me because I felt that like if I can just grow and sell a great product, the best way of marketing is word of mouth. If they like the product, they're gonna come back and buy more and they're gonna tell their friends about it. So I really focus on like the benefits of the product and show the results. So the day that we launch, even though I started with one product, which was an oil, it sold out.

0 (40m 42s):
How many bottles did you sell?

6 (40m 44s):
I think I had like a hundred. Wow.

0 (40m 46s):
And, and I have to assume it was you and and Melvin like in your house, like packaging them up and like putting the labels on them and sending them off?

6 (40m 55s):
Yep. So yeah, it was just me and him and I remember he, he had said in the car, cuz we our, we were driving home as the orders were coming in and he's like, what is in this oil? Like what did you do? I was like, I don't know, but we're onto something so let's go home and pack these orders. And so that was the first day that we launched and I was not expecting orders to come the second day because I'm like, okay, maybe all the people that that supported and bought me, they're probably all my followers and they don't need to buy any more oil. So now we gotta like wait till they come back to be repeat customers. The next day, more oil sold, the next day more oil sold.

6 (41m 35s):
And I will tell you from the day that we launched May 23rd, 2014, we have not gone a day without having sales on our website.

0 (41m 46s):
Wow. One of the things that is a challenge when you're, when you start out right, and especially when you're successful, is that people think that success instantly equals to having lots of money. But actually it can be a big challenge because you don't have enough money to scale. You know, especially if you're spending everything that's coming in to make more product. And just from a, like a business perspective, I mean on the one hand it was exciting people were ordering things, but I imagine that making a profit was challenging initially, especially cuz your ingredients were expensive. Oh

6 (42m 18s):
Yeah. Our ingredients in our packaging was like very expensive, but we were able to do okay because there was no middleman. So we were able to generate a decent amount of profit in the beginning. But you know, everything that we generated, you know, we bootstrapped our company for so long until we got into retail. But as long as we were like online selling direct to consumer, we were doing okay. But we just invested that right back into more product and marketing.

0 (42m 46s):
Tell me about how you, I mean you and Melvin are, you're not celebrities, you were, you had no connections. Yeah. You're entering a space that's dominated by three, four companies, right? Yep. And so you're up against, there's a lot that's working against you. So how did you get into that world? How did you find people to work with and to help you kind of get to the next step and to expand? Did you, did you, would you go to like trade shows or would you Yeah. Tell me what you did.

6 (43m 18s):
We did a lot of trade shows in the beginning. So as I mentioned, like I would go online and find like different workshops that I can attend. I would also, yeah. You know, join these like natural hair communities and all of these natural hair sites. And so I was able to meet and connect with a lot of great people just by going to trade shows. Like one of the, the manufacturers that I work with today, I met someone that introduced me to them at a trade show. Hmm. Some of our marketing that we did early on was a connection made at a trade show. So, you know, it is just getting out there and networking and you know, just showing up every show that we did.

6 (43m 59s):
You know, even though we didn't have a lot of money, you can tell that we put a lot of love and effort into like our displays and how everything looked. People would just come over and talk to us and wanna learn more and figure out how they can help us scale. And they also found out like that we were actually real cool people and very humble people that, you know, they wanted to work with. And so a lot of the connections came from consumer trade shows and also B2B trade shows.

0 (44m 25s):
Yeah. And was it just you and Melvin for the first year or so?

6 (44m 30s):
For the first year it was, yeah, it was me and Melvin and then we had brought on, we started working with like an outside contractor that was like doing marketing for us. Yeah. Because all of the marketing that was like me just doing it just Instagram, yeah. Off of Instagram. And I found her at about six months and I knew that like influencers was a huge part of my strategy of like bringing on people and you know, finding like brand ambassadors and micro influencers that we can work with. And she helped me secure like one of the big influencers that I had worked with at that time. Tell

0 (45m 8s):
Me about the, the capital outlay. Like, I mean today to get influencers it's a, I mean obviously it's a big business and it costs money, but in 20 14, 20 15, did you have to spend a lot of money to get influencers to work with you?

6 (45m 22s):
I mean, you know, at that time it was a lot of money to me. When I look back I'm like, no, that wasn't a lot of money. But I would say I probably, I think, I think my first influencer was like $3,000 per post. Yeah,

0 (45m 38s):
That's, yeah. I mean and that's, that's a lot for a small business cuz you were probably

6 (45m 41s):
Yeah. That, that's

0 (45m 42s):
A lot still well under a million dollars in sales I imagine. Yeah. Did you, I mean, one of the things that, that being at a trade show also is you've got to talk about your product and you've gotta kind of be out there. Yeah. And so how did you do that? How did you, like people you wanted to approach and maybe work with, how did you get through your introversion to do that?

6 (46m 8s):
Yeah, so, so honestly I, I had to learn how to get outta my own way. That's number one. So I'll just use this as an example. So the first influencer that we worked with was, I guess she was a celebrity influencer at the time. And I saw that she was gonna be at this beauty event and it was in Detroit. You know, I'm in Chicago, so I call my friends and I'm like, we're gonna drive to Detroit. I wanna go to this event because I wanna talk to this influencer and I wanna just, just give her my products and just see if she likes it. And

0 (46m 39s):
Was she a beauty influencer or hair influencer in particular

6 (46m 42s):
Or She was neither. She was just, she was on a reality show and she just had really beautiful hair. I knew that like, I'm like, she has beautiful hair. She starts talking about like what she's doing with her hair and she starts talking about it with my product. People are gonna buy my product because of her. And so my friends, they were game, they were like, okay, we'll drive to Detroit with you. And so I had set up a table, it was a booth display and she was speaking and then they opened it up for like questions in the audience. Yeah. And I said, okay, Monique, here's your chance. Don't blow it, just say it. And so I raised my hand when I tell you like, I was probably sweating under my arms. I was so nervous, but I forgot what I, or what question I asked, but I, the last thing I said to her was, and I just started a product line, it's called Myel Organics and it's for natural hair, and I see that you have natural hair.

6 (47m 33s):
And she was like, yes, I have natural hair. Just meet me on the side and let me try your product. So then I followed up a week later and, you know, we ended up doing a contract together and so she became the first influencer. Wow. But it happened because of like me getting out of my way and not being afraid to like, you know, say something.

0 (47m 53s):
Yeah. You, through all of this networking work you did, you land your first retail shop, which is Sally Beauty, which is a massive chain of stores and I think you got into like 90 or 95 stores. Yeah. Initially tell me how, how that happened. How did you get in? I mean, I have to assume it's hard to get into one of these stores.

6 (48m 13s):
It's extremely hard to get into retail. Like, and the funny thing is, I didn't even realize how hard it was because it kind of like fell into our laps. So we had built up so much great momentum. We were selling product like hot cakes and, you know, we had a lot of social media buzz and this was only year one. And we were also selling in like, you know, your mom and pop beauty supply stores. And so it was a black-owned beauty supply store that had called me and she was like, you know, your products are just selling crazy in this store. I need to introduce you to this lady.

6 (48m 55s):
And she has like all the retail connections and she can help get you into like, the major stores. And so I kind of just like blew her off and I was like, oh, okay, yeah, just gimme her number. And I took her number, never called the lady. Hmm. So the beauty supply owner calls me again, she's like, did you call her like, I told her that she, she was expecting your call and you know, I probably got distracted busy. I still didn't call the lady. So the, the third time she gets on a call with my husband and I, like, we happen to be on a call together. So she puts me on blast in front of my husband. She is like, yeah, I've been telling Monique to call this lady, you know, she has great connections with retails and the way your products are moving in my store.

6 (49m 35s):
Like, you guys should really just entertain her and, and give her a call. And so my husband's like, oh, well gimme your number, I'll call her. Because again, like my fear was like the fear of rejection. Like I didn't know what to say to her. So yeah, I kind of just let like my own fear and like doubt keep me from calling her or keep, you know, I was procrastinating, but my husband, like, he is extroverted and he's very persistent. So he's, I'm gonna call this lady, I'm gonna see what she's talking about. He calls her, she flies out to Chicago and she comes to see, like, we put together like this little mini presentation and it was really just like our analytics of like how we were selling online and the chart that we showed her, like literally blew her mind.

6 (50m 20s):
And she was like, this, this is just unbelievable. Wait, you guys started in, you started this year? Yeah. We're like, yeah, we started in May and she was like, no, I've never seen this before.

0 (50m 34s):
When we come back in just a moment how that conversation changed the trajectory of Monique's homegrown business. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built this.

NetSuite (50m 59s):
Today's episode is sponsored by NetSuite. NetSuite gives you the visibility and control you need to make better decisions faster. And for the first time in NetSuite's 22 years as the number one cloud financial system, you can defer payments of a full NetSuite implementation for six months. That's no payment and no interest for six months. And you can take advantage of this special financing offer today. NetSuite is number one because they give your business everything you need in real time, all in one place to reduce manual processes, boost efficiency, build forecasts, and increase productivity across every department. 33,000 companies have already upgraded to NetSuite, gaining visibility and control over their financials, inventory, hr, e-commerce, and more. If you've been sizing NetSuite up to make the switch, then you know this deal is unprecedented, no interest, no payments. Take advantage of this special financing offer at netsuite.com/built netsuite.com/built. To get the visibility and control you need to weather any storm netsuite.com/built.

Audible (52m 1s):
With Audible, you can enjoy all your audio entertainment in one app. You'll always find the best of what you love or something new to discover. Audible offers a really wide selection of audiobooks across every genre, from bestsellers and new releases to business mysteries and thrillers, wellness, celebrity memoirs and more. And get this as an audible member, you can choose one title a month to keep from the entire catalog, meaning it's yours forever and you can come back and listen at any time. The Audible app makes it easy to listen anytime, anywhere while traveling, doing chores, walking, working, out, flying, whatever you decide. In fact, lately I've been using Audible to listen to James clears Atomic Habits on my runs. And I'll tell you what, I'm actually running better. New members can try Audible free for 30 days. Visit audible.com/built or text built to 500 500. That's audible.com/built or text built to 500 500 to try Audible free for 30 days. audible.com/built.

6 (53m 11s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this. So it's the summer of 2015 and Monique and Melvin happened to be at a gymnastics tournament with their girls in Dallas and the headquarters of that all important national chain.

0 (53m 24s):
Sally's Beauty is just 45 minutes away, which turns out to be really serendipitous.

6 (53m 30s):
So we get a call from this broker and she goes, Hey Sally's, they're very interested. They heard about what you guys are doing on social media, they are very excited about this brand. They wanna meet you guys and you know, we were like, oh, okay, well we're already in Dallas but you know, we're here with our kids and you know, we don't have a babysitter and we don't have anything to wear. And she was like, they're like, bring your kids to this meeting. They really wanna meet with you guys. And I'm like, how do we go to this corporate meeting and we're bringing our kids? They're like, you know, five and nine. I'm like, they're not gonna sit still. And so we're like, Hey, we're just gonna make it happen. And so we ended up bringing our kids to this meeting and we sat in Sally's corporate boardroom and I remember telling my kids, I'm like, this is a very important meeting.

6 (54m 14s):
Just sit in the corner, keep your hands crossed. Don't say a word. Hope

0 (54m 17s):
You had a lot of crayons.

6 (54m 21s):
Yes. So what's so special about like that moment is because like now they're teenagers and they were a part of like the beginning to see their mom following their dreams. Yeah. But you know, Sally's were like, you know, we're gonna test you guys and, and about 95 stores because you guys are new. And I'm like, Hey, I'm just happy to be in 95 stores.

0 (54m 43s):
How did you, because one of the challenges, you've gotta scale up, right? You've gotta, you need the cash to provide them with all of the product they need for, for the stores. And you guys were still bootstrapped, it was you and Melvin. Yep. Was your company. How did you all of a sudden go from making a few hundred items a week to thousands?

6 (55m 3s):
Yeah, and I knew that was the next question because when we knew that we were going into Sally, so that was in the summer of 2015. Remember the trade show that I, I mentioned that I was at, yeah. That I met someone that connected me to the manufacturer that we currently work with today. Yep. So it was like timing is everything. Because the previous manufacturer that we were working with in Chicago that was very small, they cannot keep up with our supply and demand just with our online orders. And then connecting us with a manufacturer that allowed us payment terms. We started off with like 30 day terms.

6 (55m 43s):
And so that allowed us more flexibility with like, you know, our money. But then we knew that like we needed to support the retail shelf cuz it's very expensive to go in retail. You have to like, you know, pay them for like, there's a percentage of like their marketing and what they're gonna do to support your brand. So you're paying for that. So there are like a lot of different factors and numbers that were coming off top and looking at our numbers and our balance sheet. We're like okay, we're not gonna be able to afford all of this. Now we need a loan

0 (56m 16s):
And how much money did you need?

6 (56m 18s):
So we, I don't know if we actually knew how much we needed. I think that we just knew we needed a lot of money. So my husband, when he worked at ups, he built a relationship with one of the contractors that provided services for UPS and they became friends and this was like, you know, well off guy. And so when we needed the money, my husband was like, I know the perfect person to call. And so he called his friend and basically like showed him the same type of analytics our website. And his friend was also blown away. He was like, wow, you guys are growing like this and you just started. And we were like, yeah but here's a dilemma. We're about to go into retail. We have this offer on the table, we're launching in the 95 stores but we need the money to support it.

6 (57m 3s):
And so his friend gave us a loan for 250 grand. Hmm. And that 250 was like the push that we needed to like, you know, launch into Sally's.

0 (57m 14s):
And by the way, when you're in 95 stores, cuz a lot of people think, okay, that's it. You've made it but you're one of like 10,000 products in that store. Yeah. It's still really, really hard. This is why you see people like doing samples at the grocery store because it doesn't necessarily guarantee anything.

6 (57m 31s):
Absolutely it does not. People think it's nice and pretty to Sam on shelf. But listen, you are a small fish in a big pond. Yeah. And you're competing against people that have way larger budgets that can pay to be on those shows and can kick you off of those shelve if they want to. So we launched in 95 stores and we listed every store on our website. We communicated that on social media and I remember we were preparing to go to a trade show. It was February 19th, 2016. And the reason why that date never leaves my head because that was a day that like, it was like crazy in the stores.

6 (58m 12s):
Like in

0 (58m 13s):
The Sally stores.

6 (58m 13s):
In the Sally stores because the day that we launched it, people went crazy

0 (58m 19s):
Because you, you announced it on your social channels

6 (58m 21s):
Just on Instagram.

0 (58m 22s):
And people went to those stores to find the products.

6 (58m 25s):
They didn't go to those stores, they went to every Sally store

0 (58m 30s):
And they're like 3000 of them. Yes.

6 (58m 31s):
There are 3000 stores. So they went to every store and it got to the point where like our customers were harassing the store managers. They were calling corporate, they were angry because they were saying that she announced that she was gonna be in Sally's on social media and we can't find our products. Yeah. And so it got all the way up to like Sally's corporate office where they called the same broker that initiated all of this. And they asked her, they said, can you please call the Myel team? Please tell them to stop their efforts on social media because it is really causing chaos in our stores and we can't keep up. Wow. So long story short, we went from 95 stores to 3000 chain-wide in less than six months.

6 (59m 16s):
And that has never happened to a new brand.

0 (59m 20s):
So you start this brand in May of 2014, you're in Sally's by the end of 2015 I think. Yeah. Clearly there was a demand for this. There was like a deep desire and demand for what you were making and thousands and hundreds of eventually millions of people, mainly women, felt like there wasn't a product out there for them. Yeah. Do you remember like the first year you guys hit a million dollars in sales?

6 (59m 45s):
Yeah, so the first year we did about like 300 and I think it was 360 or 70,000. That was the first year. Yeah. Year two we did 2.7 million. Wow. Yeah. That

0 (59m 59s):
Is crazy. I mean just think about that for a sec. Yeah. You were posting on Instagram in early 2014.

6 (1h 0m 6s):
Yeah. And it's like when I even say it and look back, it's like wow. Like I

0 (1h 0m 11s):
Hope Melvin quit his job at that point.

6 (1h 0m 13s):
At that point. So he quit his job in like 2016 because I quit six months after starting. Yeah. And he quit like a year later. So he really tried to hold on because he, he just knew that he was gonna keep his corporate job and and help build this brand. And it was to the point where the brand told him like, no, you're not gonna have time to do this. You're gonna focus on this brand and leave that job.

0 (1h 0m 37s):
So I mean it seems like once you were in all those Sallys, I know Target started carrying Myel in 2016. Did they come to you? Was it, did it get to the point where the big retailers started to come to you?

6 (1h 0m 49s):
Oh yeah. So honestly all the retailers that were in, like we never approached them. They all came to seek after us. So once like Target got whim of what was going on in Sally's, we get the call from Target like, Hey we wanna meet with you all. Yeah. We got the call from Walmart and funny story, like the call that we got from Walmart, we turned them down the first year. Hmm. We didn't go into Walmart until like the second time that they reached out to us.

0 (1h 1m 16s):
Why You didn't feel

6 (1h 1m 17s):
We were not ready. We were not ready. Like you know, it's

0 (1h 1m 20s):
Because their demands are pretty intense.

6 (1h 1m 22s):
Exactly. Like Walmart is the biggest retailer in the world and if you mess up you don't get a second chance. That's why I say being self-aware is so important and being aware of like where you are in your business and we knew at that moment we were not able to afford to like keep up with their demands. You know, I tell a lot of entrepreneurs it's okay to say no. Yeah. It's about timing and sometimes it's not the right time for you to say yes to what may look enticing, but it may very well not be what you need at that moment. And if we are the brand that we say we are and we know that we're gonna grow how we say we're gonna grow, then Walmart will come back the next year and they came back the next year.

0 (1h 2m 5s):
Tell me, as you were growing, right, I mean it started out with you and Melvin and then you started with some contractors. How did you find people? How'd you source people in part because you're not that far, you're about an hour away from Chicago.

6 (1h 2m 19s):
Yeah.

0 (1h 2m 19s):
You know, an hour out in Indiana. Was it hard to find people to, I mean how did you find people to come and work with you? Yeah,

6 (1h 2m 27s):
It's hard to find people now, honestly. Yeah. So I think that like the challenge in the very beginning was like not knowing what to hire. I mean we kind of just started with like where we knew that we were drowning. Customer service was like one of the first positions that we hired for because I was doing customer service in addition to marketing and, and then once we started to grow and get bigger again, it's like, you know, meeting people, going to like events, finding people on social media. And then, you know, I started growing more, I started meeting like mentors. So like Richie Lou Dennis is like one of my mentors founder of Shay Moisture of Shea.

6 (1h 3m 9s):
Yep. And then of course one of my mentors is my sales broker. Like we still have a relationship to this day. So, you know, recommendations from people that have been in this beauty space. I would make a lot of connections there as well.

0 (1h 3m 23s):
You mentioned Rich Dennis, who obviously hugely successful in, in the beauty space and now owns Essence Magazine. Yeah. And, and is a major investor. He made a significant investment in your company I think in in 2020 through his, his fund already by that point, I mean you were already in a hundred thousand stores, you had 30 products. Yeah. Obviously he's a huge player in the industry and hugely influential. But I, I'm curious, did you need the funding at that point? I mean you were already well on your way to, you know, being a big brand.

6 (1h 4m 2s):
Yeah, we were well on our way, but we were also well on our way of closing our business. Why? Because we were, we were not profitable. So like, you know, now the story comes back full circle. So as I mentioned, we were doing well D two C with our profit margins because it was a healthy enough profit margin where like we were able to like do good things once we got into retail, our profit margins were like slash in half because remember we went into retail with the still the high cost of goods. So, and all of the other fees that are attached with like retail, we ended up spending a lot in marketing and retail and this is where like, you know, understanding like your balance sheet profit and loss statements.

6 (1h 4m 51s):
Like even though my husband, like he's over finance now, but when we first started, like we didn't really have a good understanding of like how to run a business. So we were literally spending and not monitoring like what was going out and making sure that we were profitable. So top line was great. The company was growing, like you said, we were in a hundred thousand stores. So on the outside looking in growing

0 (1h 5m 15s):
160, 200% a year.

6 (1h 5m 16s):
Yep, yep. On the outside looking in like, you know, it looked amazing. Yeah. But when you lift up the hood and you looked underneath the hood, everything was jacked up. Yeah. We had to learn the hard way and it really humbled us. And so we appreciate and understand the importance of having a good cfo, a good accountant because it makes a world of a difference. Yeah. So when we got to the point of having new voices invest in us, that's how horrible our books were looking. So we needed that to stay afloat.

0 (1h 5m 46s):
I really appreciate you telling this story because you know, here you are four or five years in just really successful. Right. And as you say on the outside, that's the impression and it was, yeah it is. It was super successful. But you can still drive a business into the ground if you don't manage it well.

6 (1h 6m 6s):
Yeah, it was, it was a huge lesson but a very valuable lesson. So yeah.

0 (1h 6m 13s):
When you I think got that investment from Rich Dennis, it was either before right around the time of the pandemic.

6 (1h 6m 22s):
Yes. It was right before.

0 (1h 6m 24s):
So pandemic happens and you know, I've had this conversation versions of it with a lot of D two C and retailers who were all freaking out. They're all panicking, you know, like what's gonna happen. But in fact in your space and beauty, it was the opposite. It actually had a huge impact because people were at home watching, you know, videos, seeing in Instagram influencers and people actually started spending money on care. Self-care did what happened to the business that year.

6 (1h 6m 56s):
We experienced like four x growth during the pandemic. So when I tell you we closed with Richou with New Voices end of February, the pandemic happened like a couple of weeks later and I was scared. I'm like, okay, we just took all this money, now we can't, like what do we do? We had this like 200 and something page marketing plan. We can't do any of the things that we said we were gonna do on this marketing plan. Like how are we going to continue to sell practice stores are closed. And I remember reaching out to Rich and I said, what do you recommend? And he was like, keep your foot on the gas pedal.

6 (1h 7m 36s):
Huh. And when he told me that, I was like, okay, it's go time. So I kept my foot on the gas pedal and I understood that I needed to pivot. And so I said, okay, what are people doing? They're gonna be at home, they're gonna be on their phones watching tv, but mostly they're gonna be on their phones. So I told my team, I said, we need to be the brand that shows up every time they're on their phones. So we increased our content and let's focus on, you still need to be beautiful. Just because you're at home doesn't mean that you don't take a shower and you don't calm your hair. You still get up, you still beautify yourself because you still wanna feel good and confident even when you're at home because that's gonna make you feel better.

0 (1h 8m 20s):
You obviously there, there was a lot of interest from venture capital firms and private equity firms and all kinds of people probably knocking on your door to invest. Yes. Because they could see where this was going and you guys would eventually raise a series A reportedly over a hundred million dollars in financing. I think Berkshire was the lead there.

6 (1h 8m 47s):
Yep.

0 (1h 8m 47s):
Tell me about that process. I mean usually when we talk to founders it's like, oh and then I went to like this firm and then this VC office and they were just really mean and they were asking all these horrible questions and they rejected me. Like I think for you guys it was the opposite. It was like they were all desperately at begging you to invest. Yeah,

6 (1h 9m 7s):
We were there because we waited and we were there because we also went through the rejection and not having money and, and you know, looking for people to invest in us. What I did, I felt to mention is that in 2018, before we received the investment from Richie Lou, when we were upside down, we were in talks with an investment group for almost about a year. And this investment group, like they were going to invest in us and waited until like the last hour to pull out and not invest. And I remember previous CFO when we were going through our challenges in 2018, I remember like a word of wisdom that he told us and he said, you know, the best time to raise money, you know, is when you don't need it.

6 (1h 9m 56s):
Hmm. And so that always stuck with me

0 (1h 9m 58s):
Because then you can call the term Exactly. Determine the terms.

6 (1h 10m 1s):
Exactly. Yeah. And so that always stuck with me. So when we started seeing all of this, this growth in 2020, I told my husband, I think we should raise another round. And so once the firms found out that we were looking to go out and raise, like they were chomping at the bits to like get to us. I mean we spoke to over like 60 different private equity firm that were all interested in like speaking with us. And when I tell you like I was so exhausted, I was so drained cuz I'm like, I have to tell this story again. And I was so nervous. Yeah, yeah. Because, you know, I I also, I suffer from like imposter syndrome. Like do I deserve to sit here?

6 (1h 10m 42s):
Like am I saying the right things and you know, but again, it was a challenge I pushed myself. And the other reason why we talked to all of these firms was because it was so exciting to these firms to see a black-owned company that was very profitable, that had such growth and they had never seen it before. And that's like the sad part about it. Yeah. And we wanted to like help shift mindsets and change that narrative. So even if they didn't invest in us, when they sit down with the next, you know, Monique and Melvin Rodriguez, it's not a shock factor. It's more normalized and they'll believe in that company that much more because of like what Monique and Melvin have done with Myel.

6 (1h 11m 22s):
So all in all, we narrowed it down after speaking to all of those people to partner with Berkshire because they were the firm that, you know, was really aligned with our vision. They had an amazing track record. They really helped us scale and grow and get to like, you know, our ultimate dream. And that was to partner with a conglomerate like p and g

0 (1h 11m 43s):
In 2023, early in 2023, it was announced that p and g Procter and Gamble would acquire Myel. So I, I mean I have to assume the, the talks were going on for quite a while and you probably had to stay really quiet. Yes. And they acquired my alpha an undisclosed amount, but presumably it was a lot. And first of all, I completely understand why you would wanna work with p and G's, one of the biggest companies in the world. Their ability, they're just their research department, their marketing. So it makes a lot of sense. But you know, with the investment from Berkshire, presumably you could have, you would've continued to grow and expand and, and was there in your view like a path where you could have become a massive independent company without joining p and g or Unilever or, or a company like that?

6 (1h 12m 35s):
Yeah, and I think, you know, the path is still to become a massive independent company because you know, with our partnership with p and g, we are operating as an independent subsidiary under p and g. So we are operating as a standalone. So the company's still in Indiana, p and g has not came in and, and hired a new ceo. Like it seems like nothing has changed. Now we just have access to more, you know, with the advanced technology, the access to the unlimited resources, like you said, the marketing, the media, the innovation, that's something that we wanted to unlock.

6 (1h 13m 16s):
You know, the whole goal is to create legacy. And I felt that partnering with p and g, the name Mayel, the brand, the heart and soul of the brand, the legacy will continue on for generations after generations. So my great grandkids will go in the store and they will still see Mayel there because of the unlock of resources and access that we now have with working with a major global company like p and g. I

0 (1h 13m 41s):
Mean, it's an incredible achievement. Right. For, given that you started this thing on Instagram in 2014 and 2023, it's acquired by one of the biggest companies in the world. You're, I think, if not the first, one of the first female black founders to have a company acquired by p and g. When you think about your story, I mean, 2014, you were a nurse. I mean, you were, you had a, you know, good life and your husband was, was well on his way to a corporate job at ups, but you were always looking for something else, something to kind of satisfy this creativity that you had and this drive.

0 (1h 14m 23s):
And how much of, of where you are now do you think has to do with how hard you worked and how much do you think has to do with fate and luck and just serendipity?

6 (1h 14m 32s):
You know, honestly I think it's, it's 50% faith and 50% hard work. Yeah. I don't think you can have one without the other. Like you have to be able to step out and believe in yourself, believe in God, and and know that, you know, if God gave me this vision, I can believe that he's gonna give me all the necessary tools, the resources to people, the access. It's not for me to know how all of this is gonna work, but it's for me to just trust the process and allow him to guide me along the way. And then I know that I can't just expect for things to just follow my lap. You have to go out here and you have to work for it. So a combination of me going out there and you know, going to these networking events, meeting people, challenging myself, stepping out of my comfort zone.

6 (1h 15m 19s):
Like I feel that God sees that and he sees me putting the effort forth and he's gonna match the effort. You are creating your life. You are co-creators with God and if he sees you putting one foot in front, he's gonna help you put the other foot in front of the other. And that's how I like to live.

0 (1h 15m 38s):
That's Monique Rodriguez, founder and CEO of My Organics. My L Products are now sold in over a hundred thousand retail outlets in the US and in over 80 countries around the world. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And it's totally free. This episode was produced by Casey Herman with music, composed by Ramine Arab Bluey. It was edited by Andrea Bruce with research help from Alex Chung. Our production staff also includes Neva Grant, JC Howard, Liz Metzger, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, Carla Estevez, and Sam Paulson.

0 (1h 16m 22s):
I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey Prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear@wonderyshop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.

9 (1h 17m 5s):
From Wondery comes a new series, flipping the Bird, Elon versus Twitter, a story about what happens when the richest man on the planet decides to acquire a powerful social media company in the name of free speech. But does he have what it takes?

10 (1h 17m 21s):
It started off promising

9 (1h 17m 24s):
Or is this all just about Elon?

11 (1h 17m 26s):
He's essentially mad that his tweets aren't performing as well as he would've expected them to.

12 (1h 17m 33s):
But really just felt like, okay, this really is just a platform being ruled by a dictator who does things on his own whims

9 (1h 17m 40s):
And what will be left of Twitter. By the time he's done,

13 (1h 17m 43s):
Basically my entire team's was gone. By the end of it, infrastructure was just completely gutted. He'll like tweet a thing and then everyone's like, we gotta work on that now because he tweeted it.

11 (1h 17m 52s):
I'm supposed to leave this man as a genius.

12 (1h 17m 54s):
It just felt like everything was kind of descending into chaos.

9 (1h 17m 57s):
Follow Flipping the Bird wherever you get your podcasts. Hey Prime members. You can listen to episodes add free on Amazon music. Download the Amazon music app today.