1 (0s):
Support for NPR and the following message come from Comcast through Internet Essentials Comcast has connected more than 8 million people from low-income households to high-speed internet most for the first time more at Comcast Corporation.com Internet Essentials support for how I built this and the following message come from American Express. You want to build your business. They can help build your business with financing solutions for eligible business customers the powerful backing of American Express don't do business without it terms apply visit American Express.com business really quick before we get to the show. I want to tell you that there are still a few tickets left for our last live show of the Year.

1 (44s):
This was happening in Denver, Colorado. I'll be talking with Kurt Richardson creator of the OtterBox phone case at the Paramount Theater on November 13th. If you haven't been to one of our live shows, they are super fun as you are about to hear you can get your tickets and find more information at NPR presents dot-org and I hope to see you

3 (1m 3s):
there. I just remember my Blackberry kept buzzing and buzzing and I was like, what is going like did the bakery Catch Fire is my family. Okay, what could this possibly be? And I had all these voicemails and I have of my favorite voice mail was from this woman in Kansas City who I think may be with someone's grandma and she was just like, well, I heard you know Anderson Cooper talk about this crackpot and I just I'm never gonna make it to New York. So like would you man shipping me one and it was like, Are you going to tell her are you gonna call her back and tell her no because I was

1 (1m 38s):
not going to call her back and tell her no

3 (1m 41s):
and we now have an online business

1 (1m 43s):
where that is like when

3 (1m 48s):
Opportunity Knocks. What are you gonna say like, not today when it's time to rise to the occasion you rise?

1 (2m 2s):
From NPR it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz and on the show today how Christina toesies passion for pie and cookies litter to open Milk Bar a multimillion-dollar sweet shop. That's Reinventing nostalgic American Desserts. We absolutely love food stories on the show. When we had Alice Waters on I could have listened to her talk about strawberries for the entire hour or spent the whole interview with Jenny Burton Bauer hearing about the molecular structure of her rich dense.

1 (2m 46s):
Jeni's Splendid ice cream. There's a special creativity about food and also something else. I'm like a tech device or a product that requires sophisticated machine tooling to build. Food stories just

3 (3m 0s):
seemed a tiny bit more

1 (3m 2s):
accessible almost like you here in think I could do that. Now before we get carried away, let's be clear about one thing coming up with an amazing burrito or burger or ice cream is hard, but it's even harder to produce it at scale and keep the quality High, especially if you are as obsessed about the details as Christina Tosi, but the funny thing is if you've ever seen her Milk Bar pie, or Cookie, you would never know because in some ways they look like the least obsessed over deserts in the world. The cookie is a jumble of oats and butterscotch and potato chips and pretzels the milk pie is a gooey mixture of butter and brown sugar and cream and eggs.

1 (3m 47s):
Her cakes are unfrosted on the sides. But the moment you bite into any of those treats. I'm willing to bet you will freak out because that's when you begin to understand Christina's level of Asian the exact amount of chocolate or cream or vanilla the perfect crumb on the cake. These are the products that Christina Tosi sells at her Milk Bar bakeries, but what she's really trying to sell his Joy a moment a small and relatively affordable Indulgence all this from a kid who was raised on junk food and ended up deciding to learn to become a pastry chef for several years Christina worked in some of the best restaurants in New York until she became a logistics manager for David Chang David's one of the most influential chefs in America who opened a chain of Asian themed restaurants under the name Momofuku and with his encouragement Christina eventually founded Milk Bar.

1 (4m 45s):
The bakery has since spread to 16 locations across the country with a cult following and an estimated Revenue in the tens of millions of dollars. You can even buy Christina's cookies and Pie makes at Target and if you're one of those people who love the Leftover milk at the bottom of a bowl of cereal Christina was perhaps the very first person to take that milk and turn it into soft serve ice cream Christina. Tosi join me on stage at the Town Hall in New York City a few weeks ago for a live conversation. And one of the first things I want to know is how do you milk a cornflake?

3 (5m 19s):
You're very hip on culinary technique. That's exactly how we make cereal milk. You just

1 (5m 24s):
milked. It was

3 (5m 24s):
exactly a little two fingers. It's like from The Farms of Ohio to Credible this Streets of New York City to be very

1 (5m 32s):
be very Deft with your fingers, right so so let's start with with where you grew up outside of Washington DC. What kind of kid were you? I mean were you like super academic sporty? What do you remember about being a kid?

3 (5m 48s):
I was a mix of all those things. I was very much an academic because like my parents would be like toesies don't get anything but a days and I was Of I Remember Loving running at a young age and I just have always had a lot of energy and just found places to put it but I was always a curious kid

1 (6m 10s):
and you actually grew up speaking Italian, right? And yeah,

3 (6m 14s):
my dad's side of the family is from Northern Italy. He's first generation American and I didn't realize it didn't even occur to me that that was interesting or strange or different kind of just was but I grew up with like romance languages for sure. And as a kid, I mean because we'll get to

1 (6m 31s):
this in a second about what you majored in which I just I you know what? I'm just gonna tell everybody you majored in Applied Mathematics. And what was the other thing Italian language Italian, right? That's a slam dunk that Tota totally foreshadows compost cookies, but the path is so straight and narrow. So when I mean so when you were like a teenager or you know, I mean were you was baking even part of your life? For you

3 (7m 0s):
making was was part of my life from a super early age. I grew up in the home kitchen and it wasn't with the Nuance of technique or like culinary wisdom. It was just I was the youngest and that was like kind of where childcare happened. My mom was a working mom. So it would just be like go hang out with your grandma's go into the kitchen because they're making dinner I grew up in the suburbs and like you didn't food wasn't a thing back then like you didn't go out to eat like Maybe if I read all my books for school, I was like a book at member and went to Pizza Hut to get like a pan pizza or if we were really really really good as teenagers.

3 (7m 40s):
We would go to like Baskin-Robbins on Thursday night. That was like if we were very well behaved but everything else happened at home and cooking was was fine. I was never really that into Savory food based on my diet that I'm so happy you shared with everyone

1 (7m 56s):
you were you were basically you grew up on Kraft mac and cheese. Is an hot dogs and Doritos,

3 (8m 1s):
right? Yeah and lima beans with ranch salad dressing that's been a

1 (8m 5s):
that's been a hidden secret for a while vegetable.

3 (8m 9s):
But I so I like grew up being trained to be super studious and super yielding and the place that I like resonated with most was when we were making cookies or baking brownies or lemon bars or just like ho-hum home baked goods, but it was the place where I kind of like broke the rules and acted out was like

1 (8m 33s):
stealing a little bit more cookie dough and my grandma wasn't looking or like the little the little

3 (8m 37s):
nibbles that I knew I wasn't allowed to have but that was also what resonated with me most because we would bake every single day or every single night and it was less about having dessert on the table and more about these baked goods bringing us into the community that we lived in but as we

1 (8m 56s):
as a teenager, and and when you mention was a college like I'm imagining that like baking was just something you did. It was just something you enjoy doing but it wasn't like I'm going to do this because you went to the you start out at the University of Virginia start studying Applied Mathematics and Italian. So I

3 (9m 14s):
think the engineering school at UVA first and then I was like science. What's this about? I like math and I like to bake not really

1 (9m 23s):
seeing the connection as a did you envision your life as a life of somebody who was going to do something. NG with Applied Mathematics, like like be an accountant or an economist or something like that

3 (9m 35s):
my very practical Mother after like my first year of college was like great. I got home, you know, like first day of break and she was like great like when are you starting your summer job and I was like, well you talking about and she was like let's go and I got a job and an actuary office and I was like, oh, I don't know that this resonates with me and I was raised by these people that were so passionate about what they did for a living and they Always raised us to follow that passion. I think they just would have preferred that it was like as an actuary. Yeah as a mechanic, of course. Yeah, and

1 (10m 10s):
so did you I know that after a year at UVA you dropped out and you decided to it wasn't for you for a variety of reasons and you you kind of decide to go to Italy for some time and but that again that wasn't like there was like the sort of revelatory like Epiphany in food, or was

3 (10m 28s):
it no nothing. It so I figured out how to transfer from UVA to JM you but instead of going to JMU on campus how to enroll myself right into the study abroad program and Italy because the thing that I that I knew for sure about myself was that I I was a Wanderlust and I still am today and I just started over that like timeframe of being in my like late teens and early twenties just starting to be like, who are you and whenever I get an answer to one. Those things I'd start to collect the answers and I want to be out in the world. I feed off of that. So I went to Italy not under the guise of food under the guise of Education.

3 (11m 9s):
Yeah, but I got so much more out of

1 (11m 11s):
it. And so you finish James Madison and I think in 2002 you get your degree in Applied Mathematics and Italian and what was your thought? Like, what did you think you were going to do at that point? Did you have an

3 (11m 24s):
idea? I was a little short-sighted. I basically took as many courses as possible to get out of the formal education process are graduated in three years being like I got to get out of here. I'm over getting straight A's and I know I don't actually want to do anything for a living with these things. And so it's kind of on the eve of graduation that I was like, oh, I can't go home. I sped so fast through this formal University education, but I don't want to do this. Things for a living as so I just asked myself the simple question of like alright girlfriend and like real talk. What is it that you're passionate about that you want to make into a living and it was this one thing that I just did every single day habitually without thinking about it and it was baked cookies.

1 (12m 16s):
You would bake cookies like even in your dorm

3 (12m 18s):
room. It's very common when you are like super studious you work really hard you study all night and then like Like your your way to sort of like shed, the weight of expectation stress is to bake. It's an outlet and for me, it was like a social outlet because I would I'd bring it. I'd bring it every day to high school. Yes, people went to high school with me. I would show up every single morning. Well with something baked so when you

1 (12m 42s):
finish so when you finish college, you start the gears in your head start to think okay. Maybe there's something there and and you decide. All right. I'll move to New York and and and sort of find my way.

3 (12m 57s):
I knew my answer was baked cookies. And so I took a step back and I was like, okay. Am I going to do this at home? There's no way I'm going to do this at home. And I knew I wanted to get out and I was always drawn to New York City. And so I kind of said like, all right. I've been doing this formal education thing for a few years. So I already feel behind on this like Newfound dream. So like I gotta go to the like most fast paced most well-known food place and I got to figure out how to make cookies a profession. So I enrolled myself in culinary school to become a pastry chef. That's like what you would call a formal cookie maker and at least in my term that was my translation of it and I moved to New York City having only been here for a few hours once as a teenager and just hit the ground

1 (13m 49s):
running. So why don't your parents feel about that because you went to the I think that was a French Culinary Institute to learn how to be Come a pastry chef. How did your mom and dad feel about that?

3 (13m 59s):
I didn't give them much time to react because I knew how they would feel about it and I knew who I was and I knew what made sense to me and I wasn't asking for permission. So I think I told my mom two days before I got on like the Chinatown Bus and with a suitcase full of like cleaning supplies and a sleeping bag and a change of clothes and And she wasn't happy but I imagine on some levels of child. They also realized that there was a stubbornness about me and that I did everything they asked me to do and that it was my life to

1 (14m 39s):
live. And what did you think about about culinary school? I mean did it was it everything that you'd hope versus like transformational amazing intense

3 (14m 48s):
experience? I loved every minute of it. I mean part of its kind of goofy because you're wearing a uniform and your uniform Like a white Chef's coat and a kerchief that you have to tie a certain way and it's a white paper toque that make kind of makes you feel very goofy the second you like lean over it falls off your head and the unify didn't go I went to public school like the thought of wearing a uniform that someone tells you how to wear like, I might the things I wear always an expression of what I was so there's part of it that was militaristic and curious to me and then the other part of it. I realized very quickly that with culinary school just like any Of my education you get as much out of it as you put into it and that's when it's really started clicking.

3 (15m 32s):
I was learning all of this technique. I was eating a lot of chocolate making friends and I was I was on my path. I was going to culinary school by day. I was working at restaurants to pay the rent at night and I was never home because who can really afford any livable space in New York City.

1 (15m 52s):
What did you do after you graduate? It was your first job.

3 (15m 55s):
So I Got my first job while I was in culinary school. I was a pastry cook at Boule and I like just wedged my way my foot in the door when I was still a student because I was like again like I'm behind I was like in my 20s and was like, I got to play catch-up. So I basically convinced them to hire me as an intern and then convince them to give me a full-time job the second that I graduated and I was working like the fine dining for Star hustle, which is Basically working six days a week. My schedule was from 11 a.m. Until 3 a.m. And on the sixth day you had to work a double which meant you had to go in at 7 a.m.

3 (16m 36s):
To 3 a.m. To get your seventh day off. Well,

1 (16m 39s):
and what would you do? Like, what was your job

3 (16m 42s):
trapped in a kitchen you have a prep list? And so you you look at the prep list. It's and it's a list of things that you need for the day based on the desserts. You sold the night before the number of covers that you were. in terms of reservations like in the morning when I worked at the Double I would always have to make this white chocolate mousse pipe it into this beautiful tiny little cup and then make this green tea gelee and it was with super expensive green tea and you had to boil it to a certain temperature and it could only sit there for two Mississippi's and then you had to whisk in the agar and still and if you messed it up, which I messed up plenty of times you would really get hammered for it and even now to this day the smell of green tea T I will never never be anything green tea flavored on the menu at Milk Bar because it's like the most beautiful PTSD even though I so appreciate why other people love it for me it's something completely different and personal

1 (17m 42s):
so I imagine like what was like is kitchens can be like we've all seen cooking shows and have read stories by kitchens. Like they can be pretty, you know, nasty places right really kind of brutal places. What's it like there? I mean, you know, there's a hot restaurant. Lots of people coming in was it was it, you

3 (18m 1s):
know hostile tense

1 (18m 3s):
uncomfortable or was it just messy all those things?

3 (18m 6s):
It's tough. I mean it was tough. It's tough work. It's a tough Pursuit and somehow I was totally built for the ride of it on some level. I think my dad raised me enough as a tomboy to be like, let's go like let's go. We're not like we're not crying over spilled milk. We're not like I like I see you skin your knees route. Like you're fine. Let's go. Let's go. Let's go and to not think about the barriers that were put in place to just like are you here? Did you show up do you mean it nothing's that's worth it is ever easy and I didn't think about anything.

3 (18m 47s):
Other than that. I just charged forward so did I mean I'm just

1 (18m 51s):
curious why you were at boulet. I mean you are learning how to be a pastry. Chef Raymond, this is sort of like you are in the trenches. Were you already at that point thinking? Yeah, you know, this is this is the thing. I think I want to do. I want to be a pastry chef. I want to be the pastry chef at some famous restaurant was that did that start to become an ambition or was it more just you were enjoying what you're doing and you were doing it.

3 (19m 14s):
So my first year was just about getting to a point where I wasn't getting my butt kicked at some if not every point of of the day and so for me it was this pursuit of learning almost like in the sisyphean complex of just like you're just rolling the boulder up the hill and thinking about like, oh my God. Okay tomorrow, how am I going to do it better? How am I going to do? It faster quicker more technique oriented. And after about a year of it is when I really started to see opportunity not just meeting the standard but seeing opportunity

1 (19m 50s):
you were there for a couple years and in 2005 you went to go work for 50 was kind of a legendary Molecular Gastronomy Restaurant in here in New York famous chef Wylie Dufresne, but you didn't go there to to work in the kitchen, right?

3 (20m 6s):
So I left boules because I had learned everything about that technique in that style. And when I was thinking about what I wanted to do next I was starting to think about who I was in food not just learning to how to perfect someone else's techniques, but who I Is through food and I knew I was all about like the home baked good but I also knew I was super curious and adventurous speaking. And so I did the same thing. I stuck my foot in the door at wd-50 and said I want to intern for you as a pastry cook until you have a job opening and then I will happily wedge my way and there and it got to a point at wd-50 that my role was beyond pastry cook.

3 (20m 50s):
I was helping the chef think about Hazard analysis plans with critical.

1 (20m 55s):
Whole point you'll see the hazard analysis Hazard analysis critical control point plan. This is basically food safety, right because every restaurant especially New York, you're going to get hammered if you do some tiny thing wrong, so you got sort of brought in to help Wiley like come up with a food safety plan for his kitchen

3 (21m 15s):
I'd say hey Chef like is there extra credit I can do because I was raised to be that person in school. And first he was like, what are you even doing? What are you talking about not? Sanding that lends. It was like I need help with the health department. I'm trying to figure out what this has a plan. What is it? Yeah, they just are telling me I need it and he was a super smart super Savvy guy but there were a lot of walls up that he had to figure out how to break

1 (21m 40s):
down a restaurant had to have Hazard analysis critical control point

3 (21m 44s):
plan. If using a certain technique, we're going like super

1 (21m 48s):
do it. What's the technique was the

3 (21m 49s):
technique the cooking technique is called Su v--'s under pressure. An anaerobic environment by sucking air out of the

1 (21m 57s):
bag and then boost gently boiling it. And so and so to do to use that technique you needed this like health safety plan in your

3 (22m 5s):
restaurant you needed this like 60 page analysis of everything from you bring the watermelon in and who's receiving it and who's taking the temperature and is there a is there a potential bacterial contamination step? And if so, is there a kill step all the way through it Landing? A perfectly placed on your

1 (22m 26s):
beautiful plate. All right. So you helped write this thing. In the meantime. Are you doing any cooking at the

3 (22m 31s):
restaurant? Oh, yeah. I'm working as one of two pastry Cooks in the restaurant.

1 (22m 36s):
That was like a super hot restaurant right the time like it was getting

3 (22m 39s):
press. Oh, yeah. Yeah. It was it it was it was probably the last great restaurant in New York City that fact that that oh my gosh, no stuff that existed before. Like eater and food blogging and and access to these great restaurants existed online. It was it was the restaurant that only existed in this beautiful way in the underbelly of the New York food scene by Word of Mouth it was in the Lower East Side. No one even went to the Lower East

1 (23m 14s):
Side back then Andre you getting a chance to experiment at that point or were you still sort of doing what you were told to

3 (23m 20s):
do? So I found a way to both experiments. went through the ideas of my pastry chef at the restaurant and learn so much about technique and flavor manipulation and how to bring the flavor of corn bread into an ice cream base, and then I started realizing because I didn't really have a kitchen in New York City in my own home that if I just showed up to work early I could just like make my Homespun desert before my shift started work through the crazy technique driven demands of the EFT and then serve my like brownies chocolate chip cookies for family meal and that was my first like step into serving my baked goods in an environment of discerning culinary

1 (24m 13s):
Minds. So when the staff like the restaurant staff, he's like four o'clock right before the restaurant opens at 5:30, whatever the family meal. You would just bring desserts and

3 (24m 23s):
I would just bring up whatever I had. Add showed up early to

1 (24m 26s):
bake and that really is the beginning of what would become your most famous dessert, right? That's

3 (24m 32s):
right. How did that happen? What's the story? It was a Sunday and I said to Pat the fact that was a sunny is an important part of it was a Sunday. I was showing up to work early as I always did and I was going to make something for family meal. That was my routine and I was looking in our fridges and I was like, I don't really have anything. Extra for me to work with and it was a Sunday and in restaurants, you don't get deliveries of supplies of your of your raw food Goods on Sundays. And what am I going to make? What am I going to make? What am I going to make and my favorite cookbook at the time and still today is The Joy of Cooking.

3 (25m 12s):
It's like equal parts dorky and historical and there's like not really pictures. You have to really be under the words and was deep into the pie section and I fell in love with the story of chess pie. I and chess pie is this pie down south that you make when you don't have enough apples make apple pie or pecans to make pecan pie. You make just pie with like the southern twang said over and over again chess pie and I love the idea of like is kind of pie with the filling and none of the other probably better for you stuff. And I love the idea of putting just whatever you have together. The basic Pantry items butter sugar vanilla extract.

3 (25m 55s):
eggs and whisking it together and put it in a pie shell and baking it and I was never one for really following the recipes of another cookbook because I was always tinkering and so I kind of I purposefully didn't measure anything to sort of tasted the batter put it in the Shell baked it went off to do my normal pastry cook duties never really set and the meal that you make for family meals and important one because it shows your peers What You're Made Of what you tastes good what you cook for them is almost may be more important than what you're cooking for. Your guests. Not really but in theory it is and so I was I was in bed. I was embarrassed that day because I thought this is the first time I'm going to put up a family meal dessert that I'm not proud of it didn't even set that just that's everything about that as bad technique through it in the fridge didn't think about it through it up for family meal at four pm and kind of went and hid in a corner and ate my meal quickly.

3 (26m 50s):
And before I knew it there was just like loud oohs and aahs and Change things and I was just going to get a fight in the kitchen what's going on and these guys that I worked with were just like just buzzing all over the place. Like what is this what you make and I'm like thinking that I'm hiding in the shadow around this dessert instead. They're freaking out about this like gooey buttery delicious mess of a pie that they named Crack Pie, and we have since renamed for other reasons. Bye. But it was it was this thing that lived in the underbelly of New York City dining before I even open Milk Bar.

1 (27m 33s):
All right, you're still at wd-50 you working as a pastry chef. But I guess around 2005 or 2006 while he gets a call from David Chang the famous David Chang founder of Momofuku. He's having some problems with the health department because he wants to do right he's trying to do sous-vide as well. He's shutting him down, right? Yeah

3 (27m 57s):
these guys well 2006. Also Noodle Bar David Chang, like y'all probably even know who that was. Noodle Bar had just opened Noodle Bar had Pride. Open six seven eight months at the time, but Dave called Wylie. I was like dude. I'm getting in trouble for the same thing that you

1 (28m 16s):
just got his being he was going to shut down by the health department because he wasn't able to show a plan with

3 (28m 21s):
his I mean what entrepreneurial cook you don't they will teach you the stuff at culinary school. It's like never seen before technique and therefore the idea of writing this crazy Hazard analysis plan a great chef is not typically a bookworm on that level. Ville and so Wily new like clockwork that I'd be like Chef it's my weekend. What do you got for me? I need like I need you to go. I need you to go uptown which was the East Village. I need you to go uptown and how my friends Dave and I was like cool great.

1 (28m 57s):
So when you got when you met him, did he say? Hey, can you help me write this Hazard critical analysis control point plan Rivers

3 (29m 4s):
called he was like, I did a bad thing and I I need your help because if you know Dave, you know, like and most of us that are in it is personal to us. So when someone comes in and like threatens to shut down your business, it's everything we've got that's in it and when someone threatens the one thing that you've been working so hard for it's like uh, and he kind of lost it

1 (29m 29s):
on so and a lot stood on them. So what my job to clean it up so you started building a plan for him. Yeah and what at some point he said Hey, will you come work with me?

3 (29m 40s):
Yeah, I was in this interesting transition period of wd-50 because I knew it was time for me to move on. I didn't see myself as the pastry chef. They're fine dining. It felt different than who I was as I was figuring out my voice and food and on top of that there was this magnetism to Dave and to what he was doing and to how we got along it was like we spoke the same language without Ever having to say a

1 (30m 8s):
word and what were you doing there? Because you hey, we're

3 (30m 11s):
not cooking. Right? No, he was like do you want a job and I was like, well, what would the job be in is like, I don't know you figure it out and there was something about the like, I don't know this or that really like whatever is needed. And also we'll figure it out like the openness of it was like Perfect. Where do I sign up at that

1 (30m 32s):
time? I don't think Momofuku had a pastry chef for didn't even dessert

3 (30m 36s):
menu to is the Wild Wild West. I don't know that there is even a girl anywhere in I don't even know that there was a girl in the kitchen. They were a bunch of dudes in a tiny little space like going for it Blood Sweat and Tears the thought of dessert right at that point. It was dainty. There's time-consuming it takes up space from an economic. And point like it was kind of in their mind just to waste

1 (31m 4s):
so I mean did you do the same thing at Momofuku? Like when they have family meal, would you bring desserts and stuff like that too? Yeah Crack Pie and all these things. Yeah.

3 (31m 13s):
I think I think the first time because Dave was like, what is this was his Crack Pie that like while he keeps telling you about as I was just passing by and he was like, I want to taste it and I was like, okay and I made it. I think I made a miso Crack Pie once I've just make whatever. Yeah and bring it in. I mean everyone who doesn't look, Big this was really like the person that brings baked goods in for work. Yeah, of course, I would love that. But I mean it

1 (31m 35s):
sounds like this was really an outlet for your creativity. Right? Like it really was just something you loved doing it because it was at this time where you kind of came up with the idea of playing around with cereal milk and making panna cotta so had because cereal milk, of course would Loom large in your life eventually. Yeah. How did you figure out how to extract milk from from cereal?

3 (32m 0s):
I was starting to think through deserts differently and starting to really understand and flex these muscles of like rule-breaking in the baking and in the desert space for me the fine dining part of desserts that I have always struggled to resonate with were the ones that feel like they're so far over your head or their so luxurious that there's no like connection to what your taste buds know to be like sweet and guilty and indulgent and knotty and all the reasons why we love to eat dessert and so I was thinking through like basic desserts panna cotta is a basic desert and I was like, oh what a missed opportunity like butter milk or lemon those are great ideas.

3 (32m 48s):
But like when it be cool if it was flavored something different and I just I started to like use the weird isms that I'd solve a math problem with words. Like what's the lowest common denominator milk? What can I flavor this milk with to speak to people and I would just I my favorite thing to do as a kid and still my favorite thing to do today is just walk the aisles of the grocery store in New York City terms. We don't really have grocery stores as much as we have bodegas and I would just walk the aisles and be like, could you be a flavor of milk? Could you be a flavor of milk? I got to the cereal aisle and was like, I was always a flavor of I was like it's a good idea or a bad idea.

3 (33m 29s):
But right

1 (33m 30s):
because I mean who does remember that as a kid right like Captain Crunch crunch berries, right amazing, whatever mazing

3 (33m 38s):
their favorite flavor. Yeah Cinnamon Toast Crunch. Come on, like this was where when I made cereal milk for the first time. I did the same things I did with the pie where I was like this either got a little ashamed not really certain because when you're trying to find your true voice, You're not even sure that it sounds right when it comes out, but it was seeing the look on people's face. It was seeing the look on David's face was seeing the look on my

1 (34m 6s):
co-workers you and made you basically took milk and you infuse the milk with like corn flakes, right? You just poured corn flakes in there and just let it sit there and

3 (34m 15s):
then I miss more than that, but that's like basic of it basically

1 (34m 20s):
strained. It's got some yeah and maybe anakata out of that and then served it. And you said did you tell them what it was? No,

3 (34m 27s):
you just said I have made this but to then I said takes us tell me what you think and I kind of scattered away

1 (34m 32s):
because it was cornflake milk.

3 (34m 34s):
Yeah, maybe a little toast upon the cornflakes little seasoning and they came running after me and were like, what is this? What is this? It was like they knew what it was and

1 (34m 45s):
they called it a little bit.

3 (34m 47s):
Yeah, and it was seeing their reaction of like you get me you got me. What is this? I know what it is. I can't put Finger on it. My eyes are popping out of my head and I just want to give you a big hug that I was like this is it

1 (35m 7s):
wow, like this is special Rekha serum. I mean nobody was taking milk and infusing it with cereal. I'm is sort of little

3 (35m 17s):
weird. It sounds silly to say now, right? It sounds how you see it

1 (35m 20s):
everyday. It seems like a no-brainer now, but

3 (35m 22s):
right or you can say that everyone was doing it. We were just doing it over like in are holy king. Thomas yeah, exactly. Delicious. Yeah, no one was setting it into a panna cotta swirling it into a soft serve or thinking about it through that lens.

1 (35m 35s):
Yeah. So some point David asked you. Hey, can you I want you to make dessert. Yeah for the restaurant what he just decided. Let's try this. Let's make

3 (35m 45s):
dessert. I think he saw in me someone that always needed to be in over my head to be moving and I think at the same time he knew he was building this amazing magical thing in Momofuku and that in order to continue to be taken. Seriously. He was going to have to take his restaurant Empire seriously and like it or not that includes desserts. So what did you make? Strawberry Shortcake

1 (36m 18s):
But it

3 (36m 18s):
wasn't it wasn't you know, it wasn't it was like the best dorky approach to Strawberry Shortcake. What was it? It was this super high fat butter Shortcake that had a little bit of corn powder in it for flavor and buttermilk, and I would roll it in confectioners sugar before baking it because that was something my grandma would do with her cookies when I was a kid and so it gave this incredible like salty but sweet and sharp and buttery and crumbly and tender and I take these tiny little Gems of TriStar strawberries and I'd macerate them but in a certain ratio of sugar and I would just a little bit of Sherry and balsamic vinegar to make the strawberries taste like something you would never had and I'd put sour cream and the whipped cream because it needed a little bit of an edge and I had all these things that like it couldn't just be strawberry butter.

3 (37m 5s):
How don't you guys want that? Yeah so good. I mean I couldn't just make a strawberry. Sure. Yeah. But I had to make something and it was that it was being pushed to make something to say, who are you on a plate? You're not standing behind somebody else. You are the person making the desert that brought out a different side of me. So

1 (37m 34s):
I guess around 2008. There was this opportunity, right? They've had he had a restaurant another restaurant and the neighboring laundromat or whatever. They move out. Yeah and what he To you and says hey Christina, why don't you open like a desert place? Next door was that I mean,

3 (37m 55s):
I don't happen. I was making desserts for a few of the Momofuku restaurants at that point, but the only place that I could make the deserts was in one of the restaurant kitchens and the only that guess what that happens at 3 o'clock in the morning when everyone else when it was closed because there's no space. All right, and so there would be a point where he was like, we gotta like find we had a front we're going to find you space. We're going to find you space and he knew Ooh that I love to bake. He knew that. I mean I was I would still bring in baked goods. So he's like I have an idea we got to take over this laundromat space. I think you should take it. I think you should take it. We don't want somebody else to move into the block. I think you should take it. You'll still make desserts for us, but you'll then you'll just like Do Your Own Thing on this Mentos?

3 (38m 36s):
It would be a

1 (38m 36s):
bakery that had like a door storefront, but you would also make desserts for his restaurants and it would be like kind of part of Momofuku but also sort of

3 (38m 45s):
separate. Yeah. Like great. Let's do it. Wow like that. Yeah,

1 (38m 50s):
and so he was going to basically kind of sponsor this thing and you were going to go in and kind of run

3 (38m 55s):
it. He was like great go figure out how to sign the lease and like let's go One's Gonna open it. Wow,

1 (39m 2s):
and and at that point, I'm just curious because you were so I mean, you know, you were so experienced, right? But still really young. I think you're 27. Did you go through the process of like, I don't know screaming a business and And putting together a business plan and like getting lawyers and all these things no

3 (39m 22s):
guy. No cook would ever do that. No. I was young and I didn't know enough to know any better. I'd just said yes and John was a cool opportunity. I said, yeah, I was like great. That sounds great. That sounds like something exactly like what I would like to do and I'll go do it. I'll just go do

1 (39m 41s):
it. When we come back in just a moment. Heh, Christina prepared for milk bars opening day. And what happened after Anderson Cooper in a piece of Crack Pie stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Support for this podcast comes from American Express director of global sales strategy Chase Hines explains how American Express works with their customers to find the right Financial solution for their business. It's a lot like solving a puzzle each customer's different. Each business is different.

1 (40m 21s):
We really want to understand what your goals are for the year for three years out and what would extra financing do to help you achieve those aspirations? One of our customers is a long-standing family-run restaurant and the sons dream was to open up a second location finances are a little bit tough as they were just running the business and we were able to partner with him understand exactly what he needed and help them open up that second location and now they're on to their third. So whether it's a need to open a second location or fulfill a big New Order, we want to make sure that we're there for you along that Journey American Express wants to help you move your business forward with Isabel financing Solutions chat with them today to see if you're eligible or visit American Express.com business to learn more terms apply.

1 (41m 13s):
Here's some of what's at stake at the next Democratic presidential

3 (41m 17s):
debate. Elizabeth Warren is on the

1 (41m 19s):
rise, but is she the new FrontRunner? Bernie Sanders makes his first

3 (41m 24s):
major appearance since his recent heart

1 (41m 26s):
attack. Joe Biden is now at the center of the impeachment story

3 (41m 31s):
The MPR politics podcast will be there after the debate to break

1 (41m 34s):
down all the moments that matter. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2008 and Christina has just signed a lease to take over the space next to Momofuku second restaurant and turn it into a bakery into Milk Bar and when it came to the look and feel of the bakery, it was a big departure from fine

3 (42m 1s):
dining the original like inspiration for Milk Bar was it's going to be like a modern-day take on Dairy Queen / Baskin-Robbins, but I'm also going to serve a bunch of baked goods because that's What I love to do. I'm

1 (42m 13s):
curious about the aesthetic of it because I've read that everyone described as part Punky Brewster apart Lisa Frank and which I love I think it's awesome. Like

3 (42m 22s):
what arctan boy Chic an

1 (42m 24s):
amazing. I mean did you think did you have any kind of vision your mind of what you wanted it to look like and feel like or

3 (42m 32s):
did that just kind of happen organically? Aesthetically it didn't even occur to me to think of what it would look like, but I knew what it would feel like I knew that I wanted to open this quirky American style bakery that served cookies and cakes and pies and soft serve and that I wanted it to hold space in people's lives. I was like the world doesn't need more bakeries. We don't need more chocolate chip cookies. We need more of the theory of that but in a way that like inspires and is sticky and A place that anyone can come and people can get like still feel a little scene get a little wacky.

3 (43m 14s):
And so everything was just like brass tacks stainless steel, you know, the cheapest Furniture we could find scraping scraping paint off the side of an exposed brick wall and then all of the other aesthetic from that like our neon milk sign, yeah was literally a the storefront is a quarter of the way into the block. Back and people can't find it because I refuse to pay for like permitting and drawings to put a sign outside and I was like, but if I hang a really big neon sign in this creepy hallway, I bet I bet that would work and I was like, okay. Well, what does it say milk?

3 (43m 54s):
I couldn't fit all of Milk Bar without it. Yeah coming awkward. So I typed milk on my laptop and highlighted it and was like, you know, if it's modern-day Dairy Queen it should have like a little bit of that. Style giuk brush grit medium and then I'm off the shelf off the shelf on trust medium and I was like, what color is it going to be and it's like, okay. I will taxi cabs in New Yorker yellow the stop lights are red and green the little crosswalk guys, you know, like flashes white and it's like pink that'll Stand Out that'll get someone's attention. They'll at least see the light and they did and

1 (44m 32s):
and and what and what were you when you opened? It up. What were your first products had they all been tested out at Momofuku.

3 (44m 41s):
Yeah, I would still just make family meal the way that I always had so I would some of the things that are still on the menu at Milk Bar today like the corn flake chocolate chip marshmallow cookie was somebody burnt the cornflake crunch that was used for another desert and I was like, well, we're not going to throw this away. We were like raised by parents that like waste not want not mentality. So I was like hide it in a cookie put some chocolate chips in it, and we were using marshmallow. For some other like R&D moment and sounds like just use the rest of the marshmallows. It was kind of just like a hodgepodge cooked and we made it in put it out and it would people freaked out and be like, okay, that won't that's going on. I read that I read

1 (45m 18s):
that I don't know if there's a Pocketful that you for breakfast every day. You eat a corn flake marshmallow chocolate from a

3 (45m 22s):
teat to every morning when the Bots 11 years later like it's very angry. If I start with to warm cookies without like caffeine and something else that's like slightly more. Possible though my diet today is proven.

1 (45m 38s):
Otherwise, all right, so when so the store was going to have corn flake marshmallow chocolate chip cookies. It was gonna have Crack Pie birthday cake. I mean, did you have staff at the beginning or was it just you?

3 (45m 52s):
I think there were four of us at the beginning and they were the they remain for of the most incredible loyal human beings. Lord knows why they followed me down into this crazy.

1 (46m 6s):
He

3 (46m 6s):
path but we would show up every day. I mean, we literally like you go home and sleep two hours. And then when you come back, I'm gonna go home and take a shower. Yeah, then you'll come back because it was a

1 (46m 16s):
hamster. We like with a day you open there

3 (46m 18s):
was a line around the block to get a nap. What was that head of that people have people know about it. We have the trust of people that knew what the Momofuku name meant and it was like one it was to November 15 2008 recession. Ian people were scared, but you know how New Yorkers are like people still wanted to get out and and and be a part of a scene and everyone loves a good line. I don't know. It didn't make any sense to me. I was like, how do these people even know? We're opening a bakery today do they even know what they're waiting in line for and he and they came and it was like, I'm so grateful that I didn't have time to worry about are people going to get their Yeah, are they going to get why we would put pretzels and potato chips and ground coffee and all these other crazy salty sweet things into a cooking called a compost.

3 (47m 13s):
Cookie. Are they gonna be like girl? What are you doing? Yeah, and it and and what it proved out was like there's like an incredible number of people that are like I think of them as like sweet tooth so mates that like showed up and they showed up for like a milkshake on a Monday morning at 10 a.m. And they showed up at 2 a.m. Because they were like I'm trying Going to Wile out but I got two dollars and so can I get a cookie? Can I get a cookie? I'm trying to figure out

1 (47m 47s):
how how did you like manage the business and also bake all this stuff because you these were your recipes they had to be the your standards like you were in the kitchen. You were scooping out cookie dough you are mixing stuff, but you're also like running a business that was Singing popularity. Like did you never

3 (48m 7s):
sleep? That's correct. That's correct. I still to this day and like always stressed out that I'm not going to get sleep at night, but it never occurred to me. It was a one day at a time thing. It was the same thing of like cool today. I'm going to show up and I'm going to roll that boulder up a freaking mountain and I'm going to do whatever it takes to make it happen because it's what I believe in it's because it's what these four people believe in its. Because people that are showing up at 9 a.m. And are like I am here for that milkshake that we're going to show up and we're going to figure out how to make it happen.

1 (48m 44s):
How was the business funded? I mean, I know of course David had, you know came in and helped you open it up. You were putting in Sweat Equity all your time. I have to assume you were last what independently wealthy at 27 years old definitely. So like was it I mean, did he put in money and then you had to depend on cash

3 (49m 2s):
flow. He loaned me money through Our through the whole Co of Momofuku and it was I was very well-versed at operating on a shoestring budget because that's how we built the Momofuku Empire and so it was it was a loan that we agreed that I'd pay back and I just figured out how to make it work. I mean, I was raised in this mentality of like you only need what you need and most of the time you have everything that you need and you can make so much more work with so little and it was always also really important to me that it was a patient Pursuit and that it was a real business and that it was a business that was successful both emotionally and financially,

1 (49m 48s):
but the profit margin on baked goods is really Slim and your cookies are not that expensive come. I mean at the time and there are two dollars to 25.

3 (49m 58s):
They were a dollar 85 when we first open. So how were you able

1 (50m 1s):
to have a sustainable business even with all the hype and all the Attention mean that that's a very narrow

3 (50m 8s):
margin. It has always been important to me like you can't hold space in people's lives. You can't be a bakery for the people if people can't be a part of the bakery. And so it was always important to me our cookie over 11 years hasn't even gone up a whole dollar in price. We push back on that sort of listen. You have to sell a lot of cookies to pay the Right. Yeah, and it's and so on some level it's a volume business but I've always thought about it in terms of like well the more cookies we make the more people were feeding cookies. Like that's what we're showing up for that's what we're here for.

3 (50m 49s):
I am not changing our fancy very expensive butter that the team that does the financial analysis of food causes like like, please please a cheaper butter and it's like no this is what this is what it's built on. It's a reality and it's something That we believe to be really important my access to food my inspiration to food was from the grocery store and I got excited about food because it was something that we could afford and so it's always been important to me that that always building something that could Inspire like my 10 year old self and I can't price my 10 year old self

1 (51m 24s):
out of it. I mean, I'm curious though because obviously there was a lot of hype and in 2009 Anderson Cooper on National Television on Regis and Kelly said, hey, I have had this amazing Crack Pie and New York's incredible like Was that a turning point did that result in just an explosion of

3 (51m 39s):
Interest? I didn't know I was going on TV and I certainly it's not like he was like Hey girl heads up. It's I got you tomorrow morning. I got you at 8:15 in the morning, but I got no my few hours before and at that time my Blackberry was the customer service like dial-up hotline and I just remember my Blackberry kept buzzing and buzzing and buzzing and buzzing and I was like What is going like did the bakery Catch Fire is my family? Okay, what could this possibly be? And I had all these voicemails and I have of my favorite voice mail was from this woman in Kansas City who I think maybe it was someone's grandma and she was just like, well, I heard you know Anderson Cooper talked about this crackpot and I just I'm never gonna make it to New York.

3 (52m 27s):
So like would you mind shipping me one and it was like, are you going to tell her you gonna call her back and tell her no because I was not going to call her.

1 (52m 36s):
Can tell her no

3 (52m 37s):
and as like I know how to ship pime. I feel like my whole upbringing was about taking off the baked goods we'd make and putting them into care packages and sending them in the mail. There's nothing better than receiving baked goods in the mail. So I was like I know how to do that and I went to like the all the local drugstores and bought those like break and Freeze Ice Packs and then went to all of like the ups and USPS stores was like, I'll take all the boxes. I'll take all the boxes and to showed up at the bakery and was like, here we Go we got a new day. It's a bigger Bolder to it was yesterday and we now have an online business. Where when Opportunity Knocks.

3 (53m 25s):
What are you gonna say? Like, not

1 (53m 27s):
today? Yeah, right where like when it's time to rise to

3 (53m 31s):
the occasion you rise.

1 (53m 35s):
What what was I mean? I can't imagine how insane it was like baking all keeping up with demand running a business. Like probably a lot of media requests were coming in what was keeping you up at night. Like what was causing stress for you was anywhere you stressed

3 (53m 52s):
out. It's so interesting. I'm confident I was stressed out but I wouldn't be like, I'm so stressed out. I can't function. I just be like, okay. What's next? What am I thinking about what slowing us down? There was a point where I was worried. About I'd be worried about like do we have enough cookie scoops and is the team feeling inspired to scoop as fast as I know we can scoop. Those are realities and it became more operational than anything else financially. I was very it's very like self mandated on knowing what numbers we needed to hit to be in a good place to be in a medium place and I knew every year I buy or every quarter I would line up the like, what do we need to be able to do it better and more thoughtfully now that we know a little bit more and what is our bottom line resource?

3 (54m 47s):
How do we invest it back into the business?

1 (54m 48s):
What was the relationship between you and David like I mean, he is a brilliant Chef obviously an incredible reputation but also has a reputation for having clash with lots of people. It's not it's not, you know abnormal for super talented people to clash with other people. It's not a ding on him. But I mean was he like coming in and trying to give you tips and advice and I don't know like where you sort of pushing back and saying get out of my way or what or did he just leave you

3 (55m 13s):
alone all of those things all of this? Those things depending on the day. I think if you work in a kitchen that like healthy tension that like your one moment, you're on my team the next moment. You're in my way the next minute. We just don't see eye to eye about how we're going to get to the finish line or whatever. It is. Like at this point. He remains forever brother and one of my most thoughtful sound boards for how I am thinking about building Milk bar with the team. But I mean we would early days we'd argue. He'd be like there can't be alive. No one wants to wait and let like we would argue about how quick or how slow the line would take and why and at the same time when you are a stubborn as I can be you need someone that's also willing to dig into you because there you can't see it.

3 (56m 7s):
No one can see everything and so our relationship has been hilarious and human throughout. I mean, we've known each other now for almost 20 years. Yeah. But what I have like taken the step or the leaper how I don't know. I mean, I have no clue and I'm so grateful for having him in my life to kind of kick me out of the house.

1 (56m 32s):
Did you I mean, I think within about two years you started to expand you went to three stores you had 60 employees. I'm just curious about the economics of this. I mean, we're even paying yourself in the first year or so very

3 (56m 46s):
little Yeah, but like also what am I I'm here to live to build this Bakery. I'm not like I'm really taking a day off. What am I doing? Yeah, like the my going out is like going to a local Bodega to get like a dirty sandwich late at night. That is joy and Splurge for me and it was whatever it took to make the business work after the first I was like, I'm going to write a cookbook because one I know that that part of the business will hell I can put that back into the business and plus it helps us reach more people and recipes and send me other the reality of opening another store because at the time I had this sweet little care package business thanks to Anderson Cooper and this one store but that business was so big that we were doing crazy things like sticking shop shipping boxes.

3 (57m 36s):
Basically all over our only store like there's a point where if you went in you could only take five steps forward and three steps to the left and then three back with you know, 5 backward steps out and I thought I saw like you got to build a bigger ship. And so I knew I needed to think about a larger production kitchen. I founded amazing space in Williamsburg, which is where we produce everything for our New York City stores. And I was like great. This is like wonderful and takes so much weight off of that tension and then all of a sudden it was like, oh that's just two rents to pay instead of one and though the production part of it is easy. I'm now under utilizing this commissary space and I need to open another a few stores to support

1 (58m 18s):
it. I'm curious because there's a point right in every business when an entrepreneur has to sort of decide is this a lifestyle business and this could have been a great lifestyle business you get about three three shops, you could you could have baked on, you know, two or three days a week and on payroll and done accounting and run a business and made a good living and had a nice life or do you scale it up? You make it something much much bigger when I mean you must have had that internal dialogue right? When did that happen?

3 (58m 47s):
I think the first time that it started that I started really taking that conversation seriously was two years ago when I decided to raise money to grow the business for the first time to actually start taking this business, which would was eight years in at the time seriously and yeah, we can start charging five dollars for a cookie, but that that wasn't right to us. That's not who we are and that's not what we believe in and I had a real Reckoning with myself of If this is a real business and it's time to start thinking you're at that crossroads and what is it? And what do you want to do with it,

1 (59m 26s):
you know is I was at the San Francisco Airport recently and it was just like a deli or bar there and they had cookies with potato chips and marshmallows and things that were so unusual when you introduce them in 2008 right crack pie cereal milk flavored things all of those things. Out there, I think Ben and Jerry's at one point had a cereal milk. I don't know if they still have the cereal milk ice cream. Do they still have it? They don't okay. I got you sore point Sorry Sorry about that. Whoo. How do you how do you feel about when you see like, you know, the mainstreaming of potato chips and sweet corn and cereal milk flavors in desserts all over the place.

3 (1h 0m 17s):
It's kind of Supernatural. It's like both endearing and wonderful because I think it points to people's enthusiasm to like ignite their curiosity and to like get a little wacky and wild and to think about breaking the rules in these tiny little ways and then on another level like it turbo charges us it makes us say like we're coming to the aisles of the grocery store. Like that's our space one. That's where my imagination started its where I Go and that's that's where we're going. That's what we're doing

1 (1h 0m 54s):
and you have stuff in at Target and in grocery

3 (1h 0m 56s):
stores, and we're coming at like we're coming in strong in the future guy. Like we're we're here. It's it's both wanting to celebrate people's like curiosity and food and then to also be like we gotta keep going. Yeah, we're gonna keep going and we're going to keep

1 (1h 1m 15s):
pushing but you bootstrap this thing for like eight years and you Were growing and growing and growing. So did you feel like you had to take outside money to really scale the business that you couldn't do it without outside

3 (1h 1m 28s):
money. No, it wasn't that at all. I mean we had I had proven for eight years that I didn't need the money. But I also knew that at this inflection point it would almost be stubborn to not consider it to not take myself seriously to not take this. Being that we had built that is like based on humanity and patience and real things and things that we do with our hands and not with our thumbs and to not put more of that in the world. Like I have been super thoughtful around how to raise money to fuel the business while also making sure that the the values and the principles of what we stand for exist and that boss of control.

3 (1h 2m 17s):
Is it possible? I

1 (1h 2m 19s):
think you guys have 16 shops now, right? You've got the mail order business accounts or like a third of your business something like that. Yeah, almost 400

3 (1h 2m 29s):
employees. Yeah 440. Wow. I took the count for

1 (1h 2m 34s):
you just in case you ask. I think I know the answer this question because you have I mean very obviously a really strong work ethic. I mean does any part of you ever just want to I don't know just kind of sell it and I mean it up. So real and just kind of enjoy the fruits of your hard work over the

3 (1h 2m 53s):
last decade. I don't see it as a hamster wheel like I'm so fueled by it's still where I'm like I could go into like my my Gmail and click on my drafts and my list of ideas that have to go on the menu whether it's in grocery stores, whatever it is is so long. I just until - list gets shorter. I and I can't see it getting shorter any I'm soon I like what am I gonna do? And what would I do in a day? I probably just wake up and start baking. Yeah. Why would I like black? Why would I give that away? I got a lot of I got a lot of ovens to do the baking in these days.

1 (1h 3m 33s):
I know that you didn't get into you didn't you didn't open Milk bar with David for to make a lot of money. It was a cool opportunity was a cool thing to do you you didn't sort of look out in the distance and say I'm going to be really rich but you've made money. How is that changing?

3 (1h 3m 49s):
your life Not much, I would say like the thing that has changed about my life is I'm not like sleeping and eating and baking in the same cubby, which is nice. I mean, but then also you missed the romance of it because it was so lovely when that was it. I spend I would say for me my biggest how it's changed. My life is I put so much of myself into this profession before Milk Bar even coming to New York City. I said goodbye to my family and knew that they wouldn't understand immediately and now and I put everything into it.

3 (1h 4m 32s):
I never took a day off and now I can like arguably take a day off and get on a plane or train or in a car or on a bus. And go and see my people and go and live life in the ways that we like create those sticky moments at Milk Bar for you. And that for me is like the greatest Indulgence like nothing else changes. Like I'm still trying to go through a store shopping. I'm still trying to make friendship bracelets like it's cool because I can take like an embroidery craft class and not be like, oh my gosh. Am I going to eat? Am I going to be eating like Kraft mac and cheese for the next six days to support it and that part of it easy and And the rest of it I just don't really care about

1 (1h 5m 13s):
you for me ask question before and I'm going to ask you the same question how much of all this that has happened to you is because of your intelligence incredible hard work. And how much do you think it's just because you got lucky

3 (1h 5m 24s):
I think it was more opportunity than it was luck. I think it was. I'm never like the one that I don't win scratch-off lotto tickets. That is a Splurge. That's what I left out. I don't consider myself to really have great luck. I'm never the one that like wins the contest but I show up and I mean it and I'm just a really big believer in good people that show up and mean it winning in the end. And I think that's a mixture of like focus and smarts and hard work and PS like I had no Street smarts when I moved to New York City all of these skills, you can sharpen As long as you remove the barriers to convincing yourself, you can sharpen your skills and it's opportunity and and like an opportunity knocks when that Blackberry starts buzzing.

3 (1h 6m 11s):
You better get your heinie out of bed and get to it

1 (1h 6m 15s):
Christina. Tosi found her Milk Bar, Christina. I spoke with Christina Tosi at the Town Hall in New York City. By the way, the tallest Milk Bar cake ever made was a seven-layer wedding cake mint cookies and cream and the occasion Christina's own wedding in 2016. And as is often the case with wedding cake, the guests didn't finish all of it that night. So the next morning they just had it for breakfast. Hey, thanks so much for listening to this live episode of How I built this our show is produced this week. But Rachel Falkner and Candice limb with music composed by rumty.

1 (1h 6m 57s):
Narrow Bluey a Live Events team includes Jessica Goldstein Ali Prescott Ellen Jorgensen and and huether. Thanks also to Julia car Nissan has Michigan floor Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Sequoia Carrillo guy Roz and even listening to how I built this. This is NPR.

3 (1h 7m 22s):
Support for this podcast on the following message come from traditional medicinals the Tea Company that lives up to its name by using traditional herbal formulas use promo code NPR for 20% off any of their teas like reishi mushroom powered by traditional medicinals.