2 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor Comcast business gig fueled Network Solutions that help businesses. Go beyond the expected to do the extraordinary Comcast business Beyond fast. Learn more at Comcast business.com. Hey, it's guy here. And before we start the show just a quick thing. A lot of people ask, how can I support how I built this and really the best way to support what we do is by supporting your local public radio station, which broadcast the show on there are Waves here at NPR we're launching our annual fundraising Campaign, which runs all the way to December 31st. So if you want to support your local public radio station, please consider donating by going to donate.

2 (42s):
Npr.org / built and thanks. Hey, everyone, just wanna let you know that the how I built this elves are hard at work and over the next few weeks. We're gonna be sharing some of my live conversations from our recent Summit in San Francisco. You'll see them every Thursday in your podcast feed. In fact, we posted our first one last week. It's with Sara Blakely of Spanx and you should definitely check it out. And we've got a bunch more on the way Kevin Systrom and Mike Krieger of Instagram tarique Farid of Edible Arrangements and many many others who keep checking for updates. All right, today's episode. It is my conversation with Miriam nafisi. She founded a beauty company called Eve and then the stationary company minted which almost died before Miriam figured out how to grow it into a multimillion-dollar brand it first ran in June of last year.

2 (1m 34s):
There you go. So April 2008 you launch minted and and you're like the doors open the shingles out. You're excited. You pop the champagne Corks And nothing nothing

1 (1m 47s):
absolute dead silence. No orders. There was not a sale to be had. It was terrifying and horrible horrible. And we almost I really contemplated that moment. This is a failure. We need to shut this business down. We need to give whatever remains of the money back to investors because it's a total

2 (2m 4s):
failure. From NPR it's how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They don't I'm Gyros and on today's show how Miriam nafisi turned her online stationery store into one of the biggest platforms for emerging artists on the internet and in the process transformed the business personal, Eli's

1 (2m 35s):
stationery

2 (2m 41s):
Back at the end of the 1980s at age 13. I was getting ready to officially become a man. This is the age of which according to Jewish tradition boys enter manhood and they have a bar mitzvah. There's a big party we get hoisted up on a chair and paraded around a dance floor you serve salmon or chicken you get the idea anyway about eight or nine months before the big day. I remember going with my mom. To a stationary store to look at tons of invitation samples. We checked out fonts Paper Stock colors. We ended up going with burgundy black and gold. She put down a deposit. It was a long process now compare that to when my son was born 25 years later.

2 (3m 26s):
I went online. I uploaded a photo of his pink little face. I pick the layout uploaded my address book put in my credit card details and Bam within like three days everyone on my list. Received a beautiful birth announcement in the mail. So thank you internet. Now. This is the revolution Miriam nafisi tapped into in 2007 when she launched

1 (3m 48s):
minted but what differentiates minted is a major

2 (3m 51s):
pivot Miriam would make early on because instead of just selling personalized holiday cards or wedding invitations Miriam actually built a platform for artists to Showcase their work and she did this by tapping into another Revolution that was Happening in the early 2000s crowdsourcing but before minted was even a thought in maryam's mind. She had ridden the.com wave of the late 90s with a company called Eve was a website that sold cosmetics and at a very young age Miriam and her partner managed to sell it before the.com bust and the thing about Miriam is that despite launching two successful companies.

2 (4m 32s):
She never intended to become an entrepreneur Miriam grew up in Terror. Ron her mom was an artist originally from China. Her dad was an economist from Iran and toward the end of the 1970s as the situation in Iran became more volatile the family decided to pack up and flee,

1 (4m 52s):
you know, the environment was unstable and we did not know it was very unclear what was going to happen. I think that we were we were really worried about what would happen to us in the new regime. So, you know, I guess my Dad thinks of us as refugees which is when you leave unwillingly when we got here. It was the you know soon after we arrived these hostage crisis started here and that was not a great time to be Iranian in the US and being a kid in school. That was really difficult. I basically really honestly tried to americanize and fit in as fast as I possibly could I really wanted to integrate and I when I came here I actually had a pretty at a strong accent.

1 (5m 40s):
I was two years younger than everybody in my class all the way through basically school. I was two years younger. So I was small I small young and foreign and I just I really wanted to be American and honestly, I sort of feel like the whole time even when I was in Iran. I felt like a little bit of a You know an outsider there as well. So you're always if you're like me and you're you move around a lot and your of mixed cultures, you're never really going to feel like you belong to one place or one culture, right? You're always going to feel a little bit like The Outsider who's traveling through time and space as an

2 (6m 13s):
observer. Were you pretty good student as a kid?

1 (6m 16s):
I was I was I was that nerdy girl who sat at the front of the class with glasses on who everybody wanted to get help from with their homework quiet. I would say quiet and and pretty competitive very competitive. Yeah,

2 (6m 31s):
and we're did I mean as a kid, did you have any real interest in like business or entrepreneurial stuff?

1 (6m 40s):
No, my parents I come from a completely non business family and honestly, you know with the Iranian upper class, you know, you didn't you didn't you didn't set up business as sort of the vaunted thing. That one goes into things that were in a my family very, Admired were things like being a doctor going into Foreign Service and the government for example, so when I was growing up in Chevy Chase, not once did business crossed my mind. I was thinking law and I do remember my mom on the first day of first grade sort of bending down to say to me something and she said I want you to go to school and I want you to beat all of the

2 (7m 21s):
boys. So you you eventually went on to To call to Williams College in Massachusetts. What did you what did you do after you graduated?

1 (7m 34s):
So that's where I did do the the expected thing. It's some of my fellow classmates who were in economics and poli-sci were interviewing for jobs on Wall Street and in management consulting firms and those firms had these huge processes on-campus recruiting processes. So I just so I went to Goldman Sachs as a financial analyst in their Investment Banking

2 (7m 55s):
Division and you loved it.

1 (8m 0s):
I can't say that I love being a financial analyst that it is sort of like loving boot camp. I don't know if you're familiar with it, but you end up working very very long hours, but I will say it's a great training ground as to what work ethic really means because you can't imagine working harder than what you actually physically pull off as a financial analyst

2 (8m 22s):
like 22 or 21 and you probably moving to New York and and all you were doing was

1 (8m 27s):
Working all I was doing was working. So I was 20 and I was where I was eating breakfast lunch and dinner at the office and I was actually selling I had a desk on the bond trading floor and I was selling bonds as well as doing working with clients. So before I could actually drink I was selling bonds. So before I could drink legally

2 (8m 45s):
so you I guess you were doing this for a couple years and then at a certain point you decide to go to business school. Were you were you thinking in your mind like, okay. I'm going to go to business school and then My start a business.

1 (8m 59s):
So what happened was I at first was just thinking about going to business school because I actually dunfin Investment Banking and management consulting and I thought perhaps I would want to go into consumer products or retail. Hmm But I didn't get into Stanford the first time I applied for business school. And so I decided to take a year off and try to boost my resume with something that was a little bit more differentiated and went to work for an Lenore Maurice were to Gar in the restaurant business. Actually. Hm who was a Stanford grad and he became a key mentor to me. He's he was starting a chain of restaurants in Palo Alto and all over California, but I was so inspired and bitten with the entrepreneurial bug during that experience and Maurice importantly said to me you really you really could do this.

1 (9m 49s):
You could start a company. I think you should really consider it because we would spend hours talking about entrepreneurial ideas venture capital and just get becoming Really obsessed to the point where I thought why go to business school a real entrepreneur doesn't go to business school, right? I'm not even interested anymore. And at that point I thought all right. I'll play one more time because my boyfriend who became my husband was applying I thought all right. Let's all throw my hat in the ring one more time and then Stanford accepted me. Yeah,

2 (10m 15s):
so you go to business school, but wait, I read that you while at business school. You published published a book called. I'm gonna read this whole this book called The Fast Track the Insiders guide to winning jobs and and Consulting Investment Banking and securities trading a book that has sold like 50,000 copies. That's very precocious. I mean that's like super like that is it's like overdrive precocious.

1 (10m 39s):
Yeah. So the reason I did that was I thought well one it's a market need. Yeah. I know how to fill this need. I have done so much recruiting at the two firms. I was working at but I knew that there was a need for the book and I wanted to experiment to see what would happen. If you create a consumer product that you know that there's a need for can you can I actually put a product together and sell it? And I also thought it would be a good project to demonstrate that I had some I guess chutzpa to be able to get into Stanford. So I sold the book right? And then I knew I had sold the book to a publisher Broadway before I as I was applying and I think that help differentiate me as well and then I used the the advance to pay for business school, which I needed to pay for. Yeah, so it was a way to pay for school.

2 (11m 24s):
So at Stanford, did you did you should have a business plan or idea that you wanted to put

1 (11m 28s):
together? Well, I started the second half of the year. So first of all second half of the year at Stanford, I was taking every entrepreneurial class I could and trying desperately to get into the best classes. I was auditing some sitting on the floor of others and then working on plans. And one thing I knew that I wanted to do is find a partner that I really liked. So I called a friend of mine in New York and tried to convince her to come to San Francisco. Start something with me and we had two ideas and she said well, I'll start a company if we if we pursue my idea which is selling Cosmetics online and I and mine was to do market research online sort of like a Survey Monkey. What was her name varsha Rao and so we decided to pursue Cosmetics as I thought sure why not I want to work with you and I need to get to convince you to come out.

1 (12m 17s):
So let's work on Cosmetics. I've used Cosmetics before we can figure this out. And so I convinced her to move out

2 (12m 26s):
to come to San Francisco to helps. You start a an online Cosmetics

1 (12m 31s):
company. Mhm. Yeah, and she slept on the couch in our studio apartment or a one-bedroom apartment. And in the morning we get up in our pajamas so we'd wouldn't wake up. My my now husband and we'd sit on the couch and call all the New York Cosmetics companies from our couch in our pajamas and convince people to sign on with us to distribute on this thing called the internet. Which most people had we're extremely suspicious of so that was a adventure but also the

2 (13m 0s):
business was going to be just an online store selling all kinds of Cosmetics to every different brand. That was the

1 (13m 7s):
idea. That's right. So the idea was to create a replenishment brand for Cosmetics. What's your thought skincare meaning things that you want to replenish skin care hair care, you know your favorite and you just want to replenish it because at that point everybody was telling us nobody was going to buy Cosmetics online that they'd never. Tried yeah and moreover women don't shop online, right? That's a fact. Yes women don't shop online and nobody will ever buy makeup on and line and I'll just say in my career that has happened repeatedly right where people will say No One's Gonna buy paper online who's gonna buy that Dubai shoes online. No one is going to do this. No one has glasses No One's Gonna buy that on - yeah. So I mean if you hear that as an entrepreneur, you've got to Discount that massively because yeah, trust me.

1 (13m 48s):
It's been everything all of those things have been said

2 (13m 50s):
so when you approach you small brands,

1 (13m 53s):
Even why didn't any of them just

2 (13m 54s):
say well we'll just sell them online ourselves. Why were they attracted to what you guys are offering them?

1 (14m 1s):
Well in those days there was no solution that would easily allow a small brand to actually sell online. I know it sounds crazy, but there was no solution. And so first of all nobody wanted to sell online we would have to go in there and convince them that the internet was not bad. We also actually hired a woman from Macy's who was formerly. From me at Macy's as a big manager of the Cosmetics business and she ended up being a river guide. It should making introductions for us helping advise us, you know, if you go to Chanel where the Chanel nail polish for example, that was that one stood out they'll recognize their colors on you.

2 (14m 40s):
So you and varsha and by the way, what's your

1 (14m 41s):
husband's name? Michael Michael are you

2 (14m 43s):
so you've are sure Michael are living in this apartment you and varsha decide you are going to start an online cosmetic store, which Today doesn't sound like that big of a deal but I guess in 1998 that was kind of

1 (14m 58s):
revolutionary. Right? Nobody was selling Cosmetics online nobody. Can you believe literally no one and think

2 (15m 4s):
so. Yeah. I wish I didn't I mention I could go back and start a Cosmetics company.

1 (15m 8s):
Yeah, and then, you know to start a company, you know, I basically took a white sheet of paper out and started drawing a website on a white sheet of paper in my kitchen along with another sheet of paper where I was trying to come up with metrics as to what I would call. Different things like people coming to your site. And what would you call the metric where someone converts into a customer? Hmm and everything had to be invented literally for the first time then we went through a really insane year. So we I graduated in 1998. We immediately started fundraising but what was it?

2 (15m 45s):
Was it easy to raise money in 1998

1 (15m 48s):
1998. It was getting pretty easy 1999 was crazy just

2 (15m 52s):
because it was the

1 (15m 53s):
Dot-com boom. It was boom. It was starting to boom. Yeah wasn't the height but it was getting there. And I sense that there was an opportunity for me to get Capital even though I was 27 and had no work experience and

2 (16m 5s):
people like Joe and people liked your

1 (16m 7s):
pitch. They loved our pitch they loved us and they loved our pitch and we had a lot of interest and we ended up in an interesting situation where we did experience some collusion. Actually. This was a really difficult part of that Journey where in the old days you could a VC firms gang up if they could find out who else you were talking to they could collude and basically work with each other and partner together to drive your price down your valuation down, huh? And I had heard about it a business school in a lecture and it's sure enough. It happened. It happened to me. So we had a couple term sheets come in for our first round of financing and it was idea lava plus a couple of others, but to of the firm's decided they first they found out about who we were talking to.

1 (16m 53s):
They decided to collude so we signed a term sheet with one player and they were valuing us straight out of the blocks just as people and with this Power Point presentation at 6 million dollars,

2 (17m 3s):
right? Which sounds pretty good, right?

1 (17m 6s):
Yes. It was fantasy. We were very happy. We it was a prestigious firm. They had an office on Sand Hill Sandhill Road, but they turned around and actually decided to partner with another firm and they called us and said we're sorry. This is now their deal the terms are changing. And the terms now became we need you to move cities to wear. This other firm is we're going to bring the valuation down to 4 million and it was a collusion straight like a textbook Collision a

2 (17m 35s):
hole on. This is like Darth Vader territory like the terms how changed its just explain to me how that worked how that was like allowed to happen.

1 (17m 44s):
Yeah. So it's a term sheet is unfortunately not binding. It's a indication of Interest that's really a buildup of good faith. And so You could do it and get away with it. Absolutely and it happened a lot in you know in that denied late 90s when you didn't have online transparency and reputation where other entrepreneurs could learn about what people were doing to you. And so there was no consequence and so you could become as an investor much more abusive.

2 (18m 13s):
So what did you do? What did you tell them when they said that they said this four million bucks. And here you go.

1 (18m 18s):
So what's fascinating is we had not yet called Bill gross to tell him that. We were turning him

2 (18m 23s):
down Bill gross was the guy who

1 (18m 26s):
had idea lab in Pasadena. So we had had this third term sheet and we were planning to call him, but we just didn't have the time. We hadn't had the time to call him. So instead of calling him to turn him down. We put the phone down with the other group. We picked the phone up we call Bill gross and we said we're signing your term sheet will be in Pasadena tomorrow morning, and we exited the side door. Wow.

2 (18m 49s):
Okay, so you have you raised some money? It's 98 how long between the time that you went to investors receive money and you actually launched the website.

1 (19m 1s):
We took the money in in 1998 and we launched in July 1999.

2 (19m 7s):
And what described by the way we should mention the what the name of the website was.

1 (19m 11s):
I'm sorry, the name was Eve.com and like Adam but Eve and Eve. Eve yes.

2 (19m 18s):
So when you launch tv.com did people find out about right away, how do people even know where to go and how to look for it?

1 (19m 26s):
Yeah. So we ended up with a massive amount of press coverage and we actually had a lot of money for marketing and we were encouraged to spend it because at that time it was land-grab time. Everybody was trying to grab market share as fast as they could we launched in and there were four competitors you launch a right behind us. And one of the big things I learned to do is just completely block out any fear or Ocean of the competitors keep your head down. And so the minute we open the doors the literally the product started selling ridiculously quickly. Wow. I mean we did ten million dollars in sales in our first year. But yeah, it's a very was a runaway you're given that it was our first year of business

2 (20m 3s):
amazing you were so young and you were like, yeah huge,

1 (20m 7s):
but we were lest anyone be confused here. We were working till ten o'clock at night every night in the office. Yeah. This is where the investment banking background came in handy because we were trained and to operate like that and you know, my husband would come meet me at the office of 10 and we'd have dinner at 10:30 every

2 (20m 22s):
night. So you in 2000 like a year and a half after you launch you guys get an offer and you sell this company Eve.com is sold for a hundred and ten million dollars. So I mean, I don't even want to ask the question why I mean it seems obvious. It was a lot of money and a no-brainer I guess,

1 (20m 44s):
right. Right. So, you know, this was a time when we were trying to raise a series D. And honestly, the market was starting to get a little skeptical. We know when you're going to make a profit what's going on. And so I start for the first time in that for the 14 to 16 month period I started realizing that getting the next round was going to be difficult and we could take have Safe Harbor for the company inside and of the company. I thought it would probably a wise move and we closed it in April 2002 Weeks Later the market started.

2 (21m 16s):
Rushing so you made it just like by the skin of your

1 (21m 18s):
teeth? Yeah, we yes we had the foot in the door as the door was closing.

2 (21m 23s):
Do you do what's that other people in your position in the industry who maybe didn't have as good timing as you guys did who were I don't know maybe resentful of your luck or your foresight.

1 (21m 37s):
I think there were a lot of cases where people were convinced by investors or convince themselves to keep going and wait for the like exit because clearly at that point everybody was in everybody was enamored of the IPO and I do think people were resentful of us for this and they considered it lucky versus any type of hard work or Intuition or anything else and that was unfortunate because we worked our butts off to build this business. I mean we were working I basically lived at the office during this time. I never laughed so we built a pretty good business in a year. It was 10 million dollars. First year yet.

1 (22m 17s):
Yes people were I think we're very resentful that we had sold at the right time. So

2 (22m 23s):
did you just like go to Hawaii and like kick it and drink pina

1 (22m 27s):
coladas? I did take a year off and my husband and I traveled around it's true, but about two months into it. I got I was absolutely miserable. I felt like I was missing out on what was happening and huh, and and fundamentally there was a perception that we got lucky with Eve. Dot-com and I had this feeling that you know you that that's saying once you're lucky twice you're good. I wanted to see if I was actually good or not, you know, and so I think I needed to prove to myself that I could do it again.

2 (23m 3s):
In just a moment how Mariam got into the stationery business and almost abandoned it right before stumbling on an idea that would transform the entire industry stay with us. You're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible. First to Capital One with the Capital One Savor card. You can earn four percent cash back on dining and entertainment that means four percent on milkshakes with the kids and 4% music with your pals.

2 (23m 49s):
You'll also earn 2% cash back at grocery stores and 1% all other purchases. Now when you go out to cash in Capital One What's in your wallet terms apply? Thanks. Also to Brave Brave is a free next Generation web browser that values your security and privacy. This means stopping trackers and creepy ads from following you as you browse while getting unmatched speed and Battery savings. You can even earn rewards for opting into their privacy respecting ads switching to Brave is easy. You can import all your bookmarks with one click and your Chrome extensions work in Brave learn more about Brave. Wave at Brave.com built Brave yesterday was about big Tech today.

2 (24m 35s):
It's about us. I'm ship Brantley, and I'm Andrew Beck Grace. We are the hosts of the NPR Podcast White Lies a story about guilt and memory that says as much about America today as it does about the past Apple just named White Lies the best True

1 (24m 52s):
Crime show of the year, and if you haven't listened yet, you can binge the entire series now wherever you get your podcast. Thanks.

2 (25m 3s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's 2002 and after a break from work Miriam nafisi decides to get back in the game and it turns out the body shop wants to create an e-commerce Division and so they asked Miriam to run it, but after a few years working for a big company Miriam starts getting that entrepreneurial itch

1 (25m 27s):
once again when you have entrepreneurial Tendencies, sometimes you'll see Thing that you can't resist and I thought I saw change and what consumers are willing and excited about consuming and so for example bloggers were starting to emerge that were disrupting journalists that it really established institutions and consumers were willing to read them over those established institutions, and there was great talent coming to the fore and so I was thinking to myself that perhaps in product design there would be a similar opportunity that you could find. Scented designers that people would rather buy than the not talented designer. So I was up started getting really interested in the idea of having design competitions in this idea of crowd sourcing and so I decided to take stationary which I was an interesting model for me and mash it up with this kind of experimental idea which was crowdsourcing and I thought I'm

2 (26m 24s):
like if you met a friend of the coffee shop and and they said hey, you know, what, are you working on? You would say I'm Canvas is this business that's going to do what like, what would you

1 (26m 35s):
say at that point? I would have said we're going to sell stationary online

2 (26m 40s):
which sounds sounds pretty

1 (26m 42s):
clear. Yep, and it was one foot back in the old world of just take the Brand's consolidate them online and sell them. Yep. There is a slightly embarrassing idea I had which was to run a design competition around the side and crowdsource designs that weren't available through the established stationary Brands and I was going to do that on the side

2 (27m 0s):
in other words you You said I'm going to have a site that sells stationary and then on the side we're going to run like design competitions and and maybe we can develop stationary based on the winner of that design competition.

1 (27m 12s):
That's right. I got Jaqueline. All right, so the idea was focused around stationary retail and it had fantastic economics associated with it. Good margins. It was an inherently viral product because your name is on the back of the card your company name, but the shopping experience offline was pretty archaic. You'd go to a store or there'd be a piece of paper you'd Right to order some custom cards. It had to fax it in to the supplier. It was an archaic slow and really inconvenient process and I thought in my opinion the design could be improved greatly and that gave me an opening for crowdsourcing on the one hand on the other hand. I was a little bit honestly a little bit risk-averse and I thought that I did not want to raise Venture Capital again because I had had some bumpy experiences in the first in the first go-round.

1 (28m 1s):
So I thought I need to find a business model to apply this idea to that is very very cash flow positive and doesn't require a lot of cash and I'm going to run it as a cash flow business, huh?

2 (28m 14s):
In other words a business that could just self-fund right because of the Rev. That's right. Yeah, so you didn't want to have to raise a lot of money, but you still had to raise some money right to get this off the ground,

1 (28m 25s):
right? So at this point I was going to friends and because I had successfully sold. Eve they were willing to listen and so I was actually able to raise a pretty big Angel around of two and a half million dollars, which is big for an angel round.

2 (28m 40s):
So you decided you weren't even going to go to VCS

1 (28m 42s):
initially. That's right at this point. I wanted much more control. I decided not to have a co-founder from the outset and so I put the plan together and what I found was many of my friends were a little bit they were very very supportive incredibly supportive, but they were all a little a bit wary of crowdsourcing because it was not a tried-and-true model this point what was tried and true was e-commerce 1.0 which is take all the brand names put them online and provide convenient access online. Yeah, so that's what I did. I signed up all these stationary Brands and I put them online and then in the in the background I hired a coder who was in college in Portland and I would work at night on the competition structure, which was my real passion, which was to try to crowd Source the content.

2 (29m 29s):
So you raised about two and a half million dollars. Some Angel funding and you are ready to launch this site, which is going to sell stationary by the way. How many people did you hire? Did you bring a board to help you launch it

1 (29m 43s):
to launch minted. I had virtually no one there were maybe five of us something like that. And I that's when I raised I finished the angel Round We sublet a little bit of space in Jackson Square and we started with just a few people

2 (29m 59s):
first year and who built the website. Right. How did you do

1 (30m 2s):
that? So we spent almost all the two and a half million on an in-house team who came on board at engineer and the key challenge was how to render the customization of your stationary online. That was and that was so that wasn't something we could buy off the shelf from anyone. So we had to build it. I said in other words just

2 (30m 22s):
be clear a way to be able to see what your stationary would look

1 (30m 26s):
like. That's right so our Engineers built Away to see your customized text appear on the screen in inside your stationary design and that you couldn't buy from any other technology company. So I spent most of the two and a half million dollars. I raised going around signing up all these exclusives with stationary brands that you would see at a Papyrus store. For example, you see them they've already gotten distribution then well-known wedding Brands stationary Brands. I spent most of the time and the money doing that and then I just couldn't let Go of this other thing that was really risky and unproven which was to have a design competition and I really really wanted to let myself do that.

1 (31m 7s):
But I just couldn't let myself do it was this this to this tear so at night I worked with a college student who I found on rent a coder which is embarrassing to admit and we worked on this at night after everyone admitted went home. I would build the competition structure with this guy and I really wanted to do that full time, but I just I just didn't let myself.

2 (31m 29s):
April 2008 you launch minted and and you're like the doors open the shingles out. You're excited. You pop the champagne Corks

1 (31m 37s):
And nothing nothing absolute dead silence. No orders. There was not a sale to be had. It was terrifying and horrible horrible with Eve. We open the doors in the makeup was just flying out from day one. I mean was it was this massive amount of sales here? There was not one thing sold in the first 30 days not one sale and we almost I really can't Played at that moment. This is a failure. We need to shut this business down need to give whatever remains of the money back to investors because it's a total failure. Hmm.

2 (32m 8s):
Did you at least have like positive Buzz around it or

1 (32m 12s):
anything like that? We had a really negative article from TechCrunch. What did it's a terrible idea this person's failed before I think that they didn't really even understood that we had. You know, it's successfully sold the company for as much money as we did you

2 (32m 25s):
mean he's not calm.

1 (32m 26s):
Yes, so they just made some assumptions. And had just a terrible like that was our freshmen our debut. And so the so what happened was and this is what was really fascinating when you look back on it is we just didn't have enough data. And so what happened was we didn't have enough traffic to really assess whether we were successful or not because nobody nobody knew about us and nobody was coming and then when they did come what they were buying were the was a tiny little crowd Source selection that I mentioned to you. That was my little personal secret hobby passion explained I explained

2 (32m 58s):
how that worked. For a

1 (32m 59s):
moment. Yeah. So so when we open our doors in April, we had our very first design competition for what people call save the date cards that people send me on you're about to get married. Yeah, and and we had very few entries and I think what would happen is we pick something like sixty six cards out of that competition based on voting. So the way that minted works is everything is submitted to us via a design competition. We picked about 66 designs and we launched those but we had Druids if not, actually really thousands of skus that we were carrying from established stationary brands that we launched at the

2 (33m 35s):
same already said save the

1 (33m 36s):
date that already said to save the date or wedding. It was all all sorts of things wedding invitations other things that people provide and we launched all of that stationary wedding stationery product online and then just our little tiny collection of 66 crowdsource save the date cards. What was really different is that immediately the submissions that were coming in or breaking a lot of barriers and a lot of molds that have been a Seemed about that category of product. For example, people started putting photos on them. And I remember our printer who we signed up to do this tiny little bit of business said to us, you know, what in our industry people don't put photos on save the date cards Miriam. They don't they don't do that. I said, I understand but that's what's actually being submitted and that's what's winning.

1 (34m 18s):
Huh. So we're going to sell them. Yeah. So what happened was within a couple of months. We started getting let's say one order a day. Seriously one order a day maybe by June and then You know a month after that it went to two orders a day, maybe three orders a day still nothing to write home about and

2 (34m 35s):
and you were probably not you're running out of cash. I can't I

1 (34m 40s):
can absolutely our Runway at this point is running out our conversion rate, which is a critical metric that e-commerce companies use to determine success with something like point one percent meaning out of all the people who come point one percent by and that is really really low. So

2 (34m 55s):
you're in trouble like I'm getting

1 (34m 58s):
nervous. Yes. Have you know a couple hundred thousand dollars left in the bank, but then we started seeing the tiny sign of life. I thought well, maybe what I can do is take some capital and least save this business just to recoup the initial investment and that's it. So my good friend and Angel one of my really good friends. Alex. Lucy called me and said, you know, I'm just going to eat like I just getting nervous about this Market. I think you should take some Capital some institutional capital and I thought you know, I feel The same way I should get on it. So I went out and I decided to break my own Rule and actually raise venture capital and we raised in we basically closed our First Institutional round of capital.

1 (35m 43s):
So that's where we raised a couple million

2 (35m 45s):
dollars. How were you able to do that? If you if you if what you had to show for was a company that was getting no orders. You were losing money quickly. Like why would a venture capital firm give you cash at that

1 (35m 57s):
point? That's a great question guy. Yeah. Great question. So the reason why they invested in US was personal reputation that was it, you know, I delivered one thing successfully before and this one Brave investor from idg now Ridge Ventures Alex Rose and decided to take a chance on me. And that's it. That's the only reason and nobody else was interested. Do you think

2 (36m 20s):
I don't want to I don't want to put you in an uncomfortable position. I am but do you think that I'm going to do it? Anyway, it's basically it's like that for the life ring that question do. You think if you would have been a man? There'd been no doubt. Oh, yeah stationary sounds great. Here's the money.

1 (36m 37s):
I think that if I were a man, I would probably have gotten a little bit more credit for what I had previously delivered. I think the personal reputation effect of what had happened with e would have magnified uh-huh, but I don't think stationary was very and design was very interesting to a lot of mail Venture capitalists. And I don't think that when I say Silicon Valley doesn't have design confidence, I mean The investors in Silicon Valley don't really understand design and why it's important.

2 (37m 9s):
So when you so explain that the business model, I mean, obviously you were selling all of the stationery from from other brands. And so you would get a cut of that and that would fund your business that would that would that would bring in Revenue but also you had this crowd-sourced these competitions from designers and then how that work like they would Are there designs would be printed by you guys and then they would get a cut of that.

1 (37m 37s):
Well the way it worked back then was that we had the stationary Brands who were basically in a wholesale relationship with we would take the product and resell it and and earn a cut and we had the crowd-sourced side where designers would submit and they would receive a couple things. They first of all they would receive peer critique and feedback from their peers we built in a critique phase into the process which was a benefit and second if they One they would receive an upfront cash prize that was completely at our risk meaning if the product never sold they can still keep the cash and then on top of that if the product sold they would receive a percentage of every sale and so that's how the business model launched.

1 (38m 17s):
But because the only thing that sold was the crowd search product and not what we spent the entire year launching which was all the stationary Brands. We actually made a hard cut over and by Christmas of that year we went. % crowdsourcing wow, and so we turned it around we actually decided to move into the holiday cards business against the advice of all of our investors who probably rightly said you should focus on what you started which was wedding. We decided to ignore the advice launched into holiday cards, and we were we had an exceptional first Christmas. I mean we were so oversold it was we had to actually shut off our Market our search marketing our point because we were getting too many orders.

1 (39m 1s):
So the That's when the company went through a huge increase in sales.

2 (39m 6s):
So what point did you decide to drop selling other stationary

1 (39m 11s):
Brands? Yeah, so that was really rough because I had gone and sold Minted as a partner to all of these stationary Brands and I felt very ethically bound like, you know, I've made a commitment I've explained why we brought them on and now instead this crowd-sourced Design coming from unknown designers. I'm all over the country is just taking off and I felt very uncomfortable. And I and I was lingering in that discomfort for many months. It took me at least nine months to say we've got to cut and run. We're going to lose all the money. We put into those building out those brands on our site. We got to just cut that and shed all of that work all that money and all those relationships and we need to completely pivot towards a crowdsource model 100% I'm assuming you

2 (39m 57s):
had a lot of tough conversations with our

1 (40m 0s):
partners I did. But I think also they they understood why tie themselves up selling online at minted if if that's just not what's working and the sales aren't happening. And the meantime, we couldn't print fast enough the work of the emerging designers who the customers themselves were picking.

2 (40m 19s):
So as you start to gain traction those first few years did any I mean did any competitors try to go after you

1 (40m 27s):
yes, so it's 2013. We have two printers who handle all of our holiday card orders one does 50% The other one does another 50% the first week of October my cell phone rings at about five o'clock. It's the CEO of a much much larger come from a competitor and they basically say we want you didn't hear the news from us. We have bought this printing company of yours that you use, you know, this this this 50% player and we'd love to talk to you about how we could Can you supplying you with printing services through the holiday season now? This is mind you two weeks from the start of the holiday season when all of the you-know-what hits the fan meeting.

1 (41m 11s):
You have to be prepared your spending, you know, ten months of the year preparing for this moment because the seasonality is so high for holiday cards. And basically he said we know can you come in next week and talk to me and invited me and I think for like a six o'clock meeting neck that you know the following week. So I went in for the meeting and after a little bit of Chatter he said we'd like to buy you. We liked we like to buy your business and I realized in that moment that that whole thing had been constructed to basically Force us to sell our business. They basically bought that printing

2 (41m 48s):
facility knowing that you guys would be

1 (41m 51s):
like in a corner back to the corner. That's right.

2 (41m 55s):
So what did you do? When when he

1 (41m 57s):
said we want to buy it. I mean, I mean well you have is in his office kind of stuck there. So I had to say something. So what I basically said was well, let's talk about it. Let's how you know, how would this work? And I thought in the meantime God I cannot I got to get out of this meeting right now and call my that is supply chain so he can end the engineering team so they can work start working on this immediately. Like, you know, I left the meeting and I called everybody the team is waiting and we had a conversation and they were racing around the country trying to find printers who would work with us

2 (42m 26s):
to Depart of you think that you might actually have to

1 (42m 29s):
sell no. I never feared that. We would have to sell not once I knew we would find a way around it. I just I just there's just no way I would let that happen.

2 (42m 38s):
So what did you do? I mean, where did you go?

1 (42m 41s):
So we found we found another two printers who were gracious and enough to take us on and we we call still inside. The company is called printer gettin at minted because the amount of work and he'll our people went through to to do that integration at top. Aid was Dreadful, I've had this Dreadful yeah and to this day that that has left a taste in those people's mouths, you know around this potential competitor. That's still I think is still there, you know. Hmm and at the

2 (43m 17s):
time I mean when they were going after you mean there were other companies who were doing what you were doing right there were companies doing custom stationery that you could buy

1 (43m 26s):
online. That's right. So the first generation of companies had been around that. That captivated people just by the sheer fact that they could make custom stationery for you at a decent price. Right? That was just there almost like an outgrowth of the printing and Manufacturing industry. Frankly. We came along with real design vision and really tried to change that. It's entirely into a branded high-end European stationary product with lots of bells and whistles and really change the industry so that yes there were choices but we felt the design could be better and more exciting and then as this community creative He blossomed and developed. We realized that we were a creative community of all kinds of different people some people who were former lawyers, you know, there's an oil rig worker from Alaska.

1 (44m 12s):
There's a plumber a master plumber in New York City who's winning stationary challenges. There are all kinds of people who want to be creative and who want to earn money creatively and minted is a platform for these people to be seen and discovered

2 (44m 25s):
is minted a profitable company today.

1 (44m 28s):
Yes, so we are in the the low hundreds of millions of dollars in sales and we are ibadah where cash flow positive. Are you able to kind of just relax now

2 (44m 40s):
know and know that your business is fine. You'll be fine. Like can you go on vacation and disentangle disassociate yourself from from work for a week and not take calls like is that or do you still I used to always thinking about the survival of your

1 (44m 56s):
company? That's a great question because I think for the first believe it or not five or even six years even longer of the company there was constant survivability risk. Actually now, I feel differently. I feel like the company given that its profitable given that it's growing. So well, it's a great feeling and yes, I can breathe this this the paranoid paranoid immigrant mentality that I've

2 (45m 23s):
think grown up

1 (45m 24s):
with and then of course If you know a couple of crashes and other Market, you know, it make tends to make you a paranoid person he tend not to forget any of this it just it just stays with you. But yes, I can I can now say that a yes. I can guy go on a vacation for a week and not worried maybe even two weeks and not worried at all.

2 (45m 46s):
How much of your success is because of luck versus skill and intelligence and hard

1 (45m 55s):
work? I think so much of it is lock. I mean think about what would have happened if I had not been able to leave Iran, right? How many people are in areas around the world where they can't escape what the situation that their governments are creating for them. Think about all those talented people who won't ever have a chance and and I guess I would say the other thing is just sheer wanting it very badly, right? I mean, there are a lot of People who are smarter than I am. And I think it's just I really focused in on something. I'm happily extremely passionate about and love to think about all the time and I would say that's luck and passion probably outweigh the raw skills.

2 (46m 43s):
Miriam nafisi founder of minted means it's also become one of the biggest crowd sourcing platforms for emerging artists tens of thousands of artists submit their work to the site each year and only a tiny handful are chosen to have their artwork and Designs sold on

1 (47m 1s):
minted.

2 (47m 12s):
And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from one of our sponsors Squarespace design and build your own websites with features, including mobile editing go to squarespace.com NPR for a free trial then use offer code NPR to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. When it's too cold to go out or to I see to make it out of the driveway. Where do you go to find just the right movie just the right book just the right show to binge pop culture happy hour from NPR can help you keep warm and keep up at the same time.

2 (47m 56s):
Join us twice a week on pop culture happy hour. Hey, thanks for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and today we're updating a story that we first ran about a year ago and the story does not start in the typical way. A lot of people think of starting a company. They think oh, I gotta wait for that lightning bolt moments. Just hit me like that. Amazing Insight that I'm just like, oh my gosh, I got to build a company around this but that is not what happened to Chris ran a fours. He did not have that lightning bolt moment. What he did have was more of a Restless pitch, he and his friend Harrison were feeling bored at their nine to five jobs, Louisville, Kentucky and they knew they wanted to launch a business.

2 (48m 39s):
They just had no idea what to sell. So we would actually walk up and down the halls of Walmart and say, okay what if we took that toy and smashed it with that home object what we get and what if we took that thing and tweak that thing what if we smash this with that and that with this and I'm one of those brainstorming trips to Walmart, they wound up in the garden section and they are pretty a big selection of birdhouses and Chris looked at those bird houses, but didn't think about birds instead. He thought back to how he and his dad used to build little houses for bats literally a place for bats to hang out and sleep in the backyard, which I know sounds kind of creepy 50% of people out there will think.

2 (49m 21s):
Oh, that's horrible. Scary. The other 50% will think huh? That's But whichever can't be your end. Chris wants you to know that. That's they get kind of a bum rap the vast majority of them do not want to bite you and do not carry rabies. In fact in many places bats are in trouble. They're actually running out of habitat. So a nice little wooden house in the suburbs could be the perfect refuge and as a bonus, they will also eat your mosquitoes a common bat will be up to a thousand mosquito sighs insects in an hour. And that makes them one of Nature's greatest forms of natural pest control. So that was it. Son Harrison had their idea.

2 (50m 2s):
They were going to sell wooden bat houses. So now that we found this concept we started digging further into the bad house market this very Niche and particular space who knew that the bat house market was even a space at all. But clearly it's was and we started noticing that most bat houses on the market. They lack proper ventilation. They're too small. They don't have proper gripping for the animal to hang on or they just don't look good. So Krista Harrison And a prototype of a wooden bat house with grooves inside that the bats could grab onto and then they launched an Indiegogo campaign and we're kind of amazed when about 500 people signed up to buy bat houses.

2 (50m 43s):
We asked them. Why did you buy this thing and I think about two-thirds of them said like I hate mosquitoes, but I don't want to buy pesticides. I hate pesticides even more than I hate mosquitoes. So the two partners found a manufacturer in Missouri and they shipped out there first bat houses in January, and you should check it out. Picture of these things they're made of red cedar they attach right under the roof of your house. They hold up to a hundred bats and they look well sort of like Scandinavian furniture. If you got a badass this beautiful, you're going to want to put it up on the side of your house right in the middle of your yard. And then when you have your friends over for a barbecue and they'd come over and they'd say hey what the heck is that thing? You can say? Oh, yeah. That's my bad house. They're like bad house.

2 (51m 24s):
What and you say? No? No, like let me tell you about bats Chris and Harrison's company is called Bat. B&B and earlier this year. They appeared on Shark Tank where they got an investment of $100,000 from Shark Kevin O'Leary and they were both just named to Forbes 30 under 30 list for social entrepreneurship to hear more about bat B&B or here previous episodes had to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org. And of course if you want to tell us your story go to build dot npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week you can Subscribe at Apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcasts and while you're there.

2 (52m 5s):
Please do give us a review. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or at guy Roz our show is produced this week by rumty narrow blue who also composed the music. Thanks. Also to Canada slim Julia car Nissan has Mexican porn evil Grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Sequoia Carrillo. And before you go, I just want to remind you to please consider donating. Into your local public radio station by December 31st, because your gift helps bring Public Radio 2 listeners like you donate to your public radio station at donate dot npr.org / built. I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this.

2 (52m 53s):
This is

1 (52m 54s):
NPR.