0 (0s):
Hey really quick before we start the show, did you know that how I built this is also a book? Well, it's now out in paperback and available wherever books are sold. So check it out. How I built this, the book now to the show,

2 (20s):
I went to them and said, you know, we're just starting. And I said, you know, I'm being open with you. These are big orders. I got to buy a lot of materials. I can't necessarily get the credit for it. Could you pay us in 15 days from the day we ship it?

0 (33s):
So it was like a juggling act. You would basically get the raw materials and wait for your payment to come from pennies and Levitz and then pay your,

2 (42s):
Yeah. It's funny you use that term because I always thought that on my income tax where it says occupation, I was going to put down juggler. Cause there was always juggling stuff.

0 (55s):
Welcome to how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm guy Raz and on the show today, how Mitchell gold and Bob Williams combine their design smarts to sell a pollster chairs and florals and stripes grew a small business into a multimillion dollar brand. If you ever want to start a business, there are two basic ways to go about it. And we've had both types of examples on this show in the past. The first is to dive right in, even if you have no experience.

0 (1m 39s):
So think Sara Blakely and Spanx, she was on the show back in 2016. And if you remember that episode, Sarah had a sum total of zero experience in fashion, apparel, textiles, manufacturing, and distribution. She also had no connections in the industry. All pretty important things. If you want to scale a company that makes undergarments, but what Sarah did have was determination. And a few years of sales experience, even though she was selling fax machines, not underwear. Okay? So that's approach one and it's risky. But if the stars aligned and the idea is good enough, it might just work.

0 (2m 21s):
The other way is to toil away at a company in an industry you want to learn about for a few years, gain some experience, make some contacts and then start your own thing. It might not be as fun as the first approach, but it's a little less risky. And it's the approach Mitchell gold took for more than a decade. Mitchell worked in and around the home goods and furniture industry at some of the biggest retailers in the business, places like Bloomingdale's and lane today, his furniture company, Mitchell gold and Bob Williams is a multimillion dollar brand with more than 60 and design locations across the U S most of their upholstered furniture is still manufactured in North Carolina where Mitchell and his partner, Bob Williams started the company for many years, Mitchell and Bob Warren, just business partners, but romantic partners as well.

0 (3m 17s):
Bob had a natural talent for design and aesthetics and Mitchell honed his business acumen from his years, working in the industry when they launched the brand in 1989, their furniture stood out in comparison to the mainstream brands designed forward furniture that was also surprisingly comfortable and lasted a long time. And they built this brand in a small town in North Carolina, where at the beginning, they didn't always feel welcome given the fact that they were a gay couple, but today Mitchell gold and Bob Williams employs hundreds of people in and around Taylorsville, North Carolina and Mitchell in particular is among the most prominent social justice activists in the community growing up, both Mitchell and Bob went through the pain of not being able to live openly as gay.

0 (4m 8s):
We'll hear from Bob in a few minutes, but we'll start with Mitchell who grew up in the 1950s and sixties in a Jewish family, in a suburb of Trenton, New Jersey.

2 (4m 18s):
Basically my teenage years starting around 11, I was emotionally in a very difficult spot because I was starting to realize that I was gay. In those days. It was considered a mental disorder. It was really frowned upon society. There was a gay couple in town. This one fellow Bobby Varga was addressed designer and his live in boyfriend blaze was a hair designer. And I remember my parents talking about them and they loved to be with them. The Fagles as they would call them. But you knew that it was bad. You knew that that's not something you wanted to be.

0 (4m 53s):
That's a Yiddish sort of, that's a kind of a Yiddish,

2 (4m 56s):
It's a Yiddish word for homosexual,

0 (4m 59s):
But sort of a disparaging.

2 (5m 0s):
Yes. It's very disparaging. Just like the term queer was very disparaging at the time. Yeah. And I remember realizing that I had that same attraction to men and really being fearful that I was going to evolve to become very feminine and people would laugh at me and talk about me behind my back. And that the only thing open to me would be that I could be addressed designer or a hairdresser. I mean, in my wildest dreams, I never thought the things that exist for me now, I never dreamt about,

0 (5m 30s):
I mean, how do you remember coping with it? Did you try to fight it? Did you try to be like a sort of a macho teenager? What do you remember?

2 (5m 39s):
Well, there's a couple of things. One is, unfortunately I'm embarrassed to admit that I was like a little bit of a bully against some of the feminine kids with the other kids at school so that, you know, so that, that I wouldn't be known as gay. And the other part was that I prayed every night. I mean, I, myself to sleep too many nights and just prayed that God would change me. I didn't understand why God hated me. I didn't understand what I did. It's a horrible, horrible time for a gay kid. But I, I was really lucky. I eventually got through things. I was in college. I found a psychiatrist and I walked into the office and he said to me, you know, what can I do for you?

2 (6m 22s):
And I said, well, I'm gay. And I want you to change me. And it was the first time I had ever used the word gate out loud. And he looked at me and said, well, I can't change you, but I can teach you how to love yourself. Wow. And I remember being a little upset and saying, no, no, no. I want you to change me. I don't want to be like this. And he really worked with me to get me to accept it and to love myself. But it took me a few more years after that.

0 (6m 47s):
How did your, how did your parents, I mean, this is the early seventies, right? How did they take it to where they supportive?

2 (6m 54s):
Well, it's a something I tell parents be very careful what you say to your kids. When I told my mother, it was on a Sunday morning, around 11 o'clock. She called me cause I hadn't called that week and I was still sleeping and sh and I said, oh yeah, yeah, I'm okay. I said, oh, by the way, I'm going away on vacation to St. Thomas. Oh, that's so great. Who are you going with? And I said, well, I'm going with my friend, Michael, Michael. I don't understand why you do so many things with Michael. Why don't you have a nice girlfriend? You're such a nice looking boy, why don't you have a nice girlfriend? And I said, my mom, today's the day. And I just have to be honest, Michael is my idea of a girlfriend silence.

2 (7m 36s):
And her words to me were, don't tell your father, he'll have a stroke. You'll kill him. And that just shut me right down. And I went back in the closet for a couple of years. So then I came home one mother's day and I was at the country club with my parents and all of their friends. And they started talking about a Broadway play called torch song, trilogy

0 (7m 58s):
The play by, by Firestone, right by

2 (8m 1s):
Harvey Fierstein. And I had just seen it. It had just opened. So my mother said, oh, yes, I've heard about that play. We're going to get a bus and go. And I just, you know, my eyes popped out of my head. I looked at everybody at the table and I said, well, do you know what the play's about? Oh yeah. It's about a Jewish boy and his mother and how they get along. I said, okay, I wasn't going to tell them because it's about a Jewish boy. Who's gay and come to a reckoning with his mother is part of the plague. So I go back to New York and I got tickets for the next night. They come in, they go see the play the next day, my father calls me and I have to, I have to collect myself to say this because I remember standing at this Oak desk that I had in my little apartment, my little studio and my father called and said, I just want to thank you for the tickets last night.

2 (8m 57s):
And I just want to tell you that He said, I just want to tell you that all I care about is that you're happy and healthy. And it was just not what I expected from him because my father was always such a macho guy on a scale of one to 10, 10 being straight. My father was an 11. So I collected myself and I started to talk a little bit to him. And he said this, he said, you don't owe me any explanation. And So that was, that was really great.

0 (9m 32s):
I want to turn to you Bob for a moment. I know that for some of your childhood, you were raised in Texas, w I think your dad was an airline pilot.

4 (9m 41s):
Yep.

0 (9m 42s):
When you hear a Mitchell story and, and, and you know, it well about, you know, sort of his childhood and teenage years and, you know, kind of struggling with his identity, does that resonate with you? What was your experience like,

4 (9m 57s):
You know, what w when he sits there and talks about, you know, being in tears at night, I remember the same thing later on in junior high and high school, you know, laying in bed and just like, why am I like this? Why am I different? And this was in the mid seventies, late seventies when I was in high school. And I remember after graduating high school and going off to college, basically having a nervous breakdown and being hospitalized for a week because of the stress of all this. And that was tough, but that was also a time when I looked at my life and is like, all right, I need to make some changes. And that's when I started looking for schools that were primarily designed.

4 (10m 40s):
Schools started looking in New York. And at the time there was Parsons and Pratt, and did interviews did pretty well got accepted to the schools I wanted to. And of course, you know, really wanting to be successful. The only thing I could think of was Madison having news in New York Parsons is the closest to Madison avenue. So let's go to school there.

0 (11m 4s):
So you were a student at Parsons, I think after you graduated, you got, I think if I'm right, your first job was at 17 magazine, is that right?

4 (11m 13s):
It was at 17 magazine, which was really a great place to

0 (11m 16s):
Start. Yeah. What did you do there?

4 (11m 18s):
I worked in the promotion department and I was one of the art directors.

0 (11m 22s):
And, and, and this for you, Mitchell, I think out of college, one of like one of your very first jobs with Bloomingdale's, right?

2 (11m 29s):
Correct.

0 (11m 30s):
And how did you, how'd you end up getting that job?

2 (11m 32s):
So I, although as a history major in college, I became friends with the Dean of the business school. And I was going to go to law school because of course that's where my mother wanted me to do. And he said, oh, lawyers are such assholes. They're so boring. You don't want to be a lawyer. He said, you should be in retail because he used to work at Bloomingdale's. And he said, let me call and introduce you to go get a haircut. Cause I had this long pony tail put on a suit, get a haircut, go meet this guy because it's going to change your life. So I went and met Mr. Brendan, the next day had a series of interviews. And I fortunately my last interview was with Lester Grabads, who was probably, you know, if there's 10 merchants from the 20th century who were really outstanding retail merchants, Lester is one of the tops.

2 (12m 18s):
He turned the housewares department into a fashion department of fashion gift department. He turned domestics into this wildly designers' successful look. So he was my last interview and he, and I really hit it off well. And he said, do you want to come to work here? I want to put you in my division. So I started as an assistant buyer in department, 80 blankets, bedspreads pillows, and comforters.

0 (12m 43s):
And that meant that you were buying from manufacturers from blankets and pillow manufacturers full on behalf of Bloomingdale's.

2 (12m 50s):
Well, it meant that I was the assistant to the buyer who was making those decisions and I was helping him and learning how to be the person making the decision comforters were just becoming popular. And Christian Dior had designed this comforter dust, ruffles, pillow, shams sheets, draperies. It was the first time a big name designer like that had done anything in domestics. And the first time anybody had done this very coordinated look that wasn't bedspreads and we set it up. And I just remember the excitement that I had. And I remember Mr. Gribbets looking at me and he said, Mitchell, this is going to be fashionable tonnage. And that was a term that always stuck with me too, because the idea at Bloomingdale's was not just to be a high-end fashion store, but to really do a lot of business from it.

2 (13m 39s):
And it's a term that Bob and I have carried in a lot of things that we've developed over the years with the design leadership that we've had with different categories.

0 (13m 47s):
I know, I know you spent about seven years at, Bloomingdale's kind of rising to the ranks and you had gone from kind of, I don't know what what's the term for pillows and blankets and

2 (13m 59s):
Domestics

0 (14m 0s):
Domestics, right. To, to furniture, to like constructed furniture, which presumably presumably you were not kind of, you know, in the manufacturing side, but did you kind of start to learn about it

2 (14m 12s):
First of all, as a buyer at Bloomingdale's you went to furniture, factories and learned how furniture was made so that you could participate in designing furniture and develop, we call the product development. So as an example, when I was there, there was a new book that came out by Joan crone and Susie's lesson called high-tech. And what they were showing is people had taken like a big steel I-beam took two of them and put a glass top on it. Or they took a tractor stool, attractor seat and made a stool out of it. And it was very popular book. And I looked at that and thought, wow, this is really cool. A new way of looking at modern. It was a very different modern than I grew up with, but what I gave it was saying, well, I think it's just a little too hard edge.

2 (14m 56s):
I don't think it's going to be really appealing for consumers. So I went to some manufacturers that I had and worked with their designers and said, let's soften this up. Let's make these edges not quite so hard. And you have to know how things are manufactured in order to do that. And that's very much what I became known for in this store is having the style sense. That was kind of the next generation, not, not something that had been popular. And then we just made it cheaper. It was really creating a whole new style. And I actually changed the entire department at one point to this look and it became incredibly successful. Hmm.

0 (15m 33s):
So, okay. So both of you guys are living and working in New York and I guess around 1987, the two of you meet for the first time Bob had, how did that happen? How did, how did you two meet?

4 (15m 45s):
Well, it's funny because that night, I, it was a Friday night. I had gone to the movies with a friend and at the end of the evening, he said, oh, let's go out for drinks. And we go to uncle Charlie's, which was on seventh avenue. And needless to say, as soon as we walked in the door, the friend that I go with disappears, I don't see him ever again. So I'm kind of standing there in the bar by myself. And then this guy came up next to me and started talking to me and he was really nice and we chatted for a few minutes and Mitchell and I just kind of hit it off. And I think that was on a Friday night. And we went out on a Saturday night and then Sunday was gay pride.

4 (16m 27s):
And I was meeting some friends of mine to watch the parade and Mitchell met up with us. And that's how that, that was our first weekend together.

2 (16m 37s):
Yeah. I mean, we just really hit it off and we had such a synergy together. You know, the first time I went to his apartment, it was a studio apartment. It was sparse. He had a, just a gray, flannel of sleep sofa that was very pretty designed. You could just tell right away that he had a sense of style and within months we were. So that was in June by August. We were taking a vacation in the Hamptons and talking about, you know, wouldn't it be great to have a business together.

0 (17m 4s):
Wow. And what were you doing at the time Mitchell, when, when you met Bob, where do you still at? Bloomingdale's

2 (17m 11s):
No, at that time I was working for lane furniture and I was in charge of two important businesses for them. One was national accounts, which was JC penny, Levitt's, Montgomery ward, Sears, these huge accounts. And the other thing was their gallery program. They had like laying galleries that were either in stores or separate buildings for their furniture retailers zone. It was a licensed opera license kind of thing.

0 (17m 39s):
And I should mentioned, I mean, lane furniture is still very much around it, still manufacturers. Most of them

2 (17m 44s):
They're around, but they're very different than they, than they were. Then when, when I worked for them, they were making most of their product America. It was reasonably high quality. It wasn't the highest end, but it was, it was good quality,

0 (17m 56s):
I guess it around. I mean, you, the two of you met in 1987 and clearly you connected quickly because not too long after the two of you met, I think Mitchell, you were lane sent you to Virginia and then to North Carolina and North Carolina, huge center of furniture and textile manufacturing in the U S so obviously an important place to be. And Bob, you, you followed him down there. So what compelled you to leave your job at, at 17 magazine and to go, you know, follow this guy when the two of you had only been together for several months,

4 (18m 37s):
You know what, it's funny. I, you know, I'm sitting here and I'm, I'm trying to think out, you know, what, what, what the hell was I thinking? Yeah, it, it really is. And it's so funny. Cause I remember walking into my boss's office, her name was Murphy and I'm telling her that I was leaving, that I was moving to North Carolina and that I, you know, I'd be basically putting in my, my notice and I'd be gone in a couple of weeks. And, and I remember her looking at me and, you know, I said, are you sure you want to do this? And I was like, yeah, I want to do this. I want to take this chance. And you know, I, I took a leap to move to New York and ended up going to a great school, ended up working for 17 magazine, which was fantastic.

4 (19m 24s):
And so when this opportunity came along, I was just like, you know what, I'm just going to follow my instincts and go for it.

0 (19m 30s):
And where in North Carolina were where the two of you living at the time,

4 (19m 35s):
Hickory, North Carolina.

0 (19m 37s):
And tell me about Hickory North Carolina in 1988, when the two of you finally start living together, Mitchell, you're working for lane as has to have this important job for this big furniture manufacturer. Bob, first of all, what did you do when you got there? What was your job

4 (19m 55s):
Started sending out my resumes to the few little places that there was in Hickory and there were two ad agencies and I got a job it's so funny because this was right before computers became popular. And the reason why I picked this agency over the other agency was they had computers. And it's so funny. Cause I remember we had these Mac classics. So they had like the screen that was about the size of your iPhone today. And I remember I was working on a catalog for outward bound and I could only see like a fourth of the page at a time. And one day they came in and said, Bob, we got you a new computer.

4 (20m 36s):
And it had like a big monitor and I could see the whole page at one time. And I was like, wow, this is so amazing.

0 (20m 45s):
Mitchell. When you, while you were at lane furniture, did you already start thinking about starting your own business? Was that in the back of your mind or were you, were you happy working for a bigger company?

2 (20m 58s):
I was sort of happy. I really hadn't thought about starting my own business until I met Bob. When we both moved down, we bought a house and I had said to Bob, you know, how bad if you get the house together and decorate it. And you know, I worked for this company and you know, I had access to buy furniture from all the divisions, whether it was sofas tables. And he really put the house together and in the dining room, he picked out a pollster chairs. But what he did that was so different because they, whoever had an upholstered chair, it was like in an oatmeal fabric, a beige fabric, but he picked out this beautiful Florida. And then we got a table with a, like a vintage metal base with a big octagonal glass top.

2 (21m 42s):
And then for the chandelier, he took chicken wire and created like this cloud and put Christmas lights in it and it was on a dimmer and it was so cool looking. And in those days, Dorothy Collins, who was the editor in chief of metropolitan home magazine, which is one of the most popular home magazines at the time she was coming down with her editorial staff. So she came to our house for dinner. And while at dinner, she just looked at me and said, I love this living. I've never seen anything like it. And it was really a huge signal to me about Bob's taste and his ability to think differently and to think the next step. So it was really an exciting time.

0 (22m 20s):
Mitchell, when you, you go down there to, you know, take on this big job for lane furniture, presumably you were probably on the fast track to an, you know, maybe even one day I don't running the company, but, but it's, from what I understand that you began to kind of sour on the job, what, what was going on?

2 (22m 39s):
Well, I sort of felt that I would never really run the company because I was Jewish from the north and I wasn't a member of the family. And then increasingly I became very unhappy at work. It was, they had moved me down to North Carolina and it became very obvious to me that I couldn't be out. I couldn't bring Bob with me to functions of the company functions when they had spouses. And the whole way of operating was just not honest is the best way I can say it. You know, it was customer last.

0 (23m 10s):
And, and as I understand it, Mitchell, you, I mean, you decide to sort of speak out about some, some of the things that bothered you and they, I guess they, they eventually sort of let you go, right? Yeah. But I, I, you know, it seemed, I mean, reading about it, it seems like you saw that as an opportunity, right. Because you'd been in the industry for like 10 years at that point and both you and Bob had this kind of great sense of design. And I guess it's when you started talking about maybe launching your own thing, your own business, is that right?

2 (23m 38s):
Yeah. So we, Bob and I had talked about starting a dining chair, business and upholstered dining chair, business tables, and just serendipitously, my brother worked with somebody who had a friend who had a factory in Taylorsville and the patriarch of the family passed away and the factory was selling chairs. They were running it around 55% capacity and you really can't make money running a factory at 55% capacity. And they were looking to contract out somebody's product.

0 (24m 12s):
Okay. So 1989 officially, you kind of found what would become Mitchell gold and Bob Williams. But, but initially that wasn't the name. Correct. And it was called the thing was called design line. Right. Right. And the idea was to make a pollster chairs or other things,

2 (24m 31s):
The pollster dining chairs and eclectic dining tables.

0 (24m 35s):
And so what is the idea that you guys would go to your old contacts that you had from lane and from Bloomingdale's and pitch them, your products, and essentially try to get them into those stores? Was that the kind of the business model that you were thinking of? Yeah. I'm just thinking like furniture is that I think expensive. You have the raw materials, there's the labor, there's the shipping, there's the marketing like, to me, it just sounds like a daunting thing to start.

2 (25m 2s):
We were, so we were so naive. Yeah. I mean, ideally if you're starting a factory, you do need millions of dollars, but we didn't have it. So that wasn't an option. So it's just lucky that my brother knew this person that knew this person and we were able to have a conversation and we really liked each other. And as I said, their father had passed away. So it was a wife and three children in the business. They really didn't know how to run a full business and how to build the sales. So we started with them like in may we made up some chair samples and did

0 (25m 39s):
You draw them or did you actually physically make them?

2 (25m 41s):
No, we, we actually, these were chairs that existed a poster chairs that existed and we modified them. So we would say

0 (25m 48s):
Like, soda, you put on new, you reposted them.

2 (25m 51s):
Right. And we read a pollster them. Yeah. What was the exciting part of that? And just starting out is Bob and I went and looked at fabrics and you know, I think this is the essence of our partnership is, you know, I might've said let's do a pollster chairs because that's going to be a big growing category. But when Bob, when his vision of the chairs were to put this beautiful floral fabric on to put these great stripes on, they get these really rich colors of velvet to put on. And when we presented the line to people, they had never seen a pollster chairs like that before. So the first people I went to see were JC penny was one of the biggest furniture retailers in America at the time, Levitz was the biggest furniture retailer at the time.

2 (26m 35s):
And coming from Bloomingdale's, they were always intrigued with the idea that, oh, Mitchell was at Bloomingdale's and he's got the sense of style and stuff. So when I walked in, when I called them to see them, they were happy to see me. They, you know, they looked at it and they, that they think about it. Now, mind you, I had gone into pennies and said to them, you know, you have 260 stores, just give me 10 stores to test this in. And I went to Levitz in Florida, staying at my parent's condo there and made a presentation on Friday morning to Levitz. So after going home from the Levitz, I got back to my parents' apartment and they said, oh, Bob called, because this is before the days of, of blackberries.

2 (27m 19s):
And before the days of cell phones, I called Bob. And he said, you got to call Ray dykes at Penny's right away. He wants to talk to you. So I called Ray

0 (27m 27s):
Ray was a buyer at JC penny.

2 (27m 29s):
Yeah. Ray was the buyer at JC penny. And he said, the black glass table that you showed us, and that shares with it. Could you deliver that to all of our stores in the fall?

0 (27m 41s):
Wow. So in like five months, yeah.

2 (27m 45s):
Could you do this for all 260 stores and we're going to put it in our catalog. So I, knowing that I had a factory that needed capacity, I said, yes. Then on Monday, when I went to Levitz, I made the presentation to all the regionals. They said, we want all nine chairs for these four chairs. Can you also make armchairs? I said, yes.

0 (28m 9s):
Wow.

2 (28m 10s):
And they said, can you deliver this for all of our stores for fall? We had basically in that weekend sold 5,000 dining chairs and 800 tables. And I thought for a minute, I said, we'll find a way to do it.

0 (28m 26s):
Why don't we come back? And just a moment, how Mitchell and Bob juggled materials and money and manpower to make 800 tables and 5,000 tiny chairs stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this.

The Jordan Harbinger Show (28m 48s):
Hey, we've got a very different kind of sponsor for this episode today. The Jordan harbinger show, it's a podcast. You should definitely check out, especially if you're a fan of high-quality fascinating podcasts. The show covers a wide range of topics through weekly interviews, with heavy hitting guests. And there are a ton of episodes. You will find interesting since you are a fan of this show. And I would recommend our listeners check out the episodes with Ray Daleo or Mike Rowe or Adam Grant. They are really, really interesting. You will find something useful that you can apply to your own life, whether that's an actionable routine change that boosts your productivity, or just a slight mindset tweak that changes how you see the world. We really enjoy this show and we think you will as well. There is just so much there. So check out Jordan harbinger.com/start for some episode recommendations or search for the Jordan harbinger show. That's H a R B as in boy, I N as in Nancy, G E R on apple podcasts, Spotify, or wherever you listen to podcasts, What an awesome sound.

Shopify (29m 53s):
It's the sound of another sale on Shopify, the all-in-one commerce platform to start, run and grow your business. Shopify gives entrepreneurs the resources that were once available only to the big guys. So upstarts startups and established businesses alike can sell everywhere, can synchronize online and in-person sales and effortlessly stay informed. I love how Shopify has all the tools and resources that make it easy for any business to succeed from the one down the street to a store on the other side of the world, Shopify powers millions of businesses from first sale to full-scale more than a store. Shopify grows with you. Go to shopify.com/built all lowercase for a free 14 day trial and get full access to Shopify. As entire suite of features grow your business with Shopify today, go to shopify.com/built right now that's shopify.com/built.

2 (30m 59s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 1989. The Mitchell and Bob had just launched their own furniture business, and they already have an unexpectedly big order, 5,000 dining chairs and 800 tables. So the question is, can they pull it off? First of all, was the supply chain relatively straightforward? All this stuff was just, you could go to one place in North Carolina that made textiles one place that made the stuffing for the chairs. One place that, you know, had the lumber one place. That was it all relatively local. Yes, for the most part, the fabrics were lots of different fabrics.

2 (31m 40s):
So we were dealing with lots of different fabric mills. The foam we bought from a supplier that had been an established supplier with the factory that we were dealing with. And then the most, one of the most interesting things we did was we came across a wood frame for the dining chair. That was very different than what anybody else had been doing. Imagine a dining chair and most guys, when they sit on a dining chair, they lean back on it and rock a little bit, and then the chairs can become, then the legs can become loose. It's called racking. Somebody had come to us with taking a cross banded plywood and cutting them by computer. So the side of the frame had no joints in it.

2 (32m 22s):
As soon as I saw that, I said to the owner of this factory, give us an exclusive on this. Don't sell it to anybody else, but we were not able to ship them exactly when they want it. I had to say to the retail is this I can't ship, you know, like August 15th, but we can ship you by September. And then we set out with the factory to do it,

0 (32m 43s):
Help me understand why the dining chairs were, were so radical. I mean, I, and forgive me because I, I love and appreciate great furniture, but I'm not a sort of a scholar on the history of furniture, but like I'm thinking floral designs. And I think of like these old, huge, you know, resort hotels, like the Greenbriar where they've got like floral designs everywhere. So they existed. Right. I mean, or was it completely different?

2 (33m 9s):
Well, they existed, but they existed on sofas, right? They are a chair in a living room. They didn't really exist on a dining room chair.

4 (33m 17s):
Well, and these were also fully upholstered

2 (33m 18s):
Chairs. Yeah.

4 (33m 19s):
Which were more of a designer look. So you would see them at a higher price point, but they weren't necessarily for the mass consumer. And if you did, they were still expensive.

0 (33m 30s):
Fully upholstered means upholstery on the back and

2 (33m 32s):
Lights on the legs, like

0 (33m 34s):
On the legs. Okay. I see. And this was under the name design line. That was your name initially, right?

2 (33m 40s):
Well, it was under the name Mitchell Gold's design line. Right. Okay. Because when we went to get the name design line that was already taken, so my lawyer said, why don't you make it Mitchell goals, design line, then that would be different. And honestly, I took advantage of it because I knew a lot of people in the industry. And I thought that if I did have my name out there, we'd have an opportunity for people that I wasn't calling on to say, oh, I know that guy, let me go see what he's doing.

0 (34m 8s):
So you have this order, you got to do it all within four months. First of all, how are you going to finance that? How are you going to pay for all? Because I can't imagine that JC penny and Levitz just handed you a, an advance.

2 (34m 21s):
Well, actually they did. They did. Wow. Yeah. They didn't hand me an advance, but the usual terms for furniture is called like net 30 or net 60 days, which means 30 days after they receive it, they would pay for it. And I went to them and said, you know, we're just starting. But I knew, I knew these people well. And they knew that they could trust me. Right. And I said, you know, I'm being open with you. These are big orders. I got to buy a lot of materials. I can't necessarily get the credit for it. Could you pay us in 15 days? From the day we ship it. And they were very cooperative with us and did that.

0 (34m 57s):
So it was like a juggling act. You would basically get the raw materials and say, yeah, we'll pay you in 60 days or whatever. And wait for your payment to come from pennies and Levitz and then pay your suppliers.

2 (35m 10s):
Yeah. It's funny you use that term because I always thought that on my income tax where it says occupation, I was going to put down juggler because there was always juggling stuff in it. And it's such a juggling act to get the materials and to get just the right materials in. And if, if they ordered, let's just say 500 chairs, you really can't order fabric for 500 chairs. You really have to order for 550 chairs, 600. You have to give yourself a little bit extra in case some of the fabric's not good or in case they get it, it sells really quickly. You want to be able to fulfill a reorder really quickly. So it's this, it's getting these balls up in the air and keeping them going.

0 (35m 46s):
And meantime, you guys are standing up a business. So was it initially, I have to imagine that the business was just the two of you, right?

2 (35m 55s):
Well, it was the two of us with this factory doing the production.

0 (35m 59s):
And Bob, what did you, I mean, Mitchell had kind of the business background and these connections and had been a buyer and a, a little bit of a big shot in the furniture world at that point. What did you, I mean, what did you kind of see your role as where you kind of focused on the design and the sort of the aesthetic?

4 (36m 20s):
Yes, but I mean, ultimately there wasn't a ton of stuff for me to do, cause it was more of the selling and things like that. So I was still working at the ad agency

0 (36m 30s):
Because

4 (36m 31s):
We still needed an income. Sure. And so I worked there five days a week and then on the weekends I would help Mitchell. And it was also nice because we didn't have a computer or anything. So in the evenings, the ad agency was kind enough to let me use that equipment to help create all the sales materials. And finally it got to a point after about like six or eight months, I quit working at the ad agency because there was enough to keep me busy, getting ready for market picking out fabrics. I was also the bookkeeper. I was the swatch department mailing out swatches. I had all the grunt work. So I, I was, I was busy most of the time

0 (37m 13s):
You were business partners, but also live together. We're in a relationship. How did that work? How did you make that work? I mean, was there, was there any conflict or tension between the two of you?

4 (37m 28s):
Oh, no. Mitch was on the road all the time. So it was great. No, it, it was it, you know what? It was a lot of fun. And then it got to a point where he was working with, with the salespeople and the factory and I'm working with product development and my team and all that stuff. And the only time we'd really get a chance to, to talk to each other during the day was in the car, going to dinner and at dinner. And I remember at some point we decided that if one of us did not want to talk about work, the other one had to be polite and realize the other person needed a break.

0 (38m 7s):
Yeah.

2 (38m 8s):
But I would also say that for our first many years, 10, 12 years, it was super exciting. And I remember Tuesday night because we didn't really have a lot of extra money. We would go to pizza hut cause it was like 1299 for all you could eat. And that leader a diet Coke or something. And, you know, we would just be there eating that stuff and talking about business and this customer and that customer. And it was super exciting.

0 (38m 35s):
And Taylorsville, North Carolina, where, where your factory is, it's been described as is kind of like the buckle of the Bible belt. And I read an article that said that people didn't always know that you guys were a couple, even though you were

2 (38m 52s):
Well, we were in business about two years and we went away, we finally took a vacation. We went together and then people said to our partner who was running the plant, gosh, I don't understand Mitchell. And Bob worked together all the time. Why would they go on vacation together? And then I'm told that the word spread like wildfire through the factory, that we were a couple, but you know, what's what I think is interesting. And what makes me optimistic is people really got to know us. We've really, over the years only had a couple of people that quit because you know, our gayness was too much for them, but it really gave people a chance to get to know us. And it gave us a chance to get to know them too, and why they had the beliefs they had.

0 (39m 35s):
So Mitchell, when you made that sale to Levitz and dependencies, I mean, that's obviously super impressive and, and it makes sense that they trusted you. They knew you, but like you have to get those shipped in time. So 5,000 chairs by September and 800 tables. Did you, did you hit that deadline by the way? Yes. Wow.

2 (39m 59s):
Well, I knew the factory could operate. I mean, it, this was a, this was an up and running factory with 23 or so employees and I knew enough about manufacturing that I could work with them together. We had this huge opportunity. Everybody knew it. And the factory that we bought into, they had a reputation for paying their bills on time, being nice people. And we all pitched in and did it. We had people working over time, you know, we, we made it happen.

0 (40m 28s):
So you have this great relationship with this factory. You are manufacturing. Now when your product hits the stores in the fall of 1989, did they just sell themselves? Did people, was it a success from the beginning?

2 (40m 44s):
Yeah. It sold, it sold right away.

0 (40m 46s):
What explains that?

2 (40m 47s):
Well, because we had done a lot of pre-work. I mean, we had done a lot of sales training meetings to make sure the salespeople knew how to sell. It knew the information we convinced the stores to advertise. So that draws customers in and in the advertising. I mean, I literally worked with them on what the copy was to make sure it was accurate, that it could, that the product could sell itself. The posters that Bob did that were in the stores and the displays were beautiful. We had a contest for the stores that had the best displays and it was interesting at the time at, at 11 store, you offer pizza to everybody and they're all working together to make display look pretty and keep it neat.

0 (41m 24s):
And what, what would they have said to me, if I walked into a Levitz looking for new dining room chairs, I don't know what I want. Why would I pick the fully upholstered dining room chairs with floral patterns or, you know, stripes or whatever. What was the, what was the pitch that would be made to me at the time?

2 (41m 42s):
They would say, come sit down in this dining chair. You've never sat in a dining chair, this comfortable, and it has a 25 year warranty on the frame,

0 (41m 51s):
25 year warranty.

2 (41m 53s):
Nobody else could offer a 25 year warranty on the frame because those type of wooden frames at the time they became loose, our frame would never become loose

0 (42m 3s):
Because it was one piece, right. There was no joint.

2 (42m 6s):
It was a one piece side construction.

0 (42m 8s):
I want to, for people who are listening to this, I think they're going to be interested in just figuring out the business structure here for a moment. You did some really smart things, but you didn't have to put up this huge outlay of cash, which would have been hugely risky to build a factory from the ground up. You had to find a place that you could partner with. Yeah. So how did you structure that relationship? Did you sort of say, Hey, you know, it'll be 50, 50 business and then, and we'll kind of split the profits and, but we're going to incorporate under one name or did they, did they remain a separate business and you remain the separate business. And because there's all those details that you have to work out, how did you kind of work work through that?

2 (42m 51s):
Well, they, they maintained their business name and they maintain their business for a few

0 (42m 56s):
Years.

2 (42m 56s):
Got it. And we were paid a percentage of the chairs of the product that we sold. Right. But in, and within a couple of years, our business had grown so much that they started to say, well, the business that we have is not as profitable as this Mitchell golden Bob Williams business, we're going to stop making our line of furniture. But then we had so much production. I mean, we started out with a few big customers, but now several years later we were selling to all the federated department stores. So then in about five years, they came to us and said, you know, this is a lot of pressure. We're buying hundreds of thousands of dollars, if not millions of dollars of material.

2 (43m 39s):
How about if you guys buy us out completely. Right. Because when the father had passed away, the wife was getting older, she wanted to work, but she didn't really want the pressure of the business and they wanted the cash. Yeah. And I said, well, why don't you think about what price you'd want? And obviously Bob and I don't have the cash, so maybe we could pay you out. So we came up with buying them out for $850,000 to be paid over five years at 8%. And I want to tell you, that's the bargain of the century

0 (44m 11s):
Bargain of the century. Yeah. It's incredible. I mean, what amazing good luck unfortunate. Because obviously today you have, you've got a 200 plus million dollar business, even even higher, which we'll get to. But how did you design in the first sort of five years? Did you hire an outside designer or were you guys doing all the design? I

2 (44m 31s):
Know we were doing it. So I think this is an interesting and important story. When the first chairs that we did for the bedroom, Bob wanted to do a big wing chair, like really an oversized wing chair and an oversized kind of club chair. Yeah. And nobody bought it. And somebody who did buy one as a sample that worked in the factory said, geez, I can't even get it into my house. Cause

0 (44m 56s):
You, cause you were so wide, it wouldn't fit into a standard. They were just,

2 (44m 59s):
They were just too big. Right. And a friend of mine was a senior VP at <inaudible>. He's a really nice guy. And he called me after market. And he said, do you know, Mitchell? I just have to tell you the, the guy you have working with you that designing those chairs are really poorly proportioned.

0 (45m 16s):
And the guy who had working for you was

2 (45m 18s):
Bob Williams. And this is what's so great about Bob. He just looked at me and said, yeah, I know. I really have to learn how to design chairs. And he took that and he is become known as designing some of the best proportioned, occasional chairs in the industry.

0 (45m 36s):
How did you do that, Bob? I mean, you are not a trained, you went to Parsons. And so he, presumably you took some classes, but you were an ad designer, a graphic designer. How did you kind of make that transition to becoming a furniture designer?

4 (45m 49s):
Well, you know what? It was tricky and tough at first cause you're right. I was a graphic designer. I'm just used to designing on paper, you know, catalogs and ads. And now I'm dealing with this 3d object. And one of the things I realized early on was that a chair actually, you know, will float in the middle of the room. So people see it not only from the front and the side, but also from the back. It actually is a sculpture that people sit on. So, you know, you start looking at it from a couple of different points of view and, and trust me, there's been a lot of chairs that have been dogs and every so often you get one, that's a winner. And out of those winners, you get one or two that become a super winner.

4 (46m 32s):
And that's really how you build your business. That'll help fund everything else.

0 (46m 36s):
So initially it sounds like it's certainly in the first five, maybe even 10 years, the idea was you would be a furniture maker and you would sell your furniture through these retail channels, whether it was Levitz or JC Penney's or maybe Bloomingdale's, that was the idea. That was what this company was going to be.

2 (46m 57s):
Yes. I think if you were to say, what was your long-term plan? It would be that we were going to make good quality on time at a good price. And it was going to be beautifully designed. And that led us organically to be doing other things, because we were making these dining chairs and our customers, especially like the crate and Barrel's in the higher end stores would come to us and say, well, if you're making these dining chairs, it's so great. The service is so great. Can you make a living room chair? So we made a living room chair, can you make a sofa? Can you make a sleeper? And our business just evolved because our customers were asking us, and that's the best way when your customers are asking you and they're engaged with you on the product that you're developing, then they're buying it.

2 (47m 40s):
They're buying it before you even make it.

0 (47m 44s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Mitchell and Bob continue to grow as a business, basically by shrinking it and firing a few dozen of their own customers, stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's the late 1990s and as Mitchell gold and Bob Williams furniture continues to grow the brand gains an unlikely new salesperson.

2 (48m 32s):
And that salesperson was Bob Williams. So I have to just tell you a cute thing that when I first met Bob, he was very shy and we had customers coming in to show him he didn't want to talk to them. He wanted to be in the back room. And one time we had crate and barrel come in, I was busy. And I said to Bob, just go and sit and answer their questions because you know, the fabric's really well, you know, all this stuff really well. You just have to answer their questions. You don't have to sell anything. They would normally buy one, maybe two new collections from us the season. But all of a sudden they were buying four or five collections. And I went out and they're all like talking and laughing.

2 (49m 12s):
And they, the main merchandising person, Rob Pitt pulled me aside. And he said, this guy is really great. I mean, he just tells us what we want to do. He's not trying to sell us anything. He's so sweet. And then I realized I got a good sales person here too. And it was great because I mean, one of the things when Bob did start to come out of his shell was the editors really liked him. There's something special about having somebody talk about the product who doesn't have this agenda as a salesperson.

0 (49m 40s):
I read that in the first 10 years, there was something that you did that I want to ask you about. You actually fired some of your customers. You got rid of some of your customers. You had like 70 or 80 accounts and you reduced it to like 50, which actually paradoxically increased your business.

2 (50m 1s):
Yeah. W w we had done it a couple of different times. Early on. We had a customer from New York who was really obnoxious and would call the factory and yell at people. And I had to call them and say, you just can't be abusive. And they continued. And then we called them and said, you're no longer a customer.

0 (50m 18s):
You can't sell our stuff anymore. You

2 (50m 20s):
Can't sell our stuff anymore. We're not going to sell it to you.

0 (50m 23s):
Okay.

2 (50m 23s):
So we had this reputation of being a little picky and then we started drop customers if they weren't nice. And the word got around about that. But then we got to the point where we just had so much business and we had some people that were just wasting our time by, we were evolving to this higher end design brand. And we had stores that weren't showing our stuff properly that were selling it properly. They might have customer service problems. So Bob and I sat down and we went through the 72 customers that we had and we dropped it to 48. And we said, these 48, we're going to be able now to give better service to, and I swear, this number is true in that year. Our business increased 48%.

0 (51m 4s):
Wow. When you actually reduced the number of accounts where people you were selling to,

4 (51m 9s):
Right.

0 (51m 10s):
And you could do that because there was a demand for your products.

2 (51m 13s):
Well, and at the same time, we were one of the few manufacturers with a name and we were advertising in metropolitan home, architectural digest, Elle decor, all the best magazines. So that was driving consumers into stores saying, you know, I want to buy this Mitchell gold and Bob Williams furniture. So retailers, you know, sought us out.

0 (51m 35s):
You, the two of you are running this business. It's growing. I think by the, within 10 years, I think you had about 400 employees. Does that sound right?

2 (51m 44s):
I think so.

0 (51m 45s):
Meantime, your relationship, I dunno, falls apart is, I mean, it's so crazy for me to say that because I'm here, I am talking to the, both of you with clearly so much fondness and respect and love for each other. And yet your romantic relationship ended, I guess maybe grew apart. What, what happened?

4 (52m 6s):
We broke up on new year's day after nine 11. And I remember sitting at the kitchen island watching the news and nine 11 happened telling Mitchell, but what had just happened, I go take a shower. He comes and tells me about the second plane. And we drive into the office that morning. And I remember walking through the factory and everybody just like being numb, not really knowing what's going on. And I think it, over the next few months, we both just sort of realized that, you know what? Life is short.

2 (52m 47s):
We can be happier.

4 (52m 49s):
Yeah. I mean, we have a great friendship. We have a great working relationship, but our personal life, just that there wasn't much of a personal relationship between the two of us because we were working so much. And when, and that's when we decided that we needed to make a change.

2 (53m 6s):
Well, what I'll add to it is we had been on vacation and it was really obvious to both of us that it wasn't working. And we came back from Hawaii and we were in San Francisco at a restaurant. And over the course of dinner, I said to Bob, you know, I just really think we need to talk about our relationship. And Bob said, yeah, I know, but I'm afraid because I don't want to lose you as a friend. And I just looked and I said, well, let's commit to each other right now that we'll be best friends forever. And we'll keep our business and run it well together. It's our baby. And we just looked at each other and did that. And then did it nicely.

0 (53m 41s):
That decision is so mature. And so, you know, from a business perspective, very smart and wise for obvious reasons. Cause the business grew. But I'm just thinking from an emotional perspective. I mean, wasn't awkward at work. It wasn't weird. I mean, you've gone from being partners in relationship. There was no awkwardness. It was no kind of moment of, I don't know, like this is weird or this is different.

2 (54m 8s):
There was, there was awkwardness before I would say you get, sometimes we'd be angry at each other and not talk, we'd be in meetings and you could feel the tension. But after we announced that we were not going to be together anymore. Then the mood really, I think lightened. And I think our we've heard from employees that things were really better.

4 (54m 27s):
It really didn't feel awkward until we kind of saw the other person was somebody else. Yeah. And that happened, you know, a couple of times. And I remember the first time it was like really kind of strange. And then by the time I saw him with his fifth or sixth person that he was dating, it just became, you know, it wasn't that unusual. And it was like, okay, do I like this guy better than the last guy? You know? And, and he had some really interesting and fun people that, that he dated over a period of time. So it was nice getting to, to meet some, you know,

2 (54m 58s):
So I would always bring these people. We'd always have dinner cause I wanted to get Bob's approval

0 (55m 4s):
Mitchell. I obviously I've read a lot about the two of you and just for people listening, you are a very prominent supporter of gay rights and you started a foundation to combat religious based bigotry against gay people, but it is also became part of your company. Like it became part of what you did and do today. I think at a certain point you sent a letter to every employee of Mitchell gold and Bob Williams basically saying, Hey, you know, I'm starting this gay rights organization and I want everybody to know why.

0 (55m 45s):
And you were worried that people would quit.

2 (55m 48s):
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I, I wrote it, it was a three page letter and I really wanted people to understand why these very teachings were so harmful and what it meant to young people, because I knew that they cared about people. You know, they, they, these are nice people. There's, there's professional. Anti-gay people who make money off of it and do it as a business. But then there's, you know, people in the pews who are being told certain things and taught certain things. And I really wanted to have a chance to explain what I was doing and why it was so harmful. And I'll tell you that night, I, I don't even remember sleeping. I was so nervous that the next day I would come in and we'd have half the factory quit, but it turned out only one person quit.

2 (56m 34s):
And then I just walked around the factory and GAF the opportunity for people to ask questions. And it was just so sweet because people would give me a thumbs up. Other people would smile at me, but other people come and say, you know, I love you a couple of people more than a couple said, you know, I really learned a lot. I didn't realize that my beliefs were hurting. You know, I don't want to lose my child. And during the course for through it, there's one woman. I'll never forget. A few years later, she came to me, she was a sour. And she said, you know, I just want to thank you because of you. I never lost my daughter. And she told me the story of how her daughter came out to her and had she not known Bob and me and known our story.

2 (57m 15s):
She might've kicked her daughter out of the house. Like her husband wanted to. She told her husband, no, she's our daughter. We're going to keep her in lover. And then when her daughter had a girlfriend, the girlfriend was coming to Thanksgiving dinner. So we've had a lot of super rewarding things over the years about that.

0 (57m 32s):
One of the things that you guys did, you decided to do things a little bit differently. You've got, Hey, daycare facility, a subsidized lunch room you pay, I think pretty well. You're not a union company, right? There's you're not a union shop. Correct.

2 (57m 49s):
There, there really aren't unions around this part of the country. Right.

0 (57m 53s):
But you know, those kind of perks. And we, we had Gary Erickson on the show cliff bar and they do some of those things too. Has that had a huge impact on retention?

2 (58m 3s):
Oh yeah. Well, early on, one of the things that Bob and I did differently is there's more business usually in the fall than in the spring and a furniture factory. So a lot of the factories would hire up in the fall, lay people off after Christmas, hire up, lay people off. And in simple terms, we came up with this idea that rather than do that, we would talk with everybody and say, Hey, we might have to work overtime in the fall, but in the spring work four days a week or three days a week, but we want to keep everybody year round. We don't want to have this, this roller coaster. And first of all, the employee is in the area like that. We were very cooperative with people on the opening day of hunting season.

2 (58m 45s):
There's, there's different things that are important to some of these folks that are, that we weren't used to. I'd say

0 (58m 49s):
It was things like that, that, that were important to pay attention to. I mean, you both, well, you more Mitchell or really an outsider, right? This kind of Jewish guy from Trenton, New Jersey in the south. But, but doing those culturally relevant things matter to people.

2 (59m 5s):
Yeah, definitely. I would say I used to joke and say, coming down here, you know, what did people dislike about me? Was it that I was Jewish gay or from the north? And the number one thing they didn't like is that I was from the north. They really don't like, but th but everything is really changed. There's so much, there's such a mix now of people. There's so many people that come from different parts of the country. It's, it's just so different now,

0 (59m 31s):
As you were growing and really in all of these stores, was there pressure for you guys to go lower end, you know, to make sort of more Ikea affordable style furniture?

2 (59m 42s):
Oh yeah. Yeah. One of our big customers really wanted us to make lower quality, lower pricing. And we just grew apart from them because it's is the business evolved. When we started the business, we didn't start out to be a high-end company, but we just evolved that way because we wanted to make a better and better product. And part of the reason we want better and better product is because we don't want returns. And then Bob and I travel all over the world, looking for new ideas, being inspired by a restaurant, a hotel, a museum, a fashion show. And when you are making fashion forward furniture, lower end companies really don't want that. They want proven sellers.

2 (1h 0m 23s):
So it just, we just evolved this way. And it was the thing that got us new customers. I mean, the thing that when Creighton barrel first came to see us, the fact that we had these 12 fabrics in black and white, it was really appealing to them.

0 (1h 0m 38s):
You guys made a pretty big decision, I think around 2006 or seven, which was to open your own stores. And I remember I used to live in Washington DC. I remember you, you have a big store there, right? Logan circle. That was one of the big first ones. I think you now have over 30 of these stores. So you went from being a, you know, basically a wholesaler to doing that and also being a retailer, that's a completely different business and risky. Why did you decide to go in that direction?

2 (1h 1m 11s):
Well, I think that for Bob and I, we often would be frustrated that the retailers we were selling to weren't displaying our product cohesively. Weren't displaying it as best as we thought they could. And one of our retailers, ABC carpet and home at the time was a really hot store in New York. And they had come into the showroom and looked around and said, can you guys take what you're doing here and do this for us in our store, we'll give you a prime location. And in short order, we were doing $1,500 a square foot, which is unheard of in the furniture industry. The furniture industry on average at the time was about $240 a square foot.

2 (1h 1m 52s):
And in sales and sales, and we started to see how much business it was. And then we decided that we would open up our own store, but you're right. It was very, it was complicated because we had these other retailers that weren't real excited that we were building a brand that we were building our own.

0 (1h 2m 7s):
I'm sure they weren't, I'm sure they were really pissed off.

2 (1h 2m 10s):
Yes. But our superior selling ability and, and frankly, our superior service and this, our stuff on their floors was the best-selling stuff. And it was the best service stuff. So it was hard for them. They were pissed off, but they were tolerant of it. And then it got to the point where they were becoming less tolerant of it. And as an example, in 2008, my good friends at crate and barrel said, you know, we just can't do business with you anymore. You're opening a store, a couple blocks from us in Manhattan. You're putting out catalogs that business dried up. And we eventually got out of most of those stores and kept opening our own stores to where now we have 25 retail locations and four outlet locations.

0 (1h 2m 56s):
You know, one of the things that's been interesting and it's happened to this industry and we've done some of, some of these brands on the show is direct to consumer, you know, Casper mattresses on the show. For example, there are, you know, there's a company can remember the name that you can build your own bed frame, that, that sort of Japanese joinery, I see it all over Instagram. And some of these products are good. I mean, they're, let's be honest. They're, they're very good products. There's, there's these companies that are financed by venture capital that are like modular sofas and you know, all, all different kinds of focused on direct to consumer sales. Is that a threat to your business model?

2 (1h 3m 34s):
Well, a lot of that stuff is a different quality level than what we're doing, but it's look, there's a lot of business out there. There's a lot of business for everybody. If people like our style sense, they're not going to get it from some of those companies that are making those modular sofas. Right. And that's the only thing they can buy from us. They can buy pillars that coordinate with it. They can buy lamps, but it's amazing what people buy online. Now, every day, when I look at the sales figures and I see like a, you know, a $7,000 sectional sold or $6,000 in dining chairs and tables and stuff, I'm just like amazed that people do it, but it's not just that they're buying it online.

2 (1h 4m 15s):
They might have seen it in a store in person. They might've called and had a virtual appointment with one of our people. There's many different touch points. So it's all, that's what we call it. Omni-channel

0 (1h 4m 29s):
Mitchell. You are no longer the CEO, right? You found somebody to run the company a few years ago, but obviously both of you are still owners. I think you sold part of the company to private equity company. So they're minority owners.

2 (1h 4m 44s):
They're there. The majority we own, we own, we own a good piece of the minority.

0 (1h 4m 48s):
I think you guys are now you have about a thousand employees nationally, correct? I think you're the, one of the biggest employers in your county, whether you intended for this to happen or not, it's made both of you wealthy, but w w what's what's your, what's your sort of long-term view. I mean, eventually to completely sell the company to somebody else,

2 (1h 5m 9s):
You know, we're going through such an interesting different phase of the business. I'll be 71 next month. I don't envision not being involved in this company in some way, in some form or fashion, even in the most modest way, but Alison has come on board, she's doing an incredible job. And honestly, for me, every day is exciting. When I open up an email and see what Alison and her team have done, it's different and better than what I would've done. So I'm kind of really enjoying watching how the company is, is going.

0 (1h 5m 43s):
When you think about the journey you had Bloomingdale's and lane, and then moving to North Carolina and starting to slope, dining room chair, business into what it is now, you know, at least $300 million business a year. Am I right about that?

2 (1h 5m 59s):
Somewhere near, there were private company can say

0 (1h 6m 3s):
More a little bit more. It's a

2 (1h 6m 5s):
Good guess. It's a number we never dreamt of. Let me say that.

0 (1h 6m 8s):
Do you attribute that to your talent and your hard work, or do you think more of it has to do with luck?

2 (1h 6m 16s):
Well, I've often said if I was going to write a book about our company, I'd call it pluck luck and perseverance. We've had situations. We've had a confluence of incredibly good things happening. We had the luck of finding a facility that already existed. We didn't have to start from scratch. We didn't have to hire somebody to put a factory together. And we've had some bad things. You know, we had nine 11, we had 2008. We had a pandemic, but there's a lot of hard work and there's skill. I mean, Bob had this innate design talent years ago, we were interviewed for CBS Sunday morning show. And I love when Rita braver said to him, you were a graphic designer.

2 (1h 6m 59s):
What made you think you could design furniture? And he said, because Mitchell said, I could, you know, I saw that in him that this, this ability and felt that together, we could make something out of it. And that's what makes a, an exciting business.

0 (1h 7m 16s):
That's Mitchell gold and Bob Williams co-founders of, well, the choke hold and Bob Williams, home furnishings these days, as he said, Mitchell has stepped away from a lot of the day-to-day operations of the company. Bob is more involved. He's responsible for new product development as president of design. And by the way, if you remember the CBS show, the good wife, nearly every scene in that show featured furniture from their company. In fact, Mitchell and Bob partnered with the set designer to create the first licensed furniture line in TV history sold in stores is the good wife collection.

0 (1h 7m 57s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week, please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episodes downloaded. If you want to follow us on Twitter. Our account is at how I built this. And mine is at guy Roz. This episode was produced by Casey Herman with music composed by REM teen Arab, Louie, who was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Claremore Ashima. Our production staff includes JC Howard, Juliet Carney, Elaine coats, Liz Metzger, Carrie Thompson, and Alex Chung. Our intern is Margaret Serino. I'm guy Roz, and you've been listening to how I built this.