0 (0s):
It's Sky Ross Here on the Wisdom from the Top podcast. I talk to leadership experts and some of the world's greatest business leaders about how they lead, innovate, and transform the people around them. If you're trying to make it in business or just wanna think more like a leader, this show probably for you. Listen now to the Wisdom from the Top podcast. From Luminary and N P R

Capital One (21s):
The. Spark Cash plus card from Capital. One helps you earn Unlimited 2% cash back on every purchase. And with no preset spending limit, your purchasing power can adapt to meet your business needs. Jorge Gaviria, founder of NDA reinvests his 2% cash back to help grow his business with new products. And I really love the idea behind NDA. It's a supply chain company connecting Mexican heirloom corn farmers with restaurants, chefs, and consumers And. while NDA is connecting more people to the culinary and cultural richness of the Mexican kitchen, it's also elevating traditional heirloom farmers that work in areas that live below the international poverty line. Imagine what? the Spark Cash plus card from Capital One An Unlimited. 2% cash back on every purchase could do for your business. Capital One, what's in your wallet? Find out more at Capital One dot com slash Spark. Cash plus terms and conditions apply

Name.com (1m 14s):
As an entrepreneur, you don't just create things and make content. You embody a lifestyle. Shouldn't your website embody it too? Well a.life U R L is a polished and personalized place for your business. A do life domain is unique and memorable. Just like what you're building. Dot Life gives you a U R L with a point of view as strong as your own. And name.com makes it simple to find the right domain and connect it to your favorite products. Own a web address that's as inspiring as your content. Get a.life. Learn more at name.com/life and use promo code built 25 for 25% off the first year of your life Domain.

Apple Card (1m 59s):
Apple Card is different. It has a cashback Rewards program. Unlike other cards you earn Unlimited daily cash back on every purchase, receive it daily and can grow it at 4.15% annual percentage yield when you open a high yield savings account. Apply for Apple Card in the Wallet app on iPhone and start earning and growing your daily cash with savings. Today. Apple Card subject to credit approval savings is available to Apple Card owners, subject to eligibility requirements, savings accounts provided by Goldman Sachs Bank, u s A member F D I C. Term Supply.

0 (2m 32s):
Hey, it's guy here. So on How I Built This, we talk a lot about working with colleagues who have different points of view. And this made me think of a conversation I recently had with actor Rain Wilson, who famously played the nerd bully Dwight Trout on the office. And Rain told me what it's like to be a person of faith in the world of comedy where religion and spirituality are more often a punchline than a way of life. To hear more check out my conversation with Rainn Wilson over on my other podcast. It's called The Great Creators. Just search for the Great creators with Guy Raz wherever you listen to podcasts. Or go to the great creators.com and now onto today's show.

3 (3m 21s):
We had never worked in retail. Our qualification was the fact that we had been customers of the thing that we wanted to create.

4 (3m 28s):
Yeah, it's interesting. I think one of our strengths at the time was the fact that we didn't know what we didn't know. A friend joined our board early on and the week before our first store opened, he said, listen, I decided to do this because I really like you too. And I wanted to make the process of failure less painful for you because this is never gonna work.

0 (3m 60s):
Welcome to How I Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz and on the show today how Scott and Alisson took a huge swing at two simple ideas and turned them both into multimillion dollar businesses. Starting a brand that scales is hard, doing it twice extremely rare. Back when I was a student in London in the mid 1990s, I used to get my coffee fix at an American style coffee bar.

0 (4m 44s):
It was called Seattle Coffee Company. It was one of the only places you could get a latte or a cappuccino or a double espresso in a to-go cup. And back then in London, when you asked for your coffee to go, they'd hand you a styrofoam cup without a lid, an inside instant coffee. At the time, there was no Starbucks in London, there was Seattle, Coffee Company and it was started by Scott and Ally Fenson. Within a few years of opening one location, they turned Seattle Coffee Company into a mini empire. It got big enough that when Starbucks was looking to expand to Europe, the company simply bought Scott and Ally's coffee chain.

0 (5m 28s):
So they eventually went back to the U US back home to Seattle. But the itch to start something new wouldn't go away. So in 2008 they decided to take on Pizza. They were inspired by fast casual chains like Chipotle and Panera, and they wondered why wasn't anyone doing fast casual in Pizza? Well, their answer was to create MOD Pizza. And today it's one of the fastest growing restaurant chains in the U us with more than 530 stores nationwide. Scott and Ally were high school sweethearts at Bellevue High just outside of Seattle. They both ended up going to college on the East coast.

0 (6m 7s):
Scott graduated a year before Ally and ended up in New York. Ally was in Paris studying abroad, but, and this is before the era of email and text messages, they still managed to stay in touch.

3 (6m 20s):
It's actually fun to think back to this because writing letters was something that we relied on a lot. Scott and I had been on kind of a little bit of a break. Our circumstances were just that we were in such different places. Scott had been on the East coast for a summer. I was in Seattle and then I knew I was gonna be abroad for the year. And when I was in France it was just about postcards and writing letters. And it started very subtly, Scott. And I would write each other occasional updates. And then as time went on, the letters became longer. And I got one of these beautifully long, wonderful letter from him. And I remember thinking, I just, I love the way he writes. I love the letters we're writing and I was able to come home for a very quick trip for the holidays during Christmas time.

3 (7m 6s):
And from that point on, there was something that had happened in our letter writing that once we were back together again from that holiday period, I, I did go back to France for the whole second semester and he then graduated and, and came over and spent time with me there. We've basically been completely together ever since that break. And then by my senior year at Wellesley, he was in New York and we tried to see each other as often as possible on weekends. So we, we, we made it work, but there was no FaceTime or, or texting or any of that. We wrote letters and then tried to spend time together when we could.

0 (7m 43s):
I guess Scott you decided to go work in finance and you got a job for the infamous or sort later infamous Drexel Burnham. Lamber. Was there, I mean finance, was it just sort of like Yeah, I mean it's, it's, it's an easy way to make some money and, and I'll go do that or were you really excited about going into finance?

4 (8m 2s):
When I graduated, I really had very little clarity as to what I wanted to do as a career. And a lot of people from Harvard ended up going to work on Wall Street and I looked at it as an opportunity, frankly, very simply, to make some money to pay my student loans back. 'cause I did need to make money and to get an education in business. 'cause I graduated with a undergraduate degree in government and I literally graduated not knowing the difference between a balance sheet and a profit and loss statement. So I had a lot to learn and I viewed it as a, a fabulous way to get an education and get paid enough so that I could start repaying my student loans.

4 (8m 48s):
And, and it turned out that that was what it delivered me. It was a, it was a great lesson for me at that stage as well.

0 (8m 55s):
Alright, so you, you, you end up working there and then I think they, they moved you to, to London and Ally you, I think 1990. You, you joined Scott in London, is that right? You, you moved there after college, after you graduated?

3 (9m 10s):
I graduated, I got my dream job, which was back in Seattle. I loved it. But it was a two year kind of program. It was with a N B C affiliate in the Seattle market.

0 (9m 22s):
You wanted to be a new, like a newscaster? Yeah,

3 (9m 24s):
Well I was actually on the track more of producing and I loved this job, but it, it became clear to me as I was doing it that if I were to pursue that career, that industry, I would be beholden to moving to the different markets that that job required me to move to. And at the time, Scott and I, you know, we had been together for a long time and we'd been living apart for a long time and we agreed that if we were going to stay together, we needed to actually be together, which meant moving to London. We were not married at the time, but yeah, I moved there in 90 and then we ended up getting married in 91.

0 (10m 0s):
In meantime, Scott you, I mean, 'cause of what? Drexel Burnham, I think it declared bankruptcy. So you presumably had to find another job. You went to go work for a, a private equity group. And I guess while while you were there, you ended up becoming the deputy c e o of a healthcare company. Is that, was that a company that the private equity group had bought out?

4 (10m 24s):
So, you're right. I, I left Drexel with a group of professionals that moved to another firm, apex Partners and I spent three years there advising and investing in a range of companies. And one of the areas that we specialized in, or we, or that I in particular focused on was healthcare with a focus on long-term healthcare. And I had been advising a company on restructuring their business and raising some financing and did a large financing. And then the, the c e o on board came to me and said, Hey listen, you've, you've put in place a lot of the framework that we're now gonna go and try to execute against.

4 (11m 5s):
Why don't you come and join us and help us do it? And wow, I knew that I didn't wanna spend my whole career on the advisory side. I really wanted to become a principal. I wanted to go build things and I was, this was my first opportunity to step across that divide and get into an operating role. So I became deputy chief executive of a, a small public long-term healthcare company.

0 (11m 31s):
Wow. And and a British based company. Yes.

4 (11m 34s):
Yeah, exactly.

0 (11m 35s):
Wow. and you were like, what, 28 years old or something and you were young. That's

4 (11m 40s):
Right.

0 (11m 40s):
Alright, so you've got this job, pretty good job. And Ally, you've got, what did you do when you got there

3 (11m 47s):
For work? I said, let's go get a latte and, and then I'll go get a job. And I was so naive. One, there were no lattes and two, there was no way an American could get a job without a work permit. I did not know that. So the very first Monday that I was there, I walked around looking for coffee because I thought Scott had just been working too hard and he just hadn't found the good coffee places. And a family friend of mine worked in publishing and I, I knocked on many doors trying to get jobs in publishing because that was the only connection I had there in London at the time. Yeah. And so I ended up getting a job with a, a magazine called City Limits.

3 (12m 29s):
It was kind of like timeout. Mm. And it was actually a very fun job for an American living in London because I, my job was to make sure that the, the magazine was distributed and marketed and, and, and had visibility on all the streets. So I would spend hours and days walking the streets of London, getting to know the news agents, making sure that they would put city limits up in an way in which people could see it. So I would drive at my little commute every day with my little homemade cup of coffee, my, my hack of Starbucks like coffee offering that I, that we were looking for, but we would've to make our own coffee, bring all the coffee back from the U us. And that was, that went on for a while.

0 (13m 6s):
Alright, so, so this is like, I mean obviously we're, we're foreshadowing here 'cause we're gonna talk about coffee in a moment, but this is the early nineties in the UK and probably a lot of people drank instant coffee and coffee culture. Like that whole sort of second wave hadn't really arrived in the U us quite yet. Starbucks was mainly in the Pacific Northwest. I think they had a location in, in Chicago, maybe one in la. But you knew it because you guys were from Seattle, right? So you knew Starbucks and in London you could not find anything like it, you couldn't find a decent cup of coffee there at the time in the early nineties.

3 (13m 45s):
It Right. And it was really surprising and probably shocking to people now to think that it was like this. But it really was. There were If, you went into all the sandwich bars that were everywhere. It was just crap coffee and little styrofoam cups.

0 (13m 58s):
You would get like a, I remember like a, a metal little teapot and they'd put some instant coffee in there and just like put hot water in there and give that to you.

3 (14m 7s):
Right. And If, you, you could find some good coffee. There were about four Italian coffee bars in Soho. The coffee was good, but If, you asked for an extra shot, which I always did. Or If, you asked for a different size or you wanted to specify what kind of milk. They just were so angry. Didn't wanna do that. Yeah. So they were the hardcore, you know, Italian coffee bar offerings and then there were a few French places that, so a few little spots would have decent tasting coffee, but nobody had what we were used to, which was a customizable coffee offering that we all now know, you know, it's everywhere. Yeah. But it was nowhere there.

3 (14m 48s):
It did not, and we know, 'cause we walked every single street. I mean, it truly, we spent about three years looking

0 (14m 52s):
And, and If you wanted it to go, they'd just give it to you in a styrofoam cup with no lid.

3 (14m 56s):
Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. With one size, with a really bad lid, the kind that you, you know, those old ones. Yeah. Yeah. They're just horrible.

0 (15m 3s):
Alright, so when did the two of you start to talk about, hey, maybe there's an opportunity here to open a, like a, a, a Starbucks like coffee place?

3 (15m 14s):
Looking back on it, it did not occur to us to do that. We were looking for something that we desperately wanted. We were getting cranky about it. We kept hearing false rumors that Starbucks is coming or somebody's friend's cousin is about to open a place. And I would go look at the real estate that we heard that where it was gonna open and nothing ever happened. And it wasn't until some friend slash colleague of Scott's had, had been hearing us talk and bitch and moan about this for, for quite some time. Right.

4 (15m 45s):
Yeah. So it's, it's interesting that it all all came to a head. I was in Scotland on a work trip with the person I worked most closely with the c e o of the company I was at and his brother who were both good friends. And they'd been hearing, Allie and I talk about this coffee idea for years. And we were flying back from Scotland to London and they both looked at me and said, you know what? You two need to stop complaining about this or do something about it. And in the spur of the moment I said, okay, well if we're gonna do something about it, then you need to do it with us. And they said, okay,

0 (16m 23s):
This is the c e o of the, of the long-term healthcare provider company. Yes. Cresta Care, this is the company Cresta

4 (16m 29s):
Care. Yeah. He, he was very entrepreneurial, his family was very entrepreneurial. Hmm. And so Starbucks had expanded to New York and the hypothesis we had was, well gosh, if it works in New York, given how international and diverse that city is, it'll work in London. And so we agreed as part of this challenge, If you will, that Ally and I and Nigel and Andrew, our two friends would go and spend a weekend in New York and we would explore Starbucks and we would make a decision. And so we ended up going to New York together and spent a weekend and came back and decided that we were gonna open a Seattle style coffee shop in London inspired by what we missed from our days in Seattle with Starbucks.

4 (17m 17s):
Well,

0 (17m 17s):
So let me just, just kind of pause a moment. I mean, this is the c e o of the, of the company. You are his deputy. Yeah. And, and he, and he's saying, Hey If, you are so, you know, sick and tired of this, why don't you go do something? I mean, he's essentially saying, Hey, you can, you, you can leave the company that I hired you to be my deputy and, and go start this thing. It's just crazy. It sounds crazy to me that he would say that. Well,

4 (17m 40s):
There are two components to this story that need maybe a little bit more detail. One was at the time the idea was we would just do this on the side and that I would stay at at cresta care. Right. That was the, the vision. Secondly, one of the most profound moments of my professional life was an incident where unfortunately the same individual ended up having a disagreement with the board. It all came to a head in a very dramatic board meeting where some evidence was produced and put on the table. And unfortunately I was the one with, you know, 15 people sitting in the room that when I looked at this document, I identified the element in this document that confirmed the board's contention.

0 (18m 30s):
Wow.

4 (18m 30s):
I, I ended up having to ask for the meeting to be paused. I asked for this friend of mine to walk out in the hall with me. I asked him directly whether or not what I saw in the document was correct. He didn't say anything and just walked away and did not go back in the boardroom. I walked back in the boardroom and shared what I had seen and that led to a front page article in the Financial Times the next day that wow, this c e o had been removed.

0 (18m 55s):
He was essentially probably stealing money from the company. Well,

4 (18m 59s):
No, he, he was negotiating his employment contract and there was a disagreement and there was some concerns about the integrity of documents that had been I

0 (19m 12s):
See.

4 (19m 12s):
Okay. And, and so it, it ended up blowing up into, and there were other wow things that kind of concerned the, the board. But in any event, this led to him being removed and despite that, that situation, and I think it was because Andrew, the person involved, recognized that he knew that I had a certain personal ethic and that I stood by my ethics when I had to Yeah. You know, call him out. And so he, I think he forgave me that and we stayed friends and we ended up building this business together. Ally and I built it and they were our backers.

0 (19m 52s):
So he basically, he, he had, they had already agreed to back you then he was ousted, but but you had already kind of made this decision that you would on the side start this coffee store.

4 (20m 3s):
Yes. Yeah. Effectively the specific sequencing and timing is a little foggy,

0 (20m 9s):
But that's super awkward. I mean, I mean this, this guy that was gonna back you that and kind of he and his brother encouraged you and then you had to kind of confirm that, you know, he had kind of produced false documents.

4 (20m 20s):
Yeah, it was, it was a very, very difficult moment. It was one of the most profound lessons of my young professional life. But we as a team, Ally and I, and, and a group of people who backed us, that this family in particular carried on and, and pursued this exciting opportunity to build Seattle Coffee Company together.

0 (20m 44s):
Alright, so it's 1995. And so I, I'm assuming you ba basically that was the reason why you left Cresta Care, or that was one of the reasons it just made sense for you to go? Well,

4 (20m 54s):
So what ended up happening is we had made an acquisition and brought on a very prominent doctor who ended up becoming the new c e O. So I was still the deputy c e o working with this new individual. I stayed in that role for another 12 months. And it was about six months into that experience that Ally and I, with the group behind Seattle Coffee Company decided at that point that we were really onto something. Ally and I talked about it and we made the decision for me to come in full time because Allie had been,

3 (21m 29s):
I had left my job in 1994.

0 (21m 32s):
Yeah. So, so these guys say, Hey, you should open your own place, but let, let's start with like, but coffee a coffee shop. Right? I mean, you, you coming from, you know, running a, a long-term healthcare company and Ally you were in publishing and of course we're not talking about like starting a, you know, an automotive company and, and you know, industrial manufacturing. But still like it is, there is still things you have to learn about that business. You know, it's, it's a quick service restaurant, let's say. So first of all, where, where did you start? Where did, I mean, you went to Starbucks in in the U us and you saw what they were doing and you loved it.

0 (22m 11s):
So how did you even start to think about how you would build a coffee shop in London? Where, where where'd you go first?

3 (22m 19s):
We, at, at the time we knew, I mean our qual we had never worked in retail. Yeah. What we realized though was our qualification was the fact that we had been customers of the thing that we wanted to create. And that became kind of the lens that we used for everything. And I remember at the time, Lavos that we went to who, who, who makes some of the best coffee, how can we learn about coffee? And we went to some coffee shows and tasted coffee and, and actually started to just systematically go through a a little list of what do we need? I mean, we wrote it down on a, on a lined piece of paper, you know, we need to find coffee, we need cups, we need lids. Because

0 (22m 59s):
Did you even know how to make an espresso?

3 (23m 1s):
No. Yeah. Right. Okay.

0 (23m 3s):
We had to I'm no judgment, I'm just, I'm just

3 (23m 5s):
Curious. Yeah. So that's the fun stuff. In fact, I remember we went to the latza training program in the little industrial estate on the outskirts of London because if we were going to be, once we decided we were going to use their coffee initially for the espresso, they then put you through these little training things. So we learned what we could and and also also realized early on the importance of good partnership. You know, who's your supplier and if they're really good and their product is really good, you can lean heavily on that. And, and we also called a daughter of some family friends of ours and said, listen, we're looking for somebody who, who's worked in, in a Starbucks style coffee place. We knew we needed to get somebody over that could help just from an operations perspective.

3 (23m 48s):
And this friend of ours said, oh yes, I'll think about it, I'll look into it. And then she contacted us and said, well, I wanna be that person. And she got to school really quickly on learning everything she could in the Seattle market. And then she moved over right before we opened the first location. But I mean, we need to get a location. That was a whole process. Yeah. We, we need the product and we need to figure out the operation of how to bring the product to, to customers. And, and it was incredibly old school. We ended up creating our mission statement to reflect this lens that we knew we needed to use. And the mission statement was written out on a yellow sticky that just said our, you know, we will create a Seattle style coffee bar that would fool a Seattle light.

3 (24m 34s):
Hmm. Which meant things like it had to be the cups and the lids that we're used to. Yeah. And it can't be compromised and it can't be the, the UK version of that stuff 'cause it's

4 (24m 43s):
Not, it's interesting. I think one of our strengths at the time was the fact that we didn't know what we didn't know, but we had an incredibly clear, and we were totally aligned on the vision for what we wanted to bring to life. And a friend of this family that I mentioned before was a very prominent retailer in the uk and he joined our board early on and the, the week before our first store opened in a board meeting, he said, listen, I decided to do this because I really like you two and I wanted to make the process of failure less painful for you because this is never gonna work.

4 (25m 23s):
And and he had his theory because, you know, he could not imagine selling enough cups of coffee to not only pay the rent, but also pay very expensive labor in the UK Yeah. And all the other Costa goods sold. And, and he just couldn't envision it because he had never been to Starbucks in the U us. He had never seen this coffee revolution. He just thought of it in the context of what existed in the UK at the time, which was very, very different. Like you said, around the world at that time, about 92% of all coffee consumed was real coffee and 8% was instant in the uk It was the inverse of that. Yeah. It was over 90% instant.

4 (26m 4s):
And the balance was real. People, they drank a lot of tea and hot drinks. Yeah.

3 (26m 8s):
But

4 (26m 8s):
Coffee was just not the thing. And so he just couldn't imagine the britts rallying around, you know, coming in often enough to buy expensive cups of coffee to make this work.

3 (26m 19s):
And he was not unique in having that kind of, you know, doomsday approach. The, the way this was viewed at the time, people just did not get it. In the uk We, for a period of time in our little basement flat, when we were trying to source the paper products, we knew we needed cups and lids and we contacted every single possibility in the uk. And I would ask for, you know, we're looking to, we need three sizes, you know, we need a short, tall and a grande, and we need the lids and the, and every single time we will, we were told, that doesn't exist. You, that does not make sense. We were even told you, you're not gonna wanna offer anything over an eight ounce cup of coffee. It will be offensive to people in the United Kingdom.

3 (26m 59s):
That is just too, that is gross. That is too much too American. Too American. They kept saying, do not do it. Do not get all those sizes. You're gonna, it's a mistake. You're gonna regret it. And it became so frustrating for us that we ended up, we had to bring in the cups from Chicago and sticker them. And I remember saying to them, once people have held these cups, once they drink their coffee out of these cups, there's no going back. Everybody will want these cups. And it wasn't very long after that point, once Seattle, Coffee, Company got going. And then others that, you know, If, you went there within a year or two, every single cup of coffee consumed on those streets where the new, you know, nice wax cups with the good lids.

0 (27m 41s):
You guys found a spot in Covent Garden, which is obviously a sort of a tourist hub and a, and a bustling area. And, and was it, was it a hit right away?

3 (27m 52s):
It was, and it was so validating because we would get people piling out of a black cab in front of this little location of ours. These euphoric Americans that had heard finally, they were the, they were what we would've been two years prior, three years prior, looking for the people that would finally open one of these places. So they would come in so excited. Or a lot of people that had been traveling around Europe had heard they would show up in London. Their first stop would be Seattle Coffee Company because they could get a taste of home. That was really fun to see. But the nice thing about Covent Garden is it's such a, it's so crowded and so busy, so very quickly, we also had, you know, British people that worked nearby. The lines developed very quickly and it was fun to watch how people would, some people knew exactly how to do it, and then a lot of people didn't.

3 (28m 39s):
And so we had to create, you know, beautiful posters that demonstrated the architectural build of one of these coffee drinks and

4 (28m 46s):
What's the difference between a cappuccino and a latte? Yeah.

3 (28m 49s):
And sometimes the British, you know, response was what we predicted, which was, you can't make it feel like it's this American concept being shoved down your throat. A lot of people came in and said, I just want a coffee. We knew what they meant was like a lot. They wanted a, they wanted coffee with warm milk and they, but they didn't know how to be, how to order it. and you could watch people in a line learn from each other. So if there was the American asking for the coffee drink using all the right lingo, the the British person behind them could start to get a little comfortable with, well, what is that? What do you mean vanilla? Can I try the vanilla?

0 (29m 25s):
And, and were you, you were basically managing this first location.

3 (29m 29s):
Yeah. I mean it was kind of a collaborative effort, to be honest. Yeah. It was a, we were just figuring it out. We were in the location all the time.

4 (29m 36s):
It, early on it was a crazy time though. Yeah. There was a moment that maybe lasted a month when we opened the store and we realized I was driving Ally to drop her at the store early, early in the morning before it opened. I would then go to the healthcare company to work during the day, and then I would drive back to Covent Garden to help her close. And we would then drive home at nine o'clock at night and pick up a Pizza or something and then wake up the next morning and do the same thing. Yeah. And, and while that was exciting and entrepreneurial, it also felt incredibly constraining because we're like, oh my gosh, we've opened this thing and now we own it.

4 (30m 15s):
And how are we gonna get our out from under this? 'cause otherwise this is just gonna be a burden. And we knew that the only way was to refine the concept, figure it out, and start growing it so that it, it wasn't just this one location that we needed to babysit.

3 (30m 30s):
We then did, we did, I remember recruited our first manager so that we could, that we didn't have to be in the store every moment of every day. It was a character named Peter, who his previous job, he'd, he'd worked in Buckingham Palace as a footman. So,

0 (30m 46s):
So the, I see the idea was If you, If you stayed running this one store, it was gonna be hamster wheel, it was just gonna be like, you couldn't get out that hamster and, but, but in order to, it's, so, so your thinking was in order to, to get off the hamster wheel, which is, I'm trying to figure that out. 'cause I would think that you just build yourself a bigger hamster wheel. It was, you would expand the concept. Yeah. Because, because you didn't go into it thinking, let's build a chain of no coffee shops. You thought, let's just build a one-off.

4 (31m 16s):
Well, we, this was the thought we had always talked about wanting to bring to London two things, the Starbucks style coffee experience and a a bit of home, a bit of Seattle. And that meant, you know, the customer service ethic, the positivity, the energy that we've associated with home that didn't exist on the High Street at London at the time. And we said, when we opened our first store, if the, if the worst thing that happens is we open this one store in Covent Garden and we bring those two things together and introduce it to London, that would be a success. But we had in the back of our mind, well gosh, if this works, then maybe it will lead to something bigger and more exciting.

4 (31m 56s):
But at the time, our planning was like one step at a time, and the initial planning was, well, let's just see if we can get one location open and we can figure out how to put all these pieces together and let's see if people even want this. Once we'd gotten through that and realized, wow, there is a lot of demand for this, then we started to say, okay, what's next? The next step was, well, we should probably open two other locations in very different venues because listen, opening a store in Covent Garden, it's Covent Garden and there are a lot of people, so let's try one in a business district and let's try one in a, in a location outside of London. And it was a bit haphazard, but that was the way we thought at the time was, let's, let's expand this one step at a time.

4 (32m 39s):
It

3 (32m 39s):
Was working in Covent Garden. And so there is a certain logic to say, well, let's find other places like Covent Garden. And we actually did the opposite, like Scott said. And, and it, I kind of look back and I wonder, gosh, we were really, we, we, we did the right thing at the time. We opened our second location was as different from the Covent Garden location as possibly be. We made it really hard for ourselves. We opened a bookstore cafe in Cambridge and then our third site was in the city financial district. And that kind of set us up for what we were able to then grow it quickly,

0 (33m 12s):
You, you decided that you were gonna expand this, this, and, and I guess going from one to two to three, you, you had a template, right? You had to design what the locations looked like. You had the logos you now had, you're getting the Laa coffee. So you had, you had it all worked out. So going from one to two to three, you could replicate that. Right. And it was a matter of just hiring people and making sure that they were well trained more or less, right?

4 (33m 39s):
Well, yes. And you know, the, the format and profile of the first store was very different from the second, different from the third. It felt a little bit at that time, like we were kind of continuing to create the concept while we were opening those first few stores.

3 (33m 55s):
Laboratory mode very much. But you're right

0 (33m 57s):
By the, but it was a sim it was a sim straightforward. I mean, you had just coffee drinks and maybe like some baked goods.

4 (34m 3s):
Yeah, we had a good pretty extensive food offering. More extensive than Starbucks at the time. To put in context, Starbucks food sales at the time were eight to 10% of sales and ours were 25%. Wow.

3 (34m 15s):
But we should talk about the coffee. Yeah. Because there was, it was within that laboratory phase where two guys showed up to our first location there in Covent Garden. They were both British, but they were two guys who had been, they were living in California and they became infatuated with Pete's coffee and the whole Starbucks scene. And they were captivated by it all, actually learned a bit about coffee while they were there. And then they decided, are we gonna set up a roastery or are we gonna set up a retail brand back in London? They decided just when we were setting up Seattle Coffee Company, unbeknownst to all of us, they decided to go with developing out the roastery tourism Mahonia Roastery.

3 (34m 58s):
So they did that while we were building out our first location. They came, stumbled on us. That was an incredible beginning of a relationship that also really enriched what Seattle Coffee Company became because we ultimately acquired tours in Mahonia. And so we now, we were roasting our own coffee. Wow. And at the time, they were supplying beans to the highest end, most special restaurants in the uk. They were really, you know, wonderfully obsessed with, with the science of, of creating great coffee and roasting beautiful coffee beans. So that helped Seattle Coffee Company quite a bit. Yep.

0 (35m 37s):
I I'm trying to get my head around. I mean, you open the first location 95 by 97 you've got 35 in the uk and then there was a period of like two months where you opened like 20 or 25 stores. Yeah. First of all, it seems like you were racing against a clock. Why were you in such rapid expansion mode?

4 (35m 59s):
Well, a lot of it was, this was at a time when Andy Grove's book, only the Paranoid Survive had come out, I believe. And we respected Starbucks so much. They had been our inspiration and they were our role model. And there was no animosity between us and them. We truly were inspired by them, and we knew that if they decided to come to London, that they would probably just take over and, you know, their size and scale and sophistication. We really felt like we were outmatched.

3 (36m 31s):
Remember somebody told us, oh, if they get here, they'll squish you like a grape.

0 (36m 38s):
When we come back in just a moment. What happened when Starbucks did come to London and how a van full of teens led Scott and Ally to think seriously about Pizza? Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

MasterClass (37m 11s):
One of the reasons I love summer is summer fruits and vegetables. And it's an incredible opportunity to prepare fresh meals in my own kitchen. In fact, I learned so much about selecting seasonal ingredients when I took a class with Chef Alice Waters on MasterClass. With MasterClass, you can learn from the best to become your best anytime, anywhere and at your own pace. Annual membership start at $10 a month and you get Unlimited access to every instructor. Thousands of online lessons, exclusive content insights, and much more. There are over 180 classes to pick from everything from self-made entrepreneurship with Sarah Blakely to skateboarding with Tony Hawk. And new classes are added every month. The Alice Waters class, for example, teaches the art of home cooking with amazing insights on building a home pantry and essential tools for the kitchen, yet Unlimited access to every class. And right now as a How I Built This listener, you can get 15% off when you go to MasterClass dot com slash built. That's MasterClass dot com slash built for 15% off an annual membership MasterClass dot com slash built.

Justworks (38m 26s):
Hey, small business leaders on How, I, Built This, we hear all about how founders have built their companies from the ground up. And today's sponsor Justworks makes it easier for you to start, run and grow a business. And let me tell you how Justworks can help your business. Whether you are looking for help with payroll benefits, HR tools or compliance, Justworks has you covered. And Justworks makes it simple to hire and manage remote employees across all 50 states. Its cloud-based platform enables managers and employees alike to quickly and securely access benefits, payroll and other HR functionality from anywhere, anytime. Justworks also believes that it's your right as a customer to have a phenomenal service experience every time. Whether you have a question about setting up benefits, paychecks or anything else, their team of experts is standing by 24 7 ready to guide you. Learn more about Justworks and how they can help you get more done by visiting Justworks dot com slash podcast. That's Justworks dot com slash podcast.

0 (39m 36s):
One more thing before we get back to the show, please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show and it's totally free. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's the mid 1990s. Allie and Scott are working round the clock on Seattle Coffee Company and the business is booming, but they still have to figure out how to manage the company's growth and deal with the looming threat of Starbucks.

4 (40m 9s):
I mean, I think we had a, an appropriate amount of humility and a little bit of an inferiority complex that if they came over they would, you know, bring the full capacities of the organization to try to to dislodge us. And so we knew that it was a market share game. We knew that we had to get out and secure the right real estate and build the brand. And in our real, in our market, they, they talk about the first mover advantage and we had to secure that first mover advantage so that if they did come, we could defend ourselves.

0 (40m 41s):
How how did you manage, I'm, I'm just trying, I mean, you know, If you 65 locations in a three year period of time. I mean you were, you had to identify locations, you had to get the build out, you had to find the people and you had to, I mean, and you were doing this all over the uk sometimes two or three a week. H how, just help me understand how you actually manage that.

3 (41m 4s):
I, I'm smiling right now because I'm having a memory of what our, our Sunday, so you mentioned guy site selection. I mean just that alone is a process that's very time intensive. Yeah. And, and we would get, you know, long lists of potential sites from our real estate broker and, and typically you go through the process of just visiting and studying those sites and you have to, you know, make a, a schedule to go do that. And at the time when we would get this list of a bunch of sites to go look at, we were parents of a very young kid named Tristan who I was nursing. And anybody who's been a, you know, parent of a baby knows there's not a lot of sleep that goes on you if you're feeding a baby in the middle of the night or early morning, you're, that can be tough.

3 (41m 52s):
But for us it actually was awesome. We would have our Sundays, I remember on weekends Tristan would wake up for his morning feed at whatever, four in the morning or something. And instead of us going back to sleep, we would load him up in the car after I fed him and we would be able to drive what otherwise would've been, you know, gridlock traffic all around the city, all around London. We would be able to drive with sleeping Tristan well fed in the back and see all of these sites all in a day. And then on that Monday morning we were able to give our feedback to the real estate guy and we could fast track things that way. I mean, that, that's how we, I mean our situation was a bit nutty.

3 (42m 32s):
Our life was very, the dimension of it was all about Seattle, Coffee, Company. But in some ways like having Tristan that helped us.

0 (42m 42s):
So alright, this crazy rapid expansion and even licensing deals overseas. I mean imagine a certain point you thought, okay, this is gonna be a global empire, but in the end, three years in Starbucks offers you $90 million and you accept it. You you you sell the company to them.

4 (43m 3s):
Yeah, it's an interesting, how that came about is interesting. We, we had been raising capital to grow. We had a strategy to turn this into a brand that was, like you said, outside of the uk. And, and we had global aspirations. We had signed up with partners in the Middle East and South Africa and Southeast Asia and had plans to go to Northern Europe and, and actually it had conversations with several brands in the U us well-known brands about us acquiring them to create a, an entree into the U US so that we would become the global alternative to Starbucks.

4 (43m 45s):
At the time, Starbucks was very established in the U US and they had gone to Japan as part of their first step to becoming an international brand. Well we were far ahead of them internationally. And so the hypothesis was we could become the Pepsi to their Coke. And at the time we sold the Starbucks, we had 68 locations, but we had 50 locations in our UK pipeline for the next year. And we had a whole bunch of stores we were gonna be opening internationally. And that's when Starbucks approached us and said, we have an aspiration of building the world's most inspiring brand or something. There, there was a context for it. And they said that we know that to do that we need to be successful in three markets, New York, Tokyo and London, and we are in New York City and Tokyo and you are in London and that's a problem.

4 (44m 40s):
And so we wanna solve that problem by working with you as opposed to against you. And, and so we ended up having this very positive conversation because again, we we very much looked up to them as, as our inspiration. So we started by having a conversation with Orrin Smith, who was the president of the company at the time. And that led to Howard Schultz coming to do a visit and entering into a negotiation to see wow, if we could make this work. And and it all led very quickly to us deciding to work with Starbucks as opposed to competing with them. So

0 (45m 16s):
All of your locations under that deal would become Starbucks. You would become, you would take on an executive role and eventually I think you were even the president of Starbucks Europe. What was that experience like for you? I mean, 'cause you, you, I I should say, I mean you didn't, I don't think you ended up spending that much time there. Was it wa was that the idea that you would just kind of stay there for a couple years as part of the commitment of being bought out? Or, or did you think, okay, I'm gonna have a career at Starbucks now?

4 (45m 42s):
Yeah, it's, it's a, it's a great question. At the time the transaction happened, I made a commitment. Allie and I made a commitment that we would work as hard as possible to make sure that the transaction was succ as successful for them and their shareholders as it had been for our shareholders. And that was an informal handshake. And I stuck around for almost two years to help manage the transition from Seattle, Coffee Company to Starbucks. And and it was a fascinating experience, very eye-opening in that we assume that, you know, this big successful business would come over and everything would be buttoned down and polished.

4 (46m 24s):
Yeah. And, and what we found was all of the challenges and the, the imperfections and the dysfunction that we had in our small little company were just amplified on a bigger scale at Starbucks. And it was funny 'cause Howard Schultz took us to dinner right after the transaction closed in London. And he had had a little bit of a, a, a campaign going on internally at the time around how do you get big and stay small. And there was a book that he was handing out to all of his senior executives called Orbiting the Giant Hairball. And he gave us a copy of it. And it's a lot of pictures and graphics and, and it, the whole premise is when you start a company like Starbucks, you have to put processes in place and systems it controls and each one of those is like a little piece of hair.

4 (47m 15s):
And it, over time it creates this hairball that if you're not careful it'll stifle. So he talked a lot to us at the time about that and he, his basic message to us was, we love what you have done in the UK and how entrepreneurial you've been and dynamic and please build a, a wall across the Atlantic and don't let, I think the word he used was the bastards, but don't let those in from Starbucks who are gonna try to take that away from you. And they will do it in my name and with all of the right intentions, but they don't understand that what I really want is for you to continue to be entrepreneurial and dynamic and creative, not just to

0 (47m 58s):
Hmm,

4 (47m 59s):
Cut and paste everything that we've done in the U us into the uk 'cause that will, that will be a hairball. And, and so what we found was he was right, there was a lot of momentum organizationally to simply replicate in a new market what they'd had success doing elsewhere. And so that was a very, very interesting experience for me. And I, I loved it, but ultimately decided Ali and I, that what we loved even more was building things. And, and I talked to Ally about it and we came back and I sat with Howard Schultz and said, I love this place, I love this brand, but I think Ally and I are gonna go and think about what to do next in terms of building our next business as opposed to coming in and managing your great business.

4 (48m 48s):
And so we ended up deciding to, to leave Starbucks.

0 (48m 52s):
So you guys moved back to the U us back to Seattle in 2000. You've got, you're financially secure. I mean, you, you can just kind of spend, focus all your energy on your family If you wanted to for the rest of your lives. But you, I think, I think Scott you joined or Maybe you started a private equity group when you got back. You, you, you created one, right? Yeah.

4 (49m 16s):
So one little thing that happened in between is, as we were leaving Starbucks, we got involved with helping to back an incredible couple and concept called Carluccio's, which is an Italian deli cafe concept that two incredible people, Antonio and Priscilla Carluccio's were in the process of bringing to life in the uk. And we helped them build a really fun, successful business called Carluccio's. And that was something that we did while we were still in the uk and then we were very involved with when we got back to Seattle. But that was another chapter for us of helping a, a really great team bring to life a concept based on what we had learned from our experiences with Seattle Coffee Company.

4 (50m 1s):
And that's a company that eventually went public in the uk and then we eventually sold it. But that was all happening while we moved back to Seattle. And then you're right, we, we decided to set up a company called the Sienna Group, which was intended to be a platform from which we could bring the experiences we'd had with Seattle, Coffee, Company and Carluccio's and support and, and back other private companies that were growing, but to do so more as a investor and coach less as an a full-time executive. So

0 (50m 35s):
You, so you're back fully back in Seattle at this point, and you, I think initially the idea with this, this this private equity group that you started was to kind of follow the Warren Buffet playbook, find great family owned businesses, buy them and don't sell them necessarily, but but hold them for a long time. Yep. And was that, I mean, did that pan out? What, what kind of businesses were you looking? I mean, he's got pink companies and railways Yeah. And chocolate and Yeah. So

4 (51m 6s):
Carluccio's was one of the businesses that we had participated in and then we ended up making a very large investment in a, a wealth and asset management company here in Seattle with the idea of, of kind of using this as a platform to start to dabble in combining profit and purpose.

0 (51m 30s):
So, so you guys are involved in philanthropy and, and so tell me how you, the conversations you started to have around starting another business of your own, because you'd been through it, right? You did your own startup 10 years earlier. Yep. And now you're, you know, it's like 2006, seven, you start to talk about maybe the two of you starting something again. How, how did that start?

4 (51m 55s):
Well, what ended up happening is we had been approached many times by people who were interested in getting us involved with a coffee business or a restaurant retail business. And we had always politely declined. But one of the elements of our time in Europe was we had a, an intense love affair with Italy and all things Italian. When we had a chance to travel most of the time we ended up going to Italy because there was just something about the country and the people and the culture and the food and everything about it, the architecture that just drew us in. And we loved our experiences. You overlay that with somebody approached us during that time that we were back in Seattle and thinking about how we were gonna be investing our professional time and, and they came to us with the idea of doing something different in Pizza.

4 (52m 49s):
And I'll be honest, I kind of poo-pooed it. And then Allie kept coming back to it saying, you know, I really think we need to look more closely at this. Why,

0 (52m 58s):
Why Ally? Why were you saying that?

3 (53m 0s):
I specifically remember one moment that made my hair, you know, stand up. I was driving our big family rig. We had groups of, you know, our boys and a couple other friends in the car. And we were doing one of those typical things where you're between a game and a practice and gotta drop off and this guy's hungry and now I am too. And what are we gonna do? And we really struggled to find the right solution for the, the carload. You know, if we're gonna feed them, then we're gonna be hungry. If we're gonna feed us, they're gonna be picky and it's gonna cost a fortune. And it was just one of these, and we'd had so many moments like that and then we just had this one in the car that day of that deja vu feeling of we are looking for something that doesn't exist.

3 (53m 42s):
And I know that what we're looking for other people would want to. And because we'd had this backdrop of somebody talking to us about Pizza and the exploration of not doing Pizza by the slice, but individualized pizzas, which of course is the way it's done on the street in Italy. So we had that in the back of our mind. And then that deja vu moment of we are looking for something that doesn't exist. Wow. If we could go and get Pizza that we could all customize. That is interesting. So I think it was a deja vu moment of I we're frustrated, we have a problem to solve, we should pay attention to this, to this feeling.

0 (54m 18s):
And, and was there somebody, I mean, was there a partner or somebody who was like, Pizza, let's do Pizza.

4 (54m 24s):
Yeah, there were a couple of people who approached us, one in particular who the general idea was Pizza is slow, it's expensive, you know, it takes time. It, and it's a sit down occasion. Or you go into these places where you have Pizza by the slice, but the Pizza was made hours ago, and it's reheating it. And is there a way to combine all of these, the attributes of fast casual with Pizza, which is the second largest food category in restaurants behind hamburgers. It's a loved product. There's so much innovation you can do because you have this great platform of dough that you can put any combination of wonderful toppings on.

4 (55m 6s):
And so maybe we can try to make the experience more personalized.

0 (55m 12s):
So, so you guys saw what Chipotle was doing, right? But fast casual was, was, was blowing up. and you know, now there's millions of burger chains, smash burger places and stuff. But, so you saw what was happening and essentially this was happening with, with things like sandwiches, burritos, but, but Pizza, nobody was really doing it with Pizza. Nobody was. There was no fast casual, quick Pizza place.

4 (55m 38s):
That's right. Yeah.

0 (55m 39s):
And this was a ca and as you say this, the second most popular fast food in, in, in the U US or food

3 (55m 46s):
Back in the day when we were doing our research and starting to brainstorm around this. Yes. I mean, those will be outta date numbers now, but they were really compelling.

0 (55m 53s):
And, and so the idea was, well, could you do this at Pizza? And I'm thinking of like, like Papa John's for example, I think, which is not a fast casual place, it's mainly delivery. But they have like a conveyor belt system, I think, where they put the dough and then they put it and it runs their conveyor belt and it comes out. It's a fully done Pizza. So, so you could do it. I mean, the concept of, of kind of creating a fast Pizza place, you could make that happen. Well,

3 (56m 20s):
That's why we knew we needed a laboratory. Yeah. We knew from our Seattle Coffee Company experience, we don't know how to do this. Yeah. We don't know what it will look like, but we need a real laboratory.

0 (56m 30s):
What was the motivation for, for the, for the both of you, I mean, you, you were gonna now dive back into a really intense project. Of course you had more resources and you had more experience. It was gonna be different than, than the Seattle Coffee Company and, and, and slightly less scrappy, but still it was gonna require a huge time and, you know, emotional energy commitment. So what got you to the point where you're like, let's do this.

4 (56m 55s):
In all honesty, it was a little bit like our time with Seattle Coffee Company, where it was one step at a time and, and the plan really didn't extend years into the future. It was, this is a really intriguing question about can you modernize the Pizza experience to deliver a more personalized, customized, quick experience? And can we do that in one location?

0 (57m 19s):
And how did you start to, to determine like, what the concept would be? Did you like rent space? Did you get a kitchen, like a commercial kitchen? Did you bring a bunch of people together in an office? What, what did you do?

4 (57m 31s):
It was a combination of all of that. Yep. We had an office for the Sienna Group, and we used that as kind of our main hub. There was a lot of work that was done on whiteboards and so forth. We then collaborated with some equipment suppliers to get into kitchens to test this idea of how we could formulate the dough and how we would press it and the different techniques for cooking it and, you know, how quickly could we do it? And so there was like multiple streams of work that were going into convince us that if we actually did lease a space and build it out and start to construct this concept that the key components would all come to life in a way that we could at least run one restaurant and, and have it operate.

4 (58m 14s):
We had lots of questions though, about would people, would we be able to deliver a product that people liked enough to actually come back? We were able to answer enough of them to convince ourselves that, hey, you know, taking a lease and trying this once might not be a bad idea. And by the way, at the time in particular Guy, we weren't thinking that if we did this, and it started to build momentum into a business that Allie and I would be the ones in the driver's seat. That was not the, the perspective at the time.

3 (58m 45s):
Early on it was even more, it was very much the kitchen table mentality, even more kitchen table mentality than Seattle, Coffee, Company had been because we had been motivated to just pull in people and wanna work and collaborate with people that we respected, that were friends. We really just sat around our table and, and you know, kind of name creation and early on, what could, you know, logos be like, we launched actually with two logos because we couldn't decide it. We, we were playing with it. We didn't have a sense of desperation. It was more about curiosity and, and getting really creative and brainstorming, what, what do we wanna create that we ourselves would need?

3 (59m 26s):
What, what solves this? And we played a bit.

0 (59m 29s):
Well, let me, let me ask you about the, the sort of the overcoming some of the bottlenecks here, right? Because a a a burrito place, you can, you know, there's tortillas are made. They're, they're quickly heated and it goes down a conveyor, you know, goes down a line and people add stuff to it and it's packaged in a foil wrapper and you're done. Pizza's a little bit different, right? Because you've got the, the, the balls of dough and usually there's one, maybe two people who are, you know, flipping the pizzas in the air and, and stretching the dough and then making the pizzas and then putting it in the oven. and you gotta monitor what, what pizza's doing what, and Maybe you can, depending on the size of Pizza oven Maybe, you can do three, four at a time. I mean, that was a bottleneck you had to solve because clearly if if there was an easy way to do this, somebody would've figured this out.

0 (1h 0m 14s):
These are presumably questions you were asking around the whiteboard. Yep. And what was the, like how did you come upon a solution to this, to the, the bottleneck issue of just a long line of people waiting to get their pizzas done and, you know, made,

4 (1h 0m 26s):
As you just described it, we were confident that people would be attracted to the idea of walking into a restaurant where they could walk down the line like they do at a Chipotle and co-create their own Pizza using 30 fresh, beautiful toppings. And that's a, you know, the fast casual concept, that idea of being able to walk down the line and have the ability to personalize was very attractive. And but to be, to be able to do so quickly and efficiently was also important. So we, we knew that would be appealing. Now, if you're at Chipotle, the food has been prepped before and it's simmering, so it's sitting there. Yeah. And as you put it together, by the time you get to the end of line, it's done.

4 (1h 1m 10s):
You put the top on it and you take it away. At MOD, that creation of the Pizza was the first step. The second step was then to cook it. And that takes three or four minutes. So in exchange for a freshly cooked product, that is gonna take a little bit longer. Now you're preoccupied because you go at the end of the line and you go grab a drink and you pay for it. And while you're doing all of that, we're cooking your product. But there was a question both in terms of customer acceptance of that slightly longer experience, and then the production process of being able to get the throughput, particularly at the peak hour.

4 (1h 1m 51s):
And in our ovens, we can at peak have 15 to 20 pizzas in the oven at one time, but it's still gonna take, you know, three to four minutes for that product to cook. And would people come and have Pizza at lunch because Pizza historically has been a dinner occasion. Yeah. And this concept wouldn't work if we couldn't crack the lunch occasion, just given the economics of paying for a piece of real estate and the people and so forth.

0 (1h 2m 19s):
And that was the, I mean, that was gonna be the concept for the first location. I mean, the idea was let's do one-off and see how this goes, and then decide what we wanna do afterwards.

3 (1h 2m 30s):
We're lucky because the first location that we had identified was actually a great one to test the, that focus that Scott mentioned around will people eat Pizza for lunch and can we handle volume? and, you know, at peak time, and the first location that was to be our laboratory was in an office building that was really only going to be trading Monday through Friday, primarily lunchtime. So it was actually a really, really great place to start to figure to, you know, to answer some of those fun most fundamental questions. That's why we chose that location downtown Seattle.

0 (1h 3m 5s):
And, and the name MOD Pizza made on Demand. Is that that's what it stands for, right?

4 (1h 3m 11s):
Well, a little bit. A little bit. The MOD name was inspired by the MOD era of the fifties and sixties in the uk. Ally and I grew up as big fans of the who and the music and vibe of that era and,

3 (1h 3m 26s):
And the original MA movement, when you read about it, it just has some that innocent rebellion kind of. Yeah.

4 (1h 3m 31s):
There's something written about the MA movement, which is a movement that was all about speed and style and challenging convention and innocent rebellion, all in pursuit of a better future. And we were like, that's it, that's what we wanna build with. Maud is a brand and a business that has that essence

3 (1h 3m 53s):
Combined with it's not, you know, made to order. It is made on demand. Which, you know, that's, that helps. And, and it, we like the idea that this is a modern way to enjoy Pizza MOD. There

4 (1h 4m 4s):
Are a lot of all sorts of, there are a lot of ways to interpret MOD. We intentionally tell people it's not literally meant to be made on demand. And we love that inclusivity and that flexibility around how ma comes to life. But Maud is what you make it. And Maude can mean a lot of things to a lot of people.

0 (1h 4m 26s):
Well, we come back in just a moment. How Scott and Ally made MOD meaningful and how an economic downturn and a free bottle of water would give shape to their Pizza business. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

Caldera + Lab (1h 4m 44s):
You know, I'm pretty good about using sunblock and wearing hats to keep the sun out of my face. But you know, as you get older, your skin also reflects your age. Well, fortunately, incorporating skincare into your daily routine can be effortless. And that's where Caldera Lab comes in with their products clinically proven to reduce wrinkles, fine lines and signs of aging. Caldera Lab proudly stands as a leader in men's skincare. The regimen leads off their product lineup. It's a twice a day routine to transform your skin. Inside this bundle, you'll find the clean slate, the base layer, and the good. The clean slate is where you start your day. It's a balancing cleanser that leaves all skin types exceptionally refreshed. The base layer is a nutrient-dense fortifying moisturizer that hydrates your skin and absorbs it fast. And the good is your go-to at night before bed. It's a serum that helps your skin look tighter and smoother. Get 20% off with this exclusive link, Caldera lab.com/built. That's 20% off by going to Caldera lab.com/built experience. A whole new level of health in skincare with Caldera Lab.

Mint Mobile (1h 5m 56s):
After years of fine print contracts and getting ripped off by big wireless providers, if we've learned anything, it's that there's always a catch. So when I first heard that Mint Mobile offers premium wireless starting at just 15 bucks a month, I thought, well, what's the catch? But after talking to them and then using their service, it all made sense. There isn't one Mint Mobile's secret sauce is that they're the first company to sell wireless service online only they cut out the cost of retail stores and pass those sweet savings directly to you. I live in the Bay Area and you'd be surprised, but cell reception in San Francisco can be terrible. I know the capital of technology, but with my Mint Mobile phone, I get crystal clear reception everywhere I go. To get your new wireless plan for just 15 bucks a month and get the plan shipped to your door for free, go to Mint Mobile dot com slash built. That's Mint Mobile dot com slash built. And when you use that U r l, you're also showing them how much you support our show. Cut your wireless bill to 15 bucks a month at Mint Mobile dot com slash built.

4 (1h 7m 12s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. So it's 2008 and Scott and Ally believe that with MOD Pizza, they're onto an idea that will work.

0 (1h 7m 21s):
But right as they're getting ready to launch the financial crisis hits, and for lots of startups it would mean the end. But Scott and Ally doubled down and decided to ask what MOD Pizza should and could do.

3 (1h 7m 36s):
This really informed a lot of what MOD was to become from a perspective of how do we take care of customers? What and how are we gonna take care of employees? And those two, we, we, we made some decisions very early on as because of the financial crisis that I think today are some of the most fundamental decisions we made about MOD, starting with the customer proposition, this, this need for value. I mean, with all the financial insecurity at the time. And people aren't gonna be, you know, the disposable income question around, are they gonna be going out for food? This one price model of here's the

0 (1h 8m 13s):
Price, here's a flat price for whatever the size of the, the Pizza. It doesn't matter how many toppings you put on it, there's one price

3 (1h 8m 18s):
And no, that had never been done before in Pizza. Mm. And the, the story of how that came about, like with so much of this stuff, it was, it was a personal thing for us. We had stayed in a, an incredible hotel in California. We'd forgotten to bring our water bottle into the hotel room, which I hate forgetting to bring our own water because I don't like to pay an insane amount of money for the, for the water in the hotel room. And as it turns out, there was this wonderful sign in this very expensive hotel room that said, we're so happy you're here. Enjoy, you know these items on the house. And I remember looking at Scott and I almost burst into happy tears. You know, my gosh, the water's free. Like all this is free.

3 (1h 8m 57s):
But yes, we agree. That's, that's refreshing. Like that was a very nice discovery moment for us. And that feeling we wanted to capture when we opened MOD, again, given the timing of the recession, this idea of one price, there is no nickel and dimming, we wanted customers to truly feel that this is a place where there is a commitment to being value for money. We've got your back. And if people ask for more chicken or they wanna add pepperoni to their Pizza, there's no additional charge. And it was really fun early on watching customers react the way we had reacted all those years ago in the hotel room where they just couldn't believe it. Like, well, what's the catch? There is no catch.

3 (1h 9m 37s):
This is the price. Now what's the Pizza that you want? And well, let's make it So the pricing came about because of the recession and that was important. And the other thing was this idea of we want to be employers that are truly taking care of the people that we're able to employ at a time when job security. And in the fall of 2008, it was a real issue. And to this day, and I'm sure we'll get into it, our opportunity employment and taking care of the people that we're able to employ continues to be, you know, absolutely fundamental to, to this business.

0 (1h 10m 11s):
Let me ask you about that. I mean, from, from the beginning. Well 'cause we, we should dive into this. I mean, you are sort of, the hiring practices are, are, are, are quite interesting. I mean, you, you hire a lot of people who are formally incarcerated and people with, with developmental disabilities and, and people who sort of have struggled with homelessness. So was that baked in from the beginning? Was that the intention or did that evolve?

3 (1h 10m 35s):
It was baked in, in the sense that we had a philosophical approach when we were starting MOD. We were in that, you know, lucky position to be able to, we didn't have to build MOD, we wanted to build MOD or we wanted to start this thing. And if we're going to start this thing, what do we want it to be? What matters to us? I mean, we were able to take time to ask all these questions and we knew that we wanted to build a business that we were proud of and something that we wanted to see grow in the world. And, and there were problems that we were seeing. And then when the recession kicks in, the problems were even worse. Can we make sure that what our business is doing is, is a force for good in some way?

3 (1h 11m 16s):
Can we help deal with some of these issues that we're now all having to deal with? The world seems to be melting, this is scary. What can and should MOD be? And from that moment on, you know, we knew we've got this platform, we do two things. We employ people and we feed people. So let's make sure that in every, with every opportunity of feeding or employing, we're using this for good.

4 (1h 11m 39s):
Yep. Our motivation was to create a platform that we could use to make a positive social impact that would endure and sustain beyond us. And we knew we wanted to focus on people and starting with the employees or our people, but then we basically said to our team, you know, MOD is what you make it. MOD is what we make it let's, we want to, our North Star is to use this business as a platform. Now let's together figure out what that means. Because

3 (1h 12m 9s):
The philosophy and those conversations happened before we even opened the first locations in our second location, we had employed a couple of individuals who had been justice involved. And this idea of how much of an impact our business could make through employment practices became clear very early on because these, at the time, unemployable individuals. They would've had to check a box in the in Seattle and we did not require them to check the box. We employed them. The first job out of prison was, was working at Maud. And in a very short period of time, even though some people thought, well that's kind of crazy, we like to say what was crazier was the incredible work that these individuals did.

3 (1h 12m 56s):
And their gratitude for being given an opportunity translated into a work ethic that was incredible. The way they took care of each other customers. I mean, this started to happen quite immediately and that's the thing that started to take hold. When we ultimately got to the point where we did have to have the conversation around, gosh, now we have, I think at the time it was five locations and kind of like with Seattle, Coffee, Company, they were all very different. Yeah. Which helped us, you know, learn very quickly about what worked and what didn't work.

0 (1h 13m 28s):
The the expansion really, I think started to kind of take off in around 2013. I mean by then you had like 12 stores mainly I think entirely in Washington state. And, and I think a year later you were up to like 31 locations in six states, which is amazing. It's pretty great. But yeah. But still slower than the growth of the, of the coffee company. Right. And, and, and then I guess over the next few years you you, you raise like around $50 million from investors. That's right. But you also began like a, a franchising program in 2014. So can you explain why you decided to do that? I mean, obviously franchising the model is great 'cause you can expand quickly and with less upfront costs, but you also risk losing control right over over the brand and the quality and, and things like that.

4 (1h 14m 18s):
Yeah, it's a great question. So you're, you're exactly right. On our fifth birthday, we had 12 stores in Western Washington. And it was at that time that we sat down as Ally said, and, and had a long conversation about what we wanted to do with MOD. Did we want to keep it regional and live frankly a more comfortable life and just drive to all the new stores and know everybody and or did we want to take a swing and see if we could turn this into a true national, maybe even international brand and really expand this platform that we'd been talking about into something much more profound. Now, most of that growth that we then embarked on was company owned growth.

4 (1h 14m 58s):
But you're right, we did also bring in a franchisee model because in that first five years, having started or kind of pioneered this category of fast casual Pizza, halfway through that first five years, a lot of other brands started to enter the category. And back to the conversation about Seattle, Coffee Company, there is a advantage for the first mover. That person or that brand that gets out and secures the right real estate builds that relationship with customers. If, you allow, allow a brand in a category to get too far ahead in a particular market, it's hard to supplant them. So as these other brands were entering the market and they were all franchised, we would only be able to push ourselves so far with company owned growth and we would ideally bring in partners who could help us expand into those markets that we wouldn't, would not otherwise get to.

4 (1h 15m 49s):
And so we brought franchising in as part of our strategy, but we, we did it differently than a lot of brands. We, we chose only partners who, importantly were people who we felt philosophically aligned with who we enjoyed and and who understood our purpose and really bought into it. And that could build out a relatively large market. So today, 85% of our stores are company owned. 15% are franchised with nine partners who are fabulous, incredibly valuable and and experienced operators. But in that second five year chapter of our growth on our fifth birthday, 12 stores in Western Washington, five years later on our 10th birthday, we had over 400 stores spread across 70 plus discreet markets around the U US.

4 (1h 16m 40s):
So that, that second five years was, it was frenetic, it was exciting, it was exhausting. And it was all driven by this mission of we wanna win in this category because the, the payoff or the the end that we're pursuing is to build this highly successful, healthy platform that we can use to make a difference in our communities and in the world around us.

0 (1h 17m 6s):
You use the word discreet, did you target sort of communities, places, regions that were a little off the beaten path?

4 (1h 17m 17s):
Well we, it's funny. I remember sitting in our little office that we had in the early days of our growth and we had a whiteboard and we were talking about our growth strategy and we literally took out a map of the United States and somewhat arbitrarily started to carve up the country in the markets that we would enter ourselves as company markets and the markets that we would then go and seek out franchise partners in. I look back on it now and think, wow, if we were answering the same question today, we would be, you know, pretty thoughtful with research and analytics. And at the time we literally got up, we, we took this map and took a marker and started circling regions of the country.

4 (1h 18m 1s):
So yeah, we constructed a growth strategy that had logic behind it, but it was, it was seat of the pants logic in some ways and

3 (1h 18m 9s):
Also dependent on where you find great partners.

4 (1h 18m 12s):
Yeah.

0 (1h 18m 13s):
So as, as this kind of rolled out, I mean, I think at a certain point, not not, I mean not too quickly after, after the expansion plans were, were kind of released or unveiled or whatever, you know, you became I think the fastest growing quick service restaurant chain in the U us for quite a bit of time. Yeah.

4 (1h 18m 34s):
We were the fastest growing restaurant brand in the country for I believe four years, three or four years. And that's a nice accolade. It's not something that, you know, we put on our resume. It's not something we view as, as that important other than it is a reflection of the fact that we were growing really fast back then. But we also recognize that that rate of growth, particularly for a small and not fully developed organization, was gonna come with a cost in terms of a heavy investment in infrastructure, a heavy investment in new market opening a heavy investment in mistakes. Because anytime you're growing that rapidly, you are gonna make mistakes.

4 (1h 19m 14s):
And that was very a conscious decision that whatever mistakes we made, whatever collateral damage If you will there comes from going too fast would be more than made up for by winning in this category and, and having all the advantages that come from being that market share leader over time being the, the Starbucks of the category, the Chipotle of the category, the Panera of the category, as opposed to the second, third, and fourth brands in those categories, many of, many times it's even hard to think who that second, third, fourth brand is

0 (1h 19m 46s):
In in, in sort of building this business, how did you guys divide and conquer? I mean, did you, who did what? I mean were you, who was the c e o? What did you, Ally, would you focus on Scott? What'd you focus on and you know, was it similar to how you operated at Seattle? Coffee Company?

3 (1h 20m 5s):
I think it was similar. I think it, I think, think it was very similar and I think Seattle Coffee Company, that that experience helped us understand how we best divide and conquer. We're really lucky, I think because we've known each other a really long time. I think it happened naturally the way that we divide and conquer combined with the fact that we have very different strengths and we just naturally kind of each focused in the areas where we could help the most Scott he is absolutely the c e o and I've always liked working with him on some of the big strategic focuses that we have.

3 (1h 20m 46s):
But I also love getting into the weeds in the areas that I know. He and I, the whole reason that we're doing this, we're so intentional at the beginning with Maude, we're only gonna do this if we know that it needs to be done it, that it matters and that we can actually do something good with it. And because that was very intentional at the beginning, that's that element of it. Ensuring that we continue to be focused on the why behind the business is, is always been a primary focus for me.

4 (1h 21m 11s):
Ally's title is protector of the Purpose. And and I think that's a a, a great way of summarizing the contribution she makes. In addition to that, she's got a magic touch around our brand and how the concept evolves and, and the way we deliver value to customers. And and I get involved with a lot of the details of like how do we build the framework and the, the infrastructure and the team to actually now go and execute on it.

0 (1h 21m 41s):
The restaurant is, I think mainly, I'm assuming most people sit down and eat there or am I wrong or there is Most people take, take Pizza out and it's a it'ss been

4 (1h 21m 50s):
Changing. Well, it's a really great question. Prior to the pandemic, 95% plus of our customers would come into MOD a restaurant and either walk down the line and build their own product or pick up their product and take it out. Since the pandemic, a much higher percentage of our business is, or our customers approach us differently either through delivery or through our digital channels. And so that's actually part of our story today, which is how we need to continue to evolve in 2019. There was a study conducted, we had an investor who joined us at the time and they commissioned a big study by a big consulting firm and they did a, a deep dive into the business and the industry and our brand.

4 (1h 22m 37s):
And we had a very thoughtful plan to, you know, develop greater off-premise capabilities and digital capabilities. And it was like a five-year plan and all of a sudden the pandemic hit and we needed to do all of that in five weeks. And, and so it's been a, the last three years has been a real adventure. The business has changed from what it was

0 (1h 22m 58s):
Just a few years ago. I mean, my, my understanding is that there was a, a sort of a, that there was a target to hit a thousand locations within five years of 2019. And, and I guess my question is, is that still the right kind of, I mean, not not even just for for for MOD, but in general for a quick service restaurant. I mean, with this sort of the, the rise of Ghost Kitchens, particularly in urban areas where, you know, you can make a bunch of stuff and send it on to DoorDash and somebody gets it. I don't know. Does it? Yeah. Does it, is it in your, is it in your interest to actually have more restaurants or to have more of these ghost type kitchens or, or, or a combination?

0 (1h 23m 38s):
I don't know.

4 (1h 23m 39s):
We really focus more on the more successful we are and the more stores we have, the more people we'll be able to employ and therefore the impact that we wish to make will be bigger. And so that's a real driver and motivator for us. Just specifically on this question of Ghost Kitchens, I I'll be honest with you, it's not really an area that's super appealing to us, and there are a number of reasons why. One is we believe one of the roles that MOD plays is a venue or a location within which the community can come together and connect in person and, and be a place of celebration and human connection. This whole idea of Ghost Kitchens is a little, it's not a model that makes perfect sense or hasn't been perfected yet because a Ghost Kitchen is a location from which you can ideally build a restaurant meal more efficiently because you don't have the more expensive real estate, but you still have the same challenge of having to get that meal into someone's hands.

4 (1h 24m 38s):
So the radius that you have to work from is still more or less constrained by the same constraints you have for any restaurant. You can only deliver a meal with a certain quality within plus or minus 5, 6, 7 miles depending upon the topography. And so it becomes really challenging. It's, some people say, well, as opposed to having these five restaurants just build one ghost kitchen. Well just, the the dynamics of distance doesn't always allow that to Yeah. To pencil.

0 (1h 25m 8s):
Yeah. So I mean, when, when you think about, you know, this as you say, I mean, you don't measure your success on a number of locations or, but I mean, is there, I mean you, earlier you, you spoke about, hey, maybe we can make this into a national and a global brand. I know you are in the United States and in Canada right now, and I don't think be outside of North, you're not outside of North America, but is is, is that part of, of the long-term plan?

4 (1h 25m 35s):
So it's interesting, you know, I think as we've gotten, we've been in this game longer and, and we have an incredible team around us. You would've thought that our planning would've become a lot more thoughtful and sophisticated. And in many ways it is, but it is still a game of one step at a time. And I can tell you with great conviction what our next step is and what we're focused on and, and the opportunities we have and the improvements we're making. But three to five steps out, our industry is changing so rapidly in the needs of the consumer and technology and even now with robotics and ai. And it's, it's an incredibly dynamic environment and it's exciting, but it does mean that we have to be really thoughtful about how we are evolving with all the changes.

4 (1h 26m 27s):
We get excited about growth because for us, growth opens up pathways for people. Right now we have about 12,000 squad members. If we were to open another a hundred stores, that's gonna be another 2,500 squad members that we're gonna be able to provide opportunities to and, and, and bring into this community where they can find belonging and connection and opportunity. And that excites us. Now, that also allows us to build, hopefully a more successful business, which will give us more fuel, more resource to do things for our team. So for instance, this last year we introduced an education benefit through an organization called Guild where people are able to access classes on a whole range of skills and access a ba and we have had an incredible take up.

4 (1h 27m 23s):
People are thirsty for those types of opportunities and we would love to go deeper into that and we'd love to offer more and more to, to provide that rich experience to really help people. And so growth is a part of that.

0 (1h 27m 37s):
I, I feel like you, I mean you sort of tapped into two in different times in your careers into two different kind of cultural phenomenon, coffee in, in Europe, certainly sort of second wave of coffee. And there's a similar, it's not an exact parallel, but a slightly similar thing with Pizza. Of course Pizza's been around in the United States for a long time, but I feel like in the last 20 years, you know, there's been a, a kind of a new renaissance like, like Pizza Bianca and, and Phoenix and Yeah. And Roberta's in New York and Mazda and LA and they're, you know, just amazing. And so there has also been this kind of Pizza revival that you guys kind of hit on too at the, you know, at this sort of similar to coffee in a sense.

0 (1h 28m 26s):
I mean, do, I mean, do you agree? Do you, do you think that that also helped kind of create momentum with, with your business?

3 (1h 28m 34s):
I think, I'm sure yes. But, but also I think it's part of why we felt healthy amount of confidence around yeah, pursuing the opportunity for, for Seattle, Coffee Company. And now with MOD, it's not fancy new crazy thinking. It's really fundamental and, and it's just about how do we evolve that and build upon that, which is already kind of proven and known. And we've also always been big believers and only ever really wanting to be involved with things that, where there's need there where it makes sense. Yeah. Where it's justified, where it's not excessive and things like, you know, Pizza and coffee are stuff we can relate to.

0 (1h 29m 14s):
It's, it's, I mean, you guys clearly were, were looking at, at trends and trying to spot them, you know, ahead of the curve and look around corners and whatever other cliche I can come up with. But you looked at Pizza and you were like, this is a category that can work. And so I guess I wonder where do you see the opportunities now? Or like If you were you guys when you were 30 looking at, you know, something to start, where would you go?

4 (1h 29m 39s):
For me, the big opportunity is to continue to lean in to this macro trend that is both, I think powerful but also incredibly needed to tap into the potential of capitalism and of business to be a force of change, a force of good in our society. We have so many issues in our country and our communities, and they're not all gonna be solved by the politicians or they're not all gonna be solved by the nonprofit sector. I think companies need to be more accountable for the health of the communities that they rely on for their survival.

4 (1h 30m 19s):
And I don't think that that is a zero sum game. I actually think that If you do that and you do it well, you can build a business that is better and stronger and more defensible because you're gonna attract and retain and engage a group of people who want to be a part of that as an employee. And then over time you'll attract customers hopefully who understand that you are about more than just a product or just about profit, that you are also about giving back and they're gonna wanna be a part of that.

0 (1h 30m 49s):
When you think about, you know, the, the journey you guys have taken together, I mean, you, first of all, you you met when you were teenagers, you know, 15, 16 years old. And it's, it's actually quite remarkable because we change, humans change a lot, your values stay consistent, but who you are is quite different from who you were 10 years, 20 years earlier. What happens is people meet in high school and then they split up because they, they grow apart, they grow in different directions and you guys have kind of grown together and changed together. And so what do you, what do you count for that? I mean, you probably don't know anybody else who met in high school and are still married.

4 (1h 31m 30s):
Well, I'll be honest guy, I just think my lucky stories every day that Ally puts up with me and, and has adapted to all those changes you talked about, Ally just keeps getting better and better and I just try to keep up with her. But it's been, you know, it's definitely been the, the blessing of my life to have a partner like her. And it has been incredibly collaborative and a lot of give and take and we're human, which means we're imperfect. We always focus on this theme of, it's, it's about progress, not perfection. And you've had these challenges together, and I'll tell you, there's nothing better than that. Sharing that with someone makes the journey just so meaningful and count my lucky stars every day.

3 (1h 32m 14s):
So do I, I remember I had, I overheard a conversation that my mom was having with a friend of hers when I was in high school getting ready to go to college. I heard her saying to her friend on the phone, yep, all and Scott are still together and you know, the, the college thing starting. And, and my mom actually said to her friend, I, I truly believe that they're meant to be together. I just worry so much whether or not they'll be able to weather all the chapters and the storms because that's where it gets hard. And I remember at the time listening to that thinking, oh, she's, you know, she doesn't know us or I don't know what she's worried about and I now know what she was worried about.

3 (1h 32m 54s):
And it's what you just said. I mean, people do change and there are chapters and it's, and so I do think that part of it is we've been very lucky, but I also think part of it has, we have that, you know, we, we subscribe to the saying that the harder you work, the luckier you get sometimes. And I think we've worked hard at, at being friends and supporters of each other through all of it. You just sometimes have to shift how you're engaging or what the stages of life that you're in. And I think Scott and I have been so lucky because the things that we've been collaborating on, whether it's having our kids or the businesses that we've built, it's stuff that we've been able to share. It hasn't been divisive stuff. It's been stuff that we could come together on.

3 (1h 33m 34s):
And that's kind of how we've chosen to approach it, which has strengthened us, not weakened us.

0 (1h 33m 41s):
Well, you've answered my question about Lucker skill, so that's, that's great. That's Allie and Scott Svenson co-founders of MOD Pizza and Seattle Coffee Company. And despite its size, MOD is still clearly a family business. They even named four of their classic pies after their sons, Tristan, Caspian, Dylan, James, and Jasper. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And as always, it's totally free. This episode was produced by J C Howard, with music composed by Tine Arab Louis.

0 (1h 34m 23s):
It was edited by Andrea Bruce with research help from Casey Herman. Our production staff also includes Neeva Grant, Liz Metzger, Kerry Thompson, Alex Chung, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Sam Paulson, Chris Masini, and Carla Estevez. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This Hey Prime members. You can listen to How I Built This early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If, you wanna show your support for our show?

0 (1h 35m 4s):
Be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

7 (1h 35m 16s):
What makes a person a murderer? Are they born to kill or are they made to kill? I'm Candace DeLong and on my podcast Killer Psyche Daily, which you can find exclusively on Amazon music, I share a quick 10 minute rundown every weekday on the motivations and behaviors of the criminal masterminds you read about in the news. I have decades of experience as a psychiatric nurse, F B I agent and a criminal profiler on Killer Psyche daily. I'll give you my expert perspective on cases like the mysterious New York City druggies, breaking down Lori Vallow, a K a Mommy Doomsdays motives and what drove Kaitlyn Armstrong to murder.

7 (1h 35m 58s):
I'll also bring on expert guests who add even more insight into these criminal minds. I promise you won't regret adding these 10 minutes to your morning routine. Hey Prime members, listen to the Amazon Music exclusive podcast killer Psyche Daily in the Amazon music app. Download the app today.