checkr (0s):
This message comes from NPR, sponsor checker. Want to diversify your workforce and change the future checkers background checks reduce hiring bias because the past shouldn't define what's ahead more@checkr.com slash NPR.

2 (21s):
The reality is when you have a pandemic and you're a public company and you've got material data. Our sense was that we at least needed to at a high level, put that out there. So in may, we indeed did come out and say at a very high level that we had some encouraging results and people attacked us every which way for having said that, because they basically said, well, that's doing science by press release. And so one of the things we learned, because none of us have been in this situation before was that we were going to get criticized no matter what we did

0 (58s):
From NPR, how I built this show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists stories behind the movements they built I'm guy Roz. And on the show today, a new bar, a fans understanding of risk led to a life saving backseat and to the spectacular rise of Madonna. Now, one of the biggest biotech companies in the world, Innovation and risk are inextricably linked. You can't innovate without taking a risk. The calculation any entrepreneur has to make, of course is how much of a risk to take.

0 (1m 43s):
One of the greatest risk takers in American history was Thomas Edison. His team of engineers invented the light bulb, the phonograph, the motion picture camera and Edison held more than a thousand patents. But to create these world changing inventions, Edison's team had to fail more than it succeeded. Edison famously once said, I have not failed 10,000 times. I've successfully found 10,000 ways that will not work. It's why we don't talk about Edison's talking doll or his electric pen or the electrographic vote recorder because despite massive investments of time and capital, those ideas failed, but the risk was necessary.

0 (2m 30s):
And those failures often led Edison's engineers down paths that would lead to totally different ideas. It's an approach that's helped to make flagship pioneering among the most successful biotech venture firms in the world. And let me just pause to explain all this for a moment, because this episode is largely about the founding of Medina and the man behind it. You borrow a fan Madonna, as many of you know, created one of the major and most important COVID vaccines, but Madonna, the company came out of that larger organization called flagship. Noubar a fan founded flagship pioneering back in 1999.

0 (3m 13s):
And the idea was to do three things all under one roof. The first to raise lots of money to invest in innovative biotech and life sciences research. The second to identify promising researchers and help to incubate new companies and the third to help manage and grow those companies. Flagship pioneering has incubated more than a hundred companies. Some of them are no longer operating, but many are thriving, including best-known Madrona, but Dono was founded in 2010 and it's already one of the largest biotech companies on earth.

0 (3m 53s):
Much of that success of course, has to do with the breakthrough technology that led to the COVID vaccine. But Madrona didn't intend to become a vaccine maker. In fact, in December of 2020, it was not equipped to mass produce vaccines, but the company had already spent billions of dollars on research around a new type of technology using M RNA molecules. And it just so happened that because of the research Moderna had been doing, it was perfectly placed to come up with a vaccine to fight the coronavirus. The story of how Newbar helped to build Medina is also the story of how he co-founded dozens of other innovative biotech companies and the huge risks he took along the way Noubar was born in Beirut in Lebanon, both of his parents are Armenian by descent.

0 (4m 44s):
His father had a thriving business importing plastics in Beirut. His mother was a trained concert pianist, but by 1975 sectarian violence, it broken out in Lebanon and the country was soon to be engulfed in a long civil war.

2 (5m 1s):
I remember a couple of events among the most stunning one was waking up at five o'clock in the morning with a gigantic explosion, which was a building, a rather large building, maybe a block away from us that was completely leveled. And, you know, with, with lots of dead people and just, it was just like for a 12 year old at the time, that was very shocking. But then when the war actually, so we're actually broke out. We, we stopped going to school. So from the beginning of 75, till probably may June, we were at home, we would have sirens going off. We would go into the basements quite routinely. We had a ping pong table in the basement. So that was kind of a redeeming feature and that we could play ping pong while we were meant to stay in these kind of underground areas.

2 (5m 46s):
You know, there was, we would watch from our vantage point probably, you know, one or two kilometers from where we were maybe one kilometer, lots of rocket fire back and forth, you know, buildings being blown up. And this was, this went on for months and months. And of course after we left, it went on for years.

0 (6m 3s):
Yeah. And I know, I know Noubar that your dad had this thriving business. He would import plastic products into Beirut. But I guess around this time in 1975, you were about 13, the family, your family left you, you fled from Lebanon to, to Montreal and Canada. That is a, you know, that's was a simply a huge kind of risky decision for your, certainly for your dad. So what did he do when you got to Montreal and, and what did the family leave behind?

2 (6m 34s):
So we left the apartment. We owned, we left all of the warehouses of, of, of inventory. He had just left and completely

0 (6m 42s):
Left in Lebanon.

2 (6m 43s):
And he actually, he went back for the first time, eight years later to actually liquidate what he could. But anyway, so, so when he came to Montreal, interestingly, he did not want to do the same thing. So he really wanted to get into the production of something. He really wanted to make things. So he explored and explored finding some small production operation to invest in or buy a year and a half of trying later, he essentially decided he couldn't wait any longer. And he'd set up exactly the same business as he had done in Beirut and started all over again.

0 (7m 16s):
That's amazing. Cause your dad must have been in his forties by then. Yeah.

2 (7m 20s):
My father was born in 29, so yeah, we can do the math, but you definitely in his 40,

0 (7m 26s):
When you got to Montreal, I'm assuming you didn't, you were not fluent in French. So you probably had to, I mean, cause you, you went to school, presumably it was school is taught in French.

2 (7m 38s):
No. So, so Montreal in 75 was still very much a bilingual place in the full sense of the word, meaning that you could co-exist without speaking both languages, either language was fine. So I ended up going to, and my brothers together, we ended up going to a Jesuit school, an all boys school was English, Loyola high school, but in the following three years in high school, I took advanced French and, and learn the language alongside English, which was the main language at the school.

0 (8m 7s):
Did you grow up, going to church every Sunday? Obviously the Armenian Orthodox church is a ancient church. It goes back to, I think Byzantine times. Did you grow up, going to church? Every Sunday?

2 (8m 24s):
I grew up going to church. Not all only now you're making me reveal on search of stuff that I've never talked about. I was, I was acquired boy probably seven, eight years old till till I came to Montreal and I continued in Montreal as did my brothers. So we did go to church. I'd like to say every Sunday, but probably it was most Sundays throughout the year. So it's most, most Armenians had a close interaction with the church and we certainly did.

0 (8m 52s):
All right. So you are in Montreal and I know that you went onto to study chemical engineering at McGill in Montreal, but then you went to graduate school in the U S you went to MIT and in Boston and from what I read you there is where you began to focus on biochemical engineering, right?

2 (9m 12s):
Yeah. So as I was graduating from McGill, MIT was the only place I applied to. And now I know in hindsight that it was very hard to get in and I might not have gotten in, but I must say, I didn't know then I, I just wasn't, maybe this is I've learned since this is all kind of the, the comedy of being an immigrant in that you actually don't know a lot of things because people don't tell you you're supposed to apply to five schools. And, you know, there may be some in Canada, some in the states. So I just applied to one school, thank God they took me. And it was fascinating. It was just a completely transformative experience. And ultimately ended up joining a lab and pursuing a PhD.

2 (9m 54s):
And everybody wanted to start doing this form of chemical engineering, biochemical engineering, because it was clear that a whole new industry was being born without the necessary engineering cadre of engineers and, and principles to apply to actually making the, the end product. So it was a really fortunate time to be entering the field, took it took about four years. So yeah, it was, I finished in the summer of 1987.

0 (10m 20s):
All right. So, so you've got this PhD in, in biochemical engineering and you can probably go work for a huge chemical company. I'm sure there was a lot of, there were a lot of, you know, offers out there, but you decided that you wanted to maybe start your own thing. And I have to assume that comes from your dad who was an entrepreneur, right? I mean, that, that you thought, yeah, let me, why don't I start my own, my own business.

2 (10m 44s):
It would have made for a good story if that was the case, but it turns out it wasn't. I did not think of starting a company based on my upbringing. So in 1985, I had occasion to go to Washington DC, to a conference that had been put on by the national science foundation. And by chance, I had a, I sat next to a person at lunch and asked him what he did. And he started recounting this person was my father's age. And he started recounting how he and another friend of his, some may be 30 years earlier, had graduated from a brand new field of engineering than called electronic engineering. And he said, when he graduated, they realized that they didn't know what to do with what they had learned.

2 (11m 29s):
And so he and his friend decided that rather than joining the fray of actually doing this type of engineering that make instruments, that their colleagues, their friends would use in doing what they did. And they had invented the oscilloscope and decided to make some and provide it to their friends. And they started out in the garage and over time they grew that business. And I found this very interesting. So I asked him who he was, I just didn't know where he was at all. And it was David Packard and Hewlett Packard, literally. Wow. And I had like, it was really fascinating.

0 (11m 59s):
It was 1985. So he must've been, you know, I think he died in the mid nineties. He was an old guy, but older.

2 (12m 7s):
He was, he was, he was my age. He was older. Certainly. I mean, I, I haven't thought back as to what his age was, but I wouldn't be surprised if he was in his 70, maybe 70, 70, at least that's how we looked to me, but very kind to spend the time and to make it. And one of the things I also remember asking him is I said, you know, like, do I need to have a technology? Do I need to have an invention because I didn't have the oscilloscope. And he said, you know, not really because you're in such a new field, anything you do will be new and useful. So that, and that stuck with me because I kind of came back with this interest in learning what I could about innovation and technology management, because I figured those are at least generic things I'd have to know. But also the very first business plan, I ended up writing the tragic claim that we were going to do this didn't specify technology.

2 (12m 53s):
It literally just said, we're going to develop instruments. That kind of address needs in the biotechnology field. And, and I quickly learned that we can't raise money on that. You have to actually have something

0 (13m 5s):
So long story. We're just going to start something in biotech and Wolf kind of figure it out. But it is amazing to me that that meeting with David Packard, because he was, I mean, of course everybody knows that name now, right. Hewlett Packard money, but it's really sounds like that encounter kind of started to get the gears in your head.

2 (13m 25s):
Well, yeah, it definitely I'll tell you one of the things that I've thought a lot about. And, you know, generally I realized these are fields that people don't talk about and you only really, at least back then used to hear about it, glorified in some success story, which like Michael Jordan playing basketball is completely unapproachable for somebody who doesn't have the physique. And doesn't have, as I did, I grew up playing basketball. I still play some basketball, but in there, Michael Jordan was never an inspiration to me because he was so, so aloof, if you will, physically from, I could not do what he did here was this guy who was completely grounded and normal. And telling me about how he set out to do this and the way he said it actually made me feel like, and you can do it too.

2 (14m 10s):
And it was fascinating that probably singularly his, making it approachable, relatable. Wasn't important. Very, and that's why I've kind of tried to do the same to as many other people as I can.

0 (14m 22s):
I mean, he started that business with like 550 bucks. Well, it was 1939 or whatever, but still wasn't,

2 (14m 29s):
It was not that much money indeed. So yeah, what happened is that I came back, I started trying to learn about startups in general, not necessarily one that I would do cause I was not close to graduating yet. When I was, I was a couple of years out still then I did in fact, get approached by a west coast, San Diego based brand new startup company, which went on to be a very successful, very successful biotech company called iDeCK. They were just starting at the time and out of, I think sheer desperation of not having anybody who knew engineering and they needed engineers to be able to make their products. They reached out to my professors and they said, look, who do you have graduating? And, and they said, well, this fellow is graduating.

2 (15m 10s):
And literally they made me an offer to be vice-president of process technology at this brand new startup, which, which you might've thought that would have been a golden thing because it was a story

0 (15m 21s):
And you would have guaranteed riches and, and financial security, all those things. Yeah.

2 (15m 27s):
I would have been a very early person there, et cetera. But what was interesting about that was that that's the first time I started thinking about, you know, what would my contribution be as opposed to what was my alternative thought, which was, should I try to figure out how to do the startup thing myself? So I kind of, I remember talking and talking to lots of different people, getting advice. And the advice I got, which in hindsight was quite useful to me from some of my professors was, look, if you really want to be in a startup, be in a startup where, what you do matters and then you can score, you can actually make the contributions. And so that led me to ultimately decide to start a company.

0 (16m 7s):
So I, the story I've read and, and it's just a bare bones version is that you, you decided to go seek funding for your venture. You didn't quite know what it was going to be, but it's gonna be a biotech company. And you started to reach out to venture capitalists at the time in 87. And they, you didn't really know what that meant, but you knew that you had to raise some money. And how did those meetings go? Well,

2 (16m 33s):
Yeah, so the very first meeting I had, and again, these things all kind of in hindsight, seem, I'm only telling you the things that stand up my mind. The very first meeting I had was the Tuesday after black, Monday, 1987,

0 (16m 46s):
When the market crashed,

2 (16m 47s):
When the market crashed. And as a, by that time 25 year, having just gotten my PhD, I had no idea why market crashing would have anything to do with startup funding. So I went literally and pitched to the very, very first time to a well-known venture capitalist, ginger Moore. And she gave me great advice. She said, look, this could be a good time in a way to make sure you figure out what you want to do in the company, because you're not going to have much competition. Everybody's going to run for the run for the shore and not really venture out. And if you really conduct the time to figure out what's worth doing, go work on it, get some angel money, if you can. And if you persist long enough, this will come back and, and ended up, you know, and I talked to a couple of other people, I heard the same thing.

2 (17m 31s):
And so that's what I ended up with.

0 (17m 32s):
So how did you find the money to start a business? Because biotech is, is cash intensive. Where did you get the capital? Well,

2 (17m 41s):
Of course the, you know, it's remarkable how, you know, every decade, the amount of money you need to do, roughly the same thing goes up dramatically. But back late eighties, even early nineties, some of the more well-known biotech companies or started with 10 million, $15 million. In my case, I only ever raised $11 million over a three-year period from venture capitalists, but that was a lot of money. So what I needed first was the first couple of hundred

0 (18m 7s):
Thousand. And how did you get it? I could

2 (18m 9s):
Tell you, it was very, very hard. There's no better way of describing it than persistent begging because at the end of the day, if you don't have something and you're proposing something that can't be shown to be either valuable or feasible, then I'm not sure what the difference is between that. And begging ultimately what happened is I talked to everybody and anybody I could meet ended up getting connected to a gentleman named Gus Aslan. And he was interested in investing small amounts of money. And I got introduced to him and he said to me, my lawyers will reach out to you and I'll give you a hundred thousand dollars, which was quite remarkable. It took probably, you know, more than a year to get to that point throughout this whole period.

2 (18m 51s):
Wow. Yeah. And then in the meantime, I lived off of, you know, borrowing from my dad and basically I got a part-time job at MIT with my professor, helping him doing some things. So I could at least stay afloat.

0 (19m 4s):
This company found it was called perceptive Biosystems. And I'm going to sort of butcher this, but I'm going to try and explain this in a way that hopefully most of us can understand, but basically you produced equipment that separated and identified proteins, which is the basis of, of, of most biotechnology drugs. This is what, what you need. You need to separate these proteins and they need to be intact in order for the research to be engaged.

2 (19m 30s):
No, that you did a very good job and I can put a finer point to what was the advanced, the original advance was that chromatography, which was used to separate proteins have been developed to work on chemicals. Not proteins, proteins are much, much larger in size than chemicals. And so they move around very slowly as a result. What used to be a technique that was meant to run for 45 minutes to an hour with proteins used to run for hours and hours. That limited the pace of advancement in research. What we invented were particles that had this interesting characteristic, where you could actually force liquid to flow through them as a result, everything went faster so that you can actually separate proteins in 10 minutes, 15 minutes.

2 (20m 14s):
And we showed that we could do this. We showed the actual theory behind how it was working. And then finally that led many years later to another technology breakthrough, which really made perceptive kind of much more known, which was a technology called mass spectrometry. So we worked on inventing a whole new way to cause proteins, to be amenable to this type of technique. And that really opened up the protein research space significantly. And our revenues grew quite substantially as a result of that second,

0 (20m 47s):
I've interviewed lots of people from, from the creative arts world, from the scientific community, different spaces where they, they didn't, they weren't sort of entrepreneurs or business people and had to really kind of figure out how to structure a business. Sometimes they made mistakes. How did you know how to do that? I mean, you had partners and people involved and I mean, even with your investors, you're 24, 25. If they were like, yeah, we'll give you, you know, a hundred thousand dollars for 10% of the business. Like how did you know what it was worth and how to structure it? And did you, did you go to anybody for help?

2 (21m 26s):
I did. I went to lots of people for help. And it's actually one of the more formative things that I've learned, which is that if you don't pretend, you know, a lot, people are much more prone to kind of advise you and help you. And it's not hard to pretend that when you're 25 years old. Yeah. But that is the first time that helped me was, was back in those days. I clearly didn't know much about raising money, spending money, planning, budgeting. I did have a lot of people around me who are willing to give advice quickly realized that a lot of that advice was quite, you know, kind of opposed to each other. So you have to

0 (21m 60s):
Figure out

2 (22m 1s):
Exactly. So what you have to do is you have to actually make some calculated bets. And then, and then I, you know, I also learned early on just about everything you assume, maybe wrong, you constantly have to figure out, okay. If I can't keep going down that path, where am I going to go next? It's too late to think of that. Once you're stuck, you know, now being opposed by whatever elements you're up against. So that there's plenty of people who gave advice. I had. In fact, one of the things I remember very well is in the first instance, raising money, I remember many investors by the time I had the story right, telling me that they thought I'd be successful, but that they didn't think my first thing would be successful. And so a whole bunch of them told me that they would want to invest in my second company.

2 (22m 42s):
And the other thing is a lot of people told me, listen, you're smart, you're capable. You got a lot to learn. You should not be CEO. And it was an interesting thing because I thought to myself, I couldn't tell whether what they're saying was good for me or good for them. It was indiscernible. So what I decided to do is I kept talking to people until I found a firm to invest with me as the initial CEO, which is what I had been for the whole time, the year and a half before. And the day after we closed the million dollars, I went to them and I said, I don't want to be CEO. Let's go hire a CEO. And they were like shocked. And the only reason I felt that way was because I wanted to make sure they weren't investing in not me, but at the same time, I thought if they really think that we should really bring in somebody for a period of time who can help work with me, then let's do that.

2 (23m 31s):
And so we found a very, very good, you know, late in his career, senior executive, I became chairman and chief technical officer. He became CEO. And for a year we worked really closely together. He taught me a lot. He helped the upgrade. And

0 (23m 46s):
As you were developing more products for perceptive Biosystems, who were your customers? I mean, I mean, obviously most of the people I talk to are, are making consumer products. So they're like today it's social media marketing and going on Instagram to find influencers, but this is not what you do or did then obviously, who are you selling your, your equipment to?

2 (24m 8s):
In the first instance, there were a handful of biotechnology companies at the time who were noteworthy, Biogen, Genentech, and Amgen Genzyme. And then there was a whole bunch of pharmaceutical companies, the household brands of Roche and Novartis and GSK Pfizer, et cetera, they all had research labs. They had huge research labs and every one of them used to do what it is. We were selling a new technology to do. And so, you know, early adopters were not a concept back then, but clearly early adopters is how you, how you get anything to be taken up. And they become your best salespeople because either they changed jobs or they tell their colleagues, Hey, I'm doing this thing really cool. You should look into it.

2 (24m 48s):
And so eventually we started getting kind of slowly, slowly growing, hired our for salespeople. And eventually when the company grew up in 1997, at the end, we were about 900 people

0 (25m 0s):
As the company grew, because I think within 10 years it was acquired, right? It was, I think it was acquired pros, a stock swap. It was a $360 million stock acquisition. And oftentimes an acquisition means that the founders who are acquired, joined the parent company now, and you did, I think the company was called Polera. This was the late nineties. And, and if people remember, this was a time when there was an obsessive race to map the human genome and you were right there at kind of ground zero of that.

2 (25m 35s):
Yes. So, so a player actually was a made up name that came after the fact, the initial company that bought perceptive was called PerkinElmer. Ultimately, the thing we decided to do was to become a content delivery company modeled after Bloomberg with the Bloomberg terminals, as you may remember, so Bloomberg takes public information, at least they did back then annotates it interconnected, add some proprietary layers on it and then sells it as a subscription essentially through terminals. And we thought we could do the same thing with biology and the human genome project was a kind of the, the actual sequence became our way of actually trying to get people to come to our site in order to receive all these higher level connectivities from that baseline information.

2 (26m 19s):
So

0 (26m 19s):
This would be like a Bloomberg terminal for biotech companies.

2 (26m 23s):
Absolutely. That was the, that was absolute division.

0 (26m 25s):
The idea would be like every finance firm had a Bloomberg terminal. Every biotech company would have these terminals and you could access this proprietary information.

2 (26m 36s):
That's what we set out to build. We needed to sequence the genome first. And we at first thought maybe the government can, the government's effort at the time would suffice, but it was going fairly slowly. And so we launched a what became a competitive effort, although it wasn't fully intended to be competitive in the first day

0 (26m 54s):
With the human genome project, you start to compete with them because they weren't moving. It wasn't moving fast enough.

2 (26m 58s):
It wasn't moving fast enough. We weren't going to wait two, three more years before this information could be available, but it definitely at the time allowed both sides to do something quite spectacular, which was to complete the sequencing of the genome in our case, as a prelude, to delivering this content business in their case as the basis for much of research

0 (27m 19s):
Going forward. It's amazing. Cause you, you are now, you've now spent a year being involved in one of those groundbreaking projects in, I think in the 20th century mapping the human genome, which clearly you knew was going to have a huge impact on medicine. Did that experience kind of once again, kind of get the gears turning in your head, thinking there's an opportunity from this for me to pursue

2 (27m 47s):
Yes, very much so, but in a different context than just the market opportunity, it was actually a foray into intrepreneurs, which is when a company creates a company. And I'd never thought of that as a, as an activity before where you literally can have a parent entity conceive of one thing and really develop it internally and then spin it up, which is what we did that actually was equally interesting, of course, being in the middle of this whole kind of public storm, if you will, in many ways, positive, sensitive word, and excitement also pointed out the fact that this, we were entering a new era in molecular biology.

2 (28m 28s):
So that was exciting. Definitely.

0 (28m 31s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment,

2 (28m 33s):
how the new era of molecular biology just happened to match up with new bars idea for an entirely new type of biotech company, stay with us. I'm guy Ross, and you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

First Republic Bank (29m 1s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. First Republic bank with best-in-class mobile banking and dedicated personal bankers. First Republic offers the best of both worlds to their clients, whether they're starting on their financial journey or planning for their future. First Republic supports their clients every step of the way, learn more@firstrepublic.com, Amber FTI C equal housing lender.

Charles Schwab (29m 25s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Charles Schwab last year taught us. We don't know what tomorrow holds, but Schwab knows that successful financial planning can help propel net worth by 2.5 times find easy flexible planning options and at Schwab.com/plan

2 (29m 49s):
in the late nineties, Ricky Martin led the so-called Latin explosion. 20 years later, we are asking who was that really for I'm Sam Sanders on my show. It's been a minute. We're breaking down some big crossover moments in pop history and asking if they worked listen to it's been a minute from NPR.

0 (30m 17s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy rise. So it's the late 1990s and newborn a fan is working at a biotech company called Applera and he's involved in lots of different projects, but over time bar is getting more and more interested in promoting a whole range of new promising molecular biology research that doesn't necessarily have immediate commercial value. And so eventually he'll leaves Applera to try to re-imagine the way biotech companies are created.

2 (30m 51s):
The idea was, you know, everybody was all fascinated with serial entrepreneurs and go from one to the other. But the question that I got intrigued by, I'm not exactly sure. Why is, could you actually do this at the same time? Could you have multiple of these things? And I was always curious about the venture capital community, which while they weren't starting these companies, they were investing in them and they had this parallelism down. They could be involved in therapeutic companies, some in cardiovascular, some in, you know, cancer does that. Didn't one didn't seem to interfere with the other. And I thought, well, why can't you do that as an entrepreneur? Why can't you do that as an innovator? And so we started an otherwise unusual entity, which was called Neupogen and it stood for new company generation.

2 (31m 36s):
You cogent that business, new kitchen is the entity that data became called flagship ventures and influx of pioneering. We put up about $60 million. It was a company that would create companies. And that's how we started the initial four or five projects. We already had some ideas what to pursue, but it was definitely Boyd by the excitement around the genome.

0 (31m 58s):
So this was so flagship ventures now called flagship pioneering. This is what you kind of really launched in 2000. And this was to be clear. I mean, this was very different from, and still is very different from what incubators are. Usually incubators are incubators and venture capitalists, venture capital, and the, this idea was different. I mean, the idea was that everything would happen under one roof, the research, the development, the teams, the businesses, like almost like, like a, like an MIT media lab, but that was a private business.

2 (32m 31s):
Well, it's an interesting way of putting it. I'll tell you, you know, that what we set out to do is to combine the typically three separate inputs into a successful startup. That is the scientific ideas usually comes from academia, the entrepreneurial talent, and then capital, which is always multiple sources, venture capital, early stage. And then eventually some later stage, they all come from different places. They have different interests. And so you can imagine there's a lot of friction between all these different, different components. What we thought is what if all three of those things, pre-existed in the same entity, because if you want to propose doing something that is way out there, if you will, if you're doing it the traditional way, you have to convince other people to join you.

2 (33m 25s):
And in any case, you have to convince investors to fund you. And all they care about is to minimize the risk. And so that's where we really found our footing is to say, can we take that advantage of having all three under one roof and apply it to propel ourselves beyond where people are comfortable?

0 (33m 44s):
Noubar obviously by this point, when you started flagship, you were a known entity. People knew the story of, you know, your previous businesses, but how did you recruit talent to come to come to flagship and to take that leap that you guys would, would have their back?

2 (34m 1s):
Well, I would say took quite a while. So the first battle was hiring leadership into our companies because our own team size didn't have to grow very much, but the companies were reforming needed to attract leadership. And that was where we started really thinking more systematically, what kind of people could make the transition, it, unlike the software field. And for that matter, these days, internet based companies or apps, you know, there's a lot of people who've done multiple companies in biotech. These companies have a half-life or a life cycle of say 10 years, 15 years. So people don't do one company after another, after another, after another, if they do one company after 10, 15 years and they succeed, they stopped doing it.

2 (34m 46s):
So you have to create the talent you have to create. And cross-fertilize. And so the early leadership of our companies is all flagship the numbers. And you know, that, what that does is it doesn't mean that they're any better. It just means that they're more experienced than we're more familiar with them.

0 (35m 1s):
You had a huge advantage and that you were in one of the biotech capitals of the world, which is the Boston area. But I imagine you were recruiting probably promising graduate students and scientists. Do I have this right? That you would basically pair them up with people who could help to navigate their businesses. So presumably people with science backgrounds, but who could do the business side of it

2 (35m 27s):
In the earlier days, it was a more of experimental if you will. I did a lot of that just because I had quite a bit of experience by just go

0 (35m 35s):
From company to company and of help them. Absolutely.

2 (35m 40s):
There was a time back a decade ago when I'm, when I would have been on 15 different boards. And literally literally was, was kind of running around trying, I had a colleague that calls was, was with us now as a managing partner. So it was just early days in 2000, 2007, eight, we were figuring out what can be systematized and what cannot, and what is a team sport and what is not, you know, there's a lot of folklore in the startup world, which I'd say emphasizes the role of the individual. There's a hero kind of a notion that's created, you know, against all odds. And, and here we were claiming that conceiving, creating, growing companies could be the object of a company, very methodical, very learning, oriented, responsible to certain goals or accountable, let's say versus kind of improvisational, romantic, chaotic, all the things that come to mind when you think of startups, I've spent the last 20 years together with my colleagues here, trying to show that most of that is on needed.

2 (36m 44s):
Some of that may be needed. Some of that may be how people decide to do it, but that's not like that's the only way you can do it.

0 (36m 50s):
And just to be clear, most of these companies that you were hatching and forming, they were focused on biomedical research.

2 (36m 58s):
They were focused on biomedical research or applications or life science in sustainability. Got it.

0 (37m 4s):
So there's a, there are a lot of stories like origin stories around MRN, a research site that go back to the seventies and the eighties and Bob Langer, who is, he's one of the best biotechnologists in the world. And he would go on to become a maternal co-founder. He was doing all kinds of research. And in the early two thousands, I read a story about some researchers from, from university of Pennsylvania who were doing some pretty groundbreaking work around MRN a, they went to a scientific conference and almost nobody. This is 20 years ago, almost nobody in the scientific community was taking this seriously.

0 (37m 44s):
When did you first, what did MRN research first come onto your radar?

2 (37m 50s):
Let me answer that. By first pointing up to you that five years ago, nobody was taking him on any research. Seriously, that's kind of an interesting thing, but back in 2010, may of 2010, got a call from Bob Langer one day. And he said to me, Hey, look, I just met with a junior faculty member at Harvard who approached me. And so I went over and met with him and met with the faculty member there at Rossi. And he showed some of the scientific work that this lab had done. Essentially, what they've done is they've taken M RNA and use the codes for the, for what's called Yamanaka factors. Yamanaka factors are transcription factors. Think of these as proteins that interact with the human genome and control what genes get made and what she's don't get made.

2 (38m 39s):
And that's what he was presenting. And he was interested in that as potentially the basis of something useful in the biomedical research field. I got interested in at the, on the spot in, or what if we could do this to introduce it into the body and to have our own cells make drugs out of it. And so I asked that question in the meeting with Bob, we kind of, he said, look, I don't, I don't know why we couldn't try. And so what ended up happening is we agreed that I would go back and initiate a project within flagship to start exploring whether that could be something of interest in use without any regard to whether we could technically do it or how we could do it. But rather more just explore.

2 (39m 21s):
Could we think about a molecule that when introduced to the body could cause the body to make any protein we wanted and that's how the journey started for us. That's what became a learner.

0 (39m 32s):
It's amazing. I mean, the idea was that you had was, could we basically, you know, could you, could you make medicines where you inject them in order for the body to develop the proteins right. To, to combat the, the ailment or whatever it is that, that was the question that was being asked at the time.

2 (39m 52s):
That's the question that we asked as the impetus for an exploration?

0 (39m 56s):
The answer to that question in general was no, that's ridiculous. Is that, is that right? More or less?

2 (40m 1s):
Well, the premonition was that it was ridiculous because it had never really been shown to be viable. And we, you know, by asking the question, we gave ourselves the permission to go find out why it is that either nobody had done it or nobody believed it could be done. And we quickly found out that people had tried it in the eighties and they had caused pretty significant immune response in cells. So people had this idea earlier, but it turns out it's not just the MRA and the immunology. You then have to figure out which cells are going to take these up. How much do they have to take up to make therapeutic doses available in your circulation? How do you know if the protein is actually the right protein, meaning will it fold correctly?

2 (40m 44s):
Will it secrete direct? I mean, you're basically going in and introducing a tiny new piece of software, not hardware, you're not messing with the hardware, the genome, but the software to make a particular protein in a sea of thousands of other proteins being made every nanosecond of the day. So, so you got to get in precisely make the protein. You want to have the effect you want. You know, so there was a lot of, as an engineer, there was a lot of unknowns, but we could list them and we could start asking a lot of people out there. What makes you think you can't be done? What are the impediments, what has been tried? That's how we do much of our innovations that we kind of worked backwards from a, an asserted destination.

2 (41m 30s):
We want to be able to do this and then try to tie to the present. I

0 (41m 34s):
Wanted to ask you about, about doubt. I mean, I understand that flagship was really designed to do exactly this kind of work to, to take on something risky and kind of weird. And maybe the scientific consensus was kind of not, there was no consensus. The community was skeptical of this research. I understand that flagship was designed for this very reason in order to, to take some risks that might fail. But I'm curious, I mean, this was going to require a lot of money, a lot of time and, and a lot of uncertainty and, and most, I mean, you had great researchers and scientists. I mean, didn't anybody in flagship that you talk to say, this is not what we should pursue.

0 (42m 17s):
Didn't didn't anybody push back didn't you have doubts.

2 (42m 23s):
I think we should, I should try to put it in context. Then important thing to realize is that we are set up to make innovation leaps that are beyond adjacencies. So, you know, this, the notion of adjacency, if you just simply on a piece of paper said in any given field, in any given endeavor of activity, I could draw a circle and let that circle represent everything that's known or everything that exists. And then I draw another ring around that circle that represents all sorts of things that have not yet been done, but are going to be done next. So imagine a sense of the arrow of time going outward from one circle to the next ring.

2 (43m 7s):
And that's kind of, for me, a simplistic mental model of how innovation science products in the marketplace occur. Now, what defines the size of that adjacency? It's how far people are willing to go before they stop thinking that something is reasonable to work on. So the question is, when will we ever work beyond that adjacency? And in the ordinary course, you get there when you get there. So you wait for a while you some new things happen, and then eventually you start working on what would have been too far out before, but now it's not so far off. So our job is to see if we could work beyond the adjacencies today.

0 (43m 47s):
But what I'm trying to understand new bar is this could have been a very different story, right? The story of Moderna could have been a story of folly of a bunch of well-funded scientists who just spent all of this money and it was a disaster. And we could have been telling this story, that story at business schools, right? I mean, there's always a possibility that would have been the story. And by green-lighting Madonna, you had to consider certain factors. But if, if most of the scientific community was saying, this is not worth doing, why did you and your team think differently?

2 (44m 25s):
So you're asking the question in a, in again, in the context, it's a very valid question, but I wouldn't say you're asking the question in isolation. Let me also just tell you that in the exact same year that we did the foundation laying for what became a donor, we also started for other projects that were each platforms in their own, right. Going after different aspects of biomedical opportunity space each with as big a leap each with as much doubt. And we did that the year before, and we've done that for the 11 years since. Yeah. So in fact, I've described this before, and I think it's really important to understand we didn't conceive of Moderna. We conceived of a hundred different modernists, right?

2 (45m 6s):
And what's happened is, and this is very much how I look at this is that experiments in reality and execution have dictated, which of those modernists got to live in which of those mothers got today?

0 (45m 16s):
How, how many of those other quote Medina's didn't make it? You said we launched a hundred,

2 (45m 23s):
Got a lot. We didn't launch a hundred. We had imagined a hundred. Right? And so the point I'm making is the accuracy with which you have to guess what's going to work is not at all important because we get into these brand new areas. It's wide open to find where value lies. Right? Imagine if we waited three, four years, as people did, or 10 years in the case of RNA, now, all of a sudden they'd go into the space and there's hundreds of patents and there's tons of different things that have already been done. That's a very different competitive approach. What we tend to do is say, you know what, we'll risk the possibility that there's absolutely no value to be heard. Yeah. So it's not that you have to get it dead, right?

2 (46m 3s):
Where you land, you just have to be in a rough space where you now start searching for where value might be. Is it delivering it into the liver or skin? Is it delivering, you know, doing vaccines or cardiovascular drugs? So all of those variables, at least for me represent alternative success versions of which I don't need everyone to succeed. I just need one to succeed.

0 (46m 30s):
When we come back, just a moment. One version of success, new bar did not anticipate was how Madonna would develop a critical vaccine at a critical time and do it unbelievably fast. Stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this.

Squarespace (47m 2s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, Squarespace. The easy to use website builder designed by world-class designers. Squarespace is all in one platform is dedicated to making it easy to establish an online presence with domains, marketing tools, analytics, and more go to squarespace.com/npr for a free trial. And when you're ready to launch, use the offer code NPR to save 10% of your purchase of a website or domain.

DocuSign (47m 32s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor DocuSign. When you're running a small business, you want to maximize every minute and every dollar that's where DocuSign could help DocuSign can give you the freedom to complete your business agreements anywhere in real time and get signed versions back in minutes, it's that simple visit docusign.com today to learn more about how DocuSign can help add valuable time back into your day.

0 (48m 4s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So we're getting to the part of the story where Madonna will go from being a biotech company. You probably never heard of to a household name for tens of millions of people. And it's easy to forget that when the company launched in 2010, the idea was to find the best use for the new research around MRN. And at that time, it wasn't at all clear that the best use would be a vaccine.

2 (48m 33s):
We've worked from day one on any number of diseases, cardiovascular disease, cancer, and vaccines were a part of our thinking process. But indeed, what we did do is we went after everything, right? That's the hundred versions of maternal that I'm referring to. We did not think for a minute that we were smart enough to anticipate what we should actually apply to platform two. And this is something else that probably is worth pointing out. We have over the years in our flagship labs, kind of realized that rather than inventing technologies, we really ought to invent platforms. And that platform is a relatively rare thing in biotechnology, unlike in the tech sector where we've seen phenomenal examples of platforms, whether it's the iOS Apple's platform or Amazons, that whole idea of a technological suite upon which many, many products could be developed or attached by 2010, before we even started Madonna, that is something that we had started many, many companies around that notion.

2 (49m 41s):
And so Madonna only ever was going to be a platform that enabled a code based molecule to make proteins in the subject, no matter what application it was. And a key discipline of that is to say, try many, many applications. And so we had, by the time this coronavirus came along, we had tested nine, maybe even 10 different human vaccines in every single case, showing neutralizing antibodies. And we had also another nine programs that were going after human therapeutics. So it was a fairly broad platform that had already been developed about $2 billion of research had gone into developing the platform.

0 (50m 22s):
Yeah, you, you went public in 2018, you still hadn't sold any products. Really. He had an operating loss of almost $400 million 2019, still. This is nine years in to Medina. You had not, I believe you had not sold anything yet. And you had almost half a billion dollars in losses, but none of that, it seems like, like none of that seemed to phase you or the team at all. Like that was not even a concern. Yes.

2 (50m 54s):
So it's not an in fact guy. What I can tell you having spent the last 34 years in the biotechnology field is that there is no biotech company that was started in 2010 with rare, rare exceptions, maybe one in a hundred that had revenues by that time. And so it's par for the course in the sense that that's not because of the failing of the technology. That's because it takes five to 10 years to actually develop a product in our field. So it's a little bit like saying, you know, I want to start a new airplane company, and then I'm surprised that I don't have an airplane on the market. And the first 10 years when it takes 14 years now, what would have been surprising is if we didn't have products in clinical testing and that's something that was completely missed because before a single vaccine for coronavirus that we tested, we had already 2000 people who had received them RNA from us.

2 (51m 51s):
And so we were far, far advanced in actually many, many different MRNs for different activities, vaccines, non vaccines. And that's what allowed us to have the conviction that what we would do in this space could be quite productive.

0 (52m 6s):
Okay. Let's, let's go back to, to the timeline for a moment. Cause it's almost like plays out like, like a movie, like a thriller. And from what I understand, I think it was like January 6th, 2020 Stephane Bancel, who's the CEO of <inaudible>. He found out about this virus in China and that it was probably a Corona virus. And I think a few days later, the first death was publicly announced in China. And at, at that point, I think that's January 11th, 20, 20, almost no one in the U S was, was talking about this seriously or in a big way. I mean, probably a few people, but almost nobody. Do you remember this story I'm coming onto your radar around that time?

2 (52m 49s):
Well, in the very early parts, January, we were exchanging emails and articles that were, you know, kind of appearing largely around the Houlihan situation initially was thought to be a flu like thing anymore. And it wasn't until January 23rd, which I remember quite clearly, partly because it was my daughter's one of my daughter's birthdays. And so I was at dinner with her and Cambridge goes to MIT. I actually got a call from Stefan who was in Davos. The situation had increased in terms of intensity. It was not clear what this would become. It was not a pandemic. There was not at all viewed that way, but, but that it could become a threat was beginning to at least appear.

2 (53m 36s):
And our discussion, interestingly was twofold. One, we probably didn't have any choice, but to at least do the first steps of this work, because if we didn't, then we'd be late reacting to it later on. But then second, it was an interesting opportunity for us to test the platform in one of its earliest, at least imagine the advantages that we could never test in any other time, which was that it would be a very rapid response technology. This technology had this innate advantage. We knew from day one that if you ever needed to go quickly, we could really go quickly. Cause it was so it's just a code molecule. You just sequence put the sequence in for the DNA. You make the RNA in one step, you put it in LMP in a second step and you're done.

2 (54m 19s):
I mean, it's simplifying, but not by much. And so what was exciting to us was that we said, we want to test our platform's ability to demonstrate very rapid capability to respond. And we did not know how, what a, what an advantage that was.

0 (54m 34s):
I mean, I think virtually overnight, you and Stefan decided to pursue this, to try and do this, to manufacture the vaccine.

2 (54m 42s):
Absolutely. It looked like the right thing to do and an incremental proof point for us that we were happy to jump into. Now, I must say within days, probably a couple of weeks, the whole thing changed in its importance and significance. And we were quite happy that we had jumped in so early on, because that's the only way that by already March, we could enter the first humans and get data.

0 (55m 6s):
How long before you had a prototype for the vaccine? Because from, from what I understand the fastest time it took to get a vaccine from development to market was I think the MMR, one of the, or these childhood thing, measles. Yeah. It was like five years or something. So in this case, how quickly were you able to, to develop a prototype

2 (55m 28s):
From the time we had the sequence to the time we had

0 (55m 31s):
Sequence of the, of the Corona virus, what's the Chinese published, I think, right. They made that available.

2 (55m 37s):
And to the time when we had the computer generated sequence of the RNA, that is essentially today, RNA 1273 was two days to,

0 (55m 48s):
From the time that it was published, you basically had had a computer model of a vaccine,

2 (55m 56s):
Basically a computer model of the sequence of MRNs that would essentially when introduced into a human would produce the S protein sufficient to generate an immune response.

0 (56m 6s):
I mean, at the time, did you know that if it just got into clinical trials, it would be, it would quickly be shown to be effective. Like, did you know that from the computer models,

2 (56m 18s):
We knew that in every other protein that we had used in humans before we could generate neutralizing that much, we knew whether we could make enough of it quickly enough, let alone to be able to do a 30,000 in a subject trial, which we'd never, ever done or dreamt of before. That was the unknown. The unknown was, can you make enough of it? And we had some questions as to what those we should choose, but essentially there was a lot of known then we just had to kind of decide based on the best information, what to try. We tried it. And by may of 2020, we had already, the first human data that showed that we could generate robust. Anybody living

0 (56m 57s):
In, in March of 2020, you began clinical trials was the NIH. It was, it was, I think, a nurse in Seattle that same month, March of 2020, your father-in-law died of COVID

2 (57m 11s):
April, April is when he passed away in Sweden. Yeah.

0 (57m 15s):
I mean, this was affecting all of us. I mean, everybody knows somebody who was either severely ill or, or was killed by this.

2 (57m 25s):
I was devastating because his wife and mother-in-law also got quite sick and we thought we were going to lose her as well. They were both in their early nineties. So it was, it was very, very tough also because, you know, we were engaged in this day-to-day battle. And on the one hand I was excited by what we were able to do. And on the other hand, when you see, you know, in his case, ultimately, a life lost, you know, it's anyway, it was quite personal to me. Let me just say that I have not lost a family member during the time of iPhones. And, and I can tell you that being on a FaceTime with somebody close to you, when they're dying is a miserable, miserable experience.

2 (58m 7s):
It was very tough and it certainly made, brought into sharp focus. What this was all about. Certainly many, many people lost lives and many more are suffering it today with the downstream effects of this disease.

0 (58m 21s):
Nobody you knew already from that first clinical trial, that the news was good, that the initial results from from phase one were good, but, but he had to go through two more phases and we, the public were not privy to that information for a variety of reasons, right? You can't, you could not come out and say, Hey, phase one looks great. These are the results. Is that there are rules against that, right?

2 (58m 46s):
Well, we indeed in may, we indeed did come out and say at a very high level that we had some encouraging results and people attacked us every which way for having said that, because they basically said, well, that's doing science by press release and many other things. And the reality is when you have a pandemic and you're a public company and you've got material data, our sense was that we at least needed to at a high level, put that out there. So one of the things we learned, because none of us have been in this situation before and was that we were going to get criticized no matter what we did. And so we just had to do what we thought was right. Make some calls, you know, explain ourselves.

2 (59m 26s):
And so we did that. We, we ultimately published the data. The NIH came out and presented their data. We were quite surprised that people were questioning the NIH, his own clinical clinical research. We didn't do the clinical work. They did. Okay.

0 (59m 39s):
Yeah. By the end of the third trial phase three end of November, and you announced that the preliminary data showed that the efficacy rate was 94%. Did that surprise you? Even you,

2 (59m 57s):
It did surprise me and it didn't surprise me scientifically it's surprisingly me. By that time, I had lowered my expectations largely by having heard so much about how difficult all this would be. You look at our vaccines are made. They either take bits and pieces of proteins and they make them artificially and they combine them and they put the adjuvants that kind of get your immune system to get angry. There's nothing molecular about the current approaches here. We were putting in a single protein, delivered a known way to specific cells. And so we were really priming the immune system, but still there was no basis to believe that we could do 90 anything. It's not at all. Typical in vaccines, let alone with a new technology and that alone out of the gates that you start at 94, we thought if we were well above 50%, at least we will start putting up a fight and maybe we can make a veteran better version

0 (1h 0m 49s):
Parallel to the testing. Presumably you had to ramp up your ability to produce this vaccine.

2 (1h 0m 56s):
Yes. And that, and that was really the, the massive heroism that I think of all the things that we could not imagine, that we could make a, you know, a billion doses, the first year of production up from probably making, you know, a thousand doses a year before of anything.

0 (1h 1m 14s):
Did you do that? How did you go from the capacity to make a thousand or 10,000 to a billion in less than a year? Well, first of all,

2 (1h 1m 21s):
At all, all these things start with people. We had the great fortune of having a gentleman named Kwan Andrus, who as head of our whole technical operations, manufacturing quality, the whole it field previously held that role at Novartis. One of the largest pharmaceutical companies had gone through previous flu epidemic kind of scale up of vaccines of that generation and just is a phenomenal leader of people. And he was really a godsend to us. And then when it came to planning rapidly responding, organizing, hiring people and just not taking, that's not possible for an answer for just about anything that they, that they did in terms of either timeframes or scale.

2 (1h 2m 5s):
And several months later, we started producing millions of doses. And then, and then eventually tens of millions and hundreds of minutes of doses.

0 (1h 2m 14s):
What does this mean now? I mean, what, what does, what does it mean for the development of other vaccines or other treatments? I mean, has this, at least to the scientific community proved that you can really maybe develop a long lasting flu vaccine or a malaria vaccine or an HIV vaccine? Like, is that, is that within the realm of possibility?

2 (1h 2m 39s):
Well, you asked me to two questions in one, one was, has it proved that the answer is no, but does it suggest that that's possible and perhaps wise to work on the answers? That's a better question and we are working on it. No, no. And I'm only saying it because look, I learned long ago, Thomas Kuhn and all these guys who've written on, on these things that, you know, the scientific process is one of organized skepticism and that organized skepticism is a good thing because it keeps you constantly looking for proof. I would say that there's, there's a slightly greater reason to believe that Mr. RNA could actually be a new drug modality. And, but the other thing it does just to come back more broadly to what it is that we've been doing in flagship is that it illustrates that yet again, completely transformative things could come out of unreasonable beginnings.

2 (1h 3m 32s):
And that if all you do is look for reasonable beginnings, you're probably not going to find breakthroughs.

0 (1h 3m 38s):
It's probably remarkable to young, younger people today that, that everybody had the chicken pox, not that long ago, and kids don't get it anymore because there's a vaccine. Is there a potential future where there's no such thing as seasonal flu

2 (1h 3m 55s):
That I can not say, although I never want to say no to that either because more broadly raising an issue, which, which is important to me and I've, I've worked for the last two years. And that is probably what I would view as health security or practicing medicine in a preemptive way. And what I mean by that is we've learned so much about disease that we realize that disease, isn't just a switch that goes on and all of a sudden, now you have it and you have to fight it, but that there are long ramps kind of on-ramps towards disease. That if we could intervene long before the diseases manifest, and we can find it now with, with new techniques, then both to prevent it through vaccines, but also to delay it, slow it down, redirected.

2 (1h 4m 40s):
There's many things we can do. And I think unless we do those things, if all we do is wait for diseases to be good and advanced until we start treating them the cost of that, the human loss as a result of that is just going to be prohibited. So in the same vein, I can't imagine a time when seasonal flu is mastered and basically kept at bay. Why? Because I think that we're learning enough about the immune system, that if we intervene early enough and broadly enough, we may well create a shield, a protective shield against these hypervariable viruses like influenza, like white rhinovirus that causes the common flu like HIV.

2 (1h 5m 22s):
I mean, there's a lot of these threats that aren't just themselves threats, but they're hyper proliferating threats. And for that, our immune system is the only answer.

0 (1h 5m 32s):
But when you think about the arc of your career and your life, you know, a chance meeting with David Packard, who kind of inspires you to think about maybe you starting your own thing, taking a gamble on MRN a which would lead to the fastest vaccine ever manufactured in history to now, you know, Madonna was founded 10 years ago. I think it's market cap. The last I checked is almost $170 billion. And that's just one of the businesses you started. It's a pretty remarkable story. How much of, of your, of where you are today, do you attribute to how hard you worked and how much do you think has to do with just luck?

2 (1h 6m 16s):
How hard I work is a function of probably the orientation that I had. That as an immigrant, you don't really take much for granted. You don't think much is owed to you and everything is a possibility and you have to go get it. In my case, the motivator has been truly trying to figure out if we could innovate a new way to innovate so hard work. Yes. In terms of luck, you know, it's ironic that you're, that you asked me that because somebody has written to me something the other day that I wanted to respond to, but I didn't, by saying better lucky and good in the sense that I think that to some extent, counting on luck is not a strategy, but it is the case that no matter how hard you work, there's no guarantee that the opportunity will come up or that you will fail to fail long enough to succeed.

2 (1h 7m 5s):
These are all things that otherwise can only be explained by chance, but I don't know what to do with that because I can't count on it. I can't summon it if I could submit it anytime, that would be fun, but I can't. And so therefore it doesn't the role doesn't play any role in my actions when it comes, it comes

0 (1h 7m 25s):
That's new bar, a fan he's co-founder and chairman of dhurna. And he's also the founder and CEO of flagship pioneering today. Madonna is probably the most famous biotech company Noubar has developed, but since it was founded over 20 years ago, flagship pioneering has helped launch more than 100 other companies. And of those 30 are now publicly traded. Thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you're not yet a subscriber, please do subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us, our email address is H ibt@npr.org. And if you want to follow us on Twitter or at guy Ross, or add how I built this could also find us on Instagram.

0 (1h 8m 11s):
That's how I built this NPR. My personal account at guide Raj. This episode was produced by Casey Herman with music composed by Ramtin Arab Louis. It was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Claire Maura Sheba. Our production staff includes JC Howard, James DeLuise, Rachel Faulkner, Liz Metzger, Julia Carney, Ferris safari, Elaine coats, and Ali sober. And the Harrison BJ Choi. Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Ross. And you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.

Charles Schwab (1h 8m 52s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Charles Schwab last year taught us. We don't know what tomorrow holds, but Schwab knows that successful financial planning can help propel net worth by 2.5 times find easy, flexible planning options and more at schwab.com/plan.

6 (1h 9m 14s):
There are millions of books out there just waiting for you, but how to keep up introducing and PRS book of the day. Every weekday, we feature some of our favorite conversations with authors and writers about their latest books. You can check it out in about the time it takes a walk, the dog happy reading.