NPR Podcasts (1s):
Reveal the economic patterns all around us while you swipe right and left, understand money better with the indicator, one of NPR, daily podcasts, more voices, all ears, NPR podcasts

Airtable (15s):
In the ever-changing landscape of work. How can you ensure your people workflows and data stay connected. We do it with air table. Air table allows you to create flexible systems that help your team operate as one. It's essentially a Lego kit that gives you the building blocks to create tools that work, how you do. We actually use air table to manage our workflow right here at built-in productions. It serves as our database for guest contact information and the place where we schedule episodes and move them through our production pipeline. So our remote team knows exactly where each project stands in real time. Without it we'd have to use multiple tools, and maybe you can relate to this. We already have enough online tools to juggle as it is. So yes, you could say that in a way you can thank air table for helping us make sure our episodes drop every week. Air table brings teams together and helps teams like ours. Run smoothly. Give it a try for free@airtable.com today. That's air table.com to get started for free.

Allbirds (1m 18s):
This episode is sponsored by Allbirds. Are your running shoes looking a bit beat up after a long winter Allbirds makes shoes and clothes that are better for you and better for the planet using revolutionary premium natural materials. The tree flier is lightweight, super springy and wildly comfortable. Making your long distance running efforts feel surprisingly effortless. They provide unbelievable cushion and comfort. So even your toughest runs are easier on your body. Perfect for when you're ready to take those extra steps to long distance running lace up the tree flier and get running today@allbirds.com. That's a L L B I R D s.com

4 (1m 54s):
April 6th, 1990. And we had bankers and lawyers and VIP's we had minister of agriculture was there and, and other big wigs, and we could not get the equipment to produce a single corn flake.

2 (2m 13s):
Did you spend $6 million? What do you mean? You can't get it to produce cornflakes,

4 (2m 17s):
Any flakes or any flakes? It just,

2 (2m 19s):
You turn the machine on and it starts going, does it actually do that? At least?

4 (2m 23s):
Yes, it would do that, but there's private was seize up inside of the extruder barrel and it wouldn't come out. It could not, oh

2 (2m 30s):
My God,

4 (2m 31s):
It did not work.

2 (2m 38s):
Welcome to how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz and on the show today, how Aaron and rotten the Stevens sprouted their first organic grains in a bathtub and grew that business into nature's path, a cereal and snack brand. That's now sold in more than 50 countries around the world. There are two companies in America that basically own the morning. One is called Kellogg's the other general mills. The top 10 cereals in the U S include honey, nut Cheerios, frosted flakes, cinnamon toast, crunch, fruit loops.

2 (3m 25s):
And so on. In other words, general mills Kellogg's general mills Kellogg's and on and on with one important exception. Post the other cereal giant in America is in there with honey bunches of oats. But when it comes to the organic cereal market, well, the names are a bit different. You've got your Cascadian farms, Kashi puffs, Barbra's puffins. You know, the names you might see at whole foods or a natural foods. Co-op these are the brands that dominate the organic space, which might sound like a breath of fresh air, you know, plucky little upstarts until you discover one important thing.

2 (4m 10s):
All of those brands are owned by Kellogg's general mills and post. Now there's nothing wrong with that. Most of these brands were at some point independent and they're still pretty good products, but over the past 20 years, big multinationals have bought up many of the organic brands you're probably familiar with, which makes today's story somewhat unusual in that nature's path is both a significant player in the breakfast cereal market and still totally independent, totally owned by its founders, Aaron and rotten, a Stevens. If you've walked into a whole foods, you've seen their stuff, the corn puffs with the baby gorillas, pandas and koalas on the bag, the heritage flakes with its hippie font and unflashy logo of a field of grains on the bag.

2 (5m 2s):
And yet, despite almost no marketing nature's path owns about three to 5% of the organic cereal market. That's pretty significant for a company that started out by selling frozen sprouted wheat bread from the back of a vegetarian restaurant in Vancouver, Canada, Aaron, and rotten, that didn't start nature's path until they were in their early forties. And even then it would take at least five more years before they started to get some traction with cereal. And along the way, the two of them built a company that now produces everything from waffles to tortilla chips. The two of them met well. They basically had an arranged marriage. Aaron was a Canadian traveler and Davao T of a spiritual guide in India, rotten that was Indian and also a student of the same spiritual leader.

2 (5m 51s):
They barely knew each other when they got married. That was in 1969 and they're still happily married. Anyway, you'll hear all about it. But first Aaron Stevens grew up on an organic farm outside of Vancouver, but when he was in high school, his father moved the family to Los Angeles.

4 (6m 11s):
I must say that we had a very loving family, but my mother, I think went through a midlife crisis. My dad went through his midlife crisis and they separated. And I went from a straight a student to a straight F student except for art. And I decided to drop out of school and pursued art. I went down to Laguna beach and ended up in Venice, California.

2 (6m 32s):
And I gather, I mean, you, you really kind of came of age in the, in the sixties, right. Teenage and early twenties. And that, I mean, you were, you know, I hate to use this word because I think it's overused, but you kinda made your way towards like the hippie culture. Is that right? Is it fairly true?

4 (6m 51s):
Well, I kind of predated hippie culture. It was then known as the beat generation and I met a lot of the icons of the whole beat generation and some great jazz musicians and artists and poets. It was quite a, a wild time, but it was a time when I got sucked into some of the darker aspects of the counterculture, which was, you know, substance abuse. And, and then at the age of 17, I ended up in a monastery up in the Chatsworth mountains and there, I had a very profound, mystical experience that kind of altered my whole perception of life. And so I, from that point on, I became a seeker, right.

4 (7m 32s):
I went to churches, I went to, I studied Vedanta and Gurdjieff and the kind of a plethora of different spiritual traditions that I, I was very interested in and somehow or other, I was put in contact with St. Kurt Paul saying through correspondence, but I really wanted to go to India to be with him. And I finally got my wish in 1967 and I went and traveled with this great teacher who took me under his wing and treated me like a son. And I spent seven months with him there in India. And toward the end of that seven month period, I thought that when I go back to Canada, I would like to start a vegetarian restaurant because me being a vegetarian and there was no place for vegetarians eat at that time.

2 (8m 24s):
I'm curious, Aaron, I mean, you're, you're 23 years old. It's 1967, India. I mean, was really becoming an important place for a particular kind of, let's say spirit seeking Western visitor. Obviously the Beatles famously were among them. What was your impression of India? It mean when you got there and you finally meet your spiritual sort of mentor and you're in the old city in Delhi, which is a really cool place. Was it everything you imagined? Was it what you'd hoped? It would be

4 (9m 2s):
Well on January 20th, 1967, you know, the plane touched down in Delhi and it was like a, it was like a different world, a different smells different. And it was the warmth of the place. And there were cattle drawn wagons and camels in the street. And, and it was very different from India today. But somehow India felt like a mother in a way. It kind of received me and, and I felt this incredible bond to India. I felt that, you know, some kind of old memories seem to be ignited. This is as soon as the plane touchdown there in Delhi, because my grandmother was born in India of a British military family.

4 (9m 48s):
And she married Dr. Harold Stevens, my grandfather. So I felt very much embraced and loved by India and the people I learned the language, you know, I wore Indian clothes and it felt like my home. And I felt so out of place when I came back to Vancouver seven months later.

2 (10m 8s):
All right. So you come back to Vancouver after a seven month trip in India inspired by your time there to open up a restaurant, this was called, it was called golden Lotus. What, what kind of restaurant was it? Was it Indian food or all kinds of foods?

4 (10m 22s):
Well, my, my concept for a vegetarian dining was something I wanted to show people how, how tasty it was, how nutritious and inexpensive it was to, to eat this way. And so I borrowed some of the best recipes from India, from Mexico, from China,

2 (10m 42s):
Vegetarian.

4 (10m 43s):
Yeah. It's all vegetarian. And it became extremely popular. It was just the right thing at the right time.

2 (10m 49s):
Did you find that? I mean, you're 23 years old. How did you finance a restaurant?

4 (10m 53s):
Well, I had $7 and, and hope and a prayer. And

2 (10m 58s):
Yeah. How did you do it? How many you, you were, you had no experience in the industry. You didn't, maybe you were a decent cook. I dunno. I just, how did you do it?

4 (11m 5s):
Not really, but I borrowed a $1,500 and I found the assets of a failed restaurant, about 10 blocks away. I bought those assets for $500. I carted all the equipment on my back because I didn't have a car back to the restaurant installed it. I had to hire a couple of people. And by the time I'd run out of money, the, the doors opened. I made the food, I prepared it. I served it some days. There were only maybe $25 in sales. And then other days were really busy. And eventually it caught on, there was an article in the paper that praise it to the heavens. And it was tongue in cheek article.

4 (11m 46s):
And from that time on the, the place was busy. It was jammed.

2 (11m 50s):
Did you, Aaron, did you own the business outright or did you have at golden Lotus?

4 (11m 55s):
No. It owned it outright, right?

2 (11m 56s):
That's, that's pretty impressive. And running a restaurant is a complex business. I mean, you've got to get the right amount of food and the right amount of supplies and you don't want to buy too much and you've got to figure out how to price it out. And then you've got to hire chefs and kitchen staff and wait staff. How did you manage all that at T I mean, just the logistics of it. Do you remember ever feeling overwhelmed by it?

4 (12m 17s):
Oh, yes. Especially when you know, having to work like 14, 15 hours a day and there wasn't anything to show for it. Those, those are the times that when I would do my practice, I would meditate and, and I'd find that inner direction and the peace and calm and clarity of mind.

2 (12m 34s):
Hmm. Let, let me turn to you right now for a sec. You were, you were also born in the 1940s in, in what is now, I believe Pakistan, but when you were still pretty young, your, your family had to flee the country rooms. It was during the partition in the late 1940s is very chaotic and violent time. And, and you eventually resettled in, in India. But despite all that I read that you actually had a pretty happy childhood.

6 (13m 4s):
Yes. The childhood was beautiful. I was adopted by my grandmother. She never had a daughter. So she said to my, my mother and my father that you guys can have more children, but I'm moving. And I would like to adopt your child, your daughter.

2 (13m 25s):
Now

6 (13m 26s):
She gave me tremendous amount of love and care. She was not educated, but she knew the value of independence. She felt she's a daughter and she needed to go to university. Somehow my father and my uncle objected to this, they said to her, so you want her to be a lawyer or a doctor. She should be married off. And she said, you mind your own business. She's my daughter. And she's going to be what she wants to be. She knew the value of education.

2 (14m 2s):
Well, I wanna, I want to jump ahead a little bit and understand Aaron, how you and retina met you. You took out from what I understand, you take a trip. This is your second trip to India in 1969. Presumably again, to meet your sort of spiritual mentor,

4 (14m 21s):
68,

2 (14m 21s):
It was 68, not 69

4 (14m 23s):
And 69. Okay. I was there

2 (14m 26s):
For six

4 (14m 26s):
Months. Okay. The restaurant for six months.

2 (14m 29s):
Wow. You just left the restaurant in the presumably in the hands of competent people who kept running it. How did you tell me how you met right now? Where did you, where and how

4 (14m 41s):
Well both threatened. And I were students of St. Croix, Paul Singh. So we had this common spiritual connection and the birthday of our mentor. I think it was February 6th, 1969. The next day after the celebration, there were probably 10, 15,000 people that had come there. And a friend of mine came up to me and he said, Mr. Otto, and gee, would you like to marry an Indian girl? And I said, I don't know if, if there's some kind of compatibility, I don't know.

4 (15m 21s):
And anyway, that evening I was introduced to retina at a dinner table where she sat at one end of the dinner table and I at the other. And we're both kind of embarrassed, I guess, looking at our plates. And after some time I kind of looked up for my plate to see what she looked like. And she looked up from her plate at the same time. And we, our eyes locked there for a moment, but I felt something there. It was a few days after that meeting that I said, this is the one I'm meant to marry.

6 (15m 53s):
But before that, I just, because you are neither Hindu nor Indian, not Punjabi. I just said, the person who introduced us no way, I'm not married.

4 (16m 8s):
Indian girls did not marry. They did not marry foreigners. That was just out of the question.

2 (16m 13s):
But at least retina was at least, was he handsome

4 (16m 19s):
Or was she going to answer that

6 (16m 23s):
He was dressed in a simple Indian clothes? And I said, Hey, he's handsome, but the way he's dressed, it doesn't seem good.

2 (16m 35s):
I'm thinking I'm not going to throw away my future with this guy. Right. I mean, but, but, but, but obviously you did get married. And, and so what I mean, cause it essentially, it was kind of like an arranged marriage in a sense, right?

6 (16m 49s):
Yes.

4 (16m 50s):
Yeah. W we, we actually ended up getting married without dating, without living together, but it felt perfectly fine. It felt, this was the way it really was meant to be. We got married and fell in love in that order.

2 (17m 8s):
It's, it's remarkable because of course arranged marriages are, are still very common in many countries around the world and, and, and, and work. Right. And often, often times they work better than marriages in Western countries that are not arranged, but I've never, I don't think I've ever heard of an instance of an arranged marriage with somebody from completely from the outside. You know, somebody coming from the west to India is, was that unusual at the time,

4 (17m 31s):
It was quite unusual. My mother and father didn't quite understand it at the time, but they gave her their love, you know?

2 (17m 39s):
Yeah. So, alright, so Rodney, you, you agreed to marry Aaron and he was a Canadian and, and I mean, it's crazy cause you're still married. So it's worked, right. We know where the ending of this, but let's go back to 1969. Where if I was, if I was there, I'd be like, rock. Nah, I don't know, man. This is a little, it's a little risky here. He know this guy. You don't barely know him. He's like Canada, you have to leave. But, but clearly you were like, let's do it. And, and you agreed to move to Canada with Aaron.

6 (18m 14s):
I had an urgent fate in our teacher and many people talked many good things about Aaron. So when I was talking with the guy who introduced us and he said, listen, daughter, if your teacher is not against it, why should you worry?

2 (18m 36s):
Wow.

6 (18m 37s):
I said, are you telling me that our teacher is for it? This marriage? He said, otherwise I would not have been bringing this proposal to you.

2 (18m 49s):
Yeah.

6 (18m 50s):
I said fine. Wow. When you trust and you have faith. Yeah. Every doubt dispels.

2 (18m 58s):
Wow.

4 (18m 59s):
And we also loved each other very much.

6 (19m 2s):
Love came afterwards, but it starting, there was fate.

2 (19m 7s):
You believed in the guidance of your teacher, but you did fall in love. Then that took some

6 (19m 12s):
Time. Very much.

4 (19m 14s):
We were still in love.

2 (19m 16s):
That's good. That's good. I'm glad to hear it. Good. And, and rock now. How, how was your at the time, were you already fluent in English and, and, and sort of that, that was no problem.

6 (19m 28s):
My English was not very good. As far as speech is concerned, I used to just laugh it off. I said, okay, come on, tell me how to pronounce a girl. And you won't believe it. It took me a month. How to pronounce girl? I used to say girl, right? So my pronunciation. And then sometimes my sentences structure was not very good.

2 (19m 54s):
I'm sure errands a Hindi was, was much, much, much worse. Comparably worse. Yeah. But all right, so you get to Canada and Aaron, you get, you have this restaurant golden Lotus it's 1969. So I'm assuming the, both of you go right back to work at the restaurant,

4 (20m 12s):
Right back to work.

2 (20m 14s):
And retina, had you ever been involved in a food business at all? Jude, do you have any experience with food?

6 (20m 20s):
No. Before 1969, I was never involved in food business. I didn't even cook. My father did have a food business. You know, this is sugar coating, almonds, sugar, coating, pistachio. But that was not my area of study. I didn't care. I mean, that's my father's work.

2 (20m 43s):
And what did you do at the restaurant? What did, I mean, how did, what was your job there? You remember?

6 (20m 48s):
I cooked, you cooked. There's a very nice woman was called Mrs. Nagra. She taught me how to cook. And I was a fast learner.

4 (20m 58s):
You know, she was making 75 cents an hour. I was making a dollar. And then she went up to a dollar and I went up to a dollar and a quarter. You know, one thing I wanted to say about retina, she, she brought her, she brought her blessings to it in a way she, we have a very dear friend he's now passed away. Just recently said, Kaiser. He used to say about retina. He said, retina can make a nickel scream. She knew how to save money. She knew she was very, very frugal. We were both very frugal. And the workers in the restaurant decided that they wanted to turn it into a cooperative.

4 (21m 38s):
So I decided, okay, you can have the restaurant for $2,500. So I sold the restaurant for $2,500 because I wanted it to be free from it. I didn't want to have multiple partners because the cooperative would mean one person, one share one, one vote and all that. Right? All of a sudden you had a lot of chiefs. So I decided to go off and eventually started a little, a, a store called Jodie and porters where I imported Indian goods. And meanwhile, retina was pregnant with our first child

2 (22m 13s):
And this was in Vancouver, in Vancouver.

4 (22m 16s):
And so retina was making muffins, which we sold in the store. And she had all these burn marks on her arms. Cause she would, she couldn't burn her arms some many times when she's pulling the muffins out of the, out of the oven.

2 (22m 28s):
Are you also selling Indian food as well at the store?

4 (22m 32s):
No. No. It was called quote then health food, you know?

2 (22m 35s):
So how did you, how did you decide to start? I mean, cause this was a store that was selling textiles and things like that. How did you decide to start selling food at the, in the shop?

4 (22m 45s):
I always loved food. I'd love. I love the whole concept behind organic food and whole food. Where in those days you could only get whole wheat bread in one store in Vancouver. And then we started selling whole wheat bread. And there was a doctor in Vancouver who was writing prescriptions for whole wheat bread. Everything in the supermarkets was white bread, white flour, white rice. And so in 1971, we opened Canada's first large natural food food supermarket on the corner of fourth and Berard. And we had a lot of trouble in those eyes filling the shelves because, because there were not that many products available, but we were the first store to carry tofu soy-based products with first,

2 (23m 30s):
Where were you sourcing it from in 19? Was it hard to get that in 1970 in the store?

4 (23m 36s):
I go down to Chinatown with my VW van and load it up with buckets and buckets of tofu and bring it back to the store. So you could tell that the market was just becoming ripe for natural and organic foods.

2 (23m 49s):
And clearly there was some people are coming in, you were a market for it. So I guess around 71, you decide to open a bigger store to sell more, more practice called livestream. How do you remember how I mean today? Right. The barrier to do that in a place like Vancouver would be enormous, right? Just, just getting the, the space and the lease and the real estate and, and you'd have to put so much money up and there'd be lawyers and real estate agents. Was it just easier to do it in 1971?

4 (24m 19s):
Yeah, it was, it was a lot easier. There was very little red tape and, and rents were cheap and believe it or not, that store was filled with customers. And most of them were hippies and young, young people and little old ladies with flowers in their hats. You know, I mean outside, there was this notice board where people who wanted to go down to Mexico or California, whatever it says, Aquarius wants to meet a Capricorn to travel with. It was, it was pretty far out. I mean, it was a happening place and that business doubled every year for several years in a row.

2 (24m 57s):
So it was. And how big was that store?

4 (25m 1s):
Well, it seemed huge at the time it was about 4,000 square feet and we, we built all of our furnishings or what do you call it? Fixtures. We mailed them all out of wood, so it was a very organic, natural feel to it. Okay.

2 (25m 14s):
Okay. Well, so, but, but that's not instead. It's pretty good. And you know, I remember I interviewed John Mackey, the founder of whole foods on the show a couple years ago, we talked about his first location in Austin and you know, back in the late sixties there weren't, I mean, there was no Hain celestial or, you know, these massive organic food brands nature's path. There's nothing like that. Right. A lot of mom and pop stores. So how did you tell me a little bit about how you filled a 4,000 square foot store with natural products? Where, where are you? I mean, were these mostly American companies? Were they mostly Canadian brands?

4 (25m 51s):
Well, I imported directly a macrobiotic line from Japan. One of our biggest suppliers was Arrowhead mills out of the deaf Smith county, Texas.

2 (25m 60s):
And that's like flower. It's like, yeah,

4 (26m 2s):
All different types of grains and stuff. So we, we got, we were importing products from Erewhon bottled oils and, and sauces. And what have you. And when I, when I saw things that were selling quite well, I decided to start bottling them ourselves so that we could offer the products at a better price to our consumers. So we had a warehouse on sixth avenue, not too far away where we bottled things, we bottled oils, juices sauces, we made nut butters and jams and jellies and all kinds of stuff. Right.

6 (26m 40s):
And the back of this tour was a small restaurant that was owned by me and Aaron.

2 (26m 47s):
And the restaurant was like a takeout restaurant in the back.

6 (26m 50s):
No, there was about a 15 seats,

4 (26m 53s):
But, but very profitable because my wife was running it.

2 (26m 57s):
Nice. And so you've got this store and the restaurant and the store, was it profitable pretty quickly or right away, or

4 (27m 7s):
It was profitable, but we didn't know how much, because we didn't really have a proper accounting system. Yeah. You know, in the first year, my accounting system consisted of, of a couple of apple boxes into which the receipts would go and then I'd hire a bookkeeper at the end of the month, this sorted all out. So it was really hard to know exactly how much profit, but we were making profit, but everything got plowed back into the business and how much profit it made. I really don't know.

2 (27m 35s):
And, and from what I understand, like Aaron, you focused on the, the store and rotten, you focused on the restaurant in the back, is that right?

6 (27m 44s):
That's true. Restaurant and the family, the kids were very young. Yeah. I needed to give them attention.

2 (27m 51s):
How did you, how did you guys manage that you had, I think your first child, you would have four kids. You had your first child shortly after you arrived in 1970, you know, back in India, you would have had family to help you to have had relatives. And so how did you manage, tell me, tell me about it because I know

4 (28m 8s):
It is a, she's kind of a superwoman, you

2 (28m 11s):
Know?

6 (28m 11s):
Yeah. And a guy that I'm some I'm surprised at myself. I just wonder how did I do that?

2 (28m 18s):
Yeah. And so, from what I gather, you had two retail stores in Vancouver, by my 1980, you had a warehouse that was making things like peanut butter and yogurt, I think like 20 to 25% of the things you were selling and livestream where your own products and brands, you had seven, $8 million of annual sales. So were

4 (28m 44s):
Yours about 20 million, about

2 (28m 46s):
12 million. That means a better, I mean, did you feel, I mean, 12 million in annual sales net? Depends. Of course there are expenses and there's rent and there's employees, but did you feel financially secure at that point or, or, or do I have that totally wrong?

4 (29m 1s):
Well, yes and no, that continual growth of the business required more cash than what the profits would be. Okay. So there was a point where I brought in a couple of partners

2 (29m 14s):
To get some financing, help.

4 (29m 16s):
Yeah. To get some financing and also their talents as well.

2 (29m 19s):
These were other people who had experienced in the natural foods world.

4 (29m 23s):
They were just friends.

6 (29m 24s):
Yes. Fence did not have any experience in business,

2 (29m 28s):
But then they had no experience in business by just bring them on.

6 (29m 32s):
You asked

4 (29m 32s):
Him, I don't know. I wasn't very practical. You know,

2 (29m 35s):
Wait, tell me the story. There was a friend of yours and this friend wanted to join. And tell me what you thought you were thinking. Well,

4 (29m 42s):
We thought we were really aligned, you know, in every possible way. And I said, well, why not share the business? You know?

2 (29m 48s):
And Brennan was laughing. I know where this is going, but I want to hear the story. I just turned to Shan. Did you feel like you needed a partner? Cause you were, I don't know. You wanted just that extra confidence that there was somebody else in this, in, in the foxhole with you?

4 (30m 1s):
Yeah. And somebody would also, he was, had a good job outside and he was putting some of his salary into the business.

2 (30m 7s):
Okay.

6 (30m 8s):
Four 30, $3,000. Aaron gave away one third of the business.

2 (30m 15s):
Wow.

6 (30m 16s):
Yeah. And I kept on saying, Aaron, please. So we did have some discussions upstairs in our bedroom.

2 (30m 25s):
So you give away a third of the business to a partner. And this was somebody who was a friend. And how did it go? Did it, what did it work out? Okay.

4 (30m 34s):
No, it didn't go. Well,

2 (30m 35s):
It didn't

4 (30m 36s):
By 19 88, 19 81. It became almost unworkable. I was the first one there in the morning. And the last one to leave. Yeah. I was the one that had all the heavy responsibilities. Yeah. My other partners did not have any house mortgaged. And we had our place mortgaged.

2 (30m 56s):
So you had more than one partner.

4 (30m 58s):
I had two partners.

2 (30m 59s):
Okay.

4 (31m 0s):
They called them fricking frack. Anyway. They all felt that I shouldn't get more salary than them. Everybody should be equal. Right. Okay. There were a number of things and it came time where we needed money from the bank because of our growth. Our growth trajectory was like 30, 40% growth a year.

2 (31m 21s):
You needed money from the bank to finance that growth.

4 (31m 23s):
We had to get money from the bank at that point. Yeah.

6 (31m 27s):
If I can give you my perspective guy, when the time to give assurance is to the bank, I was not willing to do that. I said, sorry, Aaron, this is not right. And you know, despite what I said to you, you gave the shares for a very little amount and I'm not going to give the guarantee.

4 (31m 53s):
Yeah. So I refused to sign a guarantee, a personal guarantee to the bank and retina was behind me saying, oh, go personal guarantee over my dead body. Anyway, I said, unless you agree to sell your sheriffs to me,

2 (32m 11s):
But you said this to your business partners. You said, look, I'm not going to apply for a personal guarantee unless you guys sell your shares. Back to me,

4 (32m 19s):
I said, at that point, sell your shares to me. Or you buy my shares. And we had a shotgun agreement, you know, a shotgun clause, but nobody signed it. All right. So it had no value. So what, we ended up selling the business to a completely outside party.

2 (32m 38s):
All right. So you sell, so you, you basically, you and the partners decide or to resolve this, you're just going to have to sell this business. You've been doing 12 million Canadian dollars in revenue a year. So I'm thinking, you know, take that. And at a multiple of five, that's a $60 million business. It should be a pretty, pretty good outcome. Is that, is that about right?

4 (33m 1s):
No, no. We sold it for less than 2 million.

2 (33m 5s):
Wow. How is that possible?

4 (33m 8s):
Well, that's the question. The, the purchasers said, we want you to be re remained as president. Right? Right. And we will give you 10% of the business back. Oh, okay. So it, it felt, it felt like a, not a bad deal. Right? However, when it came down to it, I said, well, what do I have 10% off? Do I have 10% of the retail stores said, no, we decided to separate that off. And I said, what about the real estate that we had? I said, no, that's in a separate business. And I said, w w what do I have 10% of? You said, well, you have 10% of the wholesale part of the business. And I said, well, that's hardly even making a profit.

4 (33m 49s):
There are, these other things are making profit. He said, well, that's up to you to make it profitable. Anyway, I resigned. I left it. And quite, it was some bitterness there.

2 (34m 3s):
I'm sure. Do you remember, what do you remember about that time? Do you remember feeling like it was a defeat?

6 (34m 9s):
Aaron is an innovator he's driven. When he falls down, he gets up shakes all the dust and keeps them running again so we could have done much better, but that inspired me to find out what is profit? What is lost? What is book value? What is cashflow? So I took a securities course.

2 (34m 35s):
Wow. So that whole experience, I mean, which was a tough experience. Yes. You basically said, okay, I need to understand what happened here and to prevent that from happening again. So you basically dove into learning about finance and, and accounting.

6 (34m 54s):
Yes. Aaron is a creator, a not a wholesaler. I knew it was not going to last. So knowing what we know now, We did make a mistake.

2 (35m 12s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment, how rotten and Erin figure out how to start a new business without partners and how they cope with a brand new cornflake factory that can not make cornflakes stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this

SimpliSafe (35m 44s):
As a husband and a parent, nothing keeps me up at night more than worrying for my family safety. And that's why many families use and recommend simply safe home security. In fact, I use it for my production studio, my office right now it's protected by simply safe, simply safe is an award-winning comprehensive security system that defends your home against intruders, burglaries, fires, flooding, and more with simply safe, 24 7 professional monitoring service trained agents spring into action. The moment your system is triggered dispatching first responders directly to your door, simply safe is designed to be so simple. You can install it yourself in just 30 minutes, no service appointments, no hard wiring and no special tools or skills required. Visit simply safe.com/built to customize a simply safe system for your home. For a limited time, simply safe is offering how I built this listeners, a free indoor security camera. Plus 20% off with interactive monitoring go to simply safe.com/built.

Audible (36m 49s):
2022 is all about celebrating our new found self-awareness and making positive change. Audible helps make space for what matters to you. It's a destination for your wellness. Whether you're looking to soul search, be inspired, work towards new goals, unwind, or simply be entertained. I've really loved listening to Andrew Robert's biography of Napoleon on audible. It's absolutely amazing. And I can go back and listen to it and my other favorites as well. Whenever I want. In fact, if you want to listen to how I built this book, it's also an audible discover an incredible selection of audio books across every genre from bestsellers and new releases to celebrity, memoirs, mysteries, and thrillers, motivation, wellness, business, and more new members can try audible free for 30 days. Is it audible.com/built or text B U I L T 2 500, 500 that's audible.com/built or text built to 500, 500.

2 (37m 51s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's the early 1980s and because of a bad business partnership, Aaron and Ratana have just sold their health food store livestream, but they're still running the restaurant in the back of the store and business there is doing so well. They decided to open a second location and they call it Woodlands.

4 (38m 15s):
It was a big restaurant, 120 seats. Yep. And it basically, it served a couple of million meals out of there. It was, it became a very popular restaurant.

2 (38m 24s):
What do you think made it so popular

4 (38m 26s):
Right now? Right. And I made it,

2 (38m 31s):
Yeah. And then tell me what, tell me what I would eat there. If I got there in 1981, we get like a, like a soup or a tofu stir fry, or like a chick pea Curry.

6 (38m 41s):
I spanakopita lasagna Masaka.

4 (38m 46s):
It was finished by China, a huge salad bar, a great selection of fresh baked pastries. I mean, this place was jammed for lunches and for dinners and always making money. And it was being really well-run by retina and it was making a good 25% profit margin on it. In the meantime, I got kind of bored of being in the restaurant business. And so I started manufacturing our first product, which was in 1985, was born out of the back of the Woodlands restaurant. It was called manna bread. It was a sprouted organic loaf,

2 (39m 23s):
Like a sea keel bread.

4 (39m 25s):
No, no, quite different from that. This one has no yeast, no sugar, no salt, No oil. Okay.

2 (39m 32s):
You get bored of the restaurant business. And you're thinking I want to get back in. Cause you had met, you've been making your own products. You had a company that made peanut butter and yogurt and other products. So, so did you start to think, you know, I think I want to go back and start something new around food, making food.

4 (39m 50s):
Well, the concept there was look, if, if, if a company selling sugared flavored water, which is bad for you and the environment can become a multi-billion dollar brand, why can't we make something that's healthy and take the lessons from, from these big companies make a really big company out of something that's good for the people in planet.

2 (40m 14s):
And you started it. You started had this conversation in the early eighties,

4 (40m 18s):
In the early eighties, probably in 1984. And so in 1985 nature's path was launched out of the back of the restaurant. And it quickly outgrew the large kitchen that we had in the restaurant.

2 (40m 31s):
But just let me ask you what was nature's path going to make it, the idea from the beginning was inspired by PepsiCo and Coca-Cola like it was,

4 (40m 40s):
And in a way it was inspired by their business model, not by their product.

6 (40m 46s):
You started with manna bread

4 (40m 50s):
And the main ingredient was sprouted organic grain. When you Sproat grain, you convert the starch in the grain into maltose and other complex sugars.

2 (41m 1s):
Right.

4 (41m 2s):
Right. And therefore it becomes sweet without adding any sweetener. And it's really delicious kind of like cake

6 (41m 9s):
And, but manna bread has a limited shelf life and limited appeal. It's very good for people who are purist and healthy.

2 (41m 19s):
So the bread has short shelf life. So I'm assuming in order to sell it, you ha I guess you had to sell it frozen, right?

4 (41m 26s):
Correct.

2 (41m 27s):
Yes. Okay. Where were you selling it at the restaurant?

4 (41m 31s):
No, no. We sold it through a, of distributors And stores in the United States.

2 (41m 38s):
Wow. And

4 (41m 38s):
Canada and Canada.

2 (41m 40s):
And the brand was called nature's path.

4 (41m 43s):
Nature's path, mana bread. Right.

2 (41m 45s):
Sold in the freezer section of, I mean, whole foods is already around. There was Mrs. Gucci's. There was bread and circus in the U S

4 (41m 52s):
We were in all of them and it sold very, very well. So it became a several million dollar, a year business,

2 (42m 0s):
Shasta manna bread,

4 (42m 2s):
Just the amount of bread.

2 (42m 3s):
And by the way, by 1985 were there trade shows already for natural

4 (42m 8s):
Foods. There was the natural food expo

2 (42m 10s):
In Anaheim. So you, where you going down there and setting up a booth with manna bread?

4 (42m 15s):
I went down there and in 1985, we couldn't afford a whole booth. So we shared a booth with another company from Vancouver, an eight foot booth. They had four feet and I had four feet. And at the trade show, I was there with my daughter, our daughter. And one day as customers would walk by, they wouldn't even notice the booth. So I went out there. I was kind of like, like one of those hucksters, you know, I had to say, yeah, come and try. Our men are brand

2 (42m 45s):
Really

4 (42m 46s):
Different and come and taste it. And it was great. And I wrote up orders from probably a hundred different accounts. And then I took it to the distributor down there and I said, look, I've got all these orders here. I would like you to carry of bread. Wow. So based on the orders that I was able to get at the show, we got wholesale distribution across the United States for men of bread.

2 (43m 10s):
Needless to say, you don't make manna bread anymore. No, but, but this was really, this was the beginning. This was the first product, but it already, in 1985, you, you knew that you were gonna develop a line of different products. Is that true? Yes. And making mannered bread probably. Will you making it in a, in like a, did you rent space in a kitchen? Did you just use a third-party manufacturer and give them the recipe to make it for you?

4 (43m 37s):
Well, w the restaurant space we had was quite large. It was about 6,000 square feet and we had

2 (43m 43s):
To hire people to make it

4 (43m 45s):
Yeah. We had a bakery in the back. Right. And because they work very well. And they're inexpensive. I used a couple of bathtubs to do the sprouting of the grains. Of course, when we moved the amount of bread operation out of the restaurant, because we outgrew it very quickly. We had to rent a space and I had special stainless steel containers made for the sprout operation. And then we, then I started adding some other things, other products to that mix. Because as, as retina said earlier, we were facing a limited amount of business with the frozen product because it was frozen. Yeah. Okay.

4 (44m 25s):
So I started to think about what kind of product could we make that has a good shelf life on it. And we're not dependent on freezers. And I thought, well, why not? Organic breakfast cereal? That's something that has a shelf life of, you know, 10, 11 months. So I found a co-packer in outside of LA that made the product for us. I said, it has to be organic. And they said, oh, yes, yes. It's going to be organic. But the only thing organic about this company was its name.

2 (44m 57s):
What's the word? Organic that had no meaning behind it. Really.

4 (45m 0s):
It had no meaning it had no teeth at an old rules or regulations. And then I went to the, the owner of the company that was making them. And I said, you know, I've been asking for an organic certificate, at least, you know, an affidavit that all the grains and all the ingredients in the cereal are certified organic. Yeah. And he said, he said, organic, organic. He said, he pointed to the table. He said, if this carbon in this table, it's organic. And I, and I just, from that moment on, I said, I'm going to make my own cereal. I don't want to be dependent on people like this, who would have no ethics.

2 (45m 35s):
There was no like certification at the time.

4 (45m 37s):
There was no certification at the time,

2 (45m 39s):
Oregon Tilth or whatever. It's

4 (45m 41s):
Called Oregon Tilth wasn't around yet. It was about to come though.

6 (45m 46s):
But you are the one who helped create those and implement those rules. Aaron.

4 (45m 51s):
Yes. I I've been a champion for organics right. From the very beginning. And I said, look, because people are abusing this term, organic. We need something that has laws behind it has teeth behind it that so that if anybody breaks these rules or these laws they'll pay a fine and they'll go to jail.

2 (46m 10s):
So put them in jail.

4 (46m 13s):
The third party organic certification was born in the late eighties. And one of the first was Oregon Tilth.

2 (46m 22s):
Yeah. I don't think USDA came around until the nineties.

4 (46m 25s):
No, I was involved in the development of the USDA organic rule when I served on the organic trade association.

2 (46m 33s):
So you came to the realization that cereal, there, there was an opportunity in cereal. And I want to, I want to ask you about the first two Aaron, cause I know Rodney, you, you wouldn't fully come into the business for a couple more years, but you were still obviously involved. What was the first kind of cereal you started to make?

4 (46m 51s):
It was called manna multi-grain flakes. Manna, Millie Bryce.

2 (46m 55s):
Yeah. Right. And so it was basically these kind of flakes made from millet,

4 (47m 0s):
Noah and whole grains, a different whole grains. Yes.

2 (47m 4s):
And, and of course you, I'm assuming you couldn't make yourself. So you were, you were working with an outside sort of manufacturer to make this and, and how, how did the cereals do? I mean, what were they selling? Okay.

4 (47m 17s):
Yes. They sold extremely well. We were actually selling truckloads of cereal before long, and we, we knew we had a tiger by the tail there or the tail had us. So you,

2 (47m 30s):
You came to the conclusion that you wanted to make your own cereal for a number of reasons. First you could, you can do quality control, but also over time it would be more economical. But building a factory was very, would have been very expensive from what I gather, even. I mean, even in like by 1987, your combined revenue for the, for the nature's path and the restaurant was, was about $3 million, which isn't bad, but it's not, I mean, it, it, to build a factory would have been hard. It ultimately cost about $6 million to do so. How did you do, did you go to, did you have to start to go to banks to, to see if you could get loans?

4 (48m 11s):
Yeah. So first of all, I went to the economic, Western economic development corporation, which was a federal organization that loaned money to businesses,

2 (48m 20s):
Maybe like in the small business administration in the U S

4 (48m 23s):
And we went to the Royal bank, for example, largest bank in Canada. And, and they said, you guys are going to get killed by Kellogg's and general mills. How do you think you're going to survive?

2 (48m 33s):
Of course, they, they didn't want it. And they didn't want to give you a loan for that reason, for that

4 (48m 36s):
Nobody would touch us. And finally, we found a smaller bank that actually decided to do back us Canadian restaurant, Canadian, Western bank.

2 (48m 44s):
You said we're going to make organic cereal in our own. And I guess we should explain this because a cereal factory is actually very complex because you're basically making a mush, right. Of all these whole grains, and then putting it through like a, an extruder, which is like a, suddenly you make sausage out of it. It just pushes it through, and then you've got to shape it and then bake it and dry it and toast. It there's a lot that goes on just to make a corn flake.

4 (49m 11s):
That's right.

2 (49m 12s):
So tell me a little bit about how you, I mean, 1989, you decided to start building a factory. Where do you even begin? I mean, you get the, get the loan, but then where do you get the equipment and where do you get the production lines and all those things?

4 (49m 28s):
Well, we've, we found a supplier that offered to build us a turnkey cereal factory.

2 (49m 36s):
So basically something that you just walk in, it's all there, you open it up, you hit the go button and then done,

4 (49m 42s):
It was using a very large extruder. They'd never built it. An extruder, this large for breakfast cereal. They had built smaller ones. This was 138 millimeter size, a screw barrel, but they had only made 72 millimeter extruded barrels before that time.

2 (49m 58s):
And just out of curiosity, how much cereal could that make a day? That what they were building you, how many bags of food you remember

4 (50m 5s):
Will this be about 2000 pounds an hour?

2 (50m 8s):
Wow. That's a lot of cereal. Okay. So you are on fire here. You're ready to go. And they build this for you, by the way you are in now, like you guys are kind of underwater, right? Because you took out this big loan To do this. Were you nervous at all about taking on so much debt?

4 (50m 27s):
We were pretty jazzed. We were pretty pumped up. We, we felt that I felt anyway. I felt that we could overcome the obstacles. I would. I've always been a very strong optimist. Yeah, of course there was some nervousness. And I can tell you that on the day of our opening of the factory, which was April six, that was my father's birthday. I swear. I remember the date, April 6th, 1990, the opening date came and we had bankers and lawyers and VIP's we had minister of agriculture was there and, and other big wigs. And we could not get the equipment to produce a single cornflake, what

6 (51m 7s):
We did

4 (51m 8s):
Or any flakes. It,

2 (51m 9s):
I just spent $6 million. What do you mean? You can't get it to produce corn flakes?

4 (51m 13s):
It could not. It did not work

6 (51m 15s):
Because that did not work

4 (51m 18s):
Key. This company had never produced an large extruder And proven it on cereal. So when you scale it

2 (51m 26s):
And you too, but I'm just saying you turn the machine on and it starts going, gee, does it actually do that? At least,

4 (51m 33s):
Yes, it would do that. But there's product was seize up inside of the extruder barrel and it wouldn't come out. So, so what, what we did that on that opening day, we did not turn the factory on. We invited everybody there and we went out and bought the big giant competitors cornflakes, and we sprinkled them on the conveyor belt.

6 (51m 54s):
And when people asked her how come the machine is not making a noise,

4 (51m 58s):
We had to come up with an answer pretty quick. We said, well, it would be too noisy to start all the equipment up. And we wouldn't be able to hear each other.

2 (52m 6s):
So you basically put another brand's cornflakes on the conveyor belt to make it look like your factory was working. It was like a Potemkin village.

4 (52m 17s):
That's right. Like fake it till you make it. Yeah.

2 (52m 20s):
Wow. Did anybody know anybody there? No. Nobody knew they did not know you were

6 (52m 24s):
Faking

4 (52m 25s):
It. Our people knew nobody else.

2 (52m 28s):
Wow. I mean you had right. Cause you had to figure out what to do, but between you would have been, it would have been so embarrassing. Right. There was press there. So they just saw these beautiful golden cornflakes in the conveyor belt and snapped pictures. And That was it.

4 (52m 46s):
Yeah.

2 (52m 46s):
But this is you're still, everyone leaves the factory. The machine is still not working. You've just paid $6 million for equipment that doesn't work. So what did you do?

4 (52m 56s):
We struggled over the next few months, we struggled like anything to try to get this equipment to work

6 (53m 3s):
And started producing it in August

2 (53m 5s):
Of 1990.

6 (53m 6s):
Yeah. Truckloads, truckloads,

4 (53m 9s):
Truckloads of product as hog feed.

2 (53m 12s):
Wait, sorry. You were making thousands of pounds of product that you would send for hog feed.

6 (53m 17s):
Yup. Yup. Yup.

2 (53m 18s):
What, why wasn't it good enough? Was it the flavor? Was it the texture?

4 (53m 22s):
If it wasn't up to our high expectations, we would not sell it. We couldn't really sell it for more than a penny or two a pound. And we'd rather give it away than sell something that is less than optimum quality.

6 (53m 36s):
But when the machines were not running, we kept on working, improving, finding help from the manufacturers, different manufacturers. And finally two over three months to produce the flakes.

2 (53m 52s):
Three months is a long time to waste so much food

4 (53m 56s):
Wasted, a lot of money. And

2 (53m 58s):
Very few businesses could survive that. Right. I mean, that's just, I would be losing my mind. I would be shouting at the guy who put in the equipment. What are you doing? This is defective.

4 (54m 9s):
W well, actually we threatened to Sue him. And rather than face a lawsuit, he came up and, and settled out of court and reimbursed us the entire cost of the equipment.

2 (54m 22s):
Wow. Okay. So, but, but now you've got bad equipment, I guess. That's not bad. You get more or less free, but how did you fix it?

4 (54m 29s):
Well, we found a consultant that used to work for that person and he said, well, let's try something here. Let's try adding a little bit of water here to the, to the mixer. And they conditioner And a little bit of oil, vegetable oil, and remarkably, everything started flow and work. It's just a simple, simple solution,

6 (54m 50s):
But those are very difficult times guy, you know, many people from restaurant I sent to the factory to work because they needed people. And more than half they left, because they said this company is going to go bankrupt. Why? Because we are throwing away so much cereals. They used to come and talk to me. Yes.

2 (55m 14s):
So you were maybe headed towards bankruptcy, maybe not towards bankruptcy, but you were not, there was a downturn in your business after this factory opened, right?

6 (55m 23s):
No, definitely. We were headed towards bankruptcy. I remember at times the factory could not afford the payroll. So luckily I had some money and I said to Aaron, I'm going to loan you this money.

2 (55m 41s):
You had money from the restaurant. Yes. And so you said, let me loan this business. Some money. Yes. But, but meantime, I guess Aaron kind of recruited you to come, come work in the factory. Right. That basically said, look, I need you here.

4 (55m 57s):
I certainly did ask her. I had to, almost on my knees. I had to ask. I said, please come and help me.

2 (56m 2s):
And you form a sort of quote, the quotes formerly joined, I guess in 1992. Recognize that is that about right?

6 (56m 9s):
Yes. But I have some condition before I joined.

2 (56m 13s):
What was your condition

6 (56m 14s):
That he will not have another partner? It will be family business. We will be the partners and he will not interfere what I will be doing.

4 (56m 24s):
You know, retina has this tremendous strength in, in finance and she has a great understanding of it. And, and of people, my strengths were in creativity, in creating products that became very successful and in marketing and sales, but operationally and financially, those are where my weak points.

2 (56m 46s):
But see, this is an important point, right? Because you have enough, self-awareness errand understand that that is a weak point, right? That you, you have that weak point. And so in order to fill that gap, you have to find the person and the person who happened to be your wife. So you were very lucky that your life partner was also just perfectly placed to be your business partner,

4 (57m 7s):
Who, who would have thought, you know, when we got married in 1969, that this shy demure, pretty girl, you know, it had such a power behind her.

2 (57m 19s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Aaron and retina start to get nature's path into the major grocery chains and why when some very big companies offer to acquire them, they say, no, stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this.

Whoop (57m 42s):
This episode is brought to you by whoop the world's most powerful wearable health and fitness coach whoop. Isn't just another fitness tracker. It measures your vital signs, including heart rate, variability, resting, heart rate, and a fully phased breakdown of your sleep, their algorithms, then process all those data points to provide you with a daily personalized recovery score, a guide so you can know how you should approach your day. In fact, I just tested it out for a couple of weeks and it's actually pretty amazing to see all the data that it gives you. Check out. They're all new whoop four dot oh, it's designed with new biometric tracking, including skin temperature, blood oxygen, and more. It's this really, really cool sleep, better recover faster and workout smarter with woop the all new devices free. When you sign up for a membership, go to woop.com, w H O O p.com and enter built at checkout to save 15% today.

Inside Tracker (58m 40s):
People age at different speeds. And the date on your ID may not truly represent your biological age, looking for ways to slow down the aging process. The keys to a healthy long life are in your blood inside tracker provides you with a personalized plan to improve your metabolism, reduce stress, improve, sleep, and better. Your health inside tracker was created by leading scientists and aging, genetics, and biometrics to analyze your blood DNA and fitness tracking data, to identify where you're optimized and where you're not. Once you join, you'll get a daily action plan with personalized guidance on the right exercise and nutrition for your body, and to see how you're aging from the inside out at inner age 2.0 to any plan for a definitive calculation of your true biological age. In fact, my wife just joined did, she says it's super easy and she's super excited to get started on her own action plan. For a limited time, get 20% off the entire inside tracker store. Just go to inside tracker.com forward slash built that's inside tracker.com forward slash built.

4 (59m 52s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's 1995 and Aaron and Rodney have sold off their restaurant business and are fully focused on getting nature's path cereals into more stores. And they're aiming for all kinds of stores by the way, not just the little mom and pop organic markets. Great. From the very beginning, I had the philosophy of that. We will sell to anybody that wants our products. We will sell in the supermarkets. We will sell the co-ops will sell in natural food stores. I didn't feel that our product should be confined to any one group of people. So right from the get go, we were selling to Safeway and to,

2 (1h 0m 34s):
And this was Safeway, Canada or

4 (1h 0m 36s):
Safeway, Canada. And then we parlayed that into the Safeway USA as well.

2 (1h 0m 42s):
Was it hard to get on the shelves at Safeway? I mean, that's a massive, huge supermarket.

4 (1h 0m 48s):
We pled poverty. We pled poverty. We said, look, you know, we can't afford to pay all the listing fees, but

2 (1h 0m 54s):
'cause, this is the thing people don't understand. You have to pay the supermarket

4 (1h 0m 57s):
Right to

2 (1h 0m 57s):
Place your product. It's like being, it's like being in the app store, you got to pay them a cut of your app. If you want your stuff in the supermarket, you got to pay them for the right shelf space. And right

4 (1h 1m 8s):
In the beginning, they took pity on us. And so we would get away with just a free fill of product. It's not that it's not that way anymore, but yeah, it's changed so much,

2 (1h 1m 19s):
But let's just back then to get, I mean, how do you had to get to Safeway? Was it, I mean, and even when you did get in Safeway, I'm assuming it was just a tiny little bit of shelf space. Not much.

4 (1h 1m 30s):
We had a former Safeway and Woodward's manager. He was our VP of sales and he had a lot of connections at Safeway. So he would go in there and he said, look, we're going to stack them high and we're going to watch him fly. And so we, we get in dials and we blow out hundreds of cases a day out of certain stores.

2 (1h 1m 50s):
And what was the value proposition? What was the value proposition on the bag? If, because again, we have to remember 1995, the average consumer was not as educated about organic and natural as they are today.

4 (1h 2m 2s):
That was our job. Our job was to educate. We tried to educate our consumers with every purchase about the value of organic farming, you know, the importance of avoiding GMOs and all these other things. So we, we even got into deep trouble with the grocery trade over some of our packaging materials. When we said contains no GMOs. We were approached by the grocery council of Canada and said, we're going to boycott you unless you take this off your, off your bags. And that became a big issue in the press, but the press tended to take our side because they say, why is Goliath picking on this little tiny company? You know,

2 (1h 2m 42s):
But, so here's, here's my question, right? If you were in a grocery store in 1995, and you had an option between Kellogg's corn flakes and a nature's path, corn flakes, which were, I have to assume significantly more expensive cause your, the, what you were selling was a, was a different quality. Organic natural is going to be more expensive. If the consumer didn't fully understand what they were getting, how, how are you making the case to them that they should go for yours?

4 (1h 3m 12s):
I think there was a kind of an awakening happening in north America where people began to become concerned about preservatives and packaging, the preservatives in the product, they were concerned about the cancerous effects of pesticides. And so, you know, our products were grown without any of these chemicals. I was interviewed by CBC way back in 1971 in our store. And the guy asked me, when do you think this organic movement is going? I said, it's going to be like a tidal wave is going to wash over everything. And it has happened. Organics has now become mainstream, and it's not so unique anymore, but in those days it was unique and people were willing to try something unique as long as it tasted.

4 (1h 3m 55s):
Good.

2 (1h 3m 57s):
All right. So you start to really kind of make inroads into, into the supermarkets. And meantime, by the late nineties, I guess you are in a sense kind of positioned. And we have conversations with other natural brands, you know, natural products, like seventh generation cleaning products. They were in a similar place in late nineties where they started to ride the whole foods wave because whole foods just went on a tear started kind of by buying a Mrs. <inaudible> pred and circus, and really expanding across the us. And it just, the whole category of, of the natural organic foods just exploded.

2 (1h 4m 38s):
What was whole foods? It must've been really significant to your, to your growth.

4 (1h 4m 44s):
Yes. Whole foods has always been one of our best clients, our best customers, but we also sell to Costco and Kroger and all the rest of them. Sometimes the natural food store said, well, why don't you just sell to us? Why do you sell to the supermarkets? And I said, because we want our product to get everywhere.

2 (1h 4m 60s):
And presumably clearly you didn't want to just be for like, you know, crunchy, granola, eating people. You also wanna appeal to families and kids, which is, which is, it helps explain why of gorilla munch and koala crisps and the, you know, the other kids sort of focus brands. You do use cane sugar. And, and, and I'm not saying it's bad. I'm just saying that now, nowadays, people are kind of looking at cane sugar and there's, you know, some people are moving towards coconut sugar or

4 (1h 5m 32s):
<inaudible> of that too. We also make cereals for every particular category that you have, people, people have want no sugar at all, or they want to have Monkfruit or they want to have coconut sugar or a Gavi, a fruit juice or fruit juice. Yeah. And now that the move has gone to Pete where people say, I don't want any sugar in my cereal. And we did, we did reduce one of our most popular cereals. We reduced the sugar level and the sales drop right

2 (1h 6m 1s):
Off

4 (1h 6m 2s):
That was called optimum optimum.

2 (1h 6m 4s):
Oh. And so the sales dropped off when you reduced the sugar. Wow. So what'd you do yet to restore it to the level of sugar? Yes.

4 (1h 6m 10s):
Well, we had to restore it a bit, but not, not to the previous level. And the sales did bounce back a little bit, but you have to be careful, you know, if you take a product that people are used to and love it, and you suddenly drastically change it, you took all the sugar out of it and it suddenly doesn't taste anymore. And then people will say, well, this is what I want, but, but their actions speak differently. So one has to be very cautious in making too radical, a change in a product. So we decided to launch a separate category of cereals that are either low sugar and no sugar so that we didn't change the old, popular ones.

2 (1h 6m 50s):
So here, here's what I'm wondering as you, you were not the only natural cereal brand out there, you know, by the late nineties,

4 (1h 6m 58s):
Unfortunately.

2 (1h 6m 59s):
Right. And it wasn't that that's the way the world is. They're always going to be competitors and you're clearly doing well. And there's people who like gorilla munch and you know, these different brands and flakes, but there are other brands that come out, you know, Cascadian farms and Muir, Glen and others. And, and, but I'm not asking you to critique their product or say, tell me why yours is better. What I'm trying to understand is what, how are you able to compete? How are you able to get the word out when you didn't presumably have a huge marketing budget? How did you manage to get people to know and to buy your products? Was it just word of mouth? Was it, or was it more sort of deliberate, intentional strategy?

4 (1h 7m 40s):
It was, we always engage in guerrilla marketing. I think it was mostly word of mouth. And we used our packaging to get our message out as well.

2 (1h 7m 49s):
Yes. Your packaging is really, I mean, I can remember. I don't remember exactly when, but for as long as I can remember seeing that big Panda face or gorilla face on the box or the koala, it jumps out at you, the gorilla in the jungle and you're like, oh, I want to eat that cereal. Or the gorilla's eating the cereal. I won't eat this. You're the gorilla's eating. Right.

6 (1h 8m 12s):
We have rhinos to rhino cereal.

2 (1h 8m 14s):
Yeah. How important was packaging and product design, do you think to, to your success?

4 (1h 8m 20s):
I think, I think it, whether it's us or it's a startup, the packaging is very, very critical. It's your, maybe your only means of getting attention on, on a very crowded supermarket shelves, the

6 (1h 8m 34s):
Best real estate on a

2 (1h 8m 35s):
Shelf. Yeah. Yeah.

4 (1h 8m 37s):
In fact, it's the most expensive real estate in the world. That's the, that's the supermarket shelf. Yeah.

2 (1h 8m 42s):
But part of your packaging certainly early on was just the window, just a clear window that allowed you to see the product inside.

4 (1h 8m 49s):
It can be that, and or it like with our equal packets, a transparent bag, but also we also sell in boxes too. So, but what we did with our boxes, we reduced the size. We took a huge gamble on reducing our billboard by shrinking the box, but not shrinking the ingredients inside.

2 (1h 9m 8s):
So the amount of cereal was the same, but the size of the box was different.

4 (1h 9m 11s):
That's right.

2 (1h 9m 12s):
Why did you do that?

4 (1h 9m 14s):
We did it because we felt the sustainability, we, for so many reasons. And, and we took a big gamble because everybody else was using big boxes, big faces with a lot of empty bag inside,

2 (1h 9m 28s):
Get a small little bag of cereal in your China

4 (1h 9m 31s):
Huge box. Yeah.

2 (1h 9m 32s):
Right. So you are in this crowded marketplace for breakfast. Cereal is, it is kind of insane, right? How crowded that market is.

4 (1h 9m 43s):
It must be the most competitive category out there, period. I must

2 (1h 9m 46s):
Be. And also over time you had to expand beyond cereals, right? I mean, today you're doing pastry, like toaster pastries, like, you know, sort of like organic pop tarts and frozen waffles and tortilla chips. And, and I mean, how important was it to, when did you start to understand that you really had to expand your product lines and you got hunting 150 plus different products today, you know, when did it, when was it clear to you that in order to thrive, you had to do,

4 (1h 10m 18s):
Yeah. It's a lot more fun to grow than to shrink. Yeah. And sure. And either you grow in the market or you start to die, there's no, in-between, there's no static in the marketplace.

2 (1h 10m 30s):
What's a product that you, you guys got really excited about and went in, full on and it turned out to just be a flop and you lost money on it.

4 (1h 10m 38s):
Oh, I can. There's a whole bunch of those.

2 (1h 10m 41s):
Tell me, let's start. Tell me, tell me one,

4 (1h 10m 43s):
We made a beautiful breakfast biscuit and it was in the shape of our logo

2 (1h 10m 47s):
Was supposed to pick a grab and go breakfast in a cookie form. Right. So some companies make those like Belvita and some of these brands right there,

4 (1h 10m 56s):
Like an organic Belvita and it was tasted good. Excellent. But we could not make it inexpensive enough for the market to take hold of it. Yeah. The price was so much higher. Our cost was so much higher than Belvita that people said, well, the heck with it, I'm just going to go buy the cheaper one. So that was a, that a flop. But you, you got to throw things at the Walnut. Everything's going to stay.

2 (1h 11m 18s):
Yeah. But you also, the bigger you grow, the more cushion you have to fail, which is

6 (1h 11m 23s):
Great to some extent

4 (1h 11m 24s):
And the bigger you are, the more costly or your, or your failures, but that doesn't mean you should ever stop. We have a big R and D team and they're always coming up with new ideas and concepts. However, I must say that during COVID the buyers out, there are not quite so interested in new products. They, they, they just want to get stock of the products that you, that you have been delivering to them over the past

2 (1h 11m 49s):
In terms of leadership. Right. How did you, I mean, rotten, clearly you came in with a plan to kind of create systems and organization and to clean up the books and to professionalize separation. And so w would you sort of describe yourself at the time in the nineties and even beyond, as like the chief operating officer and Aaron, you were the chief executive officer or, or not, is that not quite right?

4 (1h 12m 19s):
That I think that's a pretty accurate summation. However, about three years ago, I decided to step down as the CEO and retina stepped up as the CEO

6 (1h 12m 29s):
At you see, for me, the titles were not important and are not important. Yeah. For me, what was, what was important and is important, the company grows, survive and be a force not only in business, but also in sustainability and social responsibility.

2 (1h 12m 50s):
I mean it, with all due respect, Aaron, cause you are, you have a vision here, but retina really is the brains of this operation. I'm I know I'm supposed to be objective here, but I, you know, right.

4 (1h 13m 3s):
Going over the details of our past, I had forgotten how many mistakes I had made in business. And, and I am humbled by the failures and the successes. Both.

2 (1h 13m 17s):
Yeah.

6 (1h 13m 17s):
Oh, Aaron is a visionary definitely. And be a very grateful because of him, nature spat exists.

4 (1h 13m 26s):
And because of her nature's path exists, she's the yin to my yang. You know, she is, she's always there. Although we argue and we don't always see eye to eye, we have this vision for the business and for the family and we have love for each other.

2 (1h 13m 44s):
How, how did the two of you here you are, and we're having this great conversation and you're both so nice and lovely. And, and I love your relationship. It's such a, it's a such a model, but, but let's be honest. There's no such thing as a perfect relationship. And some of us are lucky to get great partners and we've got, but we fight and we argue of tension, conflict. I mean, w what was an example where you did not see eye to eye on how to operate this company.

4 (1h 14m 12s):
Right. And you've got a better memory for these.

6 (1h 14m 15s):
I can tell you in the beginning, when I was sitting on the production floor, the way people are behaving and working people who really don't want to work, I just said, Aaron, what did you do? That's the worst job you have given me, but I will do it. So, so

2 (1h 14m 33s):
Does that mean you have to fire people?

4 (1h 14m 36s):
If she wants somebody to go, she gets me to do it.

6 (1h 14m 38s):
I used to get him to do it because it's very hard,

4 (1h 14m 43s):
But she won't come to work that day.

2 (1h 14m 45s):
But in, in, in sounds like in general, you more or less each had your, your areas that you focused on and, and that you didn't really have too many drag down fights. Is that fair to say it?

4 (1h 14m 58s):
No, no, no, no, no. We didn't. It was, as long as we had our separate offices, you know, and I would focus on sales, marketing and growing the business. And she'd be focusing on the backend, working with the people she was, retina is very empathetic. She's extremely good with people. People love her. They call her the soul of the company. They call her mama Ratna. And, you know, I was, it was a little bit like Don Quixote, you know, tilting at windmills.

6 (1h 15m 27s):
And sometimes

4 (1h 15m 29s):
Some nights she had to reign me in because I, sometimes I forget that advice, you know, only expand to the extent you can personally control it. And sometimes I get carried away and I need to get reeled back in.

6 (1h 15m 41s):
I can tell you, I used to threaten him by saying, I'm not going to sign any, check you, go ahead and do what you want to do.

2 (1h 15m 50s):
So retina, you controlled the PR the purse strings. Like if he wanted to make a purchase, you had to sign, you were the finance person.

6 (1h 15m 56s):
He has to justify it. Why? Because it was not going to be like livestream.

4 (1h 16m 2s):
And almost every time she would say no, the old, even though she later on say, well, I think that's a good idea. You should go ahead and do it. Yeah. But she, at the beginning, she'd always say no. And some things she said, no, we're all the way through. And they never, they never happened.

2 (1h 16m 17s):
I want to ask you about something that, you know, naturally would, would start to happen in the organic foods business, which is some of these brands became huge, almost like multinationals. And then some of the giant brands, general mills and Kellogg's and Kraft, they understood that there was a lot of money to be made in natural, organic, and continue to do so. And they're buying up and have bought up a lot of these smaller brands because it's good for their brand. I have to imagine you start to get approached as you're, you know, you grew to a pretty big company, a hundred, but by 2010, a hundred employees, you know, your revenues, you know, in the hundreds of millions of dollars, did you start to get approached by some of the big companies to sell?

4 (1h 17m 2s):
We were getting an average of one a week,

2 (1h 17m 5s):
One a week. And this is like, what big companies, but also like private equity and venture firms things. And did anybody ever put money on the table or, or make an offer with real money and say like, we'll give you X dollars, X number of dollars to sell to us. Anybody ever say that to you?

6 (1h 17m 24s):
Not directly, but we are invited at Kraft's headquarters offered a delicious vegetarian meal,

2 (1h 17m 31s):
Was a Mac and cheese

6 (1h 17m 36s):
Made by chef. The only

2 (1h 17m 38s):
Person to stop.

4 (1h 17m 39s):
They would, they would have wined and dined us if they, if, if we would have drank their booze or eat in there, whatever. But we didn't. We talked with the craft people and they would have given us an offer that would have made our head spin. And at that time, at that time,

6 (1h 17m 55s):
And then when one of the large company, I won't mention it. Viewer at PWC offices, they were so persistent. They wanted to talk to us. They knew many things about us. They even knew ourselves. And when we were taking the elevator, I said to Aaron, I said, Aaron, we will have quite a few million dollars, but what are we going to leave to our children, bunch of money to spoil them? Why don't we leave them in mission and in business for the mission at that time, we both agreed. And we cut our conversation and our communication with that company.

2 (1h 18m 39s):
So here, here, here's the thing. So it's, it's totally admirable. We've had companies on, on the show that have the same position, right. That do not want to sell. And we've had companies that have sold including to Kellogg's and general mills, and many of those brands continue to operate as they did before. They're just, you know, in the argument that the founders have made is look, if Kellogg is going to scale our brand and bring it to an even bigger audience, we're, we're fine with that. I mean, it is true. You could probably walk away with hundreds of millions of dollars, maybe more if you sold nature's path. But at the same time, it sounds like what you're saying is we're just not as long as a world alive Aaron and retina, we will not entertain that.

2 (1h 19m 24s):
We rule that out

4 (1h 19m 26s):
Or kids also feel the same way,

6 (1h 19m 28s):
But if they feel differently, it's, it's, it's there.

2 (1h 19m 31s):
It's there call

4 (1h 19m 32s):
You. You say that things don't change much when a company changes, but I know, I know personally, some of the people who have sold out and they really regretted it because they felt that after

2 (1h 19m 44s):
Right

4 (1h 19m 44s):
After they sold out, they felt that the soul was gutted out of the company.

2 (1h 19m 49s):
Yeah. And it's not just about money. I mean, you've got, I think you've got, you've got a close to a thousand employees now between your all your right. Your different factories. And it's about right.

4 (1h 19m 58s):
A little under

6 (1h 19m 60s):
800,

2 (1h 20m 1s):
800 out of people. And that, that's a lot of people that, you know, and you know, their kids and, you know, they're, you know, you've been part of our lives. So it's not just about selling and making money. It's like, you're giving up all of that too. And that that's worse. That's sort of a lot, I think most of your kids, maybe all of your kids are involved in the company.

4 (1h 20m 24s):
Two of them are, are directly. One is indirectly and up to now, we've had four of our grandchildren have also come in as interns to work in the company.

2 (1h 20m 34s):
Hmm. And presumably, eventually one of your kids, if they want we'll, we'll take over.

4 (1h 20m 42s):
Yes. That's yes. That, that plan is as, is crystallizing as we speak.

2 (1h 20m 47s):
So when you think about the journey you took Aaron, you, you know, you didn't finish high school, you know, and, and you didn't, you, you didn't necessarily have a clear path, but you clearly found a calling and of course built an incredibly successful business. Right. And I, you, you, you had no idea when you were 18, 19 years old, that your future would be in Canada. I mean, your, your life was in India, but this is, this is the way your life could have turned out. When you think about all that you, you have built together, how much do you think that has to do with how hard you worked and, and your skills and how much do you think has to do with just luck and fate?

4 (1h 21m 28s):
Well, there's an old saying, the harder I work, the luckier I get, that's true to a certain extent, but I would say fate and luck also play their part, but effort cannot be underrated.

6 (1h 21m 41s):
We are very grateful that we are focused and single-minded whatever we did. And especially individually, but I did, I was determined. I have to go early in the morning. If it was six o'clock shift, I should be there five 30, if I'm needed to late 30. So be it, it's hard work. It's a combination of all those things. It's not only one single formula effort, common sense, faith. And I will also add great

2 (1h 22m 21s):
That's right now. And Erin Stevens co-founders nature's path. By the way, when their son Arjun got married back in 2010, it actually inspired a whole new flavor of cereal. The wedding couple made a special granola loaded with berries and coconut and chocolate gave it out to their guests as kind of a party favor. And people loved it so much that they decided to turn it into a product and they called it love crunch. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you want to contact the team, our email address is H I B T N I D. Dot wondery.com. If you want to follow us on Twitter, our account is at how it built this in mind is at guy rise, Instagram I'm at guide dot Ross.

2 (1h 23m 4s):
This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by REM teen era, Louie. It was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Claremore Ashima. Our production staff also includes a link coats. John Isabella, Liz Metzker, Carrie Thompson, Catherine cipher, Alex Chung, Christmas INI Sam Paulson, Carla <inaudible> and Josh lash. I'm guy Roz. And you've been listening to how I built this. Hey, everyone. So I want to make sure you know, all of the different ways you can listen to how I built this.

2 (1h 23m 47s):
As you probably know, you can follow the show on Amazon music, apple podcasts, or wherever you're listening right now, but a one let you know that you can actually listen to the next episode of how I built this today. One week early on Amazon music, you can also listen to it early and ad free by subscribing to Wondery plus an apple podcasts or on the Wondery app. Please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded. And another way to support the show is by filling out a survey at wondery.com/survey. And thanks

Wondery: Business Wars (1h 24m 22s):
In business competition is the key to success. Every product you own from the shoes on your feet. So the phone in your hands got there because of cutthroat business decisions. And one reason podcast business wars brings you stories about the most well-known in the world and how the decisions they make shape, what you buy and how you live with over 50 seasons to choose from. You'll hear about the fight for your feet, with Nike versus Adidas, the battle to control the smartphone market with iPhone versus Blackberry or their new season. That's covering the world of ice cream, Haagen DAAs versus Ben. And Jerry's tells the story of these two legendary American brands that have spent decades trying to conquer the global ice cream market. Each season of business wars is entertaining, fun, eyeopening, and will help you understand a little bit more about the world around you. Listen to business wars on Amazon music, apple podcasts, or wherever you get your podcasts. Listen, one week early and add free by joining one repless in apple podcasts or the wonder.