0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Adyen Adyen is the payments platform that adapts with your business. So you can accept all kinds of payments with a one single integration, Adyen, business, not boundaries, visit a D Y E n.com/ NPR.

1 (22s):
Well, I started to make some things and I would put them in the store to see how they would do, and they would do really well. And so the majority of the stock slowly became my designs and I had a full page and Vogue, and I had a good size page and bizarre, and that was beyond belief because I thought somebody is going to find me out. I don't know what I'm doing. Yeah. And I have a full page and invoke and bizarre. This is nuts. Like I don't have a clue

2 (1m 10s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Raz. And on the show today, how Norma Kamali you built a 50 year career around hot pants, sleeping bag coats, and a Farah Fawcett swimsuit and helped usher in the era of American fashion designer, starting a brand and then scaling it fast. His heart, the glass company, Warby Parker was founded in 2010 and within five years, it was a valued at over a billion dollars.

2 (1m 60s):
The suitcase maker away was launched in 2015 and by 2019 investors valued if at $1.4 billion, both incredible achievements and both incredibly rare achievements, but what's just as hard, maybe even harder is to build a brand that endures that lasts a long time. Think Dell computers in Southwest airlines, or even Starbucks and Burton, snowboards, all stories we've told on the show. And this raises a question. What does it take to last, to build something that can withstand changes and culture or in technology or in lifestyle?

2 (2m 45s):
Well, in many ways, our story Today answers that question because fashion designer Norma, Kamali figured it out. She's been able to build a brand that your mom might've worn and that you'd want to wear too. She is probably best known for creating this sleeping bag coat, but also helping to popularize hot pants, shoulder pads for women, the all-in-one dress, and for designing the iconic red bathing suit made famous by supermodel. Farah a faucet, a peace that is actually in the permanent collection at the Smithsonian museum in Washington, DC. But this isn't just a story about someone with incredible staying power is a fashion designer.

2 (3m 27s):
This is you could argue the story of modern American fashion design because back before say the 1960s design for the most part happened in Europe to wear something fancy, usually meant wearing air mez or Chanel or a Christian Dior, not gonna care and a Ralph Lauren or Calvin Klein. And Norma Kamali was in the Vanguard of young designers who changed all of that. She grew up in the 1950s in Manhattan, in an immigrant neighborhood called Yorkville. Her mother was Lebanese and her father was Basque when Norma was little, her parents split up. And when she was 13, both her father and her stepfather died.

2 (4m 11s):
So Norma was mainly raised by her mom who according to Norma was an incredibly creative person.

1 (4m 19s):
My mother always had an easel with oil paints were, she was in the middle of an oil painting while she was cooking some incredible dish that she just created. She made costumes for the plays that we had in the neighborhood for all the kids, but beautiful research costumes. And so I thought that that's what everybody does. And so I was drawing very early. I was doing creative things from, for as long as I can remember, and it was a great satisfaction for me.

2 (5m 1s):
Okay. And did you have easels and canvases all over your house and were you constantly painting?

1 (5m 7s):
Actually, no, because the house was about two feet by three feet. So they're, there was just enough space, let's say really tiny space. So in this neighborhood we had a community house that we would go to after school. And that's where I did a lot of painting. And then I enjoyed sitting by the river and sketching. It was such a happy place to just see a beautiful view and being able to sketch it.

2 (5m 42s):
Hmm. But, but when it came time to go to college, you didn't go to art school instead you wound up getting a scholarship to fit, which is the fashion Institute of technology. Right?

1 (5m 55s):
Yeah. I decided On fit because my mother was very clear that she didn't think painting was actually going to help me pay the rent. Cause she wanted me to know that she was not going to help me pay the rent. So I went to fit to see where that would take me. But you have to know that I hated fashion because it was mad men time. Right. That girdles, garter belts, home bras, the whole thing, and everything was matching.

2 (6m 34s):
It was the early, this was like the early sixties.

1 (6m 36s):
Yeah. Yeah. And I did not like that at all. I found it very restricting and I was obsessed with vintage films from the thirties and forties. So I was already going into these sort of secondhand stores. They weren't called vintage stores at the time and I would find these clothes and wear them. And I was just off the grid. Like nobody got me and I didn't study fashion. I didn't study pattern-making I studied fashion illustration with an a, and this was at the time there were actual jobs that you could get in fashion illustration now.

1 (7m 23s):
I mean, people probably don't even know what that means as far as an advertising style.

2 (7m 31s):
So, so you studied fashion illustration, which is basically drawing outfits

1 (7m 37s):
On model and yeah. And I was able to really study anatomy in a big way. I had a, I used to take a lot of courses on anatomy outside of fit. And from that, I really understanding the body, the movement of the body, the muscle of the bone. Oh. And the skin over. So it, it all comes together. Yeah. And yeah.

2 (8m 3s):
Were you an ambitious student, did you think I'm going to, I'm going to do this and then I'm going to become a fashion designer. I'm going to make it a name for myself.

1 (8m 11s):
No, I'm first of all, let's put this in perspective of the early sixties, if it wasn't until the seventies, that being a designer in a design house was an American concept. Right? So the jobs that you would get in the sixties would be manufacturers who knocked off European fashion. Even the department stores at the time would copy the collections and put them under their store brand. So if you look at vintage clothes, you'll see in a lot of the labels that the store that carried them, not necessarily the manufacturer or the designer, because that was the way it was done.

1 (9m 0s):
So the store was really the brand. And I want to add to that women in the workplace in the sixties think mad men. Again, most of the women were secretaries assistants had those kinds of jobs. So I just thought if I can get a fashion illustration job at a company or at a newspaper or a magazine, that would be fine. I would be happy with that. And so my first job interview was in the garment center at a manufacturer.

1 (9m 40s):
Unfortunately it was a difficult experience. It was an objectifying experience when you went in for an interview. Yeah. So I, I was very happy with my portfolio. I felt very good about it. I is, is your portfolio of all of your illustrations? Yes. Yeah. So I was so excited to be graduating and, you know, hopefully at this job and I walk in and he's got his feet up on his desk, he was eating a tuna sandwich and he tells me to put my portfolio down.

1 (10m 24s):
I was wearing a little black dress below my knee, low pumps. My hair was back in a bun. It was a very low key job. And he said to me, come here and turn around. And for me, and I was just, there was this white noise. And I thought, what, what does that mean? What he, and he is the power in the room. And I hear my mother's voice saying, you better get this job. You better get a job. And so I turned around and I just was so embarrassed and humiliated. And I ran out of the office.

1 (11m 4s):
I grabbed my portfolio and I remember my portfolio tearing up my stockings and my, and I'm a clip clopping on my pumps and I'm feeling and crying and so devastated. So when I got home, my mother said, well, did you get the job? And I said, no, I didn't get it. And I got a New York times, which is where they had a big section for jobs that were available. And I saw a job at an airline. And at the time Pan-Am TWA, all of these airlines were the Apple have the time, right.

1 (11m 46s):
That goes with a, those are the jobs on it. And so I, of course didn't want to be a stewardess and I had zero office skills, but I went for the job because I thought I want to travel. That's what I want to do. I want to see the world. I don't want to do this. And so I went for the job and shockingly, I got it. And the next thing I know, I'm working at a UNIVAC computer in the sixties besides education airlines were the first ones to actually commercially use computers.

3 (12m 26s):
And just to, just to add, and so what was your w when you were hired by, by Northwest

1 (12m 32s):
Northwest orient airlines in the office at Penn Plaza. Yeah. And

3 (12m 38s):
As a, as, as what was your official

1 (12m 40s):
Job? So I was a reservations specialist and basically a clerk. And I worked in this big room with desks all in a row facing a big glassed in walled office. And every single call was monitored and people were in there with headphones, listening to how we handle our,

3 (13m 9s):
So people call up and, and like, they don't want to book a ticket. Is that you would be the person that they talk to.

1 (13m 13s):
Right. I might, I was agent 10 Oh six. That was nice. I still remember. And it was Northwest orient airlines. May I help you? I mean, it, it still in my, you know,

3 (13m 26s):
Okay. So when you worked for Northwest orient airlines, which became, eventually became a Northwestern and I was no longer exists for our drug was written to a merger Delta, did you get a discount on On on travel?

1 (13m 39s):
Yes. And that was the reason I wanted to work at an airline. So the discount to travel round trip to London was $29. Wow.

3 (13m 51s):
From New York to London for 29 bucks.

1 (13m 53s):
Yes, sir. And I, every weekend I would leave Thursday night and to come back Monday. Wow. And

3 (14m 0s):
Yeah, that was, that was like the glamour, the height of glamour travel. Yeah.

1 (14m 5s):
And everybody dressed to

3 (14m 7s):
Travel. Yeah. So you were going back and forth to London in the, in the mid sixties and just hanging out and London.

1 (14m 15s):
So my first trip, I did a stop first in Paris. I met my girlfriend in Paris that when it was, it fit with me and we met in the lobby of her hotel and I was waiting for her. And at the same time, there was a rock group from London in the lobby. And so they thought I was French and they were talking about me. And I was really trying not to devolve that. I knew that they were talking about it. And so my friend Betsy came and of course we see other and we're screaming and they started laughing and they said, Oh, so you are in American.

1 (14m 57s):
And it was the Spencer Davis group. I don't know if you know who they are, you know, the, the song, I'm a man. I'm a man. Yes, I am.

2 (15m 7s):
Oh yeah, that's it.

1 (15m 9s):
And they said, when you guys come back to London, there's a club called the speakeasy and we'll get you in. So we said, sure. And when we got back to London, we of course went to the speakeasy on Margaret street. And this was this club, this private club were all of the rock people. The, everybody I got to meet Jimmy Hendricks and everybody out there.

2 (15m 40s):
I really like in the get, go out into the scene, like this is like swinging sixties, Carnaby street. London

1 (15m 46s):
Jeff back. Yeah. Jeff Beck was a really good friend. And then, and at this club, I met these two guys who really nice. And one of them said, you're going to really get along with my girlfriend really well tomorrow come meet us at our shop. And so they had a shop and the stones were partners with them in the shop where it was the shop on Kings road. It was a friend of mine at the airlines suggested I stay out at a boarding house off Kings road for $6 a night. So I did. And so this was when Kings road was all gray, except for a few stores that just burst color up the walls outside and dandies, which was the name of the shop was one of those stores.

1 (16m 39s):
And what did the store sell? They had men's clothes, women's clothes. They had a motorcycle in the store and a car engine. And, and I actually have, I'm a photo of a four of us outside on Kings road. Perry match came and did a color, a double page spread of all of us dressed in the clothes from Dan D and its historical. It looks like it's a costume party, but it was, it, it wasn't a costume party. It was what we were really wearing. And the clothes were great.

2 (17m 14s):
And by, by the way, this is a time if I'm not mistaken, when London was like, it was a center like the cultural center of all of the Western world, of course, you know, there were massive like student demonstrations where begin at the beginning in a, in New York city, in, in Paris, but like culturally right. London was Carnaby street and the stones and the Beatles and, and, and people were wearing things that you were not seeing in New York. Right.

1 (17m 42s):
Completely different. I connected right away with it. I felt that that was where my soul was. I was comfortable with it. So when I talk about London being gray, you think of these Tweed coats and the hats great London and this color bursting literally bursting. And the music, a layering out of the store's, it was art in expression in every way that you could think of film music fashioned, for sure. So much had just flipped and went against the grain of anything that had happened before.

1 (18m 25s):
So when I would come back from London, with my skirt on a very short, many, nobody had been wearing mini skirts before that. So when I came back and I would walk in the street with a mini skirt cars, with screech to a halt, it was shocking. And people would say the most ridiculous things. Like, you know, the, either that you are a prostitute or what have you, but the shock of showing your knees,

3 (18m 58s):
And that was completely like radical when you would come back to that.

1 (19m 1s):
York radical, radical,

3 (19m 7s):
I guess, around this time, U this is sort of the mid, mid sixties. You met a guy named Eddie Kamali, who would go on to be your husband. How did you meet him?

1 (19m 21s):
His name was Mohammed Hossein Kamali and his spoken name was <inaudible> or, and some of his friends would call him Eddie and I love to dance. And there was a club that opened that was a very small club. And it turned out that I knew the DJ and he was like, Oh my I'm so glad you came. And he said, they're going to have dance contests here. And I think you should enter the dance contest. And I was like, I don't know. And he said, yeah. And I know a guy that's a really good dancer that you should dance with. And they, they have a prize money that you could When.

1 (20m 4s):
So he introduced me to Eddie Kamali for sure. And of course we won the dance contest. So that in itself is enough reason to get married at 19,

3 (20m 16s):
Oh God. Oh God. Norma my mom also got married at 19, which was not unusual at the time. And so 19 years old and I'm cause I'm thinking normal, what are you thinking? But that was right. So you were 19, you're married. So when you, so will you and Eddie were married when all, when you were going back and forth to London and it, was he coming in with you or are you going

1 (20m 39s):
No, he was, he was a student here. He was studying economics. He was one of a flood of Iranian that came during the Shah's time. Yeah. So I would go to London and it was pretty early on that I started to bring back clothes for friends of mine who were saying, Oh, you've got to get me this, that isn't it. And so I would bring back these little dresses from, you know, a BCBA and bust up and all those shops in the, in the garment bag. And I got those with the sort of expandable sides. And I literally, it would be like, I was carrying a body through my carry it.

3 (21m 23s):
Yeah. And you were just packing your suitcase and bringing stuff back. So I have to pay for shipping costs.

1 (21m 28s):
I mean, I just didn't know better that you should. I mean, I, it was just like, Oh, that sounds good. And I just did it and I did that for very, I mean, four years.

3 (21m 40s):
And you're still working for the airline, right?

1 (21m 43s):
Yes. Working for the elephants and bringing clothes back. Yeah.

3 (21m 47s):
This is around like 1968, I guess. And that year you would go onto open a, a store selling clothes, but how did you connect the dots? I mean, you're obviously bringing clothes back for friends, but at what point did you say, you know what, I should actually open a shop and sell this stuff?

1 (22m 6s):
Well, it was obvious to me that more and more people were asking me to bring clothes back in. And I thought, I don't know, maybe this is maybe this is a good idea. And having a shop wood sort of solidify what I'm doing, it would be, you know, make it a half a purpose, not to just be sort of like a cattle car coming back and forth with clothes. And the, the good news was because Eddie was a student. He would have time off that he could work in the store and sell.

1 (22m 46s):
And he was great at selling very charming. And while I was at the airlines, he was selling the clothes in the store.

3 (22m 55s):
I mean, this is 1968, so it's not New York Today cause New York real estate Today is it, it's almost impossible for the average person and just rent a place in New York. But how realistic, I mean, you were a reservations clerk. How were you able to rent a space in New York city? Was it cheaper? Was it just cheap?

1 (23m 12s):
Well, it was $285 a month. It was a basement. It was literally nine by 16. I was in on East 50.

3 (23m 23s):
The third street This is 53rd between, between what streets? Second and third. It's a bit for a second and third. Okay. So this is, so this was mid town, but by the way, what did, did, did anybody in, in, in your office know that you had to shop selling fashion?

1 (23m 37s):
Mmm, that's a good question. I, I kept at a secret, but the interesting thing was there were very strict rules on a dress code at all. The airlines, very strict, not uniforms, but you had to wear a nude stockings, low heeled shoes. And I took advantage of the fact that I was really good at my job. And I had a feeling of, it would not get fired if I wore, say a wig or a boa around my neck.

3 (24m 15s):
So you just said that it was like a conservative environment. So how were you able to where a boa or a wig?

1 (24m 21s):
It, it happened over a period of time and I think they sort of got used to it and I never got sent home. People would get sent home, but I was really good at selling tours towards some of the orient. I mean, I really made some big bucks for them and I learned, I have to say, I learned how to sell through that job. I learned how I learned service sails. It was a great learning experience for me.

3 (24m 51s):
All right. So U this store, I'm assuming when you opened it up, there was nothing like it because it was you're selling clothing for me.

1 (24m 60s):
London yeah. And so people looked at shopping as sort of a sport or a sort of a, a thing that you did. So couples would get dressed to go shopping and word would get out. It would almost be like going to art galleries, right. Where people want to go see what's going on. And couples of all ages, all types of people would come and shop. And a lot of the fashion magazines, a lot of the stores, you know, a big department stores would come to see what we were doing, but we sold things to people of all ages.

1 (25m 43s):
I mean, I still have people who are in their eighties now who were telling me they wore my clothes. And I think it's so funny. Here's somebody who's 86 who is telling me that she wore my clothes and I was like, that's pretty fab. That's really good, by the way, what was the store called? Kamali

3 (26m 3s):
Kamali okay. And Eddie, was he like, did he, because he came to study economics, but did he prove to be actually a pretty good sales salesperson?

1 (26m 13s):
First of all, he was incredibly handsome and incredibly charming. And he left Iran when he was 11. And I was in boarding schools in London outside of London until he came here to go to college.

3 (26m 31s):
So he had that British accent that, yeah.

1 (26m 33s):
So he, yeah, so he charmed everybody that came in the, a store and then he would say, I would say to him, Eddie, I think this is way too much money to charge for this. And he would say, I'm going to sell it. You'll see, I'll sell it. And I was like, no. And he was, so then I just thought, well, I don't know what I'm talking about. So I'm just going to be,

2 (26m 59s):
So he was mainly handling the business side and you were kind of handling the creative side. What was that? Is it fair to say? Yeah,

1 (27m 5s):
But you asked me before, did anybody know at Northwest if I had this company and nobody did until the time magazine decided to do a story on snake skin and how snakeskin was becoming the accessory or whatever. And I had snakeskin wallpaper in the store and I was making, at that point, I started to make some things and I was making snakeskin fasts and shirts and stuff like that. And so they came to 53rd street and they photographed at a, an MI in some snake skin in front of our store.

1 (27m 51s):
And it got into time magazine. And one day this buzzer starts going off from behind the glass wall at the front. And Norma, Kamali come to the front. And so on.

2 (28m 7s):
This is in the, in the, in the, in like the big cavernous room at Northwest orient. Okay.

1 (28m 12s):
So I go out walking up and they take me into a room and they open the time magazine and they slap it down and said, what is this? And I said, Oh, wow. I didn't even see it myself. Like, wow. I, I was so excited that and scared at the same time, I didn't know how to react. And they said they frowned on that. And I said, I understand. And

2 (28m 42s):
Then the fact that you had a business.

1 (28m 45s):
Yeah. But I realized than also that this was a time that, that I, it was, it was getting very hard to do both. And they just had to make a decision. So I found it and I didn't, they didn't push me out. But in a few months after that, I decided it was time to go

2 (29m 5s):
Focus on the butt now. But now you lose your, your, your cheap flight to London to bring, be able to bring this stuff back. Right. But it sounds like at this point you're already, already designing and selling some of your own pieces.

1 (29m 19s):
Yeah. I started to make some things and my mother helped me because as I told you before, she was great. She made costumes and beautiful clothes, and I really didn't know how to sell. I didn't know how to make a pattern. I didn't have any of those skills, but my mother and I, through my growing up would work together where it say, mom, can you make these pants? I want them to do this, this and this. And she would make them until she stopped making things that she didn't think we're good for us, for me to wear. So she didn't want to make them, but we did do a lot together before this.

1 (30m 3s):
So I asked her to help me put together some of my new ideas and that's how I started it. And so we started to do some things together and I would put them in the store to see how they would do, and they would do really well. And what were you designing? I don't know if there is a term for what the clothing was at that time, to be honest, they were very creative, mainly one of a kind pieces and crafted. I did a lot of snakeskin clothing.

1 (30m 46s):
I did a lot of suede and doeskin hand whip, stitch skirts with different shapes and flares. I did the very first swayed skin skirt that I made. I hand whipped stitched. You know, you just take a whole puncher and you punch everywhere. And then you stitch it together with strips of suede. And I remember making that skirt, I put my heart and soul into it and I was so proud of it. And of course, Eddie sold it for some, whatever, ridiculous amount of money I thought. And so I started to accumulate the majority of the stock slowly became my designs.

1 (31m 32s):
And in a very short time after the clothing was primarily mine, I had a full page and Vogue and I had a good size page and bizarre. And that was beyond belief because I thought somebody is going to find me out. I don't know what I'm doing. Like I don't have a clue and I have a full page and in Vogue and bizarre, this is not

4 (32m 6s):
When we come back. And just a moment How, Norma found the best person you could possibly imagine to narrate her first fashion show a then unknown that Midler and have the ceiling eventually came down literally and figuratively on her clothing store. So stay with us. I'm Guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

3 (32m 40s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, bank of America. You finally decided to learn how to ice skate. So you ordered the essentials. Every ice skater needs a pair of blades, a new helmet, and a good set of knee pads. And you use your bank of America cash rewards credit card. She was going to earn 3% cash back on online shopping rewards that you put it towards the cost of an essential piece of post skating recovery. Oh, a heating pad visit bank of america.com/more rewarding to apply now copyright 2020 bank of America corporation. Thanks also to our sponsor. CarMax finding the right car takes time. And with the new, love your car guaranteed from CarMax, you can take your time to make sure you found the perfect car for you.

3 (33m 28s):
Start with a 24 hour test drive, drive it to work school and the grocery store before you buy. And if it feels right, you've got a full month and 1500 miles to keep on driving with the new 30 day money back guarantee. Learn more about the New. Love your car guaranteed from carmax@carmax.com.

1 (33m 52s):
We

3 (33m 52s):
Are still in the middle of this pandemic. And right now having science news, you can trust from variants to vaccines is essential. NPR shortwave has your back about 10 minutes, every weekday, listen and subscribe to wave the daily science podcast from NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Roz. So it's the late 1960s and Norma Kamali is a clothing store in Midtown. Manhattan is starting to get noticed. Her husband Edie is running the place and she is designing her own versions. Have some of the most iconic looks

1 (34m 33s):
One of the time, the first thing that got a lot of attention and that, I mean, I'm not going to take credit for being the first to do it, but I don't know anybody else that was doing it at the time was hot pants, hot pants This was in. This is in a way, I guess, for,

3 (34m 57s):
For, for those who don't know what a hot pants are,

1 (34m 59s):
What are hot? So hot pants, don't forget, we're talking many skirts, right? And how do you get a mini skirt shorter than many. It has to be shorts. We're all wearing boots that just come below our knees where sort of having that proportion. And so they were a little tiny shorts. If they weren't obscene, there was a very cool Longlegs with boots and everybody looks like they had long legs and I made them I. What I did was I treated them as pieces of art. So I would do applications and designs on these little tiny shorts

2 (35m 45s):
And stones and stuff.

1 (35m 47s):
Well, not the rhinestones I did as tops, but the, the, the, the hot pants were mostly velvet applicase and lots of beautiful colors together. I would do Palm trees and scenes, you know, all kinds of designs like that.

2 (36m 4s):
And these were short shorts basically obviously went to the fashion Institute of technology. You've studied illustration, like super talented artistic person anyway, really into clothing. But you hadn't been a clothing designer. This was not part of your skill set. Was that hard to figure out how to do it? Cause you, you, you, you didn't, I think you didn't study clothing design at fit.

1 (36m 29s):
No, but I'm obviously glad I didn't, because I would of had a certain ImmPRINT that it would have worked against what I really felt a akin to. It was very easy for me to envision what I felt should be next.

2 (36m 49s):
When you were, were kind of, you know, you're running the story of getting attention. You're getting celebrities coming in. Like, I mean, but Midler, and it was the New York dolls that, that they even had to like an album cover with one of your right, like wearing your clothing. And w were, were you, were you getting lots of celebrities coming in to the shop?

1 (37m 8s):
Today so bet Midler started around the same time we started. And we heard about this girl who is funny and an amazing singer, and she was singing and this little dive place. And so this one night or at this club, and we're sitting right up front by the stage tiny stage, and this girl comes out and she is such a good singer and she is hysterically funny.

2 (37m 38s):
Okay. And what did she, when she was not famous yet, right?

1 (37m 41s):
Yeah. She had Brown hair, like too, her shoulders, she, her, and she was wearing vintage that was falling apart on her. And in the middle of her act, she stops and says, wait a minute, who are you people and where did you get those clothes? I need to get those clothes. And so after the show I met with her and she said, I have to get these. I should have no money. Can I work for you? I'll work in your store, whatever, but I just don't have money. So I said, I know what you can do. I'm going to do my first fashion show.

1 (38m 21s):
And at the time fashion shows were narrated. People talked about the clothes and the fashion shows. So you had a narrator. So I said, I want you to narrate my fashion shows. So yeah. So this is my first fashion show. So she's so she said, what should I say? I said, I don't care. Anything you want to say, when you see the clothes, you just say whatever you want to say. So we were in this mansion of somebody at a customer's boyfriend's aunt was selling it or something. And so that's a big new Yorker on long Island in New York, in the sixties. It was incredible.

1 (39m 1s):
And so we invited all of these people, including bill Cunningham. And so I had clothes that looked like this. Let me explain what this was. I had a big polka dot ruffled jackets. I had gold Len Mae capris. I had platform's shoes. I had clothes that nobody, in fact, a stretch was not available in fabric. So the stretch I was using was actually a girdle and circus fabric. And I use circus fabric to make these pieces.

1 (39m 43s):
And so this was the tone. This is not what anybody was doing. So all of these fashion people com that is sitting on a piano with the microphone. And she was saying whatever she wants, and the people are looking at my clothes, like, like I lost my mind and

2 (40m 3s):
They totally nuts, totally create

1 (40m 5s):
The designer lots in her mind. Right. And that woman on the piano lost her mind. Like nobody knew either one of us

2 (40m 13s):
When you have a bunch of like fashionistas there and Built damn, he was like a big fashion photographer.

1 (40m 18s):
Now, now he wasn't a big fashion photographer. This is the This is the sixties. So he took a ton of photos and that's when we became friends. And he said, dearie, I'm telling you something, they're going to come back and, and understand what you're doing. Wow.

2 (40m 39s):
This is like, it's, this is like a time capsule of like such a moment in New York, say Bev Midler and bill Cunningham. Unknown's and Norma Kamali okay. So I'm curious about the actual shop, right? Because it's doing pretty well. It, it, it must've been really well for us by 1974, this was like six years in. You had to meet, you had to move to a bigger space. We went to Madison Avenue,

1 (41m 4s):
Right? So when we moved in to Madison, I thought, if we're on Madison Avenue, I have to do different clothes. I have to grow up. I have to learn how to make really beautiful well-made suits and dresses. So I started to do suiting, but classical suiting. And I was making suits for a rack out well, shin Cher and everybody. So it really was the right decision to make the right place to go. And that period of time in New York fashion was very creative.

1 (41m 46s):
And it was one of my very creative,

3 (41m 49s):
But it sounds like you were focusing more now on professional clothing or like a sort of a high-end right. The suits and dresses. I mean, you'd gone from, he been doing the hot pants and right. Some of these

1 (42m 0s):
And snake skin, and all that, you know, bell bottom.

3 (42m 5s):
So things you would, you would kind of were at clubs, or you would, where in the scene in this sounds like you are now kind of shifting to making clothing that you might wear in an office or, or to a, sort of a fine dining restaurant.

1 (42m 19s):
It was a little, it's still was very unique in the design. It still was not typical of what you could find anywhere else. And prior to that, people only knew at a time they didn't know me. I was very much in the background. Is it an occasional photo or something like that, but he really was the face of the brand. And then I started to get a little recognition. People wanted to know where the clothes were coming from. And so that was happening about that time.

3 (42m 57s):
Were you interested in a business side or did you kind of let Eddie handle that and kind of just focus on the creative side?

1 (43m 6s):
Yeah, I did. You know, this is a time when women would not consider a business as something they typically would do. It was okay to be creative in that space, but the business part of it, I never considered something that I want to have the responsibility of. And I assumed like everyone else that men were better at business, that women, I, you know, my world was that everybody believed it and assume that that was a truth.

3 (43m 45s):
And so he was in charge of hiring employees and making sure people came in on. Right. And you were, I know we're going to get to what happened later on, but at, at, at this time, when you're in a store in Madison Avenue, what was your relationship with Eddie? Like, was it, was it a, a pretty good marriage?

1 (44m 3s):
Well, you know, when you're 19, you're a really still a child there. It's just, you're a child in a grownup body. And by 1974, the, you know, our identities started to form and we were clearly going in different directions, which is expected, right? I mean, how do you not? I was so happy to have found something I love to do. And I worked so hard because I loved every minute of it. It wasn't work.

1 (44m 44s):
He was much more social and outgoing. And so there was sort of a difference in the way we looked at life and the way we looked at everything, he was more of like a partier, a really big partier. He was very into drugs and very into the night life and money is being spent on drugs and being spent on things that are not business related. And it became more and more difficult for me to get fabric and to, to just sort of do the basic things that you need.

3 (45m 32s):
Well, I mean, the meantime you're like your profile, I have to assume as rising. I mean, you, you had this kind of a big, big breakthrough in 1975 with, with the sleeping bag, right. That anybody, I mean, people who don't know it just type it in and you'll, you'll see. And they say, Oh, of course, I know that that's a sleeping bag code. So it was like a big puffer jacket that looked like a sleeping bag and it was a coat and, and became like this iconic thing. How did you come up with that idea?

1 (46m 3s):
Well, I loved camping and I love doing the hole to canoeing and going down the Rapids. And so at one cold night, when I was trying to figure out how I was going to get out of my sleeping bag to find a place to go to the bathroom, I said, I'm not getting out of my sleeping bag. It's coming with me. So I wrapped it around myself and as I was wrapped in it, I thought, you know, I think I'm going to go back and make a coat out of this. And so the first sleeping bag coat was my actual sleeping bag. And I used every bit of it.

1 (46m 46s):
I was very conscious of saving fabric and, you know, very, very careful about those things. And that pattern is still the pattern I use. Today for the classic, a sleepy backout. And I've made the coat every year since.

3 (47m 4s):
Wow. And, and that coat, right? That was, I think it was like the first time cause that that material right sleeping bag material was just like puffer jackets. Like I read that people really did not wear a puffer jackets unless it went skiing. Now it's like, you know, a North face are a Patagonia, puffer jacket is like, you know, a fashion statement, but butt in, in that, at that time, like people only wore them to go skiing. So it was sort of like an unusual right for that material to be used and just a coat.

1 (47m 35s):
Well, first of all, sleeping back fabric was different from fabric. You went skiing in mine was sort of a khaki fabric on one side and the inside was flannel with Giesen. Yeah, it was fabulous. And I, then I bought a ton of sleeping bags and just started cutting them up like a crazy woman, making sleeping bags of coats.

3 (48m 1s):
Was it a hit right away? The sleeping bag coat?

1 (48m 3s):
It actually was. And you know, that's like 74, 75, 76 studio, 54 opens and the doorman are wearing my sleeping bag coat. And so people decided if they bought the sleeping bag coat and stood outside, maybe that would be a way they could get inside. And I did not dissuade them. So we sold a lot of sleeping bag coats at during that period of time. You know,

3 (48m 38s):
I'm surprised that U, I'm curious about your public profile, right? Cause by the, by the late seventies, I mean, you were getting Bianca Jagger coming into your store and like Ian Schrager and you know, of studio 54 and like all these sort of New, York iconic fashion kind of in crowd people coming in, but it sounds like you didn't have as much of a public profile as Eddie come from you or Norma Kamali you were designing this stuff. Did people know who you are?

1 (49m 8s):
No. My personality has always been even up till now. Very, very private. I always felt intuitively that my clothes should be the star. My clothes should make people feel good. People wearing my clothes should be the celebrities in the star. And my personality is really not an outgoing personality. However, I attribute that decision quite frankly, through the years too. One of the reasons for my longevity when you're at the flavor of the month, people get tired of you when they want to see the next flavor of the month.

1 (49m 59s):
Totally agree. Yeah. I think there's sort of a formula there that works because I always did what I felt was relevant and I never really allowed myself to be out there to do. I pulled back a lot. I didn't go to parties. I didn't, I just really stayed sort of in the background.

3 (50m 25s):
I think this was really at a time where your profile. I mean, if we're, if we were in the Instagram, Twitter age, I mean, you'd be all over the place, right? Like you're, there's a, an iconic photograph that everyone listening will, will know this for anyone, anyone over, let's say 40 will know this photo. It's a Farah faucet in a red swimsuit. It's just an iconic photo. That's your swimsuit. You designed that swimsuit, which I believe today is that this Smithsonian, the Smithsonian permanent collection is, and you all of a sudden, I think kind of overnight become known as a swimsuit, is it

1 (51m 2s):
Okay? So I asked Farah Farah was a regular or in the store and just a spectacular human being. And so she was in at once and I saw her in the store and I said, I have to ask you, why did you choose that swimsuit? Because I hated it. I hated that swimsuit so much. I did six of them and I would do six to test to see how people reacted, to see whether or not I would continue doing it. And I would do these tests. And I, I remember thinking, I don't know, I just am not sure about the suit and don't, you know, she purchased it and I didn't realize, I didn't know that she did.

1 (51m 48s):
And then she said, well, I had it in my bag. And I was with my friend This photographer. And we talked about doing photos for a poster, but this was just another sort of, we're going to take pictures. And she said, so I had it with me. So I put it on and that's why. And I said, Oh my God, I really, I couldn't believe that of all the suits she had for me, that she chose that. But clearly the suit is just the Subutex to her beautiful smile, her just the aura she puts out.

1 (52m 30s):
And I think the reason men love it is because she's not threatening at all. She is just very good.

3 (52m 37s):
Sweet. And I'm curious, I mean, this was a time. This was like the late seventies where it says pre obviously long before internet commerce. And, and so you are in New York, which is a super, hugely influential place, but people couldn't get your stuff outside of New York, right? Not yet. No, no. At that time you had to go to Matt Kamali shop on Madison Avenue to buy your stuff and you couldn't get it in LA at like Fred Segal or at some of those fans now. And I mean, this is also at a time where U S American designers are starting to really, right. I mean, it's the beginning of a, a complete revolution that you're going to have a ton of, like Karen and you're going to have a, it was a Ralph Lauren and you're going to have a Calvin Klein and then veer away and then go on and on and then leaving out it, lots of it.

3 (53m 29s):
But write, this is kind of at the beginning of that is most designers we're in Europe.

1 (53m 35s):
That's correct. In the seventies started to be an, especially in New York, an incredibly expressive time. And there was such an energy and expression. It sort of was what London was in the sixties. This was now the next sort of energy fall. That was intensely exciting.

3 (54m 3s):
Oh, by the way, did you, did you have a sense that you guys were making money? I mean, did it seem like, I mean, you saw people coming into the shop and are we just not even paying attention to that?

1 (54m 15s):
I was paying attention because it takes money to buy fabric. It takes money to sort of create the next thing you're going to sell. And that's probably where the differences between Andy and myself came about because he was spending a lot of money from the company and a half.

3 (54m 40s):
He was actually spending money from the business account of the company in his own life, social life.

1 (54m 45s):
Yes. And he was going out every night and then he started, you know, word would get back to me that he was with girls. And then he started dating the sales girl in this store that I had fired because she wasn't doing her job. So he hired her back. So it started, we started to have that kind of a, not so great relationship and we'd grown apart. And to be quite honest, I wasn't mortified that he was seeing other women. In fact, I was like, Oh, well, you know, that's the way it goes. But what was happening was people were starting to realize that there was somebody else in the Kamali thing.

1 (55m 33s):
And that, that there was somebody who was designing the clothes. And at that time it was very hard for men to reconcile a woman with power. And, and I wasn't, I was very, I mean, I hardly spoke. I was very quiet, but my power wasn't coming from me, it was coming from people's idea of me. And that was bothering him two. And I think part of the reason he was dating the sales girl was because he had some sort of issue with what was happening with me.

3 (56m 12s):
So how did you guys resolve

1 (56m 13s):
It? Well, clearly this was not going to keep going in a good direction. It was. And I think the, the turning point for me, you know, there's always that one thing that happens, that's so horrific that you thank your lucky stars that had happened because you make the right move. And so I remember being the sample room one day and the same sales girl that he hired back, came in to tell me that she decided she was going to be the new designer and that she wanted me to make some of her designs. And she described them to me. So I was just looking at her thinking, this girl has definitely lost her mind, but I just let her keep talking.

1 (57m 1s):
And then she leaves and I went to my cutting table. I didn't even say anything. I went to my cutting table and the ceiling over my cutting table just fell. And I said to myself, time to leave. And so I just left. I literally, I just left. I mean, you just walked away from the business. Yes. I had $98 to my name at that point at he and I had already separated our living situation. I, I had gotten an apartment, I had a mattress, I didn't have furniture. I had my clothes and that was it.

1 (57m 44s):
And it was, it was definitely one of those moments in your life that you think, Oh my God, what am I going to do

2 (57m 58s):
When we come back? And just a moment had Norma figured out how to restart and rebuild her business and how she also learned to re-invent it with new designs, new technology, and a rollout at Wal-Mart stay with us. I'm Guy Raj. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

0 (58m 32s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, bank of America. You decided to upgrade your outdoor deck. So you ordered the essentials, a power washer, or a set of patio chairs and a shiny new grill. And you used your bank of America cash rewards credit card. She was going to earn 3% cash back on online shopping, or up to 5.2, 5% as a preferred rewards member, which you put towards the cost of your most essential deck. Addition, a bird feeder apply for yours@bankofamerica.com slash more rewarding copyright 2020 bank of America corporation.

2 (59m 13s):
If you're never quite sure how to answer the question, where are you? NPR is

0 (59m 17s):
Rough translation might be the podcast for you.

2 (59m 20s):
Yes. Finally, someone else give us

5 (59m 22s):
Your accents and your origin stories, your cross-cultural misfits yearning to just be and listen to rough translation. On NPR

2 (59m 35s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's the mid 1970s and Norma Kamali has gotten a divorce from her husband, Eddie and walked away from the clothing design store that they started together. And this is not one of those stories where they agreed to split up the business in equal parts.

1 (59m 57s):
I had the $98 that I had on me. That was it. And I had been asking around to see if I wanted to leave, what would be the right thing to do? How do you handle it? And I had advice that you can't take anything if you leave. It's not, you know, that's not how you do it. So, yeah. So I, if I wanted to leave and he didn't want me to leave, I mean, he, he literally contacted me to say, you own me as a swimmer, a collection before you go. And I was like, okay. And knowing full well that I wouldn't have money and that I would have to come back.

1 (1h 0m 42s):
So I think he really expected that I would. Wow.

2 (1h 0m 47s):
U I mean, this was a business that you started it. I mean, that store Kamali presumably had to shut down.

1 (1h 0m 54s):
Well, he kept it going for a while. Obviously it didn't stay for that long, I think maybe a year or two. And I really, I was so frightened and I had never really told, I never talked to anybody about anything private or a personal. And so I felt really kind of alone. And a big lesson I learned was that being private and quiet is not going to get you anywhere. And I had had planned to meet this.

1 (1h 1m 38s):
I'm a writer from the LA times, which was one of a rare situation that I would ever meet an editor. And she really persisted and wanted to meet me. And my eyes were swollen, shut from crying. And I was so embarrassed, but I thought I know where I'm supposed to meet her, but I don't have her numbers. So I went to meet her and she said, what happened to you? And for the first time in my life, I shared anything private.

2 (1h 2m 10s):
So you told her that your marriage to absolve that your businesses

1 (1h 2m 14s):
And that I left the business and she said, well, then do you need? And I was like, Oh my God, I need everything. And she said, well, I'm going to get you some sewing machines. And so I realized that if you talk to people and tell them what you need, something can happen. But if you keep it to yourself, nothing is going to happen.

3 (1h 2m 39s):
And she connected you to people who had sewing machines. I mean, is this reporter for them?

1 (1h 2m 43s):
Yeah. She, her husband knew somebody in the industry. And then, and then I, I decided to reach out to people and ask for help and ask if I could borrow money. And in that was my first like, okay, I better figure out how to do this.

3 (1h 3m 3s):
So, I mean, U what you did have though, was your reputation. And obviously your, your, your track record of designing already kind of iconic designs, but no money. This is a time where I, I imagine, especially for a woman entrepreneur to go and like raise money. I mean, it was, that was that even a possibility, could you have gone out and like, I dunno, pitched people and, and gotten the investors on board now.

1 (1h 3m 31s):
So we don't forget women, women didn't have the businesses that I didn't know, a woman who had her own business, nevermind. In the fashion industry. I knew women who were partners who had shops and things like that, but to have your own company and run it and design for it, that was sort of like, I couldn't think about it. I just had to do it. And so friends invested their money in me and, you know, family, friends, anybody, anything that I could muster, I did.

1 (1h 4m 13s):
And I was so committed to paying everybody as soon as I could, because what they did for me, it was, they gave me a freedom that I so desperately wanted.

3 (1h 4m 28s):
All right. So it's 1978 and you're completely starting again. And you call your new business. Oh, M O on my own. I love that. And did you, did you kind of re recreate this idea? Was it a, a brick and mortar store with a space to design clothes and the back and forth?

1 (1h 4m 46s):
Well, yeah, I had to come up with something, so I came up with, Oh, emo Norma Kamali. Hmm. And I, I did find a space on 56th street and there was a space that I used as a sample room. And so that was really the turning point in my career.

3 (1h 5m 12s):
All right. So you've got Omo, your starting from scratch and kind of, and this is a time, I think you started to experiment with like, material that was used in like sweat pants, like sweat clothing.

1 (1h 5m 27s):
So for my entire career, I would put in styles in the store and then the people from Bloomingdale's would come in and I would see full-page ads with my styles, but not with my name on it, but with Bloomingdale's and

3 (1h 5m 49s):
They were knocking, they were knocking your style off.

1 (1h 5m 51s):
Right. And I was crying, trying to pay the rent. Let's just a plain and simple.

3 (1h 5m 58s):
They would design stuff, sell it in your boutique, and then you would see the Bloomingdale's right.

1 (1h 6m 2s):
Or Al or other places. Yeah. And so finally I was doing a swimwear collection and as I was doing the collection, I thought, I think I'm going to get sweatshirt fabric because I love to swim. And when I would swim, my brother had these sweatshirts from the army Navy store. And I would put them on when I got out of the water and I bought gray sweatshirt fabric, and I designed some coverup pieces for swimwear. And then I thought, this is a really beautiful, I did a dress. And then I did a jumpsuit and then I did a coat and then I did a suit and I had 36 pieces all in gray sweatshirt, and I'm looking at it and I'm thinking, you know what?

1 (1h 6m 51s):
Somebody's going to make a lot of money on this. And this time it better be me because I can't have any more sleepless nights. We got to pay the rent. And so I didn't know what to do. So I contacted women's wear daily, who were very supportive of me, especially going out on my own. And they came to see it. And I said, how do I protect this? And they said, do not show it to anybody. We are going to introduce you to someone who will be a great partner for you to do a license with. So they introduced me to Sidney Kimmel who had Jones apparel at the time, which was a hugely successful line for women going into the workplace.

1 (1h 7m 42s):
And we signed a deal in two weeks, we were in business. Then the brand, the name became known globally. It really just took off and a huge way.

3 (1h 7m 59s):
I I'm, I'm looking at a photo of the, of a Norma Kamali sweat jumpsuit from 1982. When I see my mom and that it's not my mom. I see my mom. And I picture that did really well. I mean, U, I think by 1981, you were doing $11 million sales.

1 (1h 8m 16s):
Yeah. Easily. Yes. And it became a global, I had licenses in Japan, in Europe, in the us, I had 30 licenses for everything covering accessories, the whole deal. And that's when I really learned how to negotiate, how to manage a bigger kind of company. But there comes a point when you get too much attention that you, you get scared and you think this is going to be the end of me because it's going to be too much.

1 (1h 8m 56s):
And so after six years of doing the collection with the Jones' apparel, I didn't renew the contract. Now, let me tell you, there was a lot of money on the table, but I, I said, I don't, I don't need a lot of money. I, I just need my independence and how can I maintain that? What can I do to maintain that, but still keep my brand in a good place, a walking away, as we all know is a very important thing to do at the very right time.

1 (1h 9m 41s):
And it is the hardest thing to do. Yeah. But those were the times that really saved me from, from really bad situation.

3 (1h 9m 52s):
But you thought that, I mean, I guess I'm not, I'm not entirely clear about why you would've been, if it was successful and it was doing well, and there was money to be made, what was that?

1 (1h 10m 3s):
So, yeah, as it got bigger and bigger at the quality control diminished, and that's not good for me. Right. That's not good for my reputation. And then the distribution wasn't controlled. I remember sax was complaining because I did these big yellow slickers. Right. They were really big with Buffalo check, flannel, Buffalo check inside. And it's like, raincoat rain slicker is a big fun ones. And they, they did a big ad promotion, everything, and they still hadn't gotten their shipment. And I was on my way home. And I passed a store on 14th street, like a schlocky junk store with a rolling rack outside of the yellow slickers of my yellow slicker.

1 (1h 10m 55s):
And I said, what is happening with the distribution? Why are there no controls? And I remember I was told you're only a pimple on an elephant's ass and that's how big they're a company was. And I thought, okay, I think this is the time to, wow. Hang it

3 (1h 11m 15s):
Up. And of course, another thing that's really hard to keep control of hers is the designs themselves, right? I mean, because cars, and then let's just be clear, like, it's, it's very hard to patent designs now you can't right. You can't. And so what is, which is, which is why I like fast fashion began in the nineties and right. She sorta cheap knockoffs that you'd find it. You know, some of the stores because you can't write people, people can really just kind of copy your style.

1 (1h 11m 43s):
It's sort of it, to be honest, it sort of a way of life and the fashion industry. There's a whole, most of the industry copies. And you know, for me, I always thought I'm not going to get upset about it. I have another idea. So I don't have to worry that they took that idea. But when it comes to your survival in the business, that's when you start to get anxious about it. Now, you know, people still copy me. In fact, there's this young designer who in 2016, she opened, did website.

1 (1h 12m 25s):
And she based her website on a dress. I designed in 1973 that I still sell called the all-in-one and the dress can be worn in a a hundred different ways. It's easy care. And I have a whole video showing the way you wear it. And her whole website is this stress, the video. She did it all the way she could, where it, and that she is the creator of the dress. And she even came to my store to see what was going on in the whole thing. So I hear about This and she is a very small business. And my CFO says, we have to have to put a stop to this.

1 (1h 13m 6s):
She can't make these claims. So he talks to the lawyer at the whole thing, and this was recent. So last week I said, this is what I want to do. I don't want to have a negative conversations about somebody knocking me off. The only thing I care about is that she makes the dress in a good way. The way she's making it is so ugly and poorly made that what I want to do is drop all of the charges against her. And I'm going to send her a pattern of the dress with instructions on how to make it. And I said, and you know what? Now she's not taking advantage of me. I gave her a gift and that's it.

1 (1h 13m 48s):
And so that's my attitude at this point about knocking off. I mean, its just so pervasive.

3 (1h 13m 55s):
So yeah. Normal while you were, I mean, correct me if I'm wrong, but it seems like in the eighties you were really focusing on comfort clothing. Like, I mean now we all talk about it cause everybody's been doing zoom calls here. I am, I'm wearing, I'm wearing pajama pants right now and how slippers, but, but you know, normally together I'd be wearing a collared shirt and you know, I'd be meeting Norma Kamali I would dress really well, but it seems like you were doing like comfort clothing, you know, washable machine washable. How would you describe your like if I were to go to a shop and said, I want to look, I want to dress in Norma Kamali stuff in like 1985, what would I look like?

1 (1h 14m 41s):
Well, my philosophy has been the same all these years. So I was believing in him clothes that felt good. On knits clothes that you could wash and not dry, clean, fun clothes, clothes that you could be active in. I've always, I'm still that same person and I'm wearing sweats. As we speak. I love to feel good and close. I don't want to feel uncomfortable. I don't even want to think about my clothes, but the most important thing is that it's not precious.

1 (1h 15m 21s):
You can wear it any time. You don't have to hang it on a special hanger or it's going to get wrinkled. I that to me is so not on the list of what, what I'm going to do.

3 (1h 15m 33s):
Yeah. I'm curious because Today like for example, streetwear, which is such a weird term to me because streetwear means like $600 t-shirts right. Are like we're like $300, a rubber flip that's streetwear. I'm like who on the street is wearing a $500 a t-shirt okay. Was it, was your stuff super high expensive or was it, was it an affordable

1 (1h 15m 54s):
Affordable? So to me, value is also really important that you're able to pay the rent and still have something you love. And you know, the idea of somebody buying like a $5,000 handbag and not having any money to do anything else is like insanity. So for me, beautiful clothes don't have to be expensive.

3 (1h 16m 24s):
And, and I mean, clearly that it sounds like that became kind of a, or it was a mantra of yours. I mean, cause you, I mean, I'm moving for a little bit, but you, you would go on to, to partner with Walmart in, in the early two thousands to M to debut, a couple like a collection of clothing at Walmart, which by the way, you can still get through like eBay and people sell them at am. Like, like Norma Kamali t-shirts and stuff. But tell me about that, about that partnership. Because I mean, Norma, Kamali, high-fashion, you know, there's a certain kind of a reputation and brand in Walmart obviously is not that.

1 (1h 16m 59s):
Yeah. I'll tell you. So first of all, when Halston made a decision to do a big box, I think it was pennies. It killed is career and you know, word has always been, you don't want to get involved with those because for your reputation, it's not good, but I love to meet people and listen to ideas and what they are offering. So if people approach me about something, I probably nine times out of 10 we'll have the conversation. I always learned something from it

2 (1h 17m 36s):
Again. And it sounds like that's what happened in this case. Right? I mean, I think, I think at some point what, like someone you knew from the industry who, who got a job at Walmart, like called you up and, and made some sort of offer.

1 (1h 17m 49s):
Yes. And he said, I'm going to ask you something and I don't want you to say no right away. He said, I'm working at Walmart and I want you to come and meet me here. And I said, Oh, I don't. I really don't think so. And he said, I know you would like this meeting. I know you're going to like it just for the experience you have to come. So I said, okay, I trust your judgment on that. So I get on a plane and then you take that little plane to Wal-Mart to Bentonville. And I go to my first Walmart super store and I am blown away.

1 (1h 18m 34s):
I have never seen, I mean, I'm in New York city girl. I don't, I don't even super store in New York. Yeah. And I don't drive a car, so I'm not, you know, I'm like a new Yorker or so I'm looking at this thing and I was like, Holy mackerel. So then I, I meet some really smart people. We have these great conversations and they want to have a fashion line for Walmart. And I said, I don't think so. I don't think that's a good idea. I'm just saying, and a little over a year later I got a call from them.

1 (1h 19m 14s):
It appears that they did do a fashion line for a Walmart and it didn't work. And somebody's, that was at that meeting said, we have to talk to Norma for this time. We'll come to see you. So they said, what is in your mind, what are you thinking about? And I told them that, I thought that they should have the core of a wardrobe, like a trenchcoat a white shirt and a black trouser, a jacket, all the basics. And so I remember when I was doing a t-shirt t-shirt designs for them and I see 650 units.

1 (1h 19m 56s):
And I said, I don't know that that doesn't seem like it's going to be enough. And they said, well, that's 650,000 units. And I was like, Oh, okay. All I get it. And so the quality of the clothes was exactly the quality I wanted. The fabric was the fabric I wanted. And why is why? So, because when you Order a 650,000 units, you can get the quality one and the fabric you want. That's a tremendous amount of power. My experience at Wal-Mart was extraordinary.

1 (1h 20m 37s):
I read that When

3 (1h 20m 38s):
The collection was debuted at Walmart. And you, you were at a Walmart, like people were running up to you with, with like cash register receipts for you to have them. Right. It seems to me that that part of, of what you have tried to do and have done throughout your career has been to constantly, like you're constantly coming up with different ideas. Like you got into e-commerce super early, like in, in, in like 1996. Yeah. And you got on, you were on eBay, like really early and U, I mean, in the nineties U introduced like a, I think a, a, a, a line of like home goods products that they were all of those things. Was it, was it just you following your curiosity or were these like, like really kind of strategic business decisions that you were making?

1 (1h 21m 25s):
I actually had a website in like between 95 and 98 when I started to really kinda, I want to be because I was so comfortable with computers and because of the airlines and I understood what you could do with this kind of technology. I just wanted to jump right in right away. And of course it was way early, but I, I do well when I'm doing a lot of different things because I find each of them inspires the other and keeps things very exciting.

1 (1h 22m 7s):
Remember, I haven't changed my job in 53 years, I've had the same job. And so when I'm interested and I see something is an opportunity that can use creativity and technology, I am super excited about it. I, you know, I love VR. I love some of the amazing directions we can go in. This is a very exciting time, inventive time. This is going to be bigger than the sixties.

1 (1h 22m 47s):
We're in the revolution part of it.

3 (1h 22m 50s):
When, I mean, there's, there's so much, there's so much in your life and career that we can, that we just can't talk about it because it's been, you've had this incredible career and I know you've got a book

2 (1h 23m 6s):
Kind of talking a little bit about your life and, and also about your experience with I. I get the message of your book is like, Hey, actually, your life gets better as you get older.

1 (1h 23m 19s):
Yeah. The book is called, I am invincible. And what I do is I share my life experiences through the decades. And so the goal of the book is to help women get to each of these decades with some tools and information and aging with power is sort of the, the headline of the book and that you can get better with age and that at 75, I love the fact that I'm so much smarter now than I ever was.

1 (1h 23m 59s):
And that I do things now to serve my purpose in this lifetime, which is a very freeing thing experience.

2 (1h 24m 9s):
And you recently got engaged at 75. So congratulations.

1 (1h 24m 16s):
So thanks so much. So we all have a different schedule. We all have a different timeline and one should never judge there's by others. I am very fortunate that I did end up finding someone who is my soulmate. I'm happy that it was at this point in my life because honestly, I wasn't ready earlier. And I think the universe just is checking things out for us in helping make the right decisions, like meeting your soulmate at sea

2 (1h 24m 52s):
65. It's funny, because I talked to my mom about this, who was, it was almost her age. And she, she always says to me, I know this is the best time of my life. Like I love being in my seventies. This it's do you, do you feel that way? Yeah.

1 (1h 25m 8s):
Yeah, she is. She's absolutely right. You know, anti-wrinkle, anti-aging all of that just drives me and your mother crazy. Okay. I will speak for her. And so, so I feel that I'm in the place where I can communicate and help educate what aging is about and whether it's a 20 year old, that feels like she's getting old for a third year old, 40 year old, 50 years old. The idea of getting old should be part of the passage in a woman's life. Not something to fear, but something to cherish because of the knowledge in the experience you gain in each of these

2 (1h 25m 59s):
Jackets, Norma COVID has been really difficult on your industry. I mean, the, the in, in 2020 alone, J crew Neiman Marcus, JC Penney Brooks brothers file for bankruptcy. I mean, gap, couldn't be random, like more than 2000 stores, but I wonder this year's is going to have a, I'm assuming it's gonna inevitably change the industry in how it, how it operates in. I dunno, is there is a silver lining to it.

1 (1h 26m 29s):
Oh yeah, totally. I mean, the way the industry has been fragile for a long time and many changes needed to be made, and this only forced them to happen sooner rather than later. And talk about stressful. If you did not have a significant part of your business on e-commerce, you we're going to get beaten up pretty badly. Fortunately, since Walmart, I did so well on e-commerce there. I thought, okay, my next collection, I'm focusing on e-commerce from now on.

1 (1h 27m 12s):
And so I have been, and my company, the big, big, big percentage is e-commerce and we've really redefined ourselves. There was a company.

2 (1h 27m 25s):
Yeah. When you think about the, the history of American fashion, you know, I think a lot of people would say your you're a big part of it you're right, right, right. They're in it. It's like a history of, of restaurants, AMIA, Alice Waters, who was on the show. She is incredibly important. Part of why, why so many people eat local and organic food? Do you, do you feel like that, does that, how do you feel like as a pioneer in, in, in, in American fashion,

1 (1h 27m 52s):
You know, it's really interesting. I look at Norma, Kamali almost as this other person, right. I think that Norma, Kamali contributes to the fashion industry. I like to think people are comfortable and a casual lifestyle in their clothing because of maybe something I did with sweats. I'm like that little speck that gets things activated. And then it becomes something bigger and much bigger than I am. I certainly don't want to have like my name on it to feel better.

1 (1h 28m 35s):
I just sort of feel, Hmm. That's that's pretty cool. I liked that. I like that that's happening. I like that people are wearing sweats now at home. And everybody's saying they're gonna never wear a sweater again. Sorry. I don't believe you. I know you're going to wear a sweater again.

2 (1h 28m 53s):
And then when you think about it, you had no intention of becoming a fashion designer. You went to the fashion Institute of technology because your mom was like, you better get a job. And then, and that really was your, your objective, like the idea that you would become, This known fashion designer. It was not part of your plan, but you did. And you know, a successful, well known designer. How much of your story do you in your success do you think happened? Because cause you worked really hard and were really strategic. And how much do you think that has to do with just getting lucky?

1 (1h 29m 26s):
First of all, yes. You have to work really hard. And the way you work really hard is that you're doing what you love. So you love it so much that you don't feel like you're working hard and that you have good relationships. Because the last thing you want to do is burn bridges and relationships, you know, at 75 and 53 years in the business, the one thing I can tell you is, do not burn a bridge because that bridge is going to come around together. You're going to see all those people.

1 (1h 30m 6s):
Again, you cannot believe how everything comes round, but I also think, I hope I don't sound too crazy or woo woo. But I do think the universe has a big plan for us and you can call it luck. But I think it's even more than that. I think we do things because that's what we should be doing.

2 (1h 30m 39s):
That's iconic fashion designer. Norma Kamali. And by the way, I remember when she was talking about that one-off design, she did back in the late 1960s, that suede skirt, that she whipped stitched using a whole puncher. Well, a few years back decades after she created that skirt Norma was out walking around town.

1 (1h 30m 59s):
And I see a girl walking towards me and the most amazing skirt. And I kept looking at it and thinking, Oh my God, it moved so beautifully. I really loved that skirt. And as she was coming towards me, that was my skirt. And she must've been 19. So clearly that's girt was purchased by someone, either handed down to her mother to her or sold then given to a vintage store that then sold it to someone that skirt probably has had a several lives. And here I was seeing it and I wanted it to stop her.

1 (1h 31m 42s):
But I thought, no, that's not what you're supposed to do it. You're just supposed to look at it. And I had chills. I was so moved by it. I'll never forget that moment.

2 (1h 31m 57s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If

3 (1h 32m 0s):
You are not a subscriber, please do subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write us, our email address is H IBT at NPR dot org. If you want to follow us on Twitter at How, I built this or my personal one is at Guy Ross. And my Instagram is at Guy dot Ross or show was produced this week by JC Howard with music composed by Ramtin Arab Louis. Thanks also to Liz Metzker Farah Safari, Derek gales, Julia Carney, Neeva grant, and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Janet Lou, John Lee I'm Guy Roz. And you've been listening to her

6 (1h 32m 36s):
Built This. This is NPR.