0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor bank of America, and they were original podcast that made all the difference. What if finding your voice helped heal a nation Smithsonian, secretary, Lonnie, bunch discusses telling the story of all Americans find it, where you get your podcasts.

1 (19s):
We brought on some investors that put a lot of pressure on us, and when you're under pressure from the top down from investors, and we're not performance on the bottoms up, then you're in the hot seat of 20% growth. Wasn't enough. They wanted 30, 40, 50. And if we had 30, that wasn't enough. So it was just a pressure of more performance. And some of them are used to getting 10 times their money

2 (50s):
From NPR. It's how I built this show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built. I'm guy Roz. And on the show today, how a brother, sister team took a childhood memory from Iraq and turned it into a flourishing beverage business, Nuni tea. One of the most popular premium tea brands in the country tea is the second most consumed drink on earth after water. And of all the countries in the world, Turkey holds the top spot.

2 (1m 32s):
They drink the most tea. And surprisingly given that so much tea comes from Eastern and Southern Asia, not a single country from those areas lands in the top 10. And when it comes to the U S there is no doubt where Americans stand each year, they drink more coffee than soda juice and tea combined. And unlike the rest of the world, about 80% of the tea consumed in the U S is ice tea. But even though coffee is king in the U S the domestic tea market has grown from under $2 billion in 1990 to more than $13 billion today, which is interesting because that time period aligns with two important trends in the food and beverage industry.

2 (2m 22s):
The first was the third wave coffee scene that started in the late 1990s brands like intelligentsia and Chicago and Stumptown in Portland. The quality of their coffee elevated the experience for customers and inspired a whole new type of coffee shop. The second trend during that time was the movement towards organic fair trade environmentally conscious sourcing in all things, food and beverage and customers started to understand that these things would cost more money to buy, which is how the premium tea market really started to gain traction in the U S when Numi organic tea was launched in 1999 by brother and sister, Ahmed, Rahim and Rima Sani, their prices were five or even 10 times higher than what people were used to paying for teabags, but they knew that part of what they had to do was to educate consumers about the difference between what they were offering and what you might find at a church basement.

2 (3m 25s):
Potluck knew it was going to be more expensive because it was premium tea, not just green and black tea leaves, but herbs and dried fruit, peels, and spices that were sourced from sustainable producers around the world. When Raymond Ahmed found a new me, they were both going through transitional phases in their careers. Ream was bouncing around doing odd jobs, substitute teaching language translation, art projects. Ahmed had been spending about a decade in Europe, living a Bohemian lifestyle and tinkering with different entrepreneurial ventures, but both ream and Ahmed grew up with tea as part of their culture, especially a particular type called <inaudible> a tea made from dried limes.

2 (4m 11s):
That's popular in Iraq and in the Gulf states, their parents immigrated to the U S from Iraq in the early 1970s, when ream and Ahmed were kids, they settled in Cleveland where both their parents established successful careers. Their dad was a doctor and their mom ended up as a home contractor and interior designer, but they still kept close ties to Iraq. And the relatives there, you

3 (4m 37s):
Would go back every three, four years. So my mom was still very attached to her family. There she's, we have big, huge families there. And when we would go, I remember the whole family would come to the airport. I mean, you're talking like 30 people coming to the airport to greet us. It was so amazing between my grandmothers and uncles and aunts and cousins. And then we would go to my grandmother's house or she'd have a huge feast. And the whole, all families on both sides of the families would be

1 (5m 10s):
There. Yeah. Yeah. And I remember always playing with my cousins cause yeah, we have 30 plus cousins, first cousins. They would always ask too. What's America. Like I remember once when we went, I was probably 19. And I think we watched grease the movie like 20 times that summer. Cause you know, it was very new for them. Yeah, of course. Anytime there's a scene where they're about to kiss, they cut the image before the kiss and they started again after the kiss. So you wouldn't even see kisses on TV.

2 (5m 44s):
Did you, were you guys was being, keeping Islamic traditions important at home? Growing up?

3 (5m 51s):
My mother was religious, so she was, you know, practicing Muslim. Our dad became agnostic pretty much. So he was more traditional than he was religious. I mean, we would celebrate aid every year, you know, with a big feast and a lamb. I always used to say that we lived in two worlds in our house, was an Iraqi world and outside was, you know, the American culture. So inside, it was kind of like a little Iraq. They only spoke to us in Arabic because they wanted us to learn the language. So when we were kids, they had an Arabic only policy. So if we spoke to them in English, they wouldn't answer us.

3 (6m 32s):
And at the same time, so it was, you know, a both, and they wanted us to do well in school and they wanted to integrate with the culture and both had, you know, flourishing careers here in the United States. So we were surrounded by that.

2 (6m 48s):
Do you remember when you were a teenager, did you feel different? Did you feel like, you know, you were sort of, were you in a primarily white environment around, you know, sort of white Christian kids or did you feel included?

1 (7m 4s):
Well, I was definitely picked on quite a lot as a young child, last kid on the school bus, standing by the bus driver because people are just wanting to pick fights with me because I was different, had a different name and dark skin. There was a lot of minorities in the public school. I went to those a lot of African-Americans. And then my parents sent me to a private Catholic school for two years, which I never understood. And, and unfortunately it turned my attention to all kinds of substances to get through the being in a Catholic school that I had to wear a tie and go to mass, which I never went to.

1 (7m 44s):
So definitely a lot of non-inclusion in a non equality growing up in Cleveland as an Iraqi kid,

2 (7m 52s):
It sounds like you were going through fair to say pretty rebellious stage. I mean, if you were kind of experimenting with drugs and after Miami enough to mention that probably a parish probably were not aware of that, I guess at the time.

1 (8m 6s):
Well, I always say that psychedelic saved my life and definitely gave me an awareness of what the bigger world is like and my parents. Yeah. They finally found out when I was, I don't know, 13 and I was smoking marijuana and they didn't know what to do. Cause I was definitely the rebel of the four kids and I kind of just did whatever I wanted. And the second Delek and drug world was kind of my outlet to just express and learn who I am.

2 (8m 35s):
And you went to NYU to study psychology and theater. What was your intention? Did you, I know that you had done some photography in high school. Was that what you thought you wanted to become a photographer?

1 (8m 49s):
Well, you know, it was in the late eighties, I went without a hundred percent knowing what I wanted to do. And I had gotten a camera at my dad's old Nikon F two camera, and that became sort of my best friend and I just photographed everything. And then as I was in the art school, I went into photography and learn how to print and develop. And then that eventually led into filmmaking, which I continued to do in New York. And then I did that again in Paris and Prague. I went to film school, but I survived mostly as a photographer to make a living.

2 (9m 28s):
I read ream that you really want to be an artist, but your mom said, you're too smart for art and encourage you to study biomedical engineering, which is what you studied at college. Yeah.

3 (9m 39s):
She wanted me to be a doctor, of course. And then I took art classes everywhere I could. And then art ended up saving my life at some point. Yeah.

2 (9m 51s):
I guess something, you went through a pretty traumatic experience in your third year of college, you got in a car accident that really seems to have had a kind of a big impact on the direction that your life took. Is that, is that right? Is that right?

3 (10m 4s):
Yes. So I was in a near fatal car accident when I was 20 and almost lost both my legs from the knee down and, you know, was vacuum lifted out of the site and was in a trauma center with 12 hours, saving both my legs and revascularizing my legs and relocating my knees and had to learn how to walk again was on a wheelchair and a cast for four months and ended up going back to school in leg braces. So I was in leg braces for another about nine months. And between the age of 20 and 30, I think I had 15 surgeries on my legs.

2 (10m 48s):
You were like a really good tennis player. Like you were an athlete that was principally a part of your identity. Yeah.

3 (10m 56s):
Yeah. I was captain of my tennis team. Yeah. Tennis was definitely huge part of my identity, tennis and dance. And I remember that one of the doctors told me, he said, well, let's put it this way. You know, you're not going to be a ballet dancer at one point, they thought, you know, that she might not walk again. And I said, well, I'm going to play tennis and I'm going to dance kind of struggled to finish school. At that point. Might've been post-traumatic stress. I mean, I feel like I kind of imploded because you know, my family wasn't really into therapy or anything. It was like, you know, if you're going to a therapist or a shrink, that means that you're crazy. So I had a really difficult twenties.

3 (11m 37s):
Let's put it that way. I kept going downhill and got very depressed.

2 (11m 41s):
You were kind of on this track to become a doctor or be a researcher, but you went back into the direction of art, which is, sounds like that was your kind of your personal, how did that happen? How did you, cause you decided to go to art school, I guess, in your, in your twenties. Right?

3 (11m 60s):
Right. So I moved to Boston, I got a job in research, but I would forget what they would tell me. And so I would kind of always make mistakes and didn't really do a good job. And so I kind of got fired immediately. And I remember that my boss had told me, he said, you know, you should get an automated job. I said, you know, I got to go study art. So I was doing artwork, you know, on the side at that point, by the way, sculpture drawing, painting, painting, painting, painting.

2 (12m 34s):
Yeah. All right. You go off to art school and would eventually make your way back to the bay area where you now live and meantime Ahmed, you would, you like kind of left. You left the U S you moved to Europe. What, what were you doing?

1 (12m 49s):
So a buddy of mine was living in Paris and said, Hey, come visit me in Paris. And you know, when you go in Paris and spring, what do you do? You know, you fall in love. And, and so I stayed in Paris and France for almost two years. And, and then I was building my photography career and got into fashion photography and got into photo journalism and a buddy of mine in Paris inviting me to go to Germany, to do some work in the mountains there. So I left for Germany and then I was leaving with a buddy in Germany. We bought an old RV, a gutted RV, and we built a whole home out of it.

1 (13m 29s):
And we were on our way to go to Spain, to go live in Spain. And three days before I left, I met a guy from Czech Republic. He's like, oh, come stop by there. The food's really cheap. You can fill up your RV with food. And a week in Prague turned into almost seven years and bought a farm. You

2 (13m 46s):
Were, you were like a real nomad. I mean, in your twenties, right? You were just following your, whatever, your curiosity.

1 (13m 54s):
Yeah. There were no boundaries. There was, there was a lot of loneliness and an unknown, but it was, these are the times to do, did

2 (14m 2s):
You have at the time, do you remember having any anxiety about your future or any pressure from your parents in the sense that because did you ever have any anxiety about, you know, whether you were kind of just drifting?

1 (14m 16s):
Absolutely. Every day I went into some depression too, because you know, being in a place where you have just friends, no family, and having a culture from ours where career and success is, you know, it's a big deal. And so, yeah, it was, it was, it kinda was my shadow and it walked with me every day and reminded me, you know, what are you doing with your life? Are you going to make it as an artist? I was actually a pretty successful photographer. I'm making pretty good. You were published

2 (14m 48s):
To the L and then like other fashion journals I

1 (14m 51s):
Read, oh yeah, newspapers. I wasn't struggling financially. Like I was getting by. And some but target, I started losing the poetry and this sort of artistic style that I really grew up into photography doing black and white abstract images, reflection, shadows, things that really got me excited. So it was at that moment that I said, you know what? I want to separate art from money. And let's do something that just, you know, that allows me to make money. And then one day I'll come back to art and really give it my full attention and not to generate revenue or anything,

2 (15m 32s):
I guess, from, from what I read while you were in Prague, you got asked to build a, a tea house. What's the, what's the story.

1 (15m 41s):
So, you know, Prague was an emerging place. Then in the early 1990s, it was just, the wall had just been taken down in Germany. All the communism was kind of that whole part of the Eastern Europe, Berlin and Krakoff and Poland and Prague were just these booming cities where anything goes. And some friends that I played music with said, Hey, there's these guys opening up a teahouse and teahouses were, are very common in Eastern Europe. They're very influenced by Russia, middle east and the whole tea culture, tea houses, you know, are where people go and spend two hours for lunch and have meetings and very different, not a fast paced, no, to go cups.

1 (16m 26s):
So they had, they, they were looking for people to help. And I was doing mosaics and tile work and all kinds of creative stuff with ceramics and painting. So they asked if I would be involved in some way in helping design being part of it. And then I started serving tea and, you know, we'd serve hundreds of pots a day

2 (16m 46s):
In this, like a neighborhood in Prague or in central

1 (16m 49s):
Prague. It's an old town. Yeah. An old town Prague, right in the heart of, of Prague. So as I got really into the tea culture, and I'd already gone to tea houses prior, but as I got into helping and working there, they asked me to be a partner. Then we opened up some more tea houses. And then we ended up opening up a pretty big wholesale business of loose teas, about 300 loose teas that we sold to tea houses through a lot of Eastern Europe, but just learning the whole culture of tea. It just, yeah, it, it, it swept me away.

2 (17m 22s):
I have to assume that you are not getting rich off of this. No

1 (17m 26s):
Photography was my career and I was living on my farm. Most, I had an apartment in Prague, but it definitely was not paying the bills. I still had to, to do photography, but you know, my lifestyle wasn't very expensive.

2 (17m 40s):
Meantime, ream, you were, you were living in the bay area. Yeah. This isn't now in the late nineties, but were you doing professionally at that time?

3 (17m 49s):
So I moved out here to get my master's in fine arts. And I was working as a, a substitute teacher and I had a really bad day at work. One day, children who were really difficult and I had to commute like an hour and a half or whatever to get there. So I was driving back. I was just crying and kind of like, you know, miserable. What am I doing? Like 97, 96, 97. Yeah. And two pieces of advice that had come to my head. And one of them was my father who had always told me, just choose one thing, ream and master that thing, didn't matter what it was just choose one thing.

3 (18m 34s):
And the other piece of advice was an old boyfriend who said, you know, just grind your teeth and do it. So, you know, whatever, just overcome your fear. And I had so many ideas of different, like different ideas of things that could be done, you know, business ideas basically. And so one of them was this dry desert line that we drank as kids called NUMMI Lustra. And you know, that we'd always talked about in the family. Somebody should import this tea tea made from, from lime, from a dried line that comes from the deserts of the middle east. And I was like, okay, that's what I'm doing. Yeah.

2 (19m 8s):
And the T I mean, we talked about tea, but because I think people think of tea leaves, but is it basically dried lime peel?

1 (19m 17s):
The whole drive line? Yeah. It's no,

2 (19m 20s):
There's no tiene. It's just whole dried lime steeped in water. That's how you make it. Yeah.

1 (19m 24s):
That's it. You just crush it and right when you use it in stews and cooking, it's used all throughout the middle east, but for the tea, it's just the whole line that's crushed. And, and it's got a very unique, tastes, very sour, but in traditional culture, it's, it's kind of, you're adding the tea into sugar. You're not even putting sugar into the tea. So you're drinking this very sweet and sour blend and it's super delicious, hot or cold.

2 (19m 51s):
All right. So you are in Prague and ream. You are in Oakland. Did you send your brother an email or, I mean, this is 19, this is late nineties where emails just kind of starting out or did you call him and say, Hey, I have this idea. Can you help me? Is that, is that what you did? Or, or was it something else?

3 (20m 9s):
No. So we were on a family trip. My dad had a medical convention in LA and we all went and we, I think it was in 97 or 98, 98. Yeah. And then we drove out to the grand canyon and, you know, we went on a walk and, you know, I said, I have this idea that I'm going to do this new me thing. And then Ahmed said, well, I'm going to do it too. He had the idea too. So it was a synchronistic moment that we're both kind of merging this thought, this thought that came in from, from the universe.

1 (20m 44s):
We talked about it all the time in the cause, you know, and we would gather, we would always drink this lime. So we'd always be like, God, why isn't this available? Why didn't anyone drink it? So to point, I was trying to import it to my tea houses. So I was trying to work with my cousin who lived at the time in Oman to figure out how to import it into Europe. So when Raymond, I took this little walk in the grand canyon and we started talking about it. I was like, well, I'm trying to do that right now, too. And, and then we were like, well, let's just do it together. And then it was like, well, where are we going to do it? So she said, why don't you come to Oakland? I was like, oh, Oakland, I'd never been there.

1 (21m 26s):
So I was like, Oakland, California. I was like, well, if I come back to the United States, California is probably the place to be.

2 (21m 33s):
So you decide, yeah, fine. After this trip, come up to Oakland and hang out with you.

1 (21m 39s):
Yeah. Kind of. It was like, all right. Cause I was thinking of leaving Prague, to be honest, I was thinking of still going to Spain, which I'm still gonna end up in Spain one day. So I was in a pivotal point of, I needed to, I wanted to go somewhere and you know, at the time bill Clinton was the president and I was like, huh, this guy seems pretty cool to smoke, but didn't inhale. And all this other stuff was happening. And it was just, I felt like this country at the time was a little bit at a place where I could come back and check it out. But I only thought I was going to come for six months. Right. So I moved to Oakland and moved into Reims apartment 600 square foot apartment in Oakland.

2 (22m 16s):
And just to clarify, the idea was like, we drank this as kids in Iraq, people will love this. People don't know this team in the U S that was your idea. Yes.

3 (22m 27s):
So that was our just initial idea. So we kept calling it this new me thing. We didn't have a name for the company at the time. And we didn't know we were going to, you know, produce hundreds of teas. But yeah, we just said, let's do this.

2 (22m 42s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment, how often and ream use the yellow pages that are relatives and that 600 square foot apartment to launch their business and how at their very first trade show, they turned their booth into a big attraction, stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this support for this podcast. And the following message come from. Klayvio the email and text marketing platform that puts creators in control. If you're the creator of an e-commerce brand, you need a platform that hustles as hard as you do, Klayvio unlocks the power of your e-commerce data.

2 (23m 25s):
So you can personalize and automate messages that keep customers coming back. Creators communicate with Klayvio get started for free@klaviyo.com slash NPR

4 (23m 39s):
Support for NPR comes from Intercom presenting this message customer support doesn't have to be chaotic Intercom's tools, make it easy for businesses to offer a world-class customer support at any scale intercoms resolution bot, lower support ticket volume by 33%. This leaves reps free to resolve more tickets and handle issues. Only a human can self-serve support lightens the load by answering frequent questions automatically for faster first response and resolution times learn more at intercom.com/support capitalism.

5 (24m 21s):
Capitalism is a giant force, but I don't understand. I feel that it's a very safe system constantly in fear of losing my job. It is our biggest success and our biggest

2 (24m 32s):
Failure on this special series capitalism

1 (24m 36s):
Listen now to the through-line podcast from NPR.

2 (24m 46s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's 1998 and I'm and ream have decided to launch a business inspired by the lime tea that they both remember from their childhoods. But at this stage, it's really just an idea,

1 (25m 3s):
But I don't think it was thought through, but I thought again, I was coming, helping me get this stuff situated and get grounded. And right when I came to Oakland, you know, ream took me to the Berkeley bowl and rainbow grocery, all these hip natural food stores, which I didn't really have in Europe, they didn't really exist yet. So I was actually really blown away by the, some of the offerings, especially back then Pete's coffee at a really nice loose tea collections. How's that come? And with my experience in the tea houses, I was also noticing that there was a big void of certain types of teas in the market here, back then in 99. So kind of just doing more of the research, but we then quickly decided within our first couple of months to do a trade show and we didn't even have a product or a brand yet.

1 (25m 54s):
So what we were like, oh, well, let's just launch it on this date, which was six, seven months out or something. So it kind of gave us a timeline and an idea that we had to start creating product. But then what that product was, we were kind of evolving it as we went.

2 (26m 11s):
All right. So you are now together in the apartment and let's talk about, did you like sit down and write a business plan? Did you, what was the first kind of step you, you

3 (26m 22s):
Took, well, we didn't write a business plan, did we? No, no. We were trying to figure out the name. That was our first step. Then we landed on Numi and we just kind of knew me, knew me and we were going to spell it any w M E and then we were going to spell it. N O O M I, and then we find a landed on an Umi

2 (26m 48s):
And Umi Numi, like from Arabic Numi.

3 (26m 50s):
Yes. So next step was to do the artwork. So of course our, our priorities were the artwork

6 (26m 57s):
Because I was still trying to figure out, like, what did you guys, I know you were going to sell this tea.

2 (27m 1s):
You're going to import it. But, but then what, like, where were you going? Where were you going to go to these stores? It's like natural food stores and try to sell it to them. We were going to do a trade show.

1 (27m 13s):
That's it? It was like, no idea. We got to go to the tree. No,

3 (27m 17s):
No. Somebody told us you should do a trade show.

2 (27m 20s):
What was the, what was the product going to be? Was it just going to be loose tea that you were selling in bulk? Was it going to be, where are you going to put it in bags?

3 (27m 27s):
Yes. So I think at one point Ahmed was feeling like it's sacrilegious to put tea into teabags. Yeah. But I said, you know, people only drink tea out at teabag. So we have to sell tea and tea bags, but he said, well, we have to put a full leaf quality tea in that tea bag. So before he came, I opened up the yellow pages. Believe it or not, there were yellow pages at the time. And I went through every packaging company that was in the yellow pages, learning about the machines that packaged teas. So we, at one point, I don't know how we got his name, but we stumbled upon the person who ended up being our co-packer for 10, 15 years. They were based in Salinas and had like a two hour conversation with him.

3 (28m 10s):
He was so friendly, you know, and of course it was now like amazed that he spent that much time talking to me and then talking to Ahmed later because you know, there had to be minimum runs. So we learned about minimum runs we learned about,

2 (28m 24s):
But what did you say to him? Did you say, Hey, we're bringing in tea. We want you to put it in tea bags for us, and then 10 teabags into a box for us. It was like, was it that literally well,

3 (28m 35s):
Pretty much. I mean, he, I think he maybe did more of the talking and I did the note taking cause he would, he explained how many bags per minute get, you know, put in, you know, that we have to buy the tags from somewhere. And we buy the rappers from somewhere and everything gets shipped to his facility. But we also asked him like, how do we know if

5 (28m 55s):
It's legal? What T's we put in the bags?

3 (28m 60s):
Then Ahmed has the conversation with the FDA because we wanted to make sure everything we were doing was, you know, legal.

2 (29m 7s):
You say, you've talked to the FDA. Did you just like pick up a phone and call the FDA?

1 (29m 12s):
Well, that's the thing. The FDA told me that nobody calls us, we call you. But I got to know one of the FDA guys, because as we mentioned, we were learning about the different nuances of what you do in packaging and how you get it packaged. And yeah, I would just call and either leave messages. Or there was a couple of times I actually received the same person. And then he finally said to me, like, you know, people don't really call us to ask us what you can do and what you can't do on your packaging and what in green. So I even said to him, I said, do you mean like you can put anything in a product and sell it. And it's only until you call the person that they have to stop.

1 (29m 53s):
And he's like, basically. Yeah. And I was like, wow, that that's a pretty free market. And then Raymond, I changed places too with co-packers. I remember I used to call people for packaging and I'd say from me, and they would call me back. They would give me all the attention in the world. I'd be like, wow, they're really helping a tiny little startup. And then later on I realized, they thought we were new me, the new United motors Inc company, which is now Tesla. So back then they had a warehouse and a facility to make cars and Fremont. And I was amazed on how people were calling us back so quickly.

2 (30m 28s):
And presumably it will, because you had worked in the tea business in Prague, you already had a connection to suppliers.

1 (30m 35s):
Some, yeah. Some but some we didn't because in Europe we will buy sometimes from middlemen, like in Germany. Yeah. So like with some of the herbs we wanted to bring that, I noticed wasn't here in the U S like Robeson honeybush was South Africa or the Numi Numi lime in middle east. I had to find new suppliers and even the green teas because of our, our focus on certain quality and sustainable organic, we weren't fair trade didn't really exist then yet. But I started searching for new suppliers. So

2 (31m 8s):
Initially you thought we're gonna, of course gonna sell presumed. You had to sell Numi tea. You had to actually S and, and did you, were you able to source those from Iraq or could you find another place to get them from?

1 (31m 22s):
Well, at the time my cousin was living in Oman and Oman is generally speaking where the lime is kind of well-known come from. So he helped me source it and arrange the containers and all the legal business work to get it to the port and on a container to get here. Cause that was

2 (31m 42s):
Going to be your, I have to assume your flagship flavor, right?

1 (31m 46s):
Yeah. That's our namesake and our flagship, even though it still doesn't perform that well, 20 years later we would never get rid of it.

2 (31m 55s):
So the idea initially was to have, how many different would you say flavors of tea are or types of tea.

1 (32m 1s):
Yeah. And in that process of seeing what the market, what was available and what wasn't available. Cause we, we kind of really wanted to take more of an innovative approach. We decided to do two black teas, two green teas and five herbals, the line being one of them. And we've also decided to just do one ingredient and all of the flavors, right? So the black teas were single flavors. The green teas were single flavors. The herbs were just one herb, you know, the lemon grass mint, Roy was honeybush lime, nothing else, because I had noticed that the market was just saturated with all kinds of flavorings and blends that you really wouldn't taste the herbs or let nature speak for itself.

1 (32m 49s):
So we just stuck with those nine and then the new MES collection, which was an assorted box of all nine flavors.

2 (32m 56s):
I remember I interviewed Todd Carmichael and JP Alberti founders of black Columbia. And we talked a lot about the flavor profiles that they were looking for when they were trying to create the right blends of coffee. And were you doing that? Were you just like drinking a lot of tea and just swishing it around your mouth and kind of trying to find the right

1 (33m 18s):
Balance? Yeah. Tea, I think, well, maybe coffee levers won't like this, but I think tea is more nuanced and hundreds of more, not thousands of more varieties of tastes than coffee. But I think for me, it was about where are we differentiating ourselves? Cause I had done tons of cuppings in Europe and the tea houses and we weren't really starting with a lot of blends. We were starting with straight ingredients, just one ingredient blend. So it was whoa, who's creating the most nuance, full flavor. And then it was a lot about the leaf size with the co-packer we had, we had to really do a lot of trials and tribulations to make sure the machine can adapt to a larger lot leaf tea size, cause most tea bags were like dust.

1 (34m 9s):
So we really wanted to revolutionize putting the whole leaf and a teabag at the time. So yes, I was tasting all the time, making sure the quality was premium and we didn't add any oils or flavorings. We just wanted the pure tea. So we wouldn't, you know, adult trade it with anything.

2 (34m 26s):
So this is in, in 1999, you haven't launched yet. And this I think is sort of the, the beginning of what would eventually be known as the third wave of coffee, right? Like you had Starbucks, which was a second wave. And then now you had like LA Calum and Stumptown and, and coffee was what people were excited about in the late nineties. Coffee was just going crazy for people coming to you and saying, gosh mate, one thing about coffee. No,

3 (34m 57s):
I mean, I would say that we kept pitching the idea that what's happening to coffee is going to happen to tea. Right. So that connoisseurship and kind of the gore may ship of, if that's a word of coffee is going to happen to tea. So we're just going to ride that wave. Yeah. So

2 (35m 16s):
You, you, you are starting to kind of build out the infrastructure of what to do. And before you launched was the idea to mainly go directly to grocery stores and to have them sell your tea on the shelves or to work with restaurants or both. How did you think of your distribution model initially?

1 (35m 38s):
You know, when I look back on it, I don't think we even knew where the distribution of the product was going to go. Sure. We, we loved the natural food stores and we knew coffee shops would be great, but how are we going to get there? Is it all just shipped via, you know, the ups FedEx system or is it distributors? It was, let's just find out as we go

2 (36m 2s):
Before you launched. I have to assume you, you had to import T where you just like put the just boxes of tea stacked in your apartment rain.

3 (36m 12s):
Well, we, you know, I think we had an import broker that helped us get all the teas in and then the loose teas went to the co-packer to pack. Then we brought all of that to my kitchen and kitchen and living room basically became the warehouse. So we would, you know, we would pack all the orders, get them all out of my small Toyota Corolla and kind of assembly line them into the kitchen. And, and then we would take turns, packing, packing, and shipping.

2 (36m 42s):
And you had to have some money to import the teas and to work with a co-packer and ream. I can't imagine you had a whole lot of money, you know, at the time you were in your thirties and early thirties and kind of doing different jobs here and there and Ahmed, you had some success running, you know, being a partner at T company, but you, by no means were you wealthy or, you know, did you have lots of money? W how did you finance the business at the beginning?

1 (37m 10s):
So we, we went to our dad and asked him if he would use the leverage of his house to get alone. So we partnered with the bank and Cleveland, and he refinanced his home and he had a line of credit on his home up to X amount, but we just started with a $250,000 line of credit. And wow. Did money go fast then?

2 (37m 40s):
Wow, that's a pew. I mean, what are you guys nervous about that? I mean, $250,000 line of credit, you know, that's going to be paid back at some point. Did that cause any anxiety for either of you?

3 (37m 53s):
Yes. I mean, our parents were extremely generous and they really believed in us, so they, you know, they didn't put pressure to pay it back, but we always kind of had it in the back of our mind. And our dad kind of bailed us out on several occasions because summers were really tight tee season as, until the fall. And you have to buy all your T's in the summer. So he would bail us out with his pension plan, you know, so it was just felt like, you know, our father was really, really, really there for us.

2 (38m 27s):
So. All right. So it's, you finally get to launch moment, the moment of launch, and I guess in 1999, the way to go was to, to a trade show. And that's, from what I understand, that's how you guys kind of launched, right?

1 (38m 39s):
Yeah. We launched that in San Francisco gift show.

2 (38m 44s):
And tell me what you said about like a little booth there and put your teas out there. And I imagine you didn't have a whole lot of money to bring an architect. Like you guys built this yourself,

3 (38m 53s):
Right? The booth, well, we'd built the displays and then we would rent the tables and then we would create tablecloths, all that kind of

2 (39m 0s):
Stuff. It wasn't like a card table with some tea on top. Like you guys put a lot of effort into the, the look of this booth.

3 (39m 8s):
Yes. Three days, three days of work to get it up.

1 (39m 11s):
And our booth was just an art display that remained, I would hand so, and the most she would, so I would hang up tea, stain fabrics, and you know, all of this stuff we were doing. So it was basically you're going, it was like you were passing by a gallery. It wasn't even like a business booth. It was a gallery. Yeah. The booth was definitely a showstopper.

2 (39m 33s):
And how did people react when they, when they walked by?

3 (39m 36s):
Well, we had a major passion, major passion problem because anytime somebody would come into the booth, we would have to walk them through like all those things that they'd have to smell the tea and then see the liquid and then drink it, of course. And, you know, I think we all along, I think our, our life and our career we've had this streak of hospitality, of Arab hospitality in us. So everybody became welcome into the booth. And, you know, it was just a sort of a tea Fest, inundating them with all of our, T's not to necessarily sell product, but to, to share in it. So, you know, is it a little bit of a different twist on, on, on a sales technique,

1 (40m 22s):
But luckily, you know, not knowing really what we were doing, we didn't even have like order forms. We had to create them the first night after the show. We're like, oh my God, people want to take orders. And we got to create an order sheet. And I got schooled the first day by a gentleman who runs a spice company on margins and how to price it. So that first night after a trade show, I had to change pricing. Cause I realized, oh, we're, we're not charging enough. So, but you know, to our luck, everyone was like, you guys are going to be a huge success. I mean, and then the rainbow grocery buyer and Neiman Marcus and Dean and DeLuca

2 (41m 2s):
Johnson by you in this trade

1 (41m 4s):
Show. Yeah. So all these retailers would come by and they would just stop. And we had people piled back wondering, who's this new me? What's this business. What are they even selling? I remember the rainbow grocery buyer, Kevin, he stood there for like 20 minutes and I was like, oh my God, I love your store. And he's like, what are you guys do? And then, you know, once he got it, he was like, oh my God, I won every one case of everything in my store. Same with Dan DeLuca.

3 (41m 33s):
And then, and DeLuca had left us a voicemail on our answering machine at the time. And when I listened to it, I was like, oh, this is Dean and DeLuca.

1 (41m 43s):
I had no idea. It was such a big deal.

2 (41m 47s):
What's this? I mean, now of course this is not uncommon. Right. But in 1999, was it unusual to see like whole leaf tea and in the U S

1 (41m 58s):
Yeah, very unusual. That's why, you know, and I would go to Pete's coffee and see their loose leaf collection. I was totally blown away. Cause that was probably the only place. The time that you can get a premium quality tea in the grocery stores at the time when we launched only had very low grade teabags oil flavored non-organic yeah, it was just, there was nothing premium on the shelf.

2 (42m 27s):
How did you guys do at the trade show?

1 (42m 29s):
We did great. The gift show is a huge success. I mean, we got a counselor we saw and today, 20 years later and chains

2 (42m 38s):
Remember how much, how much you get you guys made in orders.

1 (42m 41s):
I would say over a hundred thousand, when we look at some of the chains that we got in, like Serola Tomblin, Neiman Marcus, and cost plus and rainbow, I would say over a hundred thousand for that year and

2 (42m 53s):
Where you were basically selling your teas in that in the first sort of year, first few years, is that right?

1 (42m 58s):
Yeah. Food service got fairly popular quickly food service, meaning cash prices, restaurants, hotels, Ritz Carltons, and Fairmont hotels and all the fancy places and department stores. So that, that would be specialty, but food service picked up really quick. That was actually the majority of our business in our first year and a half to two years. And

2 (43m 21s):
In that first year, you, you launched Starbucks, bought Tazo tea and started to sell Tazo at Starbucks locations. Did that turn out to be a good thing for you or a bad thing for it? Was it like all rising tides floats all boats or was it a problem?

1 (43m 39s):
It was actually a great opportunity for us because coffee roasters and the food service didn't want to support necessarily Starbucks. So they wanted, who's the new kid on the block and me was a great fit. So we actually were able to take advantage of that opportunity. Hmm.

2 (43m 58s):
People were ordering from you because they didn't want supported quote unquote corporate Starbucks brand. Yeah. And you guys were seen as kind of like the scrappy startup.

1 (44m 8s):
Yeah. Just the new innovative brand privately held brothers, sister. And it was already gaining a lot of traction and getting a lot of press. So it was eyes were turning on us when, when that business sold,

2 (44m 23s):
How much work did you guys have to do in educating consumers about how to drink tea? Was that harder that already being done because other people in the industry had already been doing that?

3 (44m 37s):
Well, I think that it was because it was in a teabag, you know, there wasn't any educational component, but we often got, you know, comments, consumer comments that the tea wasn't strong enough or because people were used to tasting these really strong perfumes. So we had to constantly remind and still remind people that you're tasting the real tea. That it's more new,

2 (45m 1s):
That there's no flavorings in it. That there's just the real fruits, flowers, and spices, because most people are drinking teas that are flavored with oils. Yeah. And then

3 (45m 12s):
They'll add milk and sugar and all kinds of stuff.

2 (45m 14s):
And your teas are just flowers and herbs and

1 (45m 18s):
Spices. Yeah. And then the other thing we had to educate was the whole leaf quality, because people are used to teabags that are just tea, destined fundings that grow bitter really quickly. You know, if you leave a teabag in for more than a minute, it'll start getting a stringent where we would tell people, no, you don't need to take it out. And 30 seconds you leave it in for five, seven minutes. You can leave it in for an hour. It's not going to get better. It gets better. And that was a big education.

2 (45m 46s):
And the United States has to be one of the few countries on earth where people, maybe Canada, people drink tea directly in a mug. They put the bag into a mug. Right. Cause I imagine most everywhere else around the world, it's in the pot.

1 (46m 1s):
Well, it's a to go culture. So you want something that you can take with you where a lot of places they'll actually sit. And obviously in this time where everything is on the run. Yeah. The ceremony of tea, you can still find if you go to China and Taiwan and Japan. Yeah. I think we've lost that here. I I've heard in the U S you used to be a ton of tea houses before the Boston tea party and, and all the taxation, and then it switched to coffee. But unfortunately now it's, yeah, it's a mug it's to go sit at your desk, not the ceremony or the ritual of making a pot and really enjoying it.

2 (46m 40s):
All right. So you guys start to really get traction very quickly. And you had to presumably start to hire people.

3 (46m 47s):
I mean, the first couple of years we were pretty scrappy. It just Ahmed and I, and then we had a family friend who, who helped us with putting in orders in, and we had our family members help us at trade shows, but then we started hiring people. So I think, you know, we hired a sales person to help with sales. We hired, you know, office person. So put somebody in the warehouse. So I think by our third or fourth year, we may have had four or five people.

2 (47m 17s):
So, okay. So from what I understand, right is early as like three or four years into the business, you guys were actually approached by other food companies who I guess were interested in acquiring you. And one of them was Hain celestial, which is, I think today is like one of the biggest natural food companies in the U S and sort of like, like an 800 pound gorilla. And this is the company that, that owned celestial.

1 (47m 43s):
Yeah. They own celestial seasonings and 40, 50 other amazing natural food brands. And, you know, tea was definitely creating a buzz to you, was it was happening to the most consumed beverage in the world. And everybody knows it. And then the Hain celestial. Yeah. We had met with the gentlemen who, who was running it then at a trade show. And, and then he gave us a call or what happened. Well, first

3 (48m 12s):
He came by our booth with a couple other, you know, execs or something, and I didn't see their badge, but he sent, you know, what you and your brother are doing is really interesting. We should talk some time. And I was like, talk about what, and then little by little, I started looking at his bed and I was like, oh my God, a CEO of Hain celestial. Anyway, he said, well, come by my booth. You know? So he was kinda brash and not very personable. Let's put it that way. Yeah. And so then I told her and I was like, oh my God, that cov slash Colossus come by his booth.

3 (48m 52s):
So we went to his booth and he did not make eye contact with us once. And he was just busy with, I don't know, he had like a Walmart buyer or something in his booth. So we weren't too keen on the relationship. Let's put it that way, because for us, it's all about, you know, human relationship and interaction. But anyway, and then, but we, you know, we, we decided to go forward and pursue it,

2 (49m 20s):
Pursue a conversation about a potential acquisition. Yeah. That must've been that just punch. Like, it must have been kind of exciting. I mean, just four years in. And cause I have to assume up until this point, you guys were doing well. Right. I think you, you, two, $3 million in revenue a year, but you probably still weren't paying yourselves that, that much.

1 (49m 43s):
Yeah. We were already probably north of four and a half million by year four. And we were probably taking two to 3000 a month of salary. So we were definitely not paying in ourselves, you know? I mean, that's, I think our first year were a thousand a month and it went to 2000, then it went to 3000. So yeah, we weren't rolling in sleeping in cash.

2 (50m 8s):
Hain, celestial comes around with a potential acquisition offer. I mean, I have to assume that that was kind of exciting.

3 (50m 15s):
It was very exciting. Yeah. I mean, we were kind of, you know, trepidatious. We were like excited. I mean, when we first launched, I remember I thought, okay, we're going to do this for like four or five years and I'm going to retire and just be an artist. So we both had that ambition yet at the same time, you know, we were having a lot of fun and we were, you know, growing the business. There's a lot of opportunities. But then of course we had a lot of financial strain at the same time and we were in the summer tea seasons in the fall and you're always are Cassius super tight. It's in the fall

2 (50m 49s):
Because most people drink it hot. Yes. Yeah. It's in the false chillier.

1 (50m 55s):
Yeah. It called in the tea season is usually from like October to March. And

3 (51m 1s):
The summers were really tough because you have to buy all your tea, you know, in June. Cause it takes three months, buy it, pack it and then sell it by the fall. So those were our toughest months when cash, your cash needs high, but your, your cash flows

2 (51m 19s):
So-so Hain, celestial starts to kind of talk to you and do they eventually make an offer? A firm offer?

1 (51m 26s):
Yeah, they did make the hard offer. Raymond. I had to go into to the van because we had no privacy in our office. So her and I had to go sit in the new van in the back of it to kind of listen to what the offer was. And

3 (51m 40s):
One point he said, you have till the end of the day to make a decision, remember it's like, who the hell are you to put like our back against the wall and make us make a decision by the end of the day?

2 (51m 53s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment. But Raymond Achmed decided to do at the end of that day and why, even though Numi tea was growing, it didn't feel like it was growing big enough or fast enough stay with us guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this. The following message comes from NPR sponsor. We work with, we work all access. You can finally leave behind all the inconveniences and distractions of working from home at the swipe of a card, you can unlock hundreds of nationwide workspaces actually designed for work.

2 (52m 36s):
And with a month to month membership, you can get workspace when you need it. No matter where business takes you. That's smart flexibility. Sign up today@wework.com slash NPR. This message

4 (52m 49s):
Comes from NPR, sponsor Ford. Introducing the Mustang Mach II. Here's the global brand director of electric vehicles. Jason Castro, Yoda on the challenge of creating an all electric SUV that drives like a Mustang, the normal, the challenge of making an SUV go fast. Is there a higher center of gravity? The beauty of the battery electric vehicle platform is that all of the weight was down low on the floor because that's where the battery is housed. And that's where the electric motors are to learn more about the new all electric pony in the Mustang. Stable go to ford.com.

0 (53m 21s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, click up a productivity that saving people one day every week, how it's simple, click up, brings all of your work into one place. You get tasks, stocks, goals, chat, and more in one tool. So you can focus on getting work done without switching apps. It's how teams and companies like Uber, Google and web flow save time, click up is for free forever. So try click up today@clickup.com slash NPR.

2 (53m 57s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's the early two thousands Hain celestial has just made an offer to buy new meaty and they've given ream and Ahmed a single day to respond. And from what I understand, you were already doing 4 million in revenue at that point, right? And they were offering you between six, 8 million bucks to buy, to buy everything, your intellectual property, your branding, your business. Yeah.

1 (54m 26s):
I, you know, I was pretty clear at the time that there's no way for the offer. We were growing at 60, 70% a year at the time. You know, we went to that next year from 4 million to 7 million, then 7 million to 10 million and let's say we were doing four then. And he offered us eight. We knew we were going to do that within 12 to 18 months. So we kind of said no way.

2 (54m 47s):
So obviously you, you set this as a low ball offer.

1 (54m 50s):
Yeah. And I think because we were a threat and because we were emerging so fast, we were growing at shelf 160% and our business, we knew we were going to probably double it the next year, which we almost did for us. It was pretty obvious that they felt threatened, but also at the same time they were intrigued and they liked our brand, but we weren't sure what was F what would the destiny of the brand would be. And we, it was too near to us to let go. We just loved it too much. And it was, we were having a lot of fun in those years.

2 (55m 22s):
So even though, even though you had cause $4 million sounds like a lot of money, but you know, to pay for the co-packers and the product and the distribution and your employees. And, but you get an eight, $8 million offer. Would that have kind of at the time solved your financial challenges?

1 (55m 41s):
Yeah, for sure. I mean, we didn't have that much debt. We didn't have a bank loan. We just had this working line capital from the bank on our dad's house, which by then increased to almost a million dollars. Now we were really beholden to this, you know, loan and making sure we can pay it back one day. So it would have taken out our debt and would have given us, you know, each a few million dollars, but that, wasn't what we were, we were about. And that wasn't, at least for me, I wasn't thinking, that's why I'm in this, I'm in this for a different journey.

2 (56m 14s):
All right. So you walk away from this offer, but you, your cash, you've got cashflow challenges.

1 (56m 23s):
I mean, was some payroll Fridays. I would just literally lay on my back on the floor of the office and wonder how are we going to make payroll the business wasn't profitable every quarter, every month. So there'd be some months we would spend more because we would go market at trade shows or we'd do promotions with retailers. And then it gets, you know, compounded by then having slow summer months where we're gonna lose cash. We're not going to be profitable.

2 (56m 53s):
Was that stressful? Two of you to be running a business that was not profitable.

1 (57m 0s):
Sometimes it, you know, when you're building momentum and building success, you know, you're going to get through it, even if you're not profitable. And other times when you don't see where the, and the light is at the end of the tunnel, then yeah. I just ended up on my back, staring up at the ceiling, wondering how it's going to happen.

3 (57m 20s):
Then we got, we also got investors too, maybe a year after that outside investor. Well, we met this fellow at a trade show and other trade show and he came to our booth and he was Indian. I thought he was, you know, he was a tea supplier and then it turned out he's a huge fashion. Mogul family industry created Tommy Hilfiger clothing and loved our stuff, had read our press binder. And he flew out to see us and we went to dinner and he said, you know, I'll sign on this napkin.

3 (58m 2s):
And we had a wonderful dinner and conversation and he felt like a brother and he invested in us. So just got lucky.

2 (58m 13s):
What about the, as you guys grew and had to kind of deal with the challenges of growth, what about the relationship between the two of you? Was it pretty clear what, what each of you did and was that, did that help you guys kind of have a easy, smooth relationship or was there ever any tension between the two of you?

3 (58m 33s):
Well, I think in terms of roles, it became more and more clear, you know, what our strengths were. Yeah. It was a lot of difficult times where we argued and fought and about, about what, about what do some business decisions, but most of the business decisions we were on the same page with it was more just the personal interaction. So I may have stepped on his foot on something. He may, I may, he may have stepped on my foot on something, there was maybe issues with different employees. I would say things like that.

1 (59m 8s):
So I think for me, when I look at some of the times that Rima and I were in challenges as brother and sister were some of the times that we were most tried financially, and that would bring the worst out me and, and my lack of ability to just be present to us as siblings and to the business,

2 (59m 28s):
Because you were worried that the money would run out or yeah.

1 (59m 32s):
I mean, I, I've learned to listen better and give space to allow the discussion to flow and not what I think is right. And I think that's where I missed the boat in days of stress and pressure is, it was just, let's get things done. Let's do it. Now. These are timelines deadlines. This is a normal

2 (59m 54s):
Reaction. I mean, we, human humans are designed to survive. Right. And when you feel like you're, you're not going to most of us freak out.

1 (1h 0m 4s):
Yeah. And then we brought on some investors that put a lot of pressure on us and if we didn't perform, then, you know, the management of people got tricky and not easy. And, and I've learned over the years that that's not, what I enjoy doing is managing people on a day-to-day basis. It's very hard. It's very hard. And when you're under pressure from the top down from investors, and we're not performing from the bottoms up, then, you know, you're in the hot seat of 20% growth. Wasn't enough. They wanted 30, 40, 50. And then if we have 30, that wasn't enough. So it was just a pressure of more performance. And some of them are used to getting 10 times their money,

2 (1h 0m 44s):
Right? Meantime was that, was that even possible to grow 30, 40, 50% a year. There were years we

1 (1h 0m 51s):
Were growing 40, 60, 70%. But at this time, as we were maturing a little bit, and we were probably north of 20 million, 15, 20 million, those types of growth became a lot more challenging than that. Well, there was the 2009, 10 recession where we, you know, we had a couple of flat years because food service completely went bust. You know, food service has always been a, you know, a good part of our business. So I think for Rema, and I think the thing I've always been happy about is that on the business decisions, from flavors to product innovation lines, to design, we've always aligned.

1 (1h 1m 33s):
We haven't had a lot of issues on the business side rooms trusted me with, you know, running the finance or operations side, obviously hiring the right people who run it, but interpersonal communication styles just, I realized that's not where I thrive and that doesn't, you know, I don't shine the best in that. So I think there was a lot of conflict during those years.

2 (1h 1m 55s):
The other thing is that you aren't just selling, like if a consumer goes to the grocery store, or many of them are just looking for a low price. Right. But you weren't just selling premium teas, but you were, you were using really expensive, still do use expensive material biodegradable. And I mean, you and your packaging, you go to great lengths not to use industrial inks and things like that. Right. I mean that, I'm assuming that's more expensive.

3 (1h 2m 25s):
Yeah. So, you know, between purchasing organic tea, going fair trade, which adds a premium that goes back to the tea farmers that adds more. And then the packaging itself, we very conscientious around, you know, in our environmental footprint. So we use soy-based inks from the beginning. We didn't understand why people use shrink wrap. So we never use shrink

2 (1h 2m 50s):
Wrap around the tee box right around

3 (1h 2m 52s):
The tee box. Yeah. So you're, you're already got the bag seal. And then finally this year, because we knew that the packaging that the tea wrapper itself, you know, was something that went into landfills. We converted all of that into a plant-based wrapper that is, you know, hugely revolutionary, if everybody could do that.

2 (1h 3m 13s):
Were you ever under pressure from investors to reduce your price point or from distributors or retailers at all? Amen. Well,

1 (1h 3m 23s):
You know, it's funny because when we launched 20 years ago, we were the most expensive tea on the shelf by 20, 30%. And a lot of retailers were like, you're crazy. You're never going to sell this at 4 99 a box. And you know, them, the highest price T other than us was 3 99. And we're like, well, we can't get it to you cheaper than that. And now, you know, we're probably standard around 6 99, and we're not the most expensive we're still, you know, in the top two or three most expensive brands. So we still get that pressure. And we, we see, you know, our biggest challenge today is some of the big conglomerates are buying the smaller T brands.

1 (1h 4m 2s):
So we do have to promote more now than we probably ever have, which is ironic 20 years into the business we're promoting now than I think yes than we've ever had. When I look at our promotional spend, it's just getting tougher and tougher in the way that the big, you know, multi-billion dollar corporations are buying all these small brands. And we're pretty much one of the last privately held brands on the market.

2 (1h 4m 27s):
When was that? Like, what do you remember the turning point being in terms of hitting a point where you were not having to worry about cashflow and money, and when did you start to see profitability? Do you remember that? Yeah,

1 (1h 4m 42s):
It was after 10 years of running the business because we dumped a lot into the business to build the brand and do trade shows. And, but about 10 years into the business, we were able to kind of get a lot more solid and create a profitable at beat. And it was right around them that we had a lot of cash because we raised about 5 million. And then we raised about, you know, five years later, 25 million to take out some investors. And luckily when we raised that 25, 15 years into the business, we were able to finally take out our dad's million dollar working line capital, which was probably for me the biggest moment of success.

1 (1h 5m 23s):
We relieved my father of any debt on the business. And he was so patient for all those years.

2 (1h 5m 29s):
I know that in 2016, Smucker's acquired a small stake in Numi and it's still privately owned and you've got some investors and you guys are obviously owners of it. I wonder. Amen. I mean, you guys have been grinding away now for a long time at this. I know you recently stepped down as CEO, but is there ever a part of you that just wants to, you know, sell your stake and kind of enjoy your life without having to grind away every day?

1 (1h 6m 2s):
Well, I do enjoy my life every day and I don't feel like grind away. Luckily we have a great team. So I feel the balance of life is, is here. But as far as the choice of whether I want to sell, I think it all depends on who the partner is. I think we'd be open to it if it really made sense for the future of Numi. Cause you know, we don't want it to plummet and disappear in three to five years, which some brands do when they exit, but we want it to thrive and we want the farmers and the planet to thrive because Numi has created a legacy. I mean, it's an educational courses, it's a founding B Corp. It's one of the leading fair trade organic brands in the whole world now.

1 (1h 6m 45s):
And we want to, to continue to live those values and, and change the way people drink and eat. And

2 (1h 6m 53s):
When you think about the, what you wanted to build and what it is today, I know that, you know, you talked about, you didn't have a business plan, they kind of kind of haphazard as of the start in the late nineties. But do you think it had, you had this kind of crystal ball to see where you work today? He would've thought, yep. That makes sense. Or you would have been surprised or how do you think you would have thought about this rain?

3 (1h 7m 17s):
I think I would have been surprised that I wouldn't lasted this long because at the time I didn't plan my life more than three months at a time. And I remember calling a friend, you know, after maybe five years of walking to the, maybe even longer walking to the same PO box every day and picking up the mail. I said, I can't believe I'm still doing this. So that's one. And for sure, I would not have predicted that we have, would have gotten to where we have, where, you know, I go to a coffee shop or a little local cafe in my town and there's new me, you know?

3 (1h 8m 1s):
And my husband's always like, she's the owner all embarrassed? And they're like, oh my God. So I wouldn't have never expected that.

1 (1h 8m 11s):
I mean, new me has been the best vehicle for me personally, and to learn and grow so much about where we put our time and terms point, you know, giving yourself to something for so long to really mature in it and allow it to mature is that's where the lessons for me have really come. But I think there were some moments we could have probably grown more had we not protected the brand? Cause I think there was a point we protected the brand from being too mainstream too quick and staying in the Ritz Carltons and the fair mounts and then Dean and DeLuca as, and, and cause Walmart wanted us in year seven, eight, you know, trader Joe's wanted us in year two target wanted us when we were young and we, we kind of said, oh, we're not ready for them yet.

1 (1h 8m 59s):
We could have grown more into mass market and grocery quicker, which would have created more impact because you know, more revenue, more product, more profits. So I just think there was moments. We held it back from rapid expansion.

2 (1h 9m 17s):
When you think about the journey that you guys went on, I mean, you were, you were sort of drifting right in your early thirties trying to figure out what you were going to do and it wasn't clear. And, and, and you had that moment when, when you were driving home from a substitute teaching gig and you just kinda lost it, you know, when you look back on your life now and, and what you've accomplished and which goes a build, how much of that do you attribute to the hard work you put in and how much do you think it has to do with luck?

3 (1h 9m 44s):
I mean, I would say a lot of hard work, a lot of hard work. I mean, from when we started 30, I was 31. Those first 10 years was, you know, wake up at six, seven, stop working in 11 work on the weekends, demoing at stores, going to different events. It was just constant. You know, I think we had a lot of good breaks. You know, the Tazo was a great break. You know, we got a lot of good press hits. One time we were on the cover of a natural foods, publication that all of a sudden got us distributors. So we had a lot of good breaks.

3 (1h 10m 26s):
We were lucky because you know, our father helped us and he, he had worked hard and had made money. So it was a combination. Yeah. Oh man, I bet you,

1 (1h 10m 37s):
I mean, I'd say hard work is it took a lot of hard work. It took the first three, four or five years of 90, a hundred hour work weeks. Yeah. There were definitely some lucky moments that really helped us. And a lot of angels surrounded us. And I think those angels surrounded us because they cared. They saw what new means essence was about and they wanted to see us succeed. So to have those kinds of people with us that really believe in the journey, believe in the mission. I wouldn't say that's luck. I wouldn't even say it's hard work. I would say it's just an force that new me has been able to bring it's now its own living creature.

1 (1h 11m 18s):
It's way beyond Rima, NY it's way beyond our team. So yeah, I think it's been, it's amazing.

2 (1h 11m 26s):
That's Ahmed, Rahim and ream. Hassani co-founders of Numi organic tea. By the way, those tea houses, Ahmed helped start in Prague. Two of them are still around, so after bed's not involved anymore. And when it comes to tea, he sticks to herbal about four months ago, he completely cut out caffeine, which means no more black or green tea at all. Thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you're not yet a subscriber, please do subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us, our email address is H ibt@npr.org. And if you want to follow us on Twitter or at guy Ross or at how I built this, you can also find us on Instagram.

2 (1h 12m 11s):
That's how I built this NPR or my personal account at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by Casey Herman with music composed by Ramtin or Louis. It was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Doris gales. Our production staff includes JC Howard, Rachel Faulkner James DeLuise, Julia Carney, Ferris safari, Liz Metzker, Janet oo, John Lee and Emily sober. Our intern is Harrison VJ choy. And Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Ross. And he'd been listening to how I built this.

2 (1h 12m 56s):
This is NPR.