0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and add free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

Upwork (10s):
How I built This is pleased to have Upwork as our presenting sponsor. Visit upwork.com to get hiring. Upwork has a message for you. Everything you know about business, it was made up by a bunch of guys a hundred years ago. Don't stay bound to their antiquated rules like the nine to five workday, commuting to an empty office building, or only hiring full-timers. Embrace a new way of working with Upwork. It's a portal to the future of business, and it's disguised as a website. Go to upwork.com. There you'll see the light. And also find talent for projects of any size. From simple deliverables to complex projects, from short-term help to full-time hires, you can finally let those old business titans and their tired ideas rest in peace. This is how we work now. Visit upwork.com to get hiring talented professionals today.

UserTesting (1m 2s):
Reading Minds is hard. Good news is you don't have to remove the guesswork and build products with greater confidence by including direct customer feedback using user testing. At each stage of the product development process, companies are being asked to do more with less. They need to move quickly to build experiences that meet changing customer expectations, and they need to do so faster than ever, all while minimizing risk and costly rework. With user testing, you can get rapid feedback from your target audiences so that you can make higher confidence decisions earlier, faster, and throughout the product development process, design, develop, deliver, and optimize products and experiences with confidence and less risk. Start your free test today at usertesting.com/ibt. That's usertesting.com/h ibt.

0 (1m 52s):
Hey, it's guy here. And before we start the show, a question. Do you ever get nervous when performing or speaking in front of an audience? I definitely do, and I have to stand in front of a lot of audiences. Well, I recently interviewed Zoe Day Chanel, and she had a great tip I hadn't heard before. A tip that's allowed her to get out of her head and into the moment. You can find out all about it and hear my conversation with Zoe on my other podcast. The Great Creators just search for the great creators with Guy Ross, wherever you listen to podcasts, and now onto today's show. So how many treadmills and rowing machines did you initially

2 (2m 33s):
Buy? 10.

0 (2m 34s):
10. 10 rowers. 10 treadmills. Okay.

2 (2m 36s):
Right. So when I opened up that studio, I spent every penny on the treadmills. I wanted to pay everything all out. And even more insane is that I had not piloted that actual program. And I'm like, oh my goodness, what if this doesn't work? I just signed a five year lease. I have all this equipment in there, and I just, again, we get back to intuition. We get back to what's in your gut that you feel. I just feel that there is no way people aren't gonna exit there without results.

0 (3m 16s):
Welcome to how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Ross, and on the show today how Ellen Latham went from being fired from her dream job to a second act as the creator of Orange Theory, a fitness franchise with more than 1500 studios around the world. The startup game is for young people, right? This is a common belief and a frustration I hear from older folks who think you have to be in your twenties and eat ramen out of a bag to build a company, except it's simply untrue.

0 (4m 3s):
In fact, in 2018, Harvard Business Review published a study by four academics about this very topic. They crunched numbers from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and they came to a counterintuitive conclusion about startups, which is this. The average age of a successful startup founder in the United States is 45. 45, and we've had a bunch of these older founders on this show. Roxanne Quimby was 40 when she founded Burpees with her partner Bert Chavitz. Pete Warhurst was 46 when he started the national storage business pods. Pat Brown was 57 when he left his job as a professor at Stanford and started Impossible Foods.

0 (4m 47s):
Bob Moore was also in his late fifties when he left seminary school and created Bob's Red Mill, one of the biggest natural food brands in America. The thing about starting a company later in life is that you usually come to the table with a lot of experience and credibility. So for anyone listening to this today feeling like you missed the boat somehow, well just wait until you learn about Ellen Latham because Ellen was well into her fifties when with two partners, she started Orange Theory, a fitness brand that today has over 1500 studios around the world. Now, if you haven't heard of Orange Theory, it's a fitness program that combines cardio, strength training, and core exercises into one workout.

0 (5m 31s):
Orange Theory Studios usually have a row of treadmills and rowing machines, and the idea is to keep your heart rate elevated throughout the exercise period. And what's amazing is that the brand, which seems like it's everywhere, was only started in 2010. Now, at the time, Allen was running her own small exercise studio in South Florida where she developed a workout that would become known as Orange Theory for most of her life. Ellen was a fitness instructor and a manager of fitness centers. She worked at YMCAs and later at a few high end spas in Florida. But after she was fired from one of those jobs, after a conflict with the owner, Ellen had to figure out how to make ends meet.

0 (6m 16s):
And that was how she started her own business. First by running fitness classes out of her home and eventually renting a small studio. Ellen first learned about fitness from her dad. He was a high school coach in Niagara Falls, New York, where Ellen grew up in the sixties and seventies. There were four kids in the family, but Ellen's extended family was much bigger than that. A huge Italian family with lots of uncles, aunts, and cousins all around

2 (6m 46s):
The whole caboodle. Yes, I was born to the youngest of eight children from an Italian immigrant family. My father was the youngest of the eight brothers and sisters. All of the relatives lived in Niagara Falls, so just the eight brothers and sisters and the first and second cousins were 140 Kellen Drells in Niagara Falls, New York. Wow. And there was always a cousin and a class that I was in or a teacher, and we had every holiday together at my grandmother's house. It was very tight. My grandmother spoke very little English, all Italian.

2 (7m 27s):
Wow. And it was all that you see on TV was exactly how I grew up.

0 (7m 32s):
Wow. Your dad was a PE coach.

2 (7m 34s):
My father was a phys ed teacher and football and track coach. And he was, he, they people in the city didn't even call him by his name. Again, it's like one of those lifetime TV movies. It would just be, Hey coach, hey coach, coach. So you're, you're in the grocery store and someone's screaming across the tomatoes, Hey coach, see you at the game this weekend. And then everyone would come out to the football game, the whole city.

0 (7m 54s):
Yeah. And how would you describe yourself as a kid? I mean, your dad was a coach. Were you, I mean, fifties, sixties, you, I know you grew up in the sixties, girls started to play more sports or to, you know, that started to become more common, but still not until really the seventies. Yeah. Did you play sports as

2 (8m 10s):
A kid? Yeah, very, very little. I played softball, intermural leagues, I played some volleyball and then, you know, being a cheerleader was kind of as physical as you kind of got in the fifties and sixties. Yeah. Yeah. But I truly was my father's daughter. There's not a doubt Out of all four of us, I just took to him in every which way. You know, they say, I guess your first love is your father. That's no joke. He was bigger than life to me and and just influenced me growing up and to this day at 67 years of age. Immensely. Yeah. Very disciplined. I was that kid who was extra early, like getting projects done at school. I was kind of that stay within the lines kind of kid, you know, discipline was big to me.

2 (8m 57s):
Yeah. And my father, you know, that was big to him.

0 (9m 1s):
I guess you were probably, I don't know, 15 or 16 years old when 72 was the year Title IX was passed, which really started to, even the playing field, literally for boys and girls, men and women in high schools and colleges, that there had to be equal access. And that really began an explosion in women's girls and women's sports. Do you remember being 15, 16? You know, cuz I think you were already like into fitness, physical fitness at that time.

2 (9m 30s):
Yeah. My first job was at 17 and my job was working at the Y W C A and it was to put women, and I don't know if you even know what I'm talking about, but in fat jiggly machines.

0 (9m 42s):
Yeah. You've seen, I've seen those, those old news reels of that, do they work those machines? You'd stand in there, there'd be like a strap around you to just vibrate. Right. People would stand in those things.

2 (9m 50s):
Absolutely not. They didn't work. I would go, I'd strap that around the woman's hip thighs and butt. She grabbed a magazine, she jiggled for about 15 minutes. I'd go and turn off the switch and I'd send her on her way.

0 (10m 2s):
Unbelievable. Like, there must have been somebody who said, well, the science shows that this will make you lose weight.

2 (10m 8s):
There was no science to fitness for many, many decades. But women, they came in, they joined their membership and it gave me my first job in the fitness industry.

0 (10m 20s):
This is what we, what your first job was. And, and I don't know, I, what was a Y W C A in 1973? What were there? Classes were there because this is sort of pre aerobics era.

2 (10m 30s):
Yes. That was, we used to call 'em slim nastic classes,

0 (10m 33s):
Slim gymnast.

2 (10m 34s):
And yes, you wore your tights in those like very unattractive body suits and you would circle your arms about a thousand times in one direction, shoulder with height a thousand in the other direction. And that was supposed to tone the arms. So I started teaching those classes. Oh yes. Gosh, I wish I had this all at a reel.

0 (10m 54s):
Yeah.

2 (10m 55s):
But yeah, that was, you know, what was going on then. Then aerobics hit and the leg warmers came out and Jane Fonda, you know, made a big hit with aerobics at that time. And I was then teaching kind of choreographed, I've taught about everything you could teach as far as group fitness. Hmm.

0 (11m 12s):
And, and I guess you stayed in the area you went to for college, you went to SUNY Buffalo, and then you went on to get your master's degree in exercise physiology. And I guess while you were at SUNY Buffalo, you were also teaching at the Y M C, I think dance aerobics, which was like sort of an early kind of aerobics class.

2 (11m 30s):
Yes.

0 (11m 31s):
How did you learn how to become a teacher for that? I mean, was there like a certification or was this like, oh yeah, Ellen, you know, she could do it like, you know, Ellen, you know how to do this right. Like why don't, why don't you just teach this

2 (11m 42s):
Class? Yeah. In the early days that's exactly what you did. And then it started where there were tapes and oh my gosh, I remember we had to like, I had albums at home and had to design my own music and put it it on one of those little, you know, cassette tapes,

0 (11m 55s):
Cassettes, yeah.

2 (11m 56s):
You really kind of did a lot of winging it. And then they started to get a little bit more organized when jazz size started pulling together kind of dance aerobics and more of a structured format, but nothing ever based on science. Yeah. You know, it really was this kind of trendy fad type of stuff, particularly for women. Yeah.

0 (12m 16s):
And how would you describe your, your physical fitness level at that time? Your teaching dance aerobics and you were in your probably late twenties at that point. Were you in pretty good shape?

2 (12m 25s):
Yeah. And working at the Y M C A, it was very interesting because working there full-time, you know, I was in the weight room with the men and there were no, at that time in the late seventies, early eighties, women lifting weights. Yeah. But being, I knew all these guys and I worked there full-time, I'd go down in this basement weight room and I was lifting weights with them. I was doing some triathlons. I, I was definitely, you know, into the fitness part of things.

0 (12m 51s):
Hmm. And I guess eventually you worked your way up to become the director of the Y M C A in Niagara Falls, right?

2 (12m 57s):
Yes. I became the first female director. There was only men before me.

0 (13m 2s):
So you had a pretty good life. I mean, you and I think you got married and eventually had a kid. Was your expectation to stay, you know, because you had a big family, your mom and dad and siblings and aunts and uncles all there. Did you expect that you would make a life in Niagara Falls?

2 (13m 19s):
So, how I married my high school sweetheart. My sister moved to Fort Lauderdale and I would come here and I would just want to go to all of the fitness studios and gyms and see what was going on here and could not believe such a difference between the small town of Niagara Falls. And there was just, wow. A real desire to, you know, I was a big fish in a small pond in Niagara Falls as I kept pushing through, you know, managing the Y and all of this. But there was this great desire to come here and I knew I had to start to be a small fish in a big pond. But yeah, my husband at that time and I moved here to Florida, we did not hear our son at that time. And then we had him here in Florida.

0 (14m 0s):
But you moved to Florida without a plan?

2 (14m 3s):
Well we didn't have jobs. Nope. We did not. And, but you know, spas were great. We were huge in Florida at that time. So I applied for a job, it was called spa and that's where the movie stars would come. Like Dallas was big then, and Linda Evans would come and stay a week, you know, this is where you would come, you'd stay

0 (14m 24s):
Weak. Oh right,

2 (14m 25s):
Okay. You'd get fit. Yeah, you'd take a thousand classes. And I went and tried out for a job there, got that and said, wow, I'd like living in this, working in this kind of environment.

0 (14m 38s):
And you were hired as the exercise physiologist, you had a master's degree. So you were, I mean obviously you had serious qualifications and what did that mean you were, you were hired to oversee their exercise programs?

2 (14m 50s):
So I did a, a lot of the testing. So when the Clants came in I would do like sub max cardio testing, that type of thing on a bike usually to see where they're at. I then gave them some information of what they should train at heart rate wise. So I was doing this way back and then give them actually a written program to go home with. Now this is before, you know, it was a lot of computer kind of things going on. So I literally remember like handwriting all of this out with sometimes stick figures, which is absolutely insane. Yeah.

0 (15m 23s):
Tell me what was happening in the world of fitness in 1988, you know, when you started, because I think you end up being there for about five years at Bonaventure.

2 (15m 32s):
Yeah. So that was like aerobics and you know, it was all about fat burning for these women. That's what they were interested in. Yeah. So there was a ton of classes. I taught water aerobics, I taught stretch, I saw relaxation, I did morning walks with them in the morning. We had a dietician there. So there was a lot of nutrition and it was very high end. And the owners at that time were very willing to put a lot of money into it. Which, you know, I had never been around whatsoever in my life. So I just thought that this was like the best,

0 (16m 7s):
Take me back to an Ellen Latham class in 1990. You know, your dad was the coach, so he was the guy with the whistle and he was like, let's go guy hustle, let's go. Was that your style as a fitness instructor?

2 (16m 19s):
Totally. There are people today who are like, do you remember when you were, and I had very curly, thick Italian hair down my back. It was of huge volume with those headbands on a very scary, some of the photos are and yeah, I was like overzealous and over inspiring and yeah, I was my father.

0 (16m 40s):
Would you, would you like, come on, let's go. You know, don't be wimps. Like that kind of stuff. Like tough

2 (16m 46s):
Love. I wasn't that. I wasn't that. And it's so funny you say that because when we created Orange Theory, I told the guys, please let's not have bootcamp in our name. Yeah. Cuz I did not like that. 10 is enough. Give me more. Yeah. I wanted that. 10 is more than enough. You look great and you tell me when you're ready to push a little more. I'm here to support that.

0 (17m 7s):
Yeah. There's a photo of you in your, gotta be in your late thirties, early forties and you're just ripped. You are just like really strong. You're, you got, you're think you're doing rows with weights. Yeah. And so, I mean, did you have women who saw you and say, I wanna look like you and show me how to do that?

2 (17m 29s):
Yeah, I mean women, like my arms, they definitely did you get a lot of cotton arms and legs and that was, you know, cause I was working out with the guys and you know, definitely women who started to be more comfortable with that. But it was a very slow integration because women were very panicked that they were gonna become too muscular. There was that for many years. The fear of, oh, I don't want to get bulky, I don't want to get big. I liked what was going on, you know, in my body. Because

0 (17m 58s):
You were

2 (17m 58s):
Strong. I, I just really liked it. I like all aspects of it. So, but you know, a lot of women weren't quite ready for that.

0 (18m 6s):
You, in your first like few years there, you and the man, you moved out with a husband at the time. You divorced when I think your son was little, maybe a year or two old.

2 (18m 16s):
Right.

0 (18m 18s):
How did you deal with that at the time? I mean, I can't imagine. I can't imagine That was a really hard time for you.

2 (18m 26s):
Yeah, he was two and definitely the, you know, definitely one of the major hurdles when you look down the hurdles of your life and the challenges of your life. Listen, we were together since we were 14, 15, small town Niagara Falls. And nothing majorly happened up and beyond. We've kind of, you know, grew into do different people. Yeah. You

0 (18m 47s):
Were so young. Yeah. You didn't Yeah,

2 (18m 49s):
It really was that. But he was a fantastic father to my son. He is like a part of our family now. Nick, my existing partner in him, we've all go and spend time at my home in Nashville, literally under the same roof visiting my son and the grandkids. Wow. We have the healthiest type of divorce that could be.

0 (19m 13s):
Oh, that's awesome. All right, so meantime you, you're building this reputation in Florida and then in like I guess around 1993 you, you have an opportunity to jump over to another spa in Miami Beach. This one called the Williams Island Spa. And you end up spending several years there like I think like six years and pretty early on you became the spa director.

2 (19m 37s):
Yes.

0 (19m 38s):
And what, what was that like? I mean it was, this was 1993 was I guess a, a luxury spa.

2 (19m 44s):
It was a luxury spa. This was my dream job. I absolutely love working with the clients. You know, fitness and exercise isn't something that people skip through the tulips and wanna do, at least not the masses. You know, you got some that are innately love exercise, but it's not like a massage. Oh I can't wait to go get a massage. You know? Right. So it's how do you change that way of thinking for people? How do you really give them hope when they really feel I'm not gonna be able to do it, it's too hard, I won't stick with it. All of these doubts. It was that kind of challenge that I loved. Yeah. And then even more doors started opening where I wrote a fitness column for the Miami Herald.

2 (20m 25s):
I did fitness tips on Fox News and Channel seven and Miami. Hmm. And then I started doing celebrity boot camps. So soap opera stairs from New York would come down for a week. I gave them the idea, cuz I used to do this at Bonna Venture Spa. Yeah. So they'd come down for a week and I'd have a group of my trainers and myself and we would put 'em up and we would feed, feed 'em and we'd do everything from rollerblading on the beach to fitness classes. And it was really for the facility all about this gray publicity they would got. And that got a lot. Yeah. It was truly the dream job.

0 (21m 2s):
Ellen, you I think have the kind of personality that, but you've just got a million ideas and, and I have to imagine that while you were there, you were just inundating the owners with ideas. Like let's do this, let's do that, let's do this and that. And probably some of those are many of those ideas brought in more customers.

2 (21m 21s):
Absolutely. I literally brought spinning to Florida. So I was at a convention and it was great. They'd send me to every convention and I'd want to go and I saw Johnny G in the corner who Johnny g invented spinning. And he's in the corner with two bikes and I go over and I'm talking to him and he's from South Africa, he's got this accent and he says, you know, this is great workout classes on bikes in a group. And you know, I'm kind of looking a little sideways. He's going, oh, oh see, I don't know. He put me on a bike. He put me through like, I think a half hour. And I was like, oh yes, yes. And yes, I went back to the owners and I said, please let me bring in 10 bikes.

2 (22m 2s):
You will get ridiculous publicity

0 (22m 4s):
From this. And this is like 98, 99. Well

2 (22m 7s):
Yeah, but, but way before it was out there. Yeah.

0 (22m 10s):
Because I remember when I was a kid we had like a, an exercise bike. Those existed but spinning was different. Yeah. This was new.

2 (22m 18s):
Absolutely. So they were like, okay Ellen, what do we, I said, listen, don't worry about it. I just intuitively felt there was something to it. Yeah. Well we brought it in and

0 (22m 29s):
You brought 10 spin bikes in

2 (22m 30s):
10 spin bikes. Okay. You couldn't people, I mean there were wait lists beyond wait lists and Miami Herald the Sunset and all the newspapers, the TV stations. What is this weird class? Cuz it wasn't, it wasn't out there. And, but you're absolutely right. I was just always excited about innovation, about, you know, what's next. Yes. You're spot on.

0 (22m 51s):
All right, so you start spinning classes there at the gym and everything's going great and you get fired.

2 (23m 0s):
I did

0 (23m 2s):
1999. What, what You're 43 years old I think around that time. What, what's going on?

2 (23m 7s):
So, you know, these were private owners and I'm, me and I was always into continually wanting to do more and grow. And I think I was feeling that the four walls were maybe, you know, a little tight and I wanted to do some things on the outside more.

0 (23m 23s):
You were entrepreneurial.

2 (23m 24s):
Exactly.

0 (23m 25s):
But you were an employee of the Williams Island Spa and they wanted you to focus on their business, understandably.

2 (23m 32s):
Exactly. Yeah. And I probably pursued a few things that, you know,

0 (23m 37s):
What did you do?

2 (23m 38s):
So Fort Lauderdale didn't have spinning, so my friend owned a gym and I had conversations with him of, you know, wanna partner up. We put 15 bikes in. Now I had this kind of down to a science and you know, he was like, yeah. And so

0 (23m 54s):
Let's bring those. And, and so you bought some bikes or you bought them together?

2 (23m 58s):
So we got 'em together and we were gonna do this little, which I, I had discussions with, you know, my owners about

0 (24m 4s):
This. Wait, they found out about this. Did you try to Correct. Did you keep the gym quiet or you or,

2 (24m 9s):
Or I I had conversations with them in the early stages about it then Yeah. Kind of silent. Then they brought me in to kind of, is this something you're doing? And I said, yeah, I really want to do this type of thing. And they said, well then we need to part ways.

0 (24m 22s):
Wow.

2 (24m 23s):
And it was like quite scary because again, I'm like out of a very good paying job and you know, I've got a nine year old son and I'm single parenting and, but again, it was just this like, there was obviously an itch that I had to scratch.

0 (24m 39s):
Yeah.

2 (24m 39s):
But at that moment, of course you're sitting in, wow, what did I do now?

0 (24m 46s):
Yeah.

2 (24m 47s):
So basically get up the next day with that ache in the pit of your stomach. Yeah. And you know, really decided, you know, and this is where you know, my father, he was still alive then. He was such a great influence and he was one that focused on, so there's a sports psychologist theory called momentum shifting. And you can momentum shift up positively or down negatively. So you know, your team's losing, your players are not performing. Instead of focusing on what's not going right, focus on what they do. Well have discussions about that. Put energy into that and that's how you will climb out of that. And he was lived by this whole momentum shift up theory.

2 (25m 27s):
We actually had discussions about that at that time.

0 (25m 30s):
And you called him and you said, dad, I, I've gotta lead this job. Or they're basically asking you to to leave. Yeah. Yeah. And I don't know what to do. And do you remember what he said to you?

2 (25m 39s):
You know, he made me start to think about, well what do I do? Well what can I start building off of? So I did get that little concession spinning, concession going and that brought a nice supply. Not a lot. Yeah. But at least you know, some finances in. And then I started doing Pilates cuz I went and got a Pilate certification. I just kept certifying and everything. And I bought one machine. I put it in a spare room next to my son's bedroom. And I had, I solicited the women in my spinning classes to come and do private Pilates with me in my home. Hmm. And that's how I started my entrepreneurial hanging of a shingle in a spare room next to my son's bedroom.

0 (26m 24s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment. How Ellen moves from that spare room in her house to her own studio. And how an unexpected windfall from Cole's department store helps her grow even bigger. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built this.

Miro (26m 48s):
Today's episode is sponsored by Miro, which is actually a tool we rely on heavily to build this show. If you haven't heard of Miro, it's the most incredible visual collaboration tool. At first glance, it might seem like just a simple digital whiteboard, but Miro is much, much more than that. It's an infinite board where your team can build on each other's ideas and create something great together from anywhere. Pick from thousands of templates to get started. Like a quick brainstorm or a user journey map or flow chart. Our team uses Miros mind map to think of guests for the show and see how they're connected to each other. Then we use Miros Swim lane diagram to cut out any confusion on who needs to do what. By mapping out processes, roles, and timelines, it just builds consistency when we all have this one source of truth. Give it a try by becoming part of the How I built this community Miro board. Head on over to miro.com/built to tell us about your experience discovering the show. Leave your thoughts with sticky notes, comments, reactions, and more. That's miro.com/built.

Headspace (27m 52s):
The last few years have taught us how important mental health is to our overall state of wellbeing. I know the stress of it all has definitely affected me, but I figured out some good ways to ground myself. And one of the tools I use is Headspace. Headspace helps improve your mental health through guided meditations, mindfulness practices, breathing and calming exercises and so much more. And these programs can help reduce anxiety, boost your mood, and help you sleep better. Headspace has helped me and more than 100 million people worldwide they can help you too. Listen up, you do not want to miss this because I have arranged something special for a limited time. All of you can try Headspace for free for 30 days by going to headspace.com/built 30. You won't find this offer anywhere else. You must use MyLink. That is H E A D S P A C e.com/built 30 to unlock all of Headspace free for 30 days. This is not something they normally do. headspace.com/built 30.

0 (29m 1s):
Hey, welcome back to how I Built this. I'm Guy Raz. So it's around 1999, 2000. And Ellen is teaching Pilates out of a spare room in her house. She'd love to open her own studio but she has no money to do it. And then one day when she's literally getting her nails done, she stumbles on an opportunity.

2 (29m 22s):
I did my nails at a spa that had two floors. The second floor, the woman who owned it had kind of a storage room, 1100 square feet that she just storage stuff in. The girl who did my nails, I was telling her all about and I said, you know, I don't know, I just feel like there's something to this Pilates. I think if I did it in a group setting, no one was doing Pilates with 10 machines. Absolutely not at that time. No one, A matter of fact when I went for certification they kind of poo-pooed doing it in a group. There's no way you can do this in a group, you gotta correct people too much. And, but my brain just works differently of how I saw it. And so I just felt there was something to it. And yeah, so I, she said, talk to the owner, I'm gonna set you up with a meeting with her.

2 (30m 7s):
I talked to her, she said, I'll take the boxes out. Let's figure out a a year to year lease. So I didn't have to go hang a shingle anywhere. And yeah, Nick, my partner who now were at 22 years being together at that time we had been together a couple years and he basically said, I will loan you the money to buy the machines. And I bought 10 Pilate machines.

0 (30m 28s):
How much did each one cost? Do you remember?

2 (30m 30s):
Oh, they were pretty expensive. I think the whole thing cost about $38,000 that he loaned me. Wow. And I bought 'em right out and I put 'em in there. I figured out how to do it in a group. I was only doing one-on-ones before, but how

0 (30m 44s):
Would I teach? But now you had 10 clients Yeah.

2 (30m 47s):
Of group. That's right. But that's right up my alley is kind of figuring out group fitness a little out of of typical lane. Yeah. And it exploded. Hmm. And I paid Nick back in four months.

0 (31m 1s):
Wow. And were you leading all the classes? Was it just you in this studio and you teaching all the classes? Or were you able to hire somebody else?

2 (31m 10s):
There was me and one other person, but I was absolutely teaching morning, night and Denny. Wow.

0 (31m 16s):
Yeah. So you were there all the time running this thing. And what was the studio called?

2 (31m 20s):
So it was called Ellen's Studio Fit

0 (31m 22s):
And it was just

2 (31m 23s):
Pilates. Just Pilates.

0 (31m 25s):
Okay. Tell me a little bit about, cuz Pilates is a lot of core exercise, right? But there's not a lot of resistance or impact. Right?

2 (31m 33s):
So Pilates is about your stabilizer muscles. So you have muscles at your joints, at your spine. They stabilize your bones muscle to muscle that they are your inside muscles. That's how I look at 'em. You have outside muscles, your workout in the gym, these are your inside muscles. So yeah, they're going to make you from the inside out strung. This is gonna prevent injury, this is going to give you better posture, this is gonna give you more flexibility. And many of the women saw differences in their trunk because the trunk Yeah. Is the main stabilizing. Right. You know, muscular for your arms and legs to work off of. So they all, they started seeing all this reshaping and that's what they absolutely loved about it.

0 (32m 11s):
And it was all women, your customers,

2 (32m 13s):
Very few men. Very few men, all women. Although a funny, exciting story, one of my women clients was Matt Damon's wife. Now Lucy, she was a bartender in Miami and he is still married to her a matter of fact. Wow. And so she's coming taking classes when she was just started dating him. And I don't forget her telling me one day, so I'm gonna bring my boyfriend to class, do you mind? And I said, absolutely not. Of course bring him. And he goes, well he's kind of like a movie star. And so it was right out of the gate, like Matt Damon's taking a Pilates class.

0 (32m 48s):
Yeah. So the Pilates gym as a standalone Pilates gym lasted for about four years, is that right? Yes. Okay. And you, because of a variety of things, you had to move the location and you were getting feedback from clients that they wanted something more. You started to think about like a, a new fat burning workout.

2 (33m 10s):
Correct. So they were looking for a workout that would burn fat, that would be of a cardio workout. And Pilates didn't do that. Yeah. And, and then it just so happened that, you know, talk about timing. I guess I've had a lot of fortunate timing. A Cole's department store wanted to build right on top of me. Well my lease wasn't done so they had to buy me out. So now I had like some money to move to a bigger space and I said, okay, I'll build another room and I'm gonna create the ultimate metabolic workout for you guys. So I ended up finding this cheap space, which was bigger and built it out.

2 (33m 52s):
A friend of mine husband was a builder, so he helped me out. And I built the first phase of what now is the Orange Theory fitness workout.

0 (34m 1s):
All right. Let me step out for the story in a second. Ask about the science of weight loss. Because of course this is elusive, right? I mean it's like the fountain of youth or the holy grail, everybody's been searching for it. But my understanding is that weights and resistance training actually has a bigger impact on weight loss than cardio alone.

2 (34m 21s):
It's a combination of both. But when you do cardio like we do it, which is interval training, you are asking the human heart, which is the most important muscle in your body to exert itself over 80%, 80 to 85%. And you create what it's called an oxygen debt. So you know, when you're puffing air, when you're like really pushing hard, if you do at least 12 to 20 minutes of that in your workout, your body has to repay that debt. So over the next 12, 24 hours, the human cells, your body is working harder to bring it back to that homeostatic state. So that is what is changing your metabolism, hormonally, all of those good things, lifting weights is absolutely a great compliment.

2 (35m 6s):
You want there to it, but you would not not wanna have a cardio component.

0 (35m 11s):
Yeah. And so how did you start to think about what, how you could answer the sort of the demand from your clients? How did you start to think about a new kind of exercise regimen?

2 (35m 22s):
Yeah, so that's where I went back on all those years in exercise fizz and really understanding how the human body responds to exercise. And that's when I said heart rate interval training, that is the key because what you can do in 12 to 20 minutes of getting your, your heart rate over 80%, you would have to go jog at just a steady state pace for an hour and a half. So 12 to 20 minutes to an hour and a half pick one, most people would pick the 12 to 20. Yeah. So when you want to challenge yourself, especially in intervals, the muscle cells that you wanna hit are all in your lower body. You know, that's where the large muscle is of our body.

0 (35m 59s):
That's where you start to get your heart rate goes up, squatting for example.

2 (36m 3s):
Correct. Correct. So treadmill's the best way to do that. That's the best piece of equipment. And then we did put strider and bike in there for people with orthopedic issues. Got it. And then the rowers was non impact power. So think of power as like a light bulb. So a 100 watt light bulb has more wattage to it than a 40 wat light bulb. As you age, you lose wattage. That's that energy. I need another cup of coffee. You're losing this energy cellularly. So I need to find something that, so for example, CrossFit uses box jumps. So you know how they explosively jumped Well I knew my knees weren't gonna be interested in that and my women weren't gonna be interested in that.

2 (36m 44s):
So I had to figure out what could I find that would give the same physiologic response but non-impact to the joints. And I found these rowers that no one was using in the corner of gyms. Yeah. And so I said perfect, I'm gonna use rowers for my power wattage, I'm gonna use treadmills for my interval training and I'm gonna use dumbbells and body weights and weighted balls and bo suits for what's called usable functional strength.

0 (37m 10s):
And by the way, this was not a new theory, like this was the basis of a lot of exercise routines. Right? Yeah.

2 (37m 16s):
I absolutely did not create interval training. It was created in the 1940s. And basically all I did is put terms, we have base pushing all out base is your aerobic zone, push is your anaerobic zone and all out is you kind of just finish off with piling some lactic acid in the system where you have to walk it off. Right.

0 (37m 34s):
Basically the idea was you'd have three different intensity levels during the exercise, the base level I guess just through sort of aerobic moderate heart rate. Yeah, yeah. Aerobic and then push like really getting your heart rate going and then all out getting you to the maximum heart rate,

2 (37m 50s):
Right? Yes. Correct. And so it's really this dance between base and push that you become extremely metabolically charged. And that's how I was training. So that's a part of it too. Don't forget, I was now at that time 51. So it was like, there was also an aspect of what am I, you know, wanna do in the next couple decades without damaging myself. Yeah. There was this great varied fitness levels in a class. I mean I would have a 65 year old with a, you know, who had heart issues next to a Miami Dolphin in my class. Yeah. And they're all taking the same class.

0 (38m 26s):
But this is, this is interesting cuz you're coming up with a, a new way of exercising this treadmill. There's gonna be the rower and the rower's low impact. That's great. Yeah. But I mean you, it seems very counterintuitive because if you were, you had to move to a new space and like from a, you'd already invested all this money in Pilate's gear, like from a cost effective perspective, like the best thing to do would've been to like just put mirrors all around the walls in a couple of ballet bars and then done You got a class, right? Like you don't have to buy any equipment. Now you're talking about treadmills and rowing machines. I mean that's like

2 (39m 3s):
Insane.

0 (39m 4s):
Yeah. That's insane.

2 (39m 6s):
It it is absolute. And and even more insane is that I had not piloted that actual program. So I'm running my women around parks doing base pushing all out. I'm got BOSU in the parking lot

0 (39m 19s):
Doing those BOSU balls are, it's like a half yoga ball with a rigid back and you can stand on it and use it for pushups and Right. And you were, you were using bosu balls and things like that as a to experiment to figure out what worked

2 (39m 34s):
In parking lots.

0 (39m 35s):
In parking lots with whoever would sign up.

2 (39m 37s):
Exactly. Well I had this group that was, you know, very committed to me, my Pilates women. So when I opened up that studio, I spent every penny on the treadmills. I wanted to pay everything all out. You know, that comes from my father, a family thing. Not a lot of things. You got on credit, you're paying stuff out. And I did that and I'm like, oh my goodness, what if this doesn't work? I just signed a five year lease, I have all this equipment in there. And I just, again, we get back to intuition. We get back to what's in your gut that you feel. I just feel that there is no way people aren't gonna exit there without results.

0 (40m 14s):
So how many treadmills and rowing machines did you initially buy?

2 (40m 18s):
10. 10 treadmills. 10 rowers.

0 (40m 20s):
10 rowers. 10 treadmills. And when you start it, like when you bring people in, you're like, okay, we got the rowers and the treadmills and the bosu balls and just like listen the weights and just follow my instructions. Like that must have been weird to like go into a room with like 10 treadmills, 10 rowers behind it. Bosu balls and weights and like what, how did people react initially?

2 (40m 45s):
Oh my gosh, when I, again, I wish I had like video of that in the early days cuz it was literally a three ring circus and there was a lot of trial and error, let's face it. You know, and the fact of figuring out, like I had people running into the bathroom throwing up cuz they over exerted and I had to really figure out like how to bring them back with language, with, you know, the design of the template. So there was absolutely a learning curve. Thank goodness many of those early members are still working out in that original studio doing this workout cuz they found such success with it. But they stuck with it even through the learning process.

0 (41m 24s):
So initially this was called the ultimate workout, right? That's what you called it.

2 (41m 28s):
Ellen's ultimate

0 (41m 28s):
Workout. Ellen's ultimate workout. And it was an hour, right? Yeah. Roughly an hour. What did, I mean, just from a business standpoint, right? How did you make sure that this was gonna be sustainable because you had invested a lot of money in all this equipment. Walk me through the math. Like you had to charge people for the classes and you needed the classes to be full. Yeah.

2 (41m 49s):
You, you know what's really crazy then? I didn't even sell membership said I only sold it by the class. By the class. Okay. That's really crazy. So you have to really be performing if you're talking about, you know, you're only getting paid for people showing up in that class, not just a membership turning over every year. So, you know, it really forced me to not only be a great performer with this kind of workout myself, but start to train other coaches to coach this workout as well. Yeah. You know, listen, in the beginning it was a crawl. It wasn't like I was packed out of the gate. People were a little like, whoa, what is this? Oh my god, it's too hard. But it had some sustainability and I think that comes from the performance end of things of me getting on that floor, Vinny getting on that floor, who was my coach at that time.

2 (42m 36s):
And just really making sure that people left there feeling noticed, making sure you did a great job. You know, really things that are more important than just going in there and killing a workout. Yeah.

0 (42m 50s):
And who were your customers at that time? I mean, who were your typical, was it like a super fit woman between 25 and 40?

2 (42m 59s):
It was probably women 25 to 50. It wasn't super fit because again, I wanted to really appeal to, you know, like I said, my Pilates women, I had a variety of fitness levels. Yeah. And that's where, you know, we really worked from the front of the house, the front desk to the coaches making the first workout, the first five workouts, you know, really down, just walk. They're no jogging, don't jog. I know you can jog. Just

0 (43m 27s):
Walk again. Walk on the treadmill. Don't run, don't.

2 (43m 29s):
Okay. Because the, the key was making them successful. Yeah. I knew that if they exited the front door going, oh, I can do that. Yeah. They'll come back. Our, our oldest member is 95 years old in Colorado and you know, people can do the workout.

0 (43m 46s):
And so that was, again, this was not yet Orange Theory, this was correct. Ellen's ultimate workout and Yep. And how long do you think it took you before you were, you could kind of breathe the sigh of relief and say, okay, this is working, this gym is working good, we got it going.

2 (44m 1s):
It was probably a good year. A good year that, you know, we figured out how to really design these templates that, you know, we weren't killing people, but we were

0 (44m 9s):
Really, and when you say we, it was just you and this guy Vinny. So there

2 (44m 11s):
Was Vinny, there was myself and there was Casey who actually now owns my Ellen's ultimate workout

0 (44m 17s):
Studio. Oh wow. Which still exists.

2 (44m 19s):
Yes, absolutely. And the ultimate workout still exists and is done very busy there. So there were the three of us that were coaching classes.

0 (44m 27s):
All right, so you've got this going and it takes about a year before, but then now you're kind of in a stable position. You are not sitting back and thinking, okay Ellen, now am I gonna conquer the world? That was not what you were thinking.

2 (44m 41s):
Absolutely not. I was thrilled. I was like, oh my goodness, look what's happened. I literally started working out of a spare room in my house. I did this like little build over time. And I have this great place that people love. I love going to, it's, I was thrilled.

0 (45m 2s):
All right, so you've got this gym that is pretty good doing well and you've been making a living and I guess one of your clients, she mentions to you that her husband, a guy named Jerome Kern is like an expert in franchising and that you should meet him. What, what do you remember about that?

2 (45m 21s):
Correct. So she came to the front desk one day and she said, Ellen,

0 (45m 25s):
What's her name by the way?

2 (45m 26s):
Her name is April. April, okay. And she, you know, said, look at this workout is crazy. It's wait list only.

0 (45m 33s):
There was a wait list to get on.

2 (45m 35s):
Yes. And so she said, you know, listen, my husband and his and his partner are Enfranchising, they were big in the massage ENV world. He owned, you know, a whole region of Massage Env and

0 (45m 47s):
Then Massage Env is like a mis

2 (45m 48s):
Massage franchise. Yep. And his partner worked for the company, Dave Long, they partnered off and they created their own franchise company and they're looking at concepts and she said, I told them about you. I said, you got to meet this woman that's got this thing going on over there. And Guy really funny how the story goes. I remember exactly that moment and looking up at her and just the franchise word was very frightening to me. It was the unknown. Yeah. And I looked up at her and I said, April, you know, that's great, but I know nothing about franchising, you know? Yeah. I don't think so. And she left.

0 (46m 27s):
Yeah.

2 (46m 28s):
So what had happened was I went home and I'm like telling Nick and my sister and you know, this is so crazy. This one of my clients came in and she's, and they're like, entertain it. Have a conversation, have

0 (46m 41s):
A conversation. Of course,

2 (46m 42s):
You know, if anyone could pull this off, you probably could like get in there and give it a good run. And so she came in like the next day and we're talking and I said, you know what? Why don't we connect? And Jerome ended up coming over with Dave. They took a class, we sat down, had a conversation. And I gotta tell you, I don't know much about partners and business cuz this was my first, but we decided to give it a shot.

0 (47m 15s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment. Why Ellen decides to trust two strangers with her business and how it grows from one gym to over a thousand in only nine years. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

Sandy Spring Bank (47m 41s):
Whatever you're saving up for a CD from Sandy Spring Bank lets you grow your savings at a guaranteed rate. Right now earn interest at 4.5% a p y on an eight month CD special, or 4.25% a P Y on a 14 month CD special. Learn more@sandyspringbank.com slash cd specials. Minimum opening deposit to earn the annual percentage yield is $500 for the eight month CD special and $2,500 for the 14 month CD. Special member F D I C.

Against the Odds (48m 11s):
Hey, I'm Mike Corey, the host of Wondery podcast. Against the Odds, each week we share thrilling, true stories of survival and put you in the shoes of the heroes who live to tell the tale. In our next season, we take you to a remote corner of Alaska that's home to one of the densest brown bear populations in the world. But in recent years, the change in climate has caused a shortage of the Bear's natural food sources. More and more bears are venturing into the town of Hayes, Alaska in search of food, putting residents on edge. Then everyone's worst fears are realized. Three experienced backcountry skiers unknowingly ski over a den and awaken a mother bear and her cub. She attacks and one of the men is left fighting for his life while his friends desperately wait for help to arrive. Follow against the odds wherever you get your podcasts, you can listen, add free on the Amazon Music or Wondery app.

0 (49m 19s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this. So it's 2009, 2010 ish. And to expand her business, Ellen has joined up with two franchising experts, Jerome Kern and Dave Long. They plan to open a pilot studio in Fort Lauderdale with the same concept as Ellen's ultimate workout, but with different branding starting with the colors.

2 (49m 42s):
My room was red at Ellen's ultimate workout. So they said, you know, why are your walls all red and this and that? I said, well, colors to me represent energy and red is dramatic and intense. And so they said, well we don't wanna copy that. Exactly. You've got your studio there. They said, and so we talked about colors and orange is another very dynamic color that's about energy and all of these great things. Yeah. And Orange was like a close sister to the red. Yeah. And then I, I don't know, I think it was Dave who came up with Orange Theory because of course the theory is you need to get your heart rate in that anaerobic zone, 12 to 20 minutes. And that's how the name came about.

0 (50m 20s):
So Orange Theory was gonna be the new name and it was gonna be, so Ellen's ultimate workout would would remain correct, but Orange Theory would be spun out of that as a new brand. And you opened the first location not too far from there in Fort Lauderdale.

2 (50m 36s):
It was in Fort Lauderdale. It was a good like 25 minutes away. It wasn't Right.

0 (50m 39s):
Yeah. And how long did that take to build that out and, well

2 (50m 44s):
That was, you know, yeah, we had to figure out what does that mean? What does it look like? How big is that? What is the best footprint? So that was small. I think that might have been about was that 2,900 or 3000 square feet we started identical. The 10 treadmills, 10 rowers, 10, you know, weight stations, that type of thing to my studio, you know, and then we had to start writing manuals, you know, basically the three of us are looking at each other and going, okay, you know, how do we do this from the ground up? I mean they knew franchising, but you know, if you're gonna duplicate this, you have to find ways that you're going to be able to do it and it not be about Ellen. So yeah, interestingly enough, in the early days they basically said, just so you know, you can't coach here, you can't show up a lot here.

2 (51m 26s):
We have to prove our concept that this can be duplicated and it not be about Ellen. Right. So that's what the challenge was. I did make them put cameras in the studio cuz I wanted to see how the coaches were coaching it. So I did negotiate that.

0 (51m 42s):
I mean they're right that to scale a business you gotta depersonalize it. Right? Yeah. But my, what I'm wondering is, I mean here you had this concept without any, any desire to franchise it, but then you had two people who knew how to franchise and saw in your concept an opportunity to franchise it, rebranded it Orange Theory and said let's try this. Right. But yeah, how did you protect yourself? Like how did you guys figure out, cuz I'm imagining they were putting in some investment in it and they were gonna put in some money into it. How did you, how did you make sure that you could still control it or own most of it or all of it, or I don't know.

2 (52m 19s):
Oh yeah, I definitely got great counsel and luckily I had, I mean, these gentlemen are just so legit. It's not funny. I just was so fortunate to have, yeah, men who respect me every step of the way, who are, you know, supportive of me and my ideas. And you know, look, this is different as a woman coming in because like you say, you don't know what you're getting involved with, with individuals that you don't know. And yeah, I lucked out.

0 (52m 50s):
You were 50, I'm sorry, I keep repeating your age at the time. I'm just saying it because it's awesome. Like, I want anyone to hear the story, to understand that you can start a business at 55. Yeah. You can start a massive business at 55 or 60. Like you can start a business that will become a billion dollar business. And at the time, did you have a patent on this? Could you patent it this model or could any of, I mean, in theory Dave and Jerome could have just taken the class and taken some pictures and been like, let's just replicate

2 (53m 21s):
This. Yeah, possibly. I mean actually some people tried to do, do that and it, it just didn't like take off. Yeah. When I had it at Ellen, some people flew in and heard about, you know, this woman who's doing this workout and this and that. But you know, gut wise, I felt, you know, Jerome grew up in Buffalo, you know, right in my backyard, which was very, yeah. I felt there were these signs, you know what I mean, guy, there were these signs that said, I don't know, I think like we're good.

0 (53m 50s):
All right, so the orange theory, Jim opens and you're not really allowed to go there much cuz they wanna see if it, if it's gonna work. But presumably from day one, the idea was let's franchise this concept of Orange Theory.

2 (54m 3s):
It was, and look, we felt even if we have one of these, two of these, three of these, let's just do the best we can with, and if you know that's all we have, then we have three fitness studios we share together. I mean, I remember those kind of conversations amongst us, which I think are important as opposed to sitting around a conference table and going, you know, let's, you know, these kind of bizarre expectations and you're maybe not paying attention to the important things.

0 (54m 29s):
Alright, so you have this first Jim and the idea, and it's amazing to me, that's just 2010. Here we are in 2023 at the time of this recording and we're talking about something just 13 years ago. But one of the ideas, I guess is to bring in technology, right? Your, your concept exists. Your concept was there, it was like get your heart rate to one of these three zones, right? Like Yep. You wanna be between 70 and 90%, right? Your maximum heart rate for most of the exercise for most of the hour, right? Yep. And so the concept was there, but there was no, you weren't like giving people heart rate monitors or measuring them, but these guys, your partners, they suggested let's bring this technology into the studio and make that part

2 (55m 15s):
Of it. They did, they did. They said, you know, listen Ellen, you always talk about what you do not measure, you cannot improve. Yeah. What if we did that, you know, legit with everyone having heart rate monitors. So at that time, the only company out there was Polar that really was Sure, you know, doing it,

0 (55m 32s):
The strape your, your belly, right? I think, right? Yeah.

2 (55m 35s):
So we started with them and the guys just really wanted to keep forging forward in this, that they felt that here's a real unique path and lane for us to, not only the workout that you created, but having this valuable information that our members could have in regard to heart rate response.

0 (55m 54s):
Yeah. And who is up there like with Peloton, right? There's like leaderboards and you're kind of competing against other cyclists. This is different, right? You're not competing necessarily against the other people in your

2 (56m 6s):
Class. No, our emphasis is competing against your last best performance. You know, you're only gonna have so many people that are always on that leader board. We offer that, we put that on there for some people who like that. But our emphasis is working against

0 (56m 22s):
Yourself. And the, the model is not a membership model. Oh, it is. But but it's not like a, you don't have to sign it for a year, it's like a month-to-month thing, right?

2 (56m 29s):
Correct. Correct.

0 (56m 31s):
And I'm curious because it's a very, and depending on where it is, an exercise gym can be very risky and isn't necessarily guaranteed to succeed. I mean, I think lots of people listening have been to empty gyms. Right. You know, especially in, in areas where there's a lot of saturation. I mean, did anybody say, you know, there are a lot of gym concepts out there. Like there's bar, there's this, there's that, you know, this is just risky.

2 (56m 57s):
We were told constantly, don't do this, don't put your own money in this. Don't Yeah. There's too much in fitness out there. Absolutely. We heard it over and over and over. Exaggerated over again.

0 (57m 9s):
Yes. And that didn't scare you.

2 (57m 11s):
You know what, again, I think that they believed in me in regard to the workout and we just agreed to reinvest. You know, we, they still had business and Massage Envy. I still owned Ellen's ultimate workout. Yeah. So basically we agreed as partners to put every bit of money coming in, invest it back into the company with heart rate monitoring in these types of things that would truly differentiate us.

0 (57m 43s):
I think within 18 months there were 12 Orange theory studios. Were they all franchised?

2 (57m 50s):
They were franchised, correct. And listen, in the beginning they, you know, it it, it was, it was a lot to work out. We had one in Arizona, we had, you know, most of them being built in Florida around us, which made it easier to control.

0 (58m 5s):
Yeah. But from what I understand, the first few franchise units did not actually perform well. Like this was not going well initially. Like Right. What, what was the problem? Were they just not trained? Well,

2 (58m 19s):
Yeah, I mean, you know, I think it was, you know, do we have the right partner who is the franchisee? And also, you know, some of our systems needed to be, you know, the three Ps we say are really what create great success in franchising. You have to have the right people, the right processes and the right program. Yeah. Well the right people is your franchisee, your staff, so on and so forth. The right program is like, again, the workout that I created. Well the processes are the system. How you checking people in, how you following up with them, you know, those we needed to maybe tighten up a little. So we stopped franchising, we worked on our processes, we worked on the program, the training, this type of thing.

2 (59m 0s):
And then we reopened the franchising concept and that really worked well for us.

0 (59m 6s):
Ellen, how did you guys, I mean you'd gone from running this one gym and teaching classes and then you know, you had some employees and, and so you were kind of overseeing it, but now you've got a growing, you know, even with 10 or 15 or 20 franchises and it grew very quickly, your role changes. Now you are in a corporate setting, you're a part of the corporate executive team. Tell me how you guys divided up responsibilities. Did Dave and Jerome focus on the business and operations end and you focused on the branding side and being a sort of a brand ambassador?

2 (59m 43s):
So the three of us each have these great strength in our lanes. So I consider myself like the artist. So the artist is the one I created. Right? The art of the workout. Then we see like Dave Long as the manager, he manages the business. He's the c e o and Jerome is without a doubt, an entrepreneur. A thousand percent. His concern is how do we open up 10 more? 10 more, 10 more. Yeah. But my intentions never changed from 50 years ago when I got in this business, was I really had the desire to offer great fitness to people. And then the other half of that was to allow a fitness environment that a fitness professional who wanted to work in it could make a decent living.

2 (1h 0m 32s):
Those were two things that I often found lacked in the fitness industry. And that's why a lot of people got out of, you know, getting into fitness. It was like a side job. It wasn't like a career. Yeah. So I love the fact there's more and more fitness professionals now I'm giving work to.

0 (1h 0m 47s):
Yeah. How did you, I mean the growth of this business just exploded. Like you, you opened the first location in 2010, right? By 2014. So four years later you've got almost 80 studios. By 2016 you have 400 studios in six countries and 40 states. I mean that pace just seems totally nuts. Just such a huge explosive growth I think, you know, did you, up until this point, your whole life you had a very clear way of living. You were teaching classes, you were running gyms, it was one location.

0 (1h 1m 30s):
That's what you did. Now in your fifties, you completely changed the way you live and work and structure your time and your life. So how did you cope with that? Yeah,

2 (1h 1m 41s):
It's a lot. And especially now you, I'm 67 years old, so it's a type of thing where I guess because this came to me late guy in my fifties. Yeah. I spent many a decades living a certain way. So I'm not really living much different. I the same friends, I have the same, you know, circles, the same things that I do, this type of thing. That makes any sense. Yeah.

0 (1h 2m 3s):
And it's interesting cuz a lot, I mean there are some businesses that where the people start them when they're very young and they don't have any kids or mortgage. There's some businesses of course, people start when they have kids and they make it work. And then you started this, your kid was already older. He did, didn't need you to like pack his lunches anymore.

2 (1h 2m 20s):
Exactly. He living on his own, he co-owns four Orange Theory studios. Oh wow. He lives in Tennessee. He's got three kids. He's, yeah.

0 (1h 2m 29s):
Let me ask you about Covid. Right before Covid, I think you guys had about 1200 studios in 22 countries. What happened at during Covid?

2 (1h 2m 38s):
Yeah. No, COVID is, was horrible. We have 1500 studios open and 1500 studios closed. That just was devastating. We pivoted as quickly as we can to go to virtual,

0 (1h 2m 50s):
But that didn't really cover it.

2 (1h 2m 53s):
No. We just needed to do what best we could for our members and for our franchisees. You know, that was of our greatest concern.

0 (1h 3m 3s):
But what did you do during that time? How did you, I mean, you guys were probably in crisis mode. Was there ever a moment where you thought, this is not gonna, this isn't gonna survive?

2 (1h 3m 13s):
I don't think that luckily coming out of it, people do want to be in a studio concept or in a group concept. They don't wanna exercise in front of their tv. And we have found that since 2021 we've increased our member base by 51% and we just feel by the end of this year, you know, we'll be back pre covid. Yeah. But, but it's very tough. It breaks our heart because you know, our franchisees are our business partners and there was a lot of struggle going on. Absolutely. Absolutely.

0 (1h 3m 51s):
Thi this is, I mean, today I think you've got how many locations? About 1300.

2 (1h 3m 55s):
1500.

0 (1h 3m 56s):
1500. Okay. 23 countries. I mean it's, it's just remarkable. Right. And this was not your intention or your goal or your expectation, but it made you rich like later in life, which is probably, I have to imagined. Totally unexpected.

2 (1h 4m 13s):
Totally unexpected. Absolutely. I, I, and I would even say that when I'm teaching glasses, I'm like, okay guys, let's make it throw a seventies, eighties, and you know, hopefully maybe even nineties you're still gonna see me here. Hmm. But you know what really excites me is this huge platform to be able to do what I had intentions doing 50 years ago. And maybe then I was only doing it for, you know, the group of 30 women in my class or the spa that I managed to have maybe had 300 members to have like a million individuals who have been touched by this workout and have made their life better. Listen, does it get much better?

0 (1h 4m 50s):
Yeah. And by the way, do you ever teach classes anymore?

2 (1h 4m 54s):
You know, I, I just stopped before Covid. I was coaching right up to before Covid and then I just really haven't gone back to actually coaching. So. Yeah.

0 (1h 5m 4s):
Yeah. And do you take the classes yourself? Oh yeah. Regularly or, yeah,

2 (1h 5m 8s):
Absolutely. Unfortunately right now with the knee, I've got some things going on, but once I get my new knees I'll be ready to go.

0 (1h 5m 15s):
And so how do you adjust for that? Because I, I think that's a big market I think. I think there's a huge untapped market of people who did run, did yoga, did pull, did stuff, and then had hip replacements in their fifties, sixties, seventies. And there's no one who's really, it's like there's physical therapy but there's no classes that are geared towards people like that.

2 (1h 5m 37s):
Yes. I was just talking about this, you know, I talk about that 95 year old woman in Colorado. Do you know that she joined Mid Covid, the Colorado studio and she sent me a picture with her mask on. She was taking class. I said, how are you doing this Betty? Tell me, explain what was your thinking? And she goes, I know all about what goes on with the heart and the lungs and I've gotta fight that now. So why would I not do this? So it's just a, you know, an attitude and I'd love to get out there more with people to say give it a try.

0 (1h 6m 12s):
Yeah. I wonder, Ellen, when you think about what happened, cuz this was only last 13 years of your life right before it was like your life before, which was great. Like you really built a great reputation and, and then life after and what happened, the explosive growth of this concept and all the wealth it created in jobs and all these things. How much of that do you attribute to, to you, your hard work, your intelligence, and how much do you think heads do with just how lucky you got?

2 (1h 6m 44s):
You know, look, I definitely have been described as relentless and you know, I grab out a kind of a dog with a bone and you know,

0 (1h 6m 52s):
You don't let go.

2 (1h 6m 53s):
I really don't. And that, you know, may come from way back my father. So whatever I'm doing and it could be a menial thing, I'm gonna do it at the best that I can do it. Yeah. I'm an intentional learner. I was just listening to a webinar on how heart rate responds when you're on a bike, how it responds when you're on a treadmill, how it responds when you're on a rower. Just the other day, you know, my design team laughs at me at corporate. They're like, are you'll never stop, will you? So intentional learning, I think absolutely being relentless was a big part of success. I think that, you know, many people are in jobs that they're miserable at and what a thing that I'll contribute to my father as well.

2 (1h 7m 33s):
When I was in high school, I remember asking him, gee dad, I don't know what to do. What do you think I should be? What should I take in college? And he looked at me and said, I don't care what you choose, I just want you to be passionate about it. He goes, because when you're passionate about something you do, you will always find work and you may find even a lot of money one day. Hmm. Wasn't he brilliant with that advice? Way, way, way back then.

0 (1h 8m 1s):
That's Ellen Latham, creator and co-founder of Orange Theory Fitness. By the way, a few years ago Ellen had the opportunity to honor her dad Art Keandre on the very football field where he spent much of his his life coaching.

2 (1h 8m 16s):
He probably never made more than $50,000 a year and was the happiest man walking around day to day. And I was able to get the football field that he practiced years and years and played games on named after my father. So it's now the Art Keandre Football Stadium. Oh, and I give two scholarships every year to football players that would need it to go to college. And that's probably a major thing I'm a proud of.

0 (1h 8m 46s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please do follow this show so you don't miss any new episodes on Apple Podcasts. Just click the plus sign at the top of the app and on Spotify, just click the follow button. If you wanna contact our team, our email address is h ibt id.wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built This and mine is at Guy Raz and on Instagram or at How I built this. And I'm at Guy dot Raz. This episode was produced by Alex Chung with music composed by Ramera Bluey. It was edited by Niva Grant with research help from Sam Paulson and technical assistance from Patrick Murray. Our production staff also includes Casey Hermann, JC Howard, Kerry Thompson, KIRO Wakim, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, and Carla Estevez.

0 (1h 9m 34s):
I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey Prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and add free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon Music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear@wonderyshop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.

Business Wars (1h 10m 17s):
Toy Story was the first fully computer animated feature film, but its genius laid not in just its groundbreaking graphics, but also in its storytelling. Viewers became emotionally invested in the journey of the character's Buzz and Woody. The stakes were high for Pixar because a new rival animation studio was gathering strength. Dreamworks was fueled by founder Jeffrey Katzenbergs Quest for revenge against Disney's CEO Michael Eisner, but Katzenbergs not alone in his desire for retribution Pixars. Steve Jobs also wants to out-maneuver Eisner and his magic kingdom. Hi, I'm David Brown, the host of Wondery Show Business Wars. We go deep into some of the biggest corporate rivalries of all time and in our latest series, Pixar has to contend not only with Dreamworks, the new kid in Hollywood, but with Disney's hunger for more control follow business wars. Wherever you get your podcasts, you can listen ad free on the Amazon Music or Wondery app.