0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

White Lies (9s):
This is Chip Brantley, co-host of the NPR podcast, white Lives. Before we found the man in Vancouver, before we sued the State Department, before we snuck into the graveyard of a federal penitentiary, all we had were the photographs, photographs of a group of Cuban men standing on the roof of a prison in rural Alabama. That's the season on the NPR podcast. White Lies.

2 (31s):
Financial Decisions can be obstacles or opportunities. It's what you know that makes all the difference. Is it time to stop renting and start buying? Are you contemplating a career pivot or just want your money to work harder with the globe and mail's independent opinions, objective insights, and helpful tools? You'll make confident decisions. So picture the life you want to live and be bullish. Invest in you. The Globe and Mail.

4 (1m 3s):
We just simply could not deliver enough product on time. We just could not grow the manufacturing enough simply because there were not enough skilled sowers. Hmm. We've found it very difficult to find people to do that kind of work in Santa Cruz. It's pretty much a retirement or university town, and you just never knew when your employees were gonna show up. You know, if if the Grateful Dead came through town, they would be. They would be there not at Osprey.

0 (1m 40s):
Welcome to How I built this, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz, and on the show today how Mike Fain Hour's love of art design and the outdoors led him to launch a bespoke backpack brand Osprey, which grew into one of the most popular backpacks in the world. We live at a time when people feel a sense of urgency To succeed quickly, just look at my inbox every single day.

0 (2m 21s):
I'm inundated with ads for Get Rich quick schemes and pitches for young entrepreneurs who became rich just a year into launching their business. And to you, I say congratulations, except that story, that narrative, the get rich quick with little effort trope. It's extremely rare and it's usually not that interesting or instructive. What is interesting is a get rich slow story, which is the one you're about to hear today, because Mike fau company took about 20 years just to hit a million dollars in annual sales. And for a business with several employees, that's not a lot of revenue.

0 (3m 1s):
Mike founded Osprey, and if you're a camper or a hiker, or you drive a Subaru crossover vehicle, you can mute my voice for a moment. For the rest of you, Osprey, are backpacks widely considered to be among the best? Mike founded Osprey in 1974 in Santa Cruz, California, which is also partly where he grew up. Now, not surprisingly, Mike came from a family of hikers, and in the seventies, if you were really into hiking and camping, the off the shelf options for gear weren't that great. In fact, lots of brands you know of today, Patagonia, north Face, Columbia. These companies were started by people who simply wanted better gear for their own adventures.

0 (3m 44s):
And that's why Mike started making backpacks to solve his problem of not being able to buy one that he liked. And eventually other people wanted him to make their backpacks. And so for much of Osprey's first 25 years in business, it was a very, very small company. Mike Vo Nower never had ambitions to build a massive global brand, but something happened in the early two thousands that would change the trajectory of Osprey. The price of making the packs in the United States became unsustainable. So reluctantly, like his competitors, Mike moved manufacturing to Asia. That shift, as you might imagine, transformed Osprey into an efficient and eventually huge backpack brand.

0 (4m 31s):
In 2021, the company was acquired by Helen Troy, a big consumer products company that also owns things like Hydro Flask and Oxo Kitchen tools. The price paid for Osprey over 400 million. And after 50 years running the business, Mike finally stepped away from the company. Mike fau was born in Portland, Oregon in the 1950s and sixties in a large family, seven kids. In fact, his dad was a Lutheran minister. And I can remember going to church every week with the whole family and not really connecting with the message.

4 (5m 11s):
I think it was something I never quite understood. And I would sit in church and I would look around me and go, do these people believe what they're hearing? Hmm. Actually, that's probably the place where I gravitated towards designing things in my head just to keep awake and

0 (5m 31s):
Pass the time.

4 (5m 32s):
Pass the time. I mean, I'd probably heard several thousand sermons of my father's. They were fascinating on one level, but on another level, probably too much for a child.

0 (5m 46s):
Yeah. So I mean, having seven kids in the family, I mean, how did your parents manage that? I mean, it's, it's hard to imagine today, right? Raising a family of seven, you know, on a minister's income. I mean, people did it, people managed, but but what do you remember? I mean, were you, you know, was was money tight growing up?

4 (6m 4s):
Money was very tight. I, we didn't really understand how tight it was. I think we probably went out to dinner maybe once a year. My father was born in Canada, grew up in Canada, and so every summer we would go up to Canada on vacation. And

0 (6m 25s):
You would drive up there.

4 (6m 26s):
Yeah, we had an old Ford Ranch wagon and we would fit, somehow, we would fit nine of us. I recall I had the wheel well from the back of the car as my own space.

0 (6m 39s):
I, I read that, you know, from your early childhood you were on, you were going on hikes with your family and and we, we do, we hike every weekend with my kids, but for the first couple years, it was a forced march. Like my kids really hated it. And now they, they, they'll grudgingly admit that they like it and they'll go. But if, if, I think if we left them to their, to their own devices, they'd probably just wanna play video games. But we do hike every weekend. Do you remember being a kid and not liking it?

4 (7m 7s):
Oh yeah, actually, I think I was usually the guy in the back trailing everyone else, kind of enjoying what I was looking at and wondering why everybody was hustling so fast, but continuously being behind and also wondering why was I doing this? What was the point of all this? Hmm. But a as I grew older, I definitely fell in love with backpacking and being in the outdoors

0 (7m 34s):
And pitching tents and, you know, and all, all of you would do it. All the kids would, would be on these trips?

4 (7m 40s):
Yeah, they would, we would drive long distances, stop late in the evening, and pitch tents in the dark, horrible old smelly canvas tents that my father must have had since the war. He was a Marine in the, in World War ii. So he, he had a lot of gear from that old backpacks and things that he's continued to use for his whole life.

0 (8m 5s):
Yeah. I heard a story about something that happened when you were a teenager that you actually like, went off on your own in the Sierras and got lost. What's, what's the story? What happened?

4 (8m 19s):
That's, I, I forgot all about that. That's true. I, we were camping in the Sierras, the whole family up at a lake at about 7,000 feet high. And we were camping and we were going to return back to Tahoe. And the drive to get to that lake was horrendous. It was perhaps a five hour drive along windy dirt roads. And I refused to go in the car. I wanted to have an adventure, so I announced that I was gonna hike there

0 (8m 51s):
And meet them back Where?

4 (8m 53s):
In Tahoe City?

0 (8m 54s):
In Tahoe City. They were gonna drive back. You did not wanna drive back. You were gonna hike back on your own. Yes. And did your parents were, were they cool with that?

4 (9m 3s):
They argued a bit about it, but my father prevailed and said, go, go off, do it. And I had a, a ridiculous map, I think about perhaps a state of California map. And somewhere along the trail, without paying attention, I lost the trail. It just sort of petered out and I, I was lost and it was growing dark and I scrambled through Manzanita brush and for several hours came out on exhausted into a clearing, threw my sleeping bag down and fell asleep and woke up and found that I was on the trail.

4 (9m 45s):
Why

0 (9m 46s):
Weren't you scared?

4 (9m 47s):
I was a little bit scared, but I, at the same time, I kind of appreciated the challenge of trying to navigate the terrain. I I did see some bask shepherds up in those mountains and knew that I could probably get help if I needed

0 (10m 2s):
It. Yeah. Yeah. I, this is the other thing that's, I just just learned about this, that that whole part of Nevada, that's a sort of border area of Nevada, California, around Lake Tahoe. There's a massive community of Basks who grew, who were shepherds, who raised sheep.

4 (10m 17s):
Yes. Yeah, they were, I could see them in the distance.

0 (10m 21s):
A and I guess when you were around like middle school age, your family ended up moving to California to actually to Santa Cruz. And then for college you stayed there, you went to uc, Santa Cruz and, and, and I, and I guess majoring in like art and photography basically.

4 (10m 40s):
Yeah. A lot of photography and some etching, drawing and printmaking, which was something I was always quite interested in. And I had my own dark room anyway, and I, it allowed me to learn more about that art. To this day, I've always loved to do art. I still do it.

0 (11m 0s):
Yeah. Tell me about, so, so while you're in college, right? I guess you were also kind of got into, into sewing your own backpacks, like make, like, this is a time, cuz this is early seventies, this is a time when, you know, obviously we, we think of outdoor gear today just didn't, it wasn't really a huge industry, right? Like a lot of people made their own stuff.

4 (11m 23s):
They did. There were kits you could buy that would send you all the cut parts with instructions or you could learn how to do it yourself. My mother taught me how to sew and I have always built my own gear. It's, it's, I don't know, it's a, I guess it's a feeling that if I'm out in the wilderness, I know what I'm using, I can rely on it, I know what's right and what's wrong with it, and I love making things. Hmm. Even built my own bicycles, braising and putting those together. So it's just something I've always done when I, I feel more comfortable when I am surrounded in my environment by things I've made.

0 (12m 7s):
And what were you, I mean, I'm assuming like early seventies, this is like the, the technology obviously has changed a lot, which we'll talk about. But you were making, what, you were making backpacks out of like canvas or cotton material or maybe polyester?

4 (12m 23s):
No, ny nylon fabrics. They were available back then.

0 (12m 27s):
Nylon. Okay. So you would make this stuff for yourself originally for yourself, right? You were making this for yourself, but I guess at, at some point, what, what happened? Did somebody ask you to make some stuff for, for them?

4 (12m 40s):
Yeah. I, to make money, I would occasionally build things for other people, which led eventually to, it dawning on me that I could start a business that way. I was working in a restaurant at the university and I had done some work in the rest in restaurants to make money as a, as a young person. And I quickly decided that I really didn't wanna work for anyone else. I wanted to start my own company and I gravitated towards what I knew how to do.

0 (13m 13s):
But this was not like when you say you wanted to build your own company, you did not have ambitions to build a massive company. I'm assuming you wanted to just have a sort of a storefront where you'd make backpacks for people or,

4 (13m 24s):
That's right. Gear.

0 (13m 25s):
Yeah.

4 (13m 26s):
I opened a retail shop in downtown Santa Cruz and started up by repairing product for people and custom making gear for them for their whatever trip they were going on or activity.

0 (13m 41s):
So this is 1974, I think, when you opened the shop and it was originally called Santa Cruz recreational packs. And, and you dropped out, I think you dropped out of schools. You figured that this is just kind of pointless. I'm not, this is not what I want to do. I wanna Right. Just get on with my life.

4 (13m 58s):
Well, I realized I that making art was going to be a tough proposition to make a living doing. And I, I think I also felt like I needed to contribute by making something functional, let's say, rather than, than simply artistic. Something more practical.

0 (14m 19s):
Yeah. I'm just curious, was it hard? I mean, today you think of, wow, opening a store, you gotta get a three to 10 year lease and you gotta put like all these deposits down. And was it complicated like that when you did it?

4 (14m 33s):
It was actually very simple. I, I started the company with my girlfriend Lori White, and we decided to find a location. We looked in the paper, there was an ad from a, I think it was a lumber company in downtown Santa Cruz that said they had a house for rent. I wrote them a letter, got a reply very quickly. The rent was $150 a month for a retail house and shop. Things were much easier to, back in those days, it was affordable to start a business.

0 (15m 7s):
How did people know about it? Was it in a busy part of town? Was it on a street that people passed by? Did you put a sign up in the window? How did anyone even know that you existed?

4 (15m 18s):
It was on a main street, a thoroughfare from the highway into downtown. I put a sign up. I never spent any money on advertising until perhaps 20 years later. And I had a, an industrial sewing machine. I, I borrowed a thousand dollars from my parents and they would, people would come in and either they would bring their gear that needed repair or they would explain to me what they were doing and I would draw out a design and build that product for them. Probably like a five week wait list.

0 (15m 53s):
Wow. And just backpacks.

4 (15m 55s):
Well, backpacks. But I, I did other strange custom things. For example, I recall once making a, a harness case for a climber who was rescuing peregrine falcon eggs. Wow. Off of o one of the walls in Yosemite. And I would do climbing gear for climbers. They kind of liked the fact that I throw in a lot of extra stitching where they had concerns.

0 (16m 22s):
So really you were an artisan. I mean you were like a 19th century European artisan, like, you know, were a cobbler or a right. I mean you were a maker, that's what you were doing. Yeah, that's right. Shoes. You'd be making shoes, you were baking bags.

4 (16m 37s):
I, I was, I was pretty far from, from being a businessman, I, I never paid much attention to the, the sides of a business that you should finance and sales and marketing. I've never really been very much interested in that. And I've surrounded myself with people that did that much better than I ever could.

0 (16m 56s):
But you were really not running a scalable business. It was you and your girlfriend. No. And the two of you were making one bag at a time and presumably would take a while to make a bag.

4 (17m 8s):
It would take a while. I could sew an internal frame pack and maybe five hours of work. Hmm. And that, back in those days, that was a $75 product. Now it's about 300.

0 (17m 21s):
Yeah. So given that it was hard to scale that it was just the two of you working in that shop, how, I mean, the amount of money you could make was fairly limited.

4 (17m 30s):
It was enough to survive on, I suppose that's all I really cared about at that time. Being 20, 21 years old, I, I didn't have any huge ambitions. I was able to put enough gas into the car to go up to the Sierras and it was, I could work at my own hours. I would get up just before 10 o'clock when the shop would open and I would work, do a lot of my work at late in the evening.

0 (17m 54s):
Yeah.

4 (17m 55s):
It was a great life. I, I feel bad for people now that want to do something like that and I just think it's not quite possible anymore.

0 (18m 3s):
Yeah. Just because the cost of doing business is so much higher. Yeah. And did you, and so I imagine, you know, in your mid twenties you're thinking, this is great. I mean this is what I do. I've got this store and I'm happy doing it and this is what my life is gonna be.

4 (18m 21s):
That's true. I I, I did that sort of work for well over 10 years, I'd say from 1974 to, I got married in 1984 to Diane, my wife.

0 (18m 38s):
Right.

4 (18m 38s):
She joined the business, she came over to work for, with myself and my girlfriend at the time before had the girlfriend from earlier and we grew the business and at some point she said, I think we need to move to the next level. And I, that involved borrowing money, which has always been a difficult thing for me to do. But I agreed. This was in right around 1986.

0 (19m 11s):
So we've, we've jumped 10 years, but I want to kind of just understand that 10 year period for a moment. Cuz you start this in 74 and it really is a, a custom backpack and repair shop in Santa Cruz. And at some point you changed the name to Osprey and it's a bird. I know that. Tell me the name, how you came up with that name.

4 (19m 29s):
I chose that name for one reason. A lot of backpack companies out there were named after the founder or the owner of the company. If you look at how my name's spelled, it's, it's pretty much unpronounceable and no one could spell it.

0 (19m 46s):
Yeah.

4 (19m 47s):
But on the other hand, I dearly didn't want to name a company after myself. I felt like it's, I just didn't want that burden of seeing my name out there on product. I had seen Osprey in the wild backpacking with my father and my brothers, I believe it was in the little Grand Canyon of Wyoming. And it was during an electrical storm and our hair was standing on end and these three or four osprey came, came zooming up over the edge of the canyon. And it was just such a memorable thing and I just chose to use that name.

0 (20m 22s):
Hmm. Alright, so you've got this business going and at some point Diane joins you as your third employee?

4 (20m 30s):
Well, actually around that time when we decided to expand, there was a fourth person, a, a woman named Gabriela Salinas. And the four of us decided to go into wholesaling.

0 (20m 44s):
How how did that happen? I mean, because for 10 years you were really a repair shop in a custom store and, and but presumably you were getting more work, right? You had to hire one person than another person.

4 (20m 58s):
Yes.

0 (20m 58s):
So what happened to get, to get you to, to sort of say, let's go and, and expand even further if, you know, it seemed like things were moving, moving along just fine.

4 (21m 10s):
Well, we had four mouths to feed. We didn't really have enough business on the level that

0 (21m 17s):
We were keeping The four of you, the four people,

4 (21m 19s):
The four partners, yes. Yeah. We were not making enough money. I think at that time, 1986, we were, we figured we were probably making about $3 an hour.

0 (21m 30s):
Right.

4 (21m 31s):
And it was not enough to live on. And we realized that we needed to grow the company, we needed to move into the wholesale realm or we could pick up a much greater customer base. And we were extremely naive about what we were doing. Moving from whole, from retail to wholesale involves a pretty radical change in your ability to manufacture product. Yeah. In a way that's profitable. But we didn't know we, we just decided to do it. We went to trade shows and we, I learned also from repair what works and what doesn't work and what's gonna last out in the field and what will fail.

4 (22m 11s):
So you put all those things together and start talking to, when we hired sales reps, you learn from them on what the market needs. So it's, it's just a learning process.

0 (22m 24s):
So you like, roughly around 1984, I guess you decided to get into wholesale and, and what did that mean? I mean, were, were there wholesalers in Santa Cruz that you could, you know, make a bunch of backpacks for and have them sell them? Where were you going to go find outlets to work with?

4 (22m 46s):
Well, the first thing that it entailed was getting a loan. Yeah. I think at the time, this was actually 1986, we borrowed $35,000 from a local community credit union. And then we had to find a location to start a larger scale production.

0 (23m 4s):
Yeah. And this was all done by hand. This is all gonna be done by hand Yes. In people making this by Okay.

4 (23m 9s):
Yeah. With, with industrial machinery. And then to tap into the wholesale market, I hit the road with my wife. We would drive from one retail mountaineering shop to another and show our product line. And there were some shops that took a chance on us, though. I think our first order came in Santa Barbara, we thought it was a big order. It was only $800 and it took us like three or four night and days of sewing to put that order together. But we delivered it on time.

0 (23m 46s):
And the retail, I mean the retail price for each of those bags was about 75 bucks. So, but I'm assuming you weren't delivering 10 bags, you were probably delivering many more than that because you were gonna, you couldn't sell it to the re to the retailer for $75. You had to sell it to them at a wholesale price.

4 (24m 1s):
Right. I would say it by that time, 1986. So a backpack was more like maybe 150, which meant we would sell it to them for roughly around 70, $75.

0 (24m 13s):
And it was just the four of you guys sewing these bags

4 (24m 17s):
Initially. And then we, we picked up a small crew of sowers and some people who would assemble the packs.

0 (24m 25s):
And you had a little, you had a sort of a factory space in Santa Cruz, right? What, like 10,000 square feet or 5,000 square feet?

4 (24m 34s):
Actually I think it was 2,500 square

0 (24m 36s):
Feet. 2,500. So it's very small. I mean, you had a $35,000 loan. Were, were you, I mean, once you transitioned to, to working with wholesalers, did your business start to boom or did it actually become harder to make money?

4 (24m 52s):
Well, I initially it was harder. We just simply could not deliver enough product on time simply because there were not enough skilled sowers. We've found it very difficult to find people to do that kind of work in Santa Cruz. It's pretty much a retirement or university town. And you just never knew when your employees were gonna show up. You know, if, if the Grateful Dead came through town, they would be, they would be there. Not, not at Osprey. Yeah. Right. Or if the surf was up or the wind for windsurfing or whatever. It's, you just didn't know.

0 (25m 31s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Mike moves Osprey to a place where the Grateful Dead has probably never played. Stay with us. I'm Guy Ross and you're listening to How I Built This.

Huel (25m 50s):
Today's sponsor, Huel started as a passion project Hu's founder Julian was focused on creating the ultimate most nutritious diet for himself. And on his journey, he realized how time consuming this was. So he came up with Huel, a shake that makes convenient, affordable, nutrition accessible to everyone. Hue Black Edition is a high protein nutritionally complete meal in a convenient shake. That means it has everything your body needs in two scoops, including 27 essential vitamins and minerals and 40 grams of protein. Not only that, hue Black Edition is vegan, lactose free, and naturally flavored. It has zero artificial sweeteners and it comes in nine flavors. The Vanilla Shake is my go-to right now, but there's so much more to choose from there. Flavors like banana cookies and cream strawberry shortcake and cinnamon roll, it works out to $2 and 50 cents for a 400 calorie meal. Get a free t-shirt and shaker when you place your first order by going to hue.com/h ibt. That's hue spelled H U E l.com/h ibt.

Justworks (26m 54s):
Hey, small business leaders at how I built this. We hear about how founders have built their companies from the ground up. Today's sponsor Just Works is all about supporting your small business growth. Are you looking for an easier way to onboard and manage remote employees? Justworks has you covered, Justworks makes it easier for you to start, run and grow a business. Let me tell you how Justworks can help your business. Great people are at the heart of every business. And Justworks can help you attract and retain top talent in a competitive market. Their platform gives you access to high quality benefits, usually only available to large corporations. Justworks makes it simple to hire and manage remote employees across all 50 states. It has a cloud-based platform that enables managers and employees alike to quickly and securely access benefits, payroll and other HR functionality from anywhere, anytime. In fact, we here at Built to Productions, we use Justworks. Take a look at Justworks transparent pricing by visiting justworks.com/pricing. That's justworks.com/pricing for details.

4 (28m 10s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built this. So it's around 1990 and Osprey is having trouble meeting growing demand and that's a good problem to have, but it means Mike has to find more workers and a larger factory and he eventually finds them both in rural Colorado. I had always wanted to check out Telluride and I got a call from economic development in Cortez, Colorado in, in the Four Corners area. And I liked the town of Dolores, which is 10 miles above Cortez. And there was an old building in town.

4 (28m 51s):
I kind of was looking for a place that we could afford to rent. It was large enough. This building was I think 7,500 square feet. Hmm. The economic development guy had no idea what was going on in that building. We knocked on the door and lo and behold, inside was a, a contract group that was building for Goretex. They were kind of doing top secret work on I think NASA space suits. Hmm. And they told us that that was their last day in operation. Hmm. And that the building would be available and that there were 35 skilled sowers that needed work.

0 (29m 29s):
Wow.

4 (29m 30s):
In addition to that, there were several hundred Navajo sowers down in Cortez, 10 miles to the South that also were out of work. So we decided this is the place to, to move Osprey.

0 (29m 42s):
This, this is a place in, it's a quite remote, I mean it's in the what, the southwestern corner of Colorado and it's, it's very far from major cities like Albuquerque, Denver, or Salt Lake City or Las Vegas. It's far, I mean it's not like it's far, it's not like a 20 minute drive. It's like four hours. So then you're a big city.

4 (30m 3s):
That's right. Albuquerque is the closest four and a half hours.

0 (30m 6s):
So I mean, was any part of you a little concerned about building your, your business in such a remote place without access to key markets and distribution networks and you know, without a whole lot of infrastructure? Cuz I looked at the map. I mean Dolores is, even now it's tiny, it's a tiny place, but what's a population like a thousand or 2000?

4 (30m 30s):
It's 1,900 or a thousand people. It hasn't grown since those days.

0 (30m 34s):
Was any part of you concerned about that?

4 (30m 37s):
Well, I would have to say that's where the benefits of Navy to come in. I didn't really know what I was getting into. I knew that it was possible to ship out of Dolores using UPS or FedEx. Right. But you have to remember that back in 1990 it was modern technology, data systems, et cetera. Communication systems were still quite primitive. Yeah. And in fact, we would go to the library to do our faxing. And the simple fact that there were so many skilled unemployed sowers was really what was the most important thing to us.

4 (31m 17s):
And they were primarily Navajo. Many of them had been sewing for many years.

0 (31m 24s):
Right. So at that point, and, and it was, and you had the money to do it, you had a little bit of money and it wasn't gonna cost you a lot. So, so you decide to settle down in Dolores, Colorado and start making backpacks there. And who were your, who were your customers? I mean, again, the small retailers around the country.

4 (31m 44s):
Small retailers that I would pick up at trade shows and that word, we didn't advertise the word of mouth that go around that we had unique designs. Nevertheless, it was still difficult to meet demand at. It was the demand was growing and we couldn't ramp up very quickly. So it was super challenging and we didn't have a lot of money. I recall when we moved from California, we had $5,000 in receivables.

0 (32m 14s):
Hmm. That was all the, that was all your orders or all the money that was owed to you at that time? Yeah. That's not a lot. Yeah. Yeah.

4 (32m 20s):
I had Lori and Gabriela had stayed in California so I, I paid them off what I could. And it was Diane and I and, and my son Rory who moved to Colorado.

0 (32m 33s):
How old was your son at the time?

4 (32m 35s):
See he was about three years old.

0 (32m 38s):
Wow. Right. Okay. So you're still very small. I mean this is a, a tiny, tiny business. And you mentioned this, that they were unique, they had unique designs. What was unique about them? I mean, I think of an Osprey backpack today and I think it of that like that top and very sort of, you know, it's, it's very recognizable. But what did, what was unique about it in 1991 or 90 when you moved to Colorado?

4 (33m 4s):
Well, I think I focused on anatomic design. Having been an artist, I understood a bit about how the body worked and I certainly spent a lot of time drawing naked people. I learned that in, in college. So I understood the shape and form of the body and I spent a lot of design time trying to focus on how to make these packs fit comfortably. And how to transmit the load from the pack to your body comfortably. Hmm. For example, how you wear a hip belt and how that pack sits on your body without causing you a lot of discomfort and also a lot on function.

4 (33m 45s):
You're, I think you were talking about the lid, the top pocket of a

0 (33m 49s):
Pack, the lid.

4 (33m 50s):
Right. We figured out how to turn that into a, a fanny pack. You know, if you're in a, at a base camp you could take the, your top lid off and go on a day hike with a fanny pack. Features like that, that made us unique.

0 (34m 4s):
Alright. So you're now in Dolores, Colorado. Tiny town starting from scratch there. And it's you and your wife running this thing and you've got some employees. How many people were you able to hire?

4 (34m 21s):
Well, I think initially I hired five. You know, we just picked it up from day to day. We would hire more and more and they were, they were primarily Navajo. And in the meantime I was covering all the other parts of the business. The designing, patterning, payroll, hr,

0 (34m 42s):
Yeah.

4 (34m 43s):
Purchasing quality control and overseeing the production

0 (34m 47s):
And going to, to trade shows to presume, cuz that was probably the best channel you had to find new customers.

4 (34m 53s):
Yeah. I was doing so many jobs that the design was just a small part of it. And that always frustrated me cuz that's what I love to do. I would find myself driving to a trade show and pretty much writing up the price sheet on the steering wheel of my car as I'm driving, just to complete all the details that you have to have ready to, to present at a trade show. Of course, nowadays it's far more professional.

0 (35m 21s):
Mike, I'm wondering how did you know that your designs were the right ones? I mean, were you doing any surveys? Were you getting feedback from customers or was it just your intuition and instincts, like what you liked?

4 (35m 34s):
It's a combination of all of that. I, we would hire sales reps. They would give you feedback on what worked and what didn't, what the retailers needed. We certainly paid attention to that. I also would go out backpacking and we would bring people in, like all of our sales reps and do our sales meetings out in the canyons and test the backpacks. So, and then of course you look at the competition and see what they're doing. But there was never, I never was happy with what I was making. I knew I could do it better. And so it was just a, Hmm. Actually, I got criticized often for changing designs.

4 (36m 14s):
Retailers don't like that. I, I didn't really spend enough time understanding where they were coming from and I would inflict them with new designs maybe every year and that would obsolete their inventories. Hmm. But I, to me it was absolutely important that I move forward and, and build a better product constantly.

0 (36m 36s):
Yeah. You know, Mike, I keep thinking about you doing all this in this tiny little town in Colorado with this, this community of Navajo sowers making your backpacks. I mean, do you, do you remember any, any stories from that time that that just made you realize like what an extraordinary, like outta the way place that you, you you chosen to start this business?

4 (36m 59s):
Yeah, I mean, I, I'm not even sure I can like doing peyote ceremonies with the Navajo is one example.

0 (37m 6s):
Oh, tell me that story.

4 (37m 8s):
Really. Okay. This happened here in Cortez during our, the period where we were working with the Navajo in production. And one day one of the guys, Otis Williams, who was sort of in charge of our quality control and our assembly and was also a Navajo medicine man, came into my office and said, Mike, we need you to do a ceremony. And that I kind of facetiously said to him, well, I'll do it as long as I get some peyote. And I was really only joking. And he, he had a serious look on his face and said, well, of course.

4 (37m 49s):
And the story unfolded that someone had put a curse on our factory. Huh. An ex-employee had gone and worked with a somebody in the black magic community of the, of the Navajos and had planted a kachina doll, which was according to Otis. And the, the people he was with was active in our factory and was disrupting communication and was an extreme danger. And we needed to do a ceremony to cleanse and to eliminate that risk. And I thought, well, I, hard thing for me to grasp, but I can tell that these people totally believe this.

4 (38m 35s):
So I, my sister who had worked with me at that time, and another guy, we went down to the reservation and to disguise place and we did a ceremony there with about maybe 20 Navajo. They had brought in a medicine man, a special medicine man who started bringing out all these relics and arrowheads and started grinding up something. I, it was dark in there. I couldn't really exactly see what he was doing, but he stood up and put a large mouth full of this paste in my mouth and then proceeded for the whole night.

4 (39m 18s):
We were under the influence of peyote and the medicine man did chanting and very powerful night. They were trying to expel this force that had entered our factory. And my sister and Eric, the guy that was with me, were having visions and I was trying to maintain because I was kind of the face of the company and having a difficult time. And it went on all night. And, well, the funny thing is that in the morning we, when we got up to leave, we were charged with the task of going to locate this kachina doll.

4 (39m 58s):
And which we eventually did, I gave it to Otis, our medicine man, and he took it up into the mountains and did a ceremony and cleansed it and proclaimed that our factory was now back in running order. Huh. And we've had a number of experiences like that, that I could go on and on. But one thing I've learned is working with other cultures, you, you really gain a lot of understanding the more time you spend with them and they add so much to how you see things. That's been a very key part of our company.

0 (40m 32s):
Yeah. I mean, it is, it is amazing. And you, you would actually go through another pretty significant cultural shift like a few years later in, in the early two thousands when you, you decided to move the company outta Cortes to to Asia eventually To Vietnam, which I think you were reluctant to do it first, right?

4 (40m 52s):
Yeah, I was pretty resistant to that idea. Yeah. Because I wanted to keep all the people we had employed. We had about a hundred people I think at that time working in Cortez. And I felt very responsible for them of course. And it just, I could not fathom picking up and moving the whole operation.

0 (41m 19s):
So what convinced you to that you had to do that?

4 (41m 23s):
Well, I think most, if not all of our competition had moved offshore and our competition would get better and better at it. I mean, the fact that they could buy their product made at half the price and not suffer any loss of quality, in fact, perhaps get a better product, made the decision not that difficult when you looked at straight in the face. Yeah. And the ability to find more skilled workers was, was becoming more difficult. I think you could say that our skilled sewing population was starting to age out.

4 (42m 4s):
Young kids were not picking up that skill, and our workforce was growing old and maybe tired, and we would have to turn down some great partners because we couldn't meet demand. For example, REI was approaching us every year to pick up our product and we always had to say, no, we can't meet that demand. And they were baffled. They, you know, they were almost angry about that because they, there was a demand growing for Osprey within their retail chain. And I'd go up and talk to 'em, but I, I'd just say we cannot fulfill orders.

0 (42m 42s):
Yeah.

4 (42m 43s):
You know, after you do that enough times, you realize this can't go on. We've gotta do what everyone else is doing and go offshore. And I took a trip to Korea, a friend of mine took me over there who knew the, the industry and introduced me to sewing factories over there. And they made counter samples and I was blown away by the quality of their workmanship. And the price was astounding. It was pretty much the equivalent of what we were paying for materials alone.

0 (43m 13s):
Wow.

4 (43m 13s):
And you have to understand that the raw material supply chain was drying up in the us it was moving offshore so that the raw materials that you needed to make this were becoming less and less available because all the other competitors had already moved offshore and were having everything made over there. Hmm. And it was like so obvious that this was a, a wave of potential that we couldn't deny and that no one else was either.

0 (43m 45s):
Yeah. And and when you made that decision, I mean it sounds like you kind of agonized over it and obviously because of the, the workers that you had, you know, supported in, in Colorado since at that point, since you'd moved there in 1990s, had been 11 years or 10 years since you'd been there. Did you feel, I don't know, maybe guilt isn't the right word, but just, or maybe that is the right word.

4 (44m 8s):
Did you feel that's that's the right word. I felt guilty about doing that. It just was an inevitable economic move.

0 (44m 17s):
Yeah,

4 (44m 18s):
We moved production to a Korea, several, three different Korean manufacturers. It was either that or shut down. I think

0 (44m 28s):
When we come back in just a moment, why Mike decides to move his factory and his family from a town of 800 people to a city of 8 million. Stay with us. You're listening to how I built this

Burrow (44m 51s):
On how I built this. We like to feature brands that are doing things so differently. They're changing entire industries. And when it comes to furniture, burrow is setting a whole new standard with their beautiful, durable, and easy to assemble designs. Burrow started when its two founders were in business school, wondering why there wasn't an easy way to get an affordable high quality sofa to your apartment without the ridiculous shipping fees. So they started Burrow. Burrow designs its furniture in its own in-house studio using premium, durable materials from stain and scratch resistant fabric to solid hardwood frames, burrow selects materials that will stand up to everyday life and every order, no matter how small or large, is delivered directly to your door for free. Burrow's new union collection is their blushed, widest modular seating design to date. And it's a breeze to build no tools needed. Listeners can get 10% off their first order at burrow.com/built. That's Burrow b u r r o w.com/built for 10% off burrow.com/built

6 (45m 58s):
Meet Jill Evans. Jill's got it all. A big house, fast car, two kids and a great career. But Jill has a problem when it comes to love. Jill can never sing to get things right and then along comes, Dean, I can't believe my

0 (46m 12s):
Luck.

3 (46m 13s):
Whoa,

6 (46m 13s):
I hit the jackpot. It looks like they're gonna live happily ever after. But on Halloween night, things get a little gruesome.

7 (46m 22s):
This is where the shooting happened outside of building society in New Romney. It's thought the 42 year old victim was killed after he opened Firearm

6 (46m 29s):
Police and Jill's life is changed forever. From Wondery, a novel comes Stolen Hearts, a story about a cop who falls in love with a man who is not all he seems to be. I'm Carrie Goleman. Follow Stolen Hearts on Amazon Music or wherever you get your podcasts. You can listen early and ad free by subscribing to Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts or the Wondery app.

0 (47m 5s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built this. I'm Guy Raz, so it's the early two thousands and Mike is still running Osprey out of Cortez Colorado, but he's moved the production of the backpacks to Korea and then he decides to move again this time to Vietnam.

4 (47m 23s):
So I took a trip down to Ho Chi Minh really enjoyed being in Vietnam more than Korea. Just seemed like a warmer, friendlier place. And Vietnam prices, fob prices were lower and that once the US had normalized trade, which I believe they did in 2001, that's when we decided to move up production to Vietnam.

0 (47m 49s):
So what did, what did that mean for sort of the home front in Colorado? Were you doing all the designs in Colorado and faxing them to a factory in Vietnam? I mean, how was that working?

4 (48m 0s):
Yeah, I was doing design work in Colorado. I, we were keeping our sales and marketing, those people continued to work in Cortes. Once we started production in Asia, we were quickly able to grow, we were able to pick up r e i, the orders started pouring in and we were running out of places to store our product. We were filling up all the empty buildings in town. We even took over the old Walmart building and filled that to the brim and we're paying a fortune to ship that out. You know, at some point we got wise and moved to all of our fulfillment to Utah where there was a train service, which saved us a lot of money.

0 (48m 49s):
What I mean, but what happens, like, so you've got the production happening in Vietnam, these aren't contract factories. Did you have somebody on the ground there all at all times or, I mean, cuz how would you communicate what you wanted or what you didn't want or,

4 (49m 3s):
I was traveling there probably four times a year spending about at least a month each time. So after doing that for a couple years and not having a very happy spouse because I was gone so much. Yeah. And also realizing that my kids were growing up in a tiny town and they were perhaps becoming susceptible to the dangers of drinking and other things that can happen when you're bored and there's nothing to

0 (49m 38s):
Do. And how many kids did you have by that

4 (49m 40s):
Point? Two kids, Rory and Amelia. Yeah. So yeah, we decided, I talked to my wife and I was, I said, well, you don't want me traveling there, why don't we just move there? And I was shocked when she said, okay.

0 (49m 52s):
So you moved to Vietnam to, I think to Ho Chi Min City in 2003 and and you're going from a, a place, a town of a thou under a thousand people to what, 10 million, I dunno how many people live in Ho Chi Minh City, but a lot of people.

4 (50m 7s):
We went from a town of 800 to a town of 8 million. Wow.

0 (50m 11s):
What was that like?

4 (50m 13s):
I loved it. I loved the culture shock, the complete change in the, not only the climate but in the, the people, the language, the food was outstanding and having it, it freed me up to focus much more on design because so many headaches disappeared when I was able to move my production over

0 (50m 36s):
There. It's kind of remarkable because this is roughly almost 30 years at that point since the, when you started this business, right. Which began as Santa Cruz backpacks and you move or want to Vietnam and, but that move really, it sounds like it really allowed Osprey to scale in a big way because now you could manufacture at scale and you could fulfill massive orders for big retailers.

4 (51m 6s):
It was a miracle and it, it allowed me to go back to pure design work without all the trouble and headaches of running production and dealing with HR issues. And

0 (51m 21s):
Where did the design happen?

4 (51m 23s):
Well, the design happened still with myself and one or two people that we had back in Colorado. The thing that happened when production moved to offshore with a lot of companies is that they also forfeited their design to those companies, to those manufacturers. I called it the Vietnam melting Pot of design. It's this forfeiture of brands, unique designs over to the factories. And consequently I decided really early on to continue to do our own prototyping and design, sample making within our own facility and not allow the factories to do that so that we could maintain our identity and our signature product.

0 (52m 14s):
What, what were you trying to, I mean there are obvious that, you know, there are obvious competitors, right? Patagonia, north Face, r e i makes backpacks, you know, bunch of different backpack brands. What, I mean, were you looking at your competitors to figure out what they were doing that what you could do differently? Or like how were you thinking about your products and why somebody would, would choose them over a competitor?

4 (52m 41s):
Well, I think for one thing, I didn't look at our competition much. Hmm. If I did, it was simply to make sure I wasn't accidentally doing something that they were doing that they had already done already. I had so many ideas on product and how to evolve it that I never was at a loss to move on to the next idea and concept. I didn't really borrow any concepts. I mean, occasionally you'd run into some idea that somebody else had done that was undeniably the only way to do it properly. And everybody followed. But in general it was, it was, it was, we were trying to do our own thing in our own little space.

0 (53m 25s):
What you, you stayed in Vietnam I think about a little over three and a half years. Close to four years, maybe four

4 (53m 31s):
Years, yeah.

0 (53m 32s):
And you come back to the US in 2007. Was there a reason why? Was it just you sort of had your, you felt like the operation there was in good shape and it didn't need you to be there anymore?

4 (53m 45s):
Actually, I think the strongest reason I came back was that, well I had promised my wife that we would be there for two years and it had extended to four. She kind of just said, it's time to head back. And I said, okay, it's, you get to pick where we live now. And we moved back to the Bay Area.

0 (54m 3s):
So you had the operation still in Cortez, Colorado, and then you moved to the Bay Area to open up a new, like a design office here, I guess,

4 (54m 13s):
Right in Mill Valley.

0 (54m 15s):
Right.

4 (54m 16s):
I was able to focus on the design in California. It was easier for me to continue traveling back and forth to Vietnam based out of San Francisco.

0 (54m 26s):
Right. Let, let me ask you about, about ip, about intellectual property, right? Because it's obviously you can, you can design something and patent it in your, in your industry, but it's, it's pretty easy to copy it too, to get away with it. And there's, I mean, there're plenty of products probably that if I went on Amazon today that really are trying to look like Osprey or, and, and that's probably be probably been going on for a long time. Did you ever worry about ripoffs and knockoffs?

4 (54m 59s):
I never worried too much about it from the beginning. I had a, a negative attitude about intellectual property and patenting. I always felt like what really matters the most is making it better and not being frozen and stuck with a, a patent. So for many, many years I refuse to patent anything. Sometimes I regret that because it, a lot of those ideas and concepts were quickly copied in the industry and became a standard. But as the company grew, I certainly ran into interference within the company on that theory.

4 (55m 41s):
And we have patented a few things that we felt were important and necessary.

0 (55m 49s):
What are some things that you, you didn't patent that, that were ended up being copied?

4 (55m 55s):
Well, one thing that comes to mind is if you look at a shoulder strap, normally you would sew a tube up and turn it inside out and insert foam inside of it. It's a fairly rigorous process to build a shoulder strap. And I came up with a way of laminating fabrics to foams and punching them with a die cut press and then binding the edges with tape. And, you know, it probably took half the time to build a harness. And once I showed that at a trade show, it caught on. There are, you know, a few cases like that where I, I probably could have made royalties or whatever on a patent, but I was too focused elsewhere to worry about that.

0 (56m 38s):
H how, I mean the, the other question I I wondered about spray was you really focus on mainly on bags, backpacks and travel bags and duffle bags you never got into, I mean there obviously there are other outdoor brands that got into gear and, and jackets and sleeping bags and other things. I mean, presumably there were people who even in the, in your own company who might have said, Hey, we gotta expand our product line.

4 (57m 3s):
It's true. That would come up on occasion. And I always, my answer to that was, we're not experts in those other realms and look how long it's taken to get to where we are. And you wanna start back again and at the beginning and pretend like you're an expert and that you're competitive in that field. I always relished it when I saw my competitors pick up outlying products, tents, sleeping bags, et cetera, because it, to me, it meant they were going to lose focus and expertise on what they already were doing and kind of water themselves down.

0 (57m 40s):
You know, Mike, it's interesting cuz you started the company, but you really very rarely were you the CEO and really only at the beginning, what was it about, about that role that you didn't not want to do that you, you really, I mean, I think already in the, by the late nineties you had somebody doing that job. Why didn't you wanna be doing that?

4 (58m 2s):
Well, I think I relished the design work so much and really did not enjoy dealing with finance and marketing and money and, and I never really had any desire to be CEO of the company. In fact, when I look back on all the years that I've done this, I think the reason I maintain ownership of, of my company for so long was simply that no one else could tell me what to do and I could focus on what I wanted to do and I have a great time doing it.

0 (58m 42s):
I'm curious, given that you were the owner and you never took any investors on, right?

4 (58m 48s):
No, I, we did in 2016, we picked up a minority ownership of a private equity partner.

0 (58m 56s):
But really, I mean, until then, but but until the very end you didn't, you didn't have any outside investors. You were the primary owner.

4 (59m 6s):
Right. We didn't even, we really didn't even borrow money unless it was to, for example, do an addition on our factory down in Cortez.

0 (59m 15s):
So it was financed entirely from, from cash flow.

4 (59m 18s):
Totally.

0 (59m 20s):
I have to imagine that at, you know, many points, certainly maybe in the last 10 years, you had people maybe approaching you to see if you would sell. And, and eventually you did, you were sold, I think in, in 2021 to a company called Helen of Troy. They acquired Osprey for 400 and a little over $400 million. Was that, I mean, it's great outcome. I mean, you started this, this little storefront in Santa Cruz. Was that decision because you didn't, I don't know, maybe none of your kids were interested in, in continuing it or you just, you were kind of done.

0 (1h 0m 2s):
I mean, tell tell me about the thinking behind that.

4 (1h 0m 6s):
It's true that my kids were not interested in taking over the company. My daughter would sometimes think that she could, but I, I would tell her, you, you have no idea what you'd be getting into and you're not prepared. So unless you start going to business school or figuring out what, how you wanna run this, forget it. But also, I, I wanted to find an owner that would have similar thinking to what I have, where I felt that people were the key of the business. And we talked, I think maybe 35 different companies. It was a very difficult time because Covid was going on. In fact, at the most intense part of negotiation, our factories were shut down because of

0 (1h 0m 50s):
Covid in Vietnam.

4 (1h 0m 51s):
In Vietnam.

0 (1h 0m 52s):
How did that affect the, the, I mean, did that mean, does that mean there was no products coming into the us

4 (1h 0m 57s):
Right. There was, there was nothing coming out of the factories. They were all closed down. Wow. So that, that certainly influenced some potential buyers. You know, they have had no idea what was gonna go on with Covid. Neither did we. And I, I appreciated the ones that hung in there. It meant they were serious and they, they really wanted the company and they believed in what we were doing.

0 (1h 1m 21s):
Now that you're sort of re retired from the company, I mean, do you plan to spend the rest of your life in, in Cortez in Colorado?

4 (1h 1m 32s):
That's a good question. I, I sort of am coming out of the woods here. I've done this for 50 years and I'm almost 70. And there are other things that I want to do. I still in good health and my plan is to go back to art. I'm converting my backpack design studio over to art and printmaking. I do consider backpack design to be a form of art. And it's sort of coming full circle to me, starting with pure art and moving back into that. Hmm. And I love to travel. One of the things I look forward to is being able to sit back and, and see just how big we are and how successful we've been.

4 (1h 2m 17s):
And I, I do do get big hits of that when I go out traveling, maybe to remote parts of Asia or anywhere. And I see our packs out in the field and I see people enjoying the use of them. And I, I don't usually say anything to them, but I, it's a great kick to see that.

0 (1h 2m 39s):
W when you think about this unlikely story, right? And, and, and everything that's happened and you know, I mean, $400 million, it's a massive company that, that you sold. And what an incredible outcome from, you know, something that began as a storefront in 1974. How much of that do you ha do you think has to do with just how hard you worked and how much do you attribute that to, to luck to lucky breaks?

4 (1h 3m 10s):
Oh boy, that's a tough question. I, my, my feeling about luck is that luck happens when you're prepared to recognize it. You know, sometimes opportunities fly by you and if you aren't aware that they're present at that moment, you don't catch them. I've certainly worked hard, but I've enjoyed it. So to me it hasn't been work. It's been, it's just been a life. It's been a wonderful life.

0 (1h 3m 40s):
That's Mike Hanauer, founder of Osprey, by the way, A cool bit of trivia. Back in 2001, the company got the kind of free publicity that a brand can only dream of. When Time Magazine put Eric Wine Mayor on the cover, Eric was the first blind person to climb Mount Everest and they're on the cover photo. He poses triumphantly on the side of the mountain wearing a bright yellow Osprey

3 (1h 4m 8s):
Backpack.

0 (1h 4m 10s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you wanna contact the team, our email address is h ibt id.wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I Built This, and mine is at Guy Roz and on Instagram. We're at How I Built This, and I'm at Guy Ross. And don't forget to follow this show wherever you listen to podcasts so you don't miss a new episode. This episode was produced by Kira Joaquin, with music composed by Routine Era Louie. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Katherine Seifer. Our production staff also includes Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Casey Herman, Carrie Thompson, Alex Chung, Chris Masini, Carla Estevez, and Sam Paulson.

0 (1h 4m 51s):
I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey, prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and add free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon Music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear@wonderyshop.com.

0 (1h 5m 32s):
Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.

2 (1h 5m 39s):
Financial decisions can be obstacles or opportunities with the globe and mail's independent opinions, objective insights, and helpful tools. You'll make confident decisions, picture the life you want to live and be bullish. Invest in you the globe and Mail.