1 (0s):
Support for NPR and the following message come from Comcast through Internet Essentials Comcast has connected more than 8 million people from low-income households to high-speed internet most for the first time more at Comcast Corporation.com Internet Essentials.

3 (20s):
I created a list of 25 feces and I started emailing I would say probably 19 got back to

1 (29s):
me. And out of those 19 when you started go meet with them. Did any of them say this is awesome. I'm in.

3 (36s):
Oh, no every single one of those first meetings were like love that you had the courage to get in here, but this needs work.

1 (49s):
From NPR it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They

3 (56s):
go.

1 (1m 2s):
I'm guy rosin on today show how a former high school track star took inspiration from a casual Jog and built outdoor voices a brand of athletic wear for people who aren't necessarily athletes. So think for a moment about energy bars when Gary Erickson introduced Clif bars to the world in the early 1990s energy bars weren't as common as they are today even in the early 2000s when lar American launched Larabars there was plenty of room to stand out. But by the time Peter Rahal debuted RX bars and 2013, there were literally hundreds of different energy bars to choose from and trying to differentiate his bar from the Thousands of other brands out there would require a different approach.

1 (1m 53s):
So Peter focused at least initially on the CrossFit Community a relatively Niche audience. It was a side door entry into what appeared to be an impenetrable category, but it worked and eventually those loyal crossfitters help turn our X bars into a major energy Barber and this is more or less the Playbook that Tyler Hannah used to launch outdoor voices by the Time she decided to debut her athletic apparel brand and 2013. Lots of people were telling her that the market was saturated. There was Lululemon and Athleta in addition to the major sports brands like Adidas and Under Armour and Nike and they were all dominating the so called athleisure Market, but Tyler saw a gap in that market.

1 (2m 40s):
She thought she could fill is he many of the big players were focused on performance Athletics The Branding seemed to be for people who wanted to Get faster and stronger and work out harder, but Tyler thought there were lots of people who didn't want to do those things people who just wanted to get out and enjoy the fresh air. So she decided to build outdoor voices as an athletic clothing brand for everyone else but surprisingly for someone who wanted to build a brand for non-athletes. Tyler Haney was at one time actually a super athlete in Boulder Colorado where Tyler grew up she was a standout track star. Was targeted by college recruiters but as a high school student Tyler knew two things.

1 (3m 24s):
She did not want to become an athlete and she definitely didn't want to go into Apparel. In fact, her mom and Dad ran a small clothing company and that business did not sound interesting to her.

3 (3m 35s):
I never wanted to be in a parallel fashion, but I was obsessed with the creativity of it. I definitely loved and was obsessed with seeing people start things. Yeah and start things from scratch. And so that Mentality, I've always been a very Creative Design inclined person. And so I realized I really wanted to be in New York. That was the place to be that was where everything was happening and so started working on a portfolio to apply to Parsons School of Design.

1 (4m 8s):
So you get to New York and you start start your degree there. And where did your mind take you where did you start to think? All right. This is what I could do what I'm doing. Done.

3 (4m 19s):
Yeah, I had no idea what I wanted to do until probably the third year in person. So what instead I did was find a bunch of different jobs while I was in school to kind of test and learn so in my sophomore year, I went to a company called launch Collective. They were an incubator for startups and startups in the fashion and kind of design space and so I got to kind of run through working with different companies at very different stages. And experienced a lot kind of simultaneously going to school at Parsons.

1 (4m 54s):
So how did you start to think about maybe actually doing apparel? Maybe actually trying this out what what happened?

3 (5m 2s):
So throughout my four years at Parsons. I had lost any sort of commitment to activity which was which was kind of wild given I'd grown up in a place like Boulder and obsessed with sports and many It's but I recognized that without teammates are coaches or practice or games to stay active. I had completely

1 (5m 27s):
stopped. So so what happened like was there just a moment or a day where you were like? All right, I gotta go for a run. I got I just like I'm really not feeling right. I'm off.

3 (5m 38s):
Yeah, it was in my senior year and I kind of remember doc I exercised in the past has helped me be more clear. I feel far from Clear. Let's try this. So Pulled out my my running gear. It was Nike at the time at top and bottom. I think it was like bright purple and black and very shiny put that suit on and went jogging for the first time in three to four years on the West Side Highway and I was out there not even a mile. I think point eight miles at a very recreational pace and realized I have not moved my body have not exercised and such a long time. This this is a wake-up call. This is

1 (6m 18s):
wild. You got home and got that your dorm room like were you like? Okay, I've got to get back on track here or were you just sort of crushed here? This is not maybe this isn't this isn't for

3 (6m 29s):
me. No, I was I was elated. I was so happy to have just simply through a bit of sweat felt like I found myself again. Wow, and so after that dead small run. I wanted more of that feeling again and movement became something that I craved on a daily basis. Again, and became this release this almost kid like recess it was the time that I could think clearly again and kind of get my wits about me and so started to kind of build that muscle that practice that routine into my life again.

1 (7m 5s):
And when did you start to see active where I mean? Like, how did you start to think that there's a problem with active wear with the stuff? I wear and run that's a problem that needs to be

3 (7m 14s):
solved. So I was still wearing my Nike. As I kind of got back into running. If you looked at the Nikes and under armours of the world. They were built on this Credo harder better faster stronger. And you know, I was wearing kind of shiny right spandex that you'd think the clothing had this connotation of like high performance high intensity yet. I was out there moving in it at a very recreational pace. So there was this personal dissonance between what I was wearing and what I was doing and the feeling I wanted to achieve through what I was doing that that I couldn't reconcile and so on one of those recreationally paste runs it dawned on me that there was an opportunity to kind of reframe activity for folks that weren't pursuing it to be the fastest.

1 (8m 5s):
So you felt like like activewear right like the Nikes and Lululemon's and those were really designed for people who were already going to the gym three four times a week or running a few times a week or going to yoga. Or had a routine but that there was no like did you ever just ever see the movie Dodgeball? Yes, of course. Yeah, like there was no Average Joe's gym, right there was no clothing for Average Joe's gym, right was that what I mean? Is that what you were thinking?

3 (8m 35s):
I wasn't thinking Average Joe's I was I was really more so thinking the opposite of the competitive athlete. So there's the Steph Curry's of the world where Winning is Everything and like there's the Muse of the world and and likely a lot more me as of the world that were just needing to find motivation to be active on a daily basis because it was good for me made me a happier healthier person and that's kind of what I started to piece together on these runs. I started to realize that this pressure that surrounded being athletic was not what would drive people to be active on a daily basis. And so I started to think through creating a company or an experience where It was really rooted in in play.

1 (9m 21s):
So Tyler it sounds to me like you really started to think about brand right? I want to develop a brand that represents X Y and Z but that you didn't necessarily have the product that you would sell as part of that brand like you hadn't started with I want to make clothes and then I want to build a movement around this shirt. It was I want to build a movement and then I'm going to figure out what the

3 (9m 44s):
product is. Correct. Yes. It was this feeling that I was Addicted to obsessed with unpacking and kind of evolving and for me I realized that the future of Athletics wasn't about being their first, but about being their most frequently and consistently and so I wanted to start to think about what drove that consistency like what if there's a brand or a path that freeze Fitness from

1 (10m 11s):
performance. I mean, it's there's a lot of similarities between This and like glossy a and what Emily is She started with a block and just writing about you know skincare and I'm self-care and it the makeup the Cosmetics came later after she already had this kind of following of people who just loved ordinary women talking about how they take care of their skin.

3 (10m 36s):
Yeah. I see what you're saying. It was definitely about building that feeling and brand brand first and I started to do it just in a simple way before I had any sort of product and I started to bring people together inviting friends to go on drugs with me and biting them to sign up for half marathons with me, which also my intent was to make it fun and what my intent was to make it, you know that we'd go out of pace that you could still talk and it be social and and it started to get people together. I'm kind of these these jobs in these informal meetups and it really did start with Community First ahead of

1 (11m 11s):
product. But do you remember like what the Tipping Point was to do a parallel? I mean you grew up. Up around apparel your mom and dad and and uncle had this apparel line and you knew how challenging that industry was. And so do you remember what it was where you thought? Okay, I mean was our conversation you have with somebody or just or you just thought this is the way to do it. It's got to be athletic wear.

3 (11m 40s):
I think these clothes that I had warned, you know through track practice etcetera were packed with this. Pressure to be fastest and so the first place that I recognize there was opportunity to to kind of like tangibly create something that that could be emotionally packed with this playfulness was with the clothing that I was wearing on these jogs. And so I looked down I was still wearing bright Chinese Spandex, and I said, I want to create an outfit that reflects the freedom and kind of the playfulness of this. In that I'm excited about right now.

1 (12m 21s):
Do you remember like the first time you went back to your dorm room, wherever you're living and you started to sketch out what they could look like.

3 (12m 29s):
Yeah. It was right out of school. So I think in 2012, which was when I started to put pen to paper and it's funny looking back because the crop top and the two-tone legging which are some of our best sellers today are the first two things. I sketched. I had no idea how to to make them because I had not gone to Parsons for fashion design by any means but a lot of the greatness of going to a school like persons was you were able to visualize your ideas. And so I was very comfortable in a Sketchbook. I started sketching out this outfit this idea of a single outfit for activity that was made of technical materials that were comfortable to move in but didn't have the connotations of competitive

1 (13m 16s):
athlete and it was like it was a top And it was like stretch pants right like that. You would run it. Yeah. Yeah a crop

3 (13m 24s):
top so effectively a sports bras and then

1 (13m 28s):
and then pants but what was the thing that you were going to make make different was it not gonna feel like I was gonna

3 (13m 36s):
be different. So for me it started with the material so traditional activewear feel shiny and kind of spandexy very synthetic. I wanted something with more of a natural hand feel that could integrate. Great into your daily wardrobe. So something you'd wear with cotton sweatshirt or something, you know pieces from your closet. And so as soon as I had sketched out this top and bottom and the intent was to always pair those two things together it became kind of your outfit for doing things your outfit for being active in a recreational way. I realized that the material was the most important aspect of athletic

1 (14m 15s):
product. So this is the thing right like we've had chip Wilson on the show who found a But he founded it in his you know 40s after he'd already had a snowboard apparel business and so he was familiar with different materials and sourcing and you know, those kinds of things your family had a small apparel company, but I'm assuming is mostly just cotton, right? Yep. You're now talking about the most complex material right? Like where you began? Where did you even know where to go to find out like what house? This stuff is made and how you could like know which material to use.

3 (14m 53s):
Yeah. I mean, I became the Google Queen so literally like and people ask me this a lot. But creating product was not something I studied. I didn't go to Parsons for that. But there's so much you can learn by by Googling and becoming obsessed with finding solutions to your questions. So I was obsessed with figuring out where the mecca of materials for technical Yarns was and and Through Google found Outdoor Retailer and got myself there

1 (15m 23s):
Outdoor Retailer

3 (15m 24s):
Outdoor Retailer. Which what is this? Yeah that that is the biggest trade show for technical Sports vendors to come

1 (15m 32s):
together. So you googling like material like like your Search terms were I mean, I'm just thinking about me because I don't have to feel like high-tech sweat wicking material click, you know enter and eventually you land on the site for like a tree. I'd show that happens to be the trade show for fabric.

3 (15m 52s):
Yeah. Yeah, exactly. So Googling for hours and hours and hours and days and days and days to narrow it down So eventually recognized that was where all arrows pointed to and and so and so that was held in Utah.

1 (16m 9s):
All right, so you find out about this trade show and you would you do did you like register as a fire or as an attendee or

3 (16m 16s):
I mean, yeah you pay for it. So, thank you. Out whatever the right credentials were and asked my dad to come along with me. So from New York flew to Boulder hopped in the car. We drove to Salt Lake City. We went to Outdoor Retailer and I went and shook hands and listen to and spoke to a probably a hundred

1 (16m 35s):
plus fenders. So you went with your dad there. And did you go as a business owner or did you like when you met people right? You say I am Tyler Haney and I'm with the G of a company or an I

3 (16m 45s):
don't you just use the student card I use this. Aiden card for far too long our way too long perfectly

1 (16m 51s):
too long. You see I said I'm a student at Parsons. Yeah, and I'm looking into just different material for my designs or they get what was your what did you say to people when you met them?

3 (17m 1s):
Yeah. I I brought my Sketchbook my badge said Parsons School of Design and my pitch would be I'm building the next great activewear brand and I'm looking for the best in class material for these two products and here are the four criteria. Area that I need and certainly people would be like, who's this young kid get out of here until I found one lovely guy named Stefan and I he took an interest in in kind of the design and what I was looking for and and really spent time with me helping me understand and of the nuances of this material,

1 (17m 39s):
he was a vendor at the trade show. He was a vendor and what was he

3 (17m 42s):
selling materials raw materials?

1 (17m 45s):
I'm Trish. I'm trying to get into this trade show, right? I'm Stefan. I've got a business and my objective at the trade show is to get as much business as possible to walk away with as many potential leads for then I go back to my office and then we can fulfill orders right but then there's this like 22 year old kid, right who's coming up and saying hey, can I talk to you I'm trying I'm trying to figure out why what what do you think like what? Yeah. Why do you think he did it?

3 (18m 14s):
It's a great question. I view it as luck. I mean I was persistent as hell. And so I was going to after I had his contact not let him not talk to me. And I think there must have been something about that persistence that you know, it was endearing

1 (18m 32s):
so you get back to New York and you follow up with this guy stuff on and what did you fly out to see him. Did you have a conversation over the phone and say here's what I want. Can you make it

3 (18m 45s):
so he had my list of requirements and he started to send. Me headers headers are going to from their fabric Library product or materials that they've developed in the past that kind of allow you to orient around kind of what you like and don't like from a hand feel perspective. And so using these headers I was able to say yes. This one has the softness I'm looking for or no. This one doesn't have the aesthetic I'm looking for and so we sent headers to then fine tune the request that they would then start to develop for me,

1 (19m 17s):
but I mean Company that makes fabric, right and is going to make like a bespoke kind of fabric for somebody. I'm assuming that they have like a minimum order like you got to order. I don't know ten thousand dollars were third $50,000 worth of material before they'll even consider doing this for you.

3 (19m 37s):
Yeah. So what we ended up doing was Finding Stefan he and his team work constantly making new materials to present to the likes of the Nikes and under armours and Lulu so they had created Created a material kind of at a similar time that they ended up showing me and maybe they had shown it to the other companies but no one had picked it and it was a fabric that really checked the boxes for me in terms of what I was looking for. And so I ordered an initial few rolls to start to make samples out of

1 (20m 8s):
so they have this material that was exactly right for you and you could order it and I'm assuming that you were just using your savings to pay for it was probably a couple hundred. Or serve thousand dollars whatever.

3 (20m 21s):
Yeah, I had had different jobs throughout school. And so it was able to have savings and

1 (20m 26s):
use those for those initial samples. All right, so they come out to you in New York and I by the way, are you out of the dorms at this point?

3 (20m 35s):
Yeah. I'm living in the East Village and needed a place to

1 (20m 37s):
store molten material there about six feet

3 (20m 40s):
tall and 12 inches wide. And so the only place to store it was in my room. So went to Ikea got a bunk bed. Took the first shelf of the bunk bed out lived on the top bunk bed, and my

1 (20m 54s):
new product Studio was right under that top bunk bed shelf and so had my products stored there. Alright, so you have this stuff. You've got your drawings get your material now. It's time to make something right. You got to get a make your prototypes.

3 (21m 10s):
Yep. So I started calling friends from school. There were a lot of people who had studied fashion. And so essentially we're starting to interview. You for designers to Simply help me understand how to connect the dots between I've got this I've got this material. I've got these sketches. I don't know what to do next

1 (21m 26s):
and in 2013, like what were you doing for money?

3 (21m 31s):
I had gone in house with one of the fashion companies that I had met through launch Collective. And so I worked there wall parallel path in kind of making this product for

1 (21m 46s):
what would become a v so you had a full time job as a Say I guess an assistant to

3 (21m 51s):
yeah. Yeah, I think my title must have been something assistant.

1 (21m 55s):
Yes, and then on the side it like at night on the weekends you were thinking about this thing that you were trying to figure out

3 (22m 1s):
exactly so go into Parsons. I know a lot of design student. So I would start to have them over and a number of Parson students pointed me to the Midtown garment district. There's tons of factories Etc that you wouldn't be aware of until you

1 (22m 18s):
Early start searching and behind those like you look at these buildings and they're just in those buildings.

3 (22m 24s):
Yeah, I mean never knew that world existed. Yeah and most of them almost all of them only made high-end fashion product. So they weren't wanting to make activewear. So kind of ran into a roadblock there. I'd go in and say hey, let's make like, can you help me make this I know nothing about pattern-making, but I need to make a pattern and then cut the fabric into This pattern and have it sewn up.

1 (22m 50s):
Wait, would you just would you like use contacts from from Parsons or would you just would you call and say hey I'm gradually Parsons and I want to meet or would you just ring the doorbells and show

3 (23m 0s):
up God? I did it all I I would call I would show up. I would find myself in factories that were definitely not willing to work with me most were like this isn't what we do can't help you. But there was one Factory called sunshine. And it was run by these two Asian women who were lovely and for whatever reason I said yes to make in the patterns for me and they had warned me that they hadn't worked with this type of material before but I said, hey, let's try let's get a pattern started. I want to see what comes back and and so after many knows we don't make this type of product.

3 (23m 41s):
I got a yes from these two women that sunshine sunshine production. And did you have

1 (23m 45s):
to like order a bunch of them?

3 (23m 47s):
They started with the turn so I so I needed to take the sketches from my Sketchbook and create 3D patterns so that you know, they'd

1 (23m 55s):
fit a human. So it was not going to be like the finished product. It was just going to be but it was going to be a sports bra and and the pants and the like the running pants right like the physical when they were done with it. You would have you would have that.

3 (24m 12s):
Yep. The first prototype the first go at the crop top in the running

1 (24m 15s):
band. I'm just trying to figure out why they agreed to do this just did it. Q do you think what did they like the product? What what made them agree to do this for you?

3 (24m 26s):
I mean I am quite Charming, you know? No I I went and I think I was so clear on exactly what I wanted and I wasn't going to give up that though. There were many knows I was going to find it. Yes, and these manufacturing houses are extremely busy ahead of fashion weeks and then when they did production, but there are off times and so they're trying to fill The hour and so I think they must just have had a gap in their scheduling and I was able to slip

1 (24m 55s):
in. All right, how long did it take for that for those prototypes to to be made

3 (24m 59s):
when I first went to Sunshine I had the product I had the designs. I asked them to make the patterns they came back and the leggings almost had three legs and them it was something had been Lost in Translation and by no means did it look like what I thought it would come back. Again, like so it took probably two to three weeks to really sit there up at the at the factory with them and understand what pattern-making was and really kind of translate for them what I wanted and in what seems like a pretty simple straightforward running legging and crop top but two to three weeks later. I got my initial prototypes

1 (25m 39s):
and how they look

3 (25m 41s):
so they looked beautiful. I put them on and and was going to be the first person to try them and pretty quickly found that They weren't stretchy like the they had been sown with a type of machine where the yarn does not is not essentially constructing the Garment in a way to stretch. So I go for a run in this new product and seems are popping everywhere. Yeah, and it's very clear to me that this is not the right

1 (26m 9s):
recipe. She got to go back to the drawing board, I guess. Yes. Hmm.

3 (26m 13s):
So I call up stuff on my material guy and say Stefan here's why. Then I've been in Midtown what a disaster all the seams are popping. This isn't working help me figure out what's next and Stefan has the connections to all of the active where manufacturers that was a big unlock for me. And so he said tie. There's no one who makes activewear on the East Coast come to LA. And so I booked a ticket to La I stayed with a friend in Venice and I Google map where I where I end up needing to go to me. Meet this manufacturer that Stefan connected me with and it's South El Monte, California, which is an hour and a half south of where I was in Venice in the middle of nowhere.

1 (26m 60s):
All right, so you so you bring your sketches again to this place in El Monte and they agree to make you a few prototypes again.

3 (27m 11s):
Yeah, so I still have the paper patterns that were made by the women at Sunshine Factory in New York. I bring the Was that I had run in that had popped seems and said, hey help me understand what's wrong here. And Jennifer was her name at the Almonte Factory and she looks at it and says Ah, you need flatlock seeming this is easy. And so flatlock seeming was essentially what was going to allow us to so the leggings and crop top so that when you move the seams have enough give that they don't pop in break. And so I spent a lot of time going back and forth. To this Almonte Factory so that I could go back to New York with the right stitching and enough product to start to get on friends and family.

3 (27m 57s):
I'm curious about

1 (27m 58s):
this point right Tyler. Were you using your own money? Did you have to borrow money from your parents or anyone at this point to just pay for just the basic start up cost?

3 (28m 11s):
This is why I was so adamant about maintaining my job because there was no other way to fund. And I was purely funding it through through my own savings granted. It was very small scale. So it wasn't that

1 (28m 25s):
expensive. I could it

3 (28m 27s):
wasn't that expensive 10 samples. I think probably cost me $1,000 but it was all money that I was collecting from having a full-time

1 (28m 37s):
job. So they make a prototype in El Monte and how does it has come out as it turned out.

3 (28m 42s):
So I started getting it on the friends that I had recruited to start to be part of these little jogger sessions. With me to close friends Annie Ryan. I lived with them. I gave them both a kit when I got back from LA and said hey take this jogging to the gym Etc give me feedback and so at a super micro-level started product testing starting with myself and then and then with like small extended group of

1 (29m 8s):
friends. And what were they telling you people

3 (29m 10s):
loved it and that that was like the fit was right on the material was was really comfortable and Started wearing it not only to the gym, but for more of their life and kind of with their daily clothing,

1 (29m 25s):
this is 2013. You've got some pretty good prototypes for getting feedback from people. You're still working full-time at what point do you think? All right, I got to just jump into this two feet.

3 (29m 38s):
Yeah. I was intent on keeping my job as long as possible. And I think that's something that I'd recommend for people in. In the startup space or wanting to create something hold on to that job as as long as you possibly can but once I started to have product that was really working. I then started working on positioning again. Like what is this brand? What is this opportunity that's going to connect to the product and be something that I want to go get more people on board with.

1 (30m 14s):
So how did you settle on the named after voices?

3 (30m 17s):
Yeah. I was actually A bar on Rivington in New York with friends and kept coming back to this feeling as a little kid and like getting up and being loud and kept describing this need in this activewear space to like shake things up. And and so I was with friends talking about that kind of like youthful Fearless little kid and in conversation, I think someone said, do you remember when your mom used to like tell you to use your indoor voice and it really started And to click there. I was like after voice that it's about getting loud. It's about boldness its usefulness. It's getting big it's can

1 (30m 57s):
I tell my kids user Library voice when they're too loud? And so the idea was like this is going to be your outdoor voice. This is where you could scream and shout and jumping what all those things.

3 (31m 8s):
Yeah thinking back to play and recess and that like unbounded enthusiasm you have as a little kid, like that's what I wanted the brand to evoke. Came up naturally in conversation and I think someone else said it and then I grabbed onto

1 (31m 24s):
it. I loved recess. I was my favorite. It's the best right? All right. So, how are you going to get your apparel into stores? What are you do at this point 2013? You've got a good prototype, but you got to get it in front of customers or potential customers.

3 (31m 44s):
Yeah, so I started Googling trade shows again and found a show called. Magic, which was in Las Vegas. And this was where all kind of the startup Brands would go to get seen by boutiques. And so after that initial run of 10, I think I paid $5,000 to get 200 units or 200 tops and bottoms made so that I could show up to this trade show in Las Vegas and start pitching after voices the next great activewear

1 (32m 15s):
brand. This is I think a pretty Famous trade show in Las Vegas writes like a couple times a year and and you went there you bought like a vendor or like a sales badge

3 (32m 27s):
or yeah, I got the tiniest Booth possible probably twelve hundred dollars to rent and I'm in this little postage stamp and had had these samples on the racks and started meeting people and lots of people would take a look not interested felt like is this really the place to be like this? Seems the seems like it's not working and then this guy named Ian walked in and he owned a little tiny fashion boutique. But really impactful Fashion Boutique. I'd find out later in our in in London London. It's called garbage store and it comes in and and says, this is interesting.

3 (33m 7s):
I love the material. What is it? And I start describing to him. Hey, this is the next great activewear brand. Its outdoor voices. Come look at the product. I'm doing this this and this with it. And he says wow, this is awesome. I want to make

1 (33m 22s):
an order. Wow. That was your first order.

3 (33m 24s):
That was my first order

1 (33m 25s):
and how many pieces did he want?

3 (33m 27s):
I believe it was in the 50s. So it was Tiny but that was the first order and I left that trade show magic with a handful of Po so purchase orders. So intent to buy

1 (33m 38s):
was it hard to get those made quickly or did you just were able to call a factory now Monte and say hey, I've got these orders and I need to do 200 more

3 (33m 48s):
so I pick up the phone. I called Jennifer and Almonte say hey, we've got our first pios Jen makes it happen. I think I left with seven purchase orders and I ended up fulfilling five. And so financially I was able to make it happen from from

1 (34m 4s):
savings a couple thousand bucks or a few thousand

3 (34m 7s):
dollars couple thousand bucks.

1 (34m 8s):
Exactly. Alright, so you get the the stuff made you send it at these boutiques and does anything happen instantly.

3 (34m 16s):
Yeah. About two weeks after the product derived it the boutique's I get a call from J.Crew this woman Tracy calls me. She says hey, I saw after voices your product at Garb store in London, and I love it. Can we talk? Wow, and she said hey, we have a platform called the discovere program. We're interested in talking with you about bringing after voices on to this program. So Tracy I go and meet her with her. I bring in the And after I meet with her a few weeks later, I get a purchase order for 11,000 units.

1 (34m 55s):
Wow, that's not going to cost a couple thousand bucks. Right? That's like you're talking now like hundreds of thousands of dollars. Maybe

3 (35m 2s):
it was $500,000 $500,000 purchase order. Yeah, and and

1 (35m 7s):
was our deadline. Did you have to get done like within a certain period of time?

3 (35m 11s):
Yeah, it was within I think the ship date was five months later.

1 (35m 15s):
And did you think no problem? I'll figure this out. Us out in

3 (35m 19s):
five months and get this made that's exactly when I realized it was time to quit my

1 (35m 24s):
job when we come back in just a moment how Tyler scramble to come up with the money and then make enough kids for J.Crew within five months stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible. First to Capital One with the Capital One Saver Card. You can earn four percent cash back on dining and entertainment that means four percent on milkshakes with the kids and 4% on music with your pals.

1 (36m 9s):
You'll also earn 2% cash back at grocery stores and 1% all other purchases. Now when you go out you cash in Capital One What's in your wallet terms apply? Thanks. Also to State Farm. Why do you need State Farm renter's insurance? Because it helps protect the stuff landlords don't like your furniture that gets drenched by a broken pipe or when a burglar makes off with your new laptop. When you add it all up your stuffs probably worth more than you think make sure it's protected with State Farm renter's insurance find an agent or get a quote at statefarm.com.

3 (36m 49s):
I know we'd all love the holidays to be this happy stress-free

1 (36m 53s):
joyful time, but let's be real that is not always the

3 (36m 56s):
case. I'm peers life kit is answering your holiday questions and help you navigate family Dynamics. All season long new episodes every Tuesday and Thursday. Listen And subscribe to life kit all guides.

1 (37m 11s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this. I'm guy Roz. So it's around the beginning of 2014 and Tyler Haney is working on fulfilling that Big purchase order from J.Crew and the immediate problem. She needs to solve his money how to come up with the money up front to make 11,000 units of the outdoor voices kit

3 (37m 31s):
my first one to my aunt. And so any mm I said, I've got this PL you're familiar with this. Are you guys willing to invest and and they put 25k and they were my they were the first funders which was awesome. So with that purchase order in hand and Essentially a commitment from J.Crew to this 500k it made it a lot easier presumably than without that PO to raise that first

1 (37m 57s):
25k. So so how much money is raised from friends and family?

3 (38m 2s):
Yeah. I think I raised within two to two and a half months 400k which was more than I needed to fulfill that 500k order

1 (38m 13s):
as like 10,000 here 25. There may be 50.

3 (38m 16s):
Yep. It was small

1 (38m 18s):
bites Hood. Go to Just where'd you go? Because a lot of people right are like pant for thousand bucks. How do you raise that money? Like, where do you find that

3 (38m 26s):
money? So I started went to people that I had met in New York that I knew had been successful and had expressed intent as kind of they got word that I was working on outdoor voices. So I think there were three friends in New York who ended up putting between 10 to 20 thousand dollars in I started Googling for kind of seed. Esther's and people that I could find online that put initial money into into companies and there was a guy named calva Pari who I remember reading a ton about and so I went to him knocked on his door and said hey, this is what I'm doing. I would love for you to put 25 to 50 KN and he did

1 (39m 9s):
was he he was just a investor in New York.

3 (39m 12s):
Yeah, he was an entrepreneur and investor and he found out about

1 (39m 15s):
him through just Googling. Wow.

3 (39m 17s):
Yeah again back back. Just typing in, you know investors in New York Fashion investors apparel investors early stage investors Etc. So I think having that that J.Crew order was really helpful early on because I knew that if I could figure out how to get these units produced. I'd have a big check coming back, you know within five

1 (39m 40s):
months so they were going to pay for it and there was no risk that they would like return unused product and you just have to eat that.

3 (39m 47s):
I'm sure there was I had that the point wasn't thinking about it. I was like 11,000 units. We're gonna get this across the Finish

1 (39m 53s):
Line got it. All right. So you get the money did that factor in El Monte make those 11,000 units

3 (39m 59s):
they made the 11,000 units and I was there in LA with them on the last possible ship date before J.Crew could cancel the PO. So we somehow caught it all together and were able to produce right in the nick of

1 (40m 15s):
time now, I remember talking to Sara Blakely about fulfilling Her first order for Neiman Marcus of Spanx and it's actually not so simple because when you're working with a big company like Neiman Marcus or in your case J.Crew, there's all these things you have two documents. You have to fill and their specific requirements that you have to meet and and write this. It's a very complex process. You don't just put stuff in a box and ship it to J.Crew. Right,

3 (40m 40s):
right. Yeah from the way it needs to be tagged. There's a whole system and and kind of way of doing things so worked. Very closely with Tracy at J.Crew to really understand what what was needed and I forgot to mention this but I knew I needed to be in LA because I wasn't going to run the risk of production going off the track. So I rented out my apartment in New York or my room my bunk room found a couch to rent in Venice and ended up living with these lovely folks that I found on Craigslist and would drive every single day from Venice. Do El Monte and Venice to Almonte making sure that every one of these 11,000 units was going to be in perfect Tip-Top shape when they got to

1 (41m 27s):
J.Crew. So when they got to J.Crew were they promoting the product like was it totally different from everything else they were selling like how is it going to be visible to J.Crew

3 (41m 38s):
customers? Yeah. This was five plus years ago, and it was really when this activewear space was starting blowing up take off. Yeah. Yes blowing up and so I PJ crew had had a lot of success with this discovered program where they brought new brands, you know to their customer and so put me on the discovered program. They did a shoot with me actually in Central Park in the product and then described the product and and launched

1 (42m 8s):
it. So it launches a J.Crew and what happened had to do

3 (42m 14s):
it did phenomenally and so I think within the first week they had already sold through 50% of of the product at that moment. I was really thankful for the opportunity to get a lot of eyeballs on the brand but I knew okay now is the time to click it into gear and start building this thing and that was 2014. I started putting together a list of larger investors that I you know had read would fund early stage companies Etc. I've worked with a friend of mine that worked in finance to At least start to put a business model together and this deck that I would then yeah go pitch investors in New

1 (42m 56s):
York with all right, so you've got to raise money right to really get this going. Where did you go? Where did you just start cold emailing potential investors?

3 (43m 8s):
Yeah. I created a list of 25 VCS that I found like we're like through Reading and TechCrunch and right through asking people and people Would raise money Etc. So I started emailing. I still had my my student edu address which was quite funny. It's somehow hadn't gotten shut off. And so I for a number of these folks. I started emailing them from my Parsons dot edu address and saying hey, I'd love to pitch you on my new idea laughter voices that the de la but I really leaned on the student card to get into these folks offices and you

1 (43m 47s):
think using your student Dress helped.

3 (43m 51s):
It definitely helped it got me into these initial meetings. The initial meetings weren't where I got funded but these initial meetings were hugely important as as kind of practice routines to really refine my picture and show up with the product I'd show up with the deck and for the first time ever go pitch on this idea. I had coming out of Parsons as a

1 (44m 12s):
graduate. Do you remember roughly what percentage of those 25 got back to you? Such a Arkham by

3 (44m 17s):
of the 25 I've let's see, I would say probably 19 got back to me which was crazy.

1 (44m 24s):
Yeah, and and out of those 19 when you started go meet with them. Did any of them say this is awesome. I meant actually give you money.

3 (44m 31s):
Oh, no every single one of those first meetings were like, thank you love this. Thanks for love that you had the courage to get in here. But you need some there. This needs work. I mean I had never done this before and I knew that by getting into the room of some of these Folks I would learn a lot and I had at that time this idea of just begin just begin just begin. So I began

1 (44m 57s):
and what specifically were these investors saying like we're getting feedback like you got to do more of this or not enough of this or this isn't

3 (45m 6s):
right. Yeah. I mean pretty consistently the first probably five conversations I get but we have Under Armour and we have Nike like why do we need another active wear brand which is a fair

1 (45m 17s):
question. Where's Lulu? Lemon, like athleisure is the so saturated, right? I mean 2014, that's probably what people were saying.

3 (45m 27s):
Yeah. Exactly. And what I started to piece together was I was in offices with men and these traditional activewear Brands had been built by men and really catered to men. So this Credo in this positioning around the competitive athlete the harder better faster stronger was That was familiar to the folks that I was pitching. And so what I started to recognize was me over here pitching this activewear brand around play and freeing Fitness from performance didn't make sense to these folks that had grown up as competitive

1 (46m 8s):
athletes. And what was the Breakthrough? How did you finally get somebody to say? Yep, I'll give you some

3 (46m 12s):
money. Yeah. I started to realize that going into these offices with mostly males and having conversations with them was not going to get me there. So ahead of going into a number of these meetings. I would start sending product to the women in the offices and the wives of some of these investors it did happen to be only male investors. So I started to find that by getting product getting the products the kit onto the women in the offices in the wives. I started to get people that were willing to spend more time and hear me out and understand ah, wait this could You something this I I'm starting to picture this. This could be something real I started to get more time with

1 (46m 56s):
folks. And who was the person who said? All right, I'll give you some money. Who's first one.

3 (47m 4s):
Yeah Peter voice from General Catalyst. General catalyst is VC. You're probably familiar with them out of Boston. He saw the product saw the pitch had gotten product on his girlfriend Natalia. She loved it. And he said I love this concept day. I want to back it and they were the first people to lead our seed

1 (47m 27s):
round and then with that, you know, once you've started to race him and how much did you raise in that first round. He remember

3 (47m 34s):
one point 1 million dollars.

1 (47m 36s):
Wow. Okay, so you got one point 1 million sounds like a lot of money but making clothing and building a team. That's really expensive at this point. Was it still just you or did you have somebody with you? I

3 (47m 47s):
had hired to to Additional team members one to really focus on sales and then want to focus on customer experience. So at this time 2014, we started we launched after voices.com a scrappy website but a place that as these J.Crew customer started to learn about us. We hoped would start to visit after voices and wanted something to exist to sell more product. And so use this seed round money to hire an additional. The three folks open and office because we had been working out of my apartment in the East Village and then to make more

1 (48m 26s):
product and is J.Crew still selling your stuff at this point

3 (48m 30s):
in 2015? Yes. Yeah. And again it was a really great way to you know, get a lot 11,000 people quickly to know about us, but after that initial by with J.Crew we decided hey we want on this directly. We want to start building. In outer voices as a direct to Consumer brand.

1 (48m 52s):
All right. So with that money like how do you start thinking about how to get this brand out into the world Beyond J.Crew

3 (48m 58s):
back to when I was initially starting the product. I had always brought these groups of people together to do an activity and at this stage I started realizing that this offline kind of gathering of community was really the best way to drive word-of-mouth. And so we hosted our first dog jog Ugh in New York and I had sent out an invite outdoor voices invites you to their first dog

1 (49m 25s):
dog, just to everybody you knew every email address. You had

3 (49m 28s):
every email address we had and I expected maybe 50 people to show up and and it ended up being closer to probably 200 that showed up with their dogs. And that's when I really started to realize that people were resonating with the little bits of the brand and the little bits of the product that we're starting to get out into the world. So we Posting content of these little informal groups get into together for different activities and hashtagging doing things doing things had become the outdoor voices Mantra any sort of activity through this outdoor voices group was hashtag doing things.

1 (50m 6s):
So with that 1.1 million dollars, were you able to actually open a store?

3 (50m 11s):
Yeah, so we opened our first store in Austin, Texas, which I had been dating someone in Austin while I lived in New York and And visited Austin for the first time straight from the airport when I landed in Austin went to a spot called Barton Springs, which it's essentially a football-field-sized Springfed pool at the downtown Center of Austin. Ya got out of the water looked up and said this is such a recreational town. This feels like the spiritual or long-term home for outdoor voices. And so we opened our first store in Austin and had found this house. 800 square foot house with a lawn next to it and said this is perfect.

3 (50m 55s):
So we spend a hundred and fifty thousand dollars to build out our first store in Austin, Texas.

1 (51m 3s):
Alright, so you've got the store NOS 10 but a million dollars is not going to be enough Runway. You've got to pay the rent. You got to pay your people. You've got to make clothing. So I have to assume that you had to go right back to it to really start to raise. More money.

3 (51m 20s):
Yeah, so with that round of funding at that point we had from an awareness standpoint relied on the J crew units a new customers driven from that as well as word of mouth. I then reached out to a friend from Parsons. Actually. We hadn't known each other. She became a friend later on but Leandra medine who had this blog called The Man repeller has this blog called man repeller and asked her to do a

1 (51m 46s):
collaboration and the man repeller this Blot, like just for people to know it is like a kind of a quirky fashion blog right?

3 (51m 54s):
Yep, and I essentially wanted to take LeAndre and work with her to create a customized kit. So same top and bottom but influenced by her personality and so launched the man repeller kit the kit came with a bag that had on the outside printed in it for the smoothie and had like a little popsicle. Jane and like a vintage jump rope and I thought she was so perfect to as our first kind of collaborative partner to really bring kind of the humor and the fun to the active Force Base in and be a really good illustration of kind of what we meant by activity for the fun of it and pretty quickly after that launched got a post in from Lena Dunham in this kit the man repeller kit and Been running for the first time on the set of girls something for the episode and on Instagram.

3 (52m 56s):
She had a caption that said I've never been around her, but I'm I'm learning to run for the first time and this kit makes me feel powerful Swift and

1 (53m 6s):
strong. This isn't like 2015.

3 (53m 8s):
This isn't

1 (53m 9s):
2015. And that's like Wow Girls is like one of the hottest shows on TV. She's a massive celebrity. She was a guest read this. Blog or she was like a reader of the blog and that's how she got the hit.

3 (53m 22s):
Yeah. She was a fan of LeAndre and man repeller and got the kit and it and wore it for that episode of girls and and posted about her experience of running for the first time. Hmm. That was a really meaningful first moment in the sense that Lena wasn't the first person you think of as you know, someone that an active wear brand is going to partner with and this was at the time where the athlete As such kind of OneNote look they were like yes in a way with muscles Etc and Lena comes blasting into into our world wearing the kit with curves and never having run and it was a perfect example of what we meant by this daily exercise or this positioning that we knew there was really opportunity to build the next great

1 (54m 10s):
brand around. So now this point right series that you raised a 1.1 million dollars your lecture series A Lena Dunham's warned your stuff like you're getting some traction. You got a shop in Austin, there's buzz like and I think you raised like seven and a half million dollars in that series a was was that a lot easier to raise that money than it was to raise seed money.

3 (54m 34s):
Yeah, the seed money I ended up probably meeting 50 people so that that initial list of 25 kept growing and growing and growing but actually having traction and a meaningful amount of traction in a short amount of time made it a lot easier. To go back to that that group at General Catalyst and put this funding

1 (54m 52s):
together. I'm curious Tyler. I mean, why wouldn't my Nike or Lululemon they could have kind of crowded you out of the market place while you were more vulnerable without a real brand. Why do you think that didn't happen?

3 (55m 10s):
I I mean, I think our brand is our moat and so the combination of the activities that we host and the product. That people wear while they're engaging in those activities is is the magic and that's I view my role as essentially kind of the new generation of Jane Fonda somebody that is at the front of this brand really helping to inspire and educate and get the world moving. It's a hard combination a recipe for somebody to

1 (55m 40s):
duplicate. All right, so you and 2016 you've gone through series B. You raise another 13 million you decide? Normally to move to Austin Tyler. How did you feel about being the CEO? I mean, I think you were like 26 27, maybe 26. I mean you were managing and running a business and certainly had people working for you who are like a lot older to take some getting used to

3 (56m 8s):
I mean being the CEO has been very natural given the vision is super clear for me I think in growing this company and at a speedy pace and with a lot of It'll around the table in a lot of strong voices. We've been lucky with the funding and engagement around the brand to have Mickey Drexler from J.Crew actually joined as the chairman of the board in 2016

1 (56m 33s):
and Mickey Drexler. It was for people don't know he's like this legendary guy in the industry turned Gap around and was a J.Crew he founded made. Well, he how did you get on his radar at all?

3 (56m 45s):
Yeah, he so he had heard about us when we initially Rated with Jay Creole and I think I've been super lucky to have a lot of engaged louder industry voices around the table, but have have had to figure out how to selectively take, you know experience advice and know how to channel it in addition to what I believe and understand that to create a company today is meaningfully different than creating a company 30 years ago and there. Our differences there.

1 (57m 20s):
I mean you've raised I think close to 60 million dollars total Mickey Drexler is the chairman of the board. You've got a board. You've got all these investors as you had and have had more experienced people coming in particularly men. Have you ever

3 (57m 36s):
felt like hey, you know, like your

1 (57m 38s):
man's playing this to me, you know back off because I know what I want to do. Have you ever had to have that kind of Confrontation? I wouldn't say it's gender.

3 (57m 48s):
But I think one thing that is super clear to me is the way we felt that outdoor voices to date is untraditional and it's our own Playbook. So I very much believe in creating the our own rules to the game. And that's what's Driven, you know the success to date and so what has become challenging over the last few years is hiring kind of more experience and Leadership sometimes comes with folks that want to bring playbooks from other companies, but at the end of the day taking control and tempering some of the input has been something that I've learned over time to be a CEO you have to learn how to take control and not necessarily listen to all the voices around the

1 (58m 34s):
table you guys have how many shops now we have nine

3 (58m 38s):
stores and how many employees we have 350

1 (58m 42s):
employees and through all this you also like met somebody new and Austin, Because I guess you the person that you were saying you guys split up but you met somebody new you got married and you are going to be a mom.

3 (58m 56s):
I am and I'm having a baby and mid-november first time doing it try and a lot of things but being pregnant as the CEO of outdoor voices has been an extreme sport. I think I've been really focused on with some of my peers like Whitney from Bumble and Audrey from the wing. Showing that there don't have to be like sacrifices from a family perspective that you take to be the CEO of a fast growing company and you can do it all all kind of in

1 (59m 29s):
harmony. You know, when I think about your story you can read it one way like it was just you were determined and you went from success to success to success and here you are but I wonder like what was there a dark moment? Was there a moment on this journey? Starting out or voices where you had serious doubts or you felt really bad about about anything.

3 (59m 57s):
I think every day leave you you kind of run the gamut of emotions based on kind of what's happening with the business and with the team etcetera and something that I've been really kind of vocal about without their voices and I think resonates personally is we're not up against the Nikes Runner armors of the world. Old as a company were up against people's negative perceptions of themselves and I think the most difficult thing about being a CEO for the first time. Sometimes you wake up and your you know, there's negative perception of your ability to get done and to really know what's right go forward.

3 (1h 0m 37s):
And so I've really focused kind of through this experience on surrounding myself with the right people to help continue to drive the confidence in my To do this and to grow the company and surround myself with smarter and smarter people that that really make this a strong strong team for the long

1 (1h 0m 56s):
run. How much of your of this story do you think is because of luck and how much do you think it's because you just worked really hard and you're really smart.

3 (1h 1m 4s):
I think it's persistence. So I think this deep-rooted knowledge that, you know, you're never going to give up and you're going to find a way and there's no other option is something that just has connected all these dots for me. People have to believe that you're going to do it and you're not going to stop at anything getting in the way. And so this crazy amount of persistence is really what's gotten me to kind of where I'm at.

1 (1h 1m 34s):
That's Tyler Hani founder CEO of outdoor voices, by the way, as you may have caught towards the end of our interview Tyler and her husband Mark are expecting a baby girls sometime around now, so by the time this podcast it's your feet. It is very likely. Tyler will be a new mom. And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from our 2019 lead sponsor campaign monitor the radically easy solution to email marketing 80 percent of retail professionals indicate email marketing as the highest driver of customer retention.

1 (1h 2m 19s):
Try it for free @ campaign

3 (1h 2m 21s):
monitor.com.

1 (1h 2m 27s):
On our brand new season of the storycorps podcast from NPR you'll hear challenging conversations between friends family members in sometimes people who could have easily been

3 (1h 2m 36s):
enemies as they Bridge divides and build connections where you'd least expect it

1 (1h 2m 42s):
episodes are available every Tuesday. Hey, thanks for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and this week's story starts when Beth in bow and a group of new moms took their babies out for

3 (1h 2m 56s):
lunch. We had a small corner table in the Pizzeria and they started immediately reaching for like the salt and pepper shakers and the coffee creamer and sugar

1 (1h 3m 6s):
because well their

3 (1h 3m 8s):
babies they think they're funny and they know they're cute, you know when they drop something and they get the attention of the moms then Got to keep doing that thing

1 (1h 3m 17s):
anyone who's been to a restaurant with a baby knows this game. You have to move all the choking hazards out of their reach. And then when you give them their actual toys, they usually just drop

3 (1h 3m 28s):
them and then I thought well, let me go online and see what exist there must be something that we can buy that just keeps them busy and makes it easier to take a baby out to

1 (1h 3m 36s):
eat. But Beth couldn't find anything quite right. She wanted some kind of placemat that kept the toys secure the food from spilling and could fit in the diaper bag. So she decided to make her

3 (1h 3m 49s):
own I use these silicone mats from Amazon that are actually designed for your pets food and water bowls a carabineer say that word ever but a clip that you just clip on and then I use the Shang tethers. There's these little tethers that you can use to clip your pliers to your

1 (1h 4m 8s):
belt Beth took her homemade placemat, and she stuck it in from her son Christian and he loved it, but she wasn't Sure, if other babies would as well so she did a little market research in the aisles of

3 (1h 4m 21s):
Target. I would see women at Target with babies and I would say, excuse me for just a second. Can I ask you a quick question? And then I'd say I have this idea. I'm inventing a product and I would say a hundred percent of the feedback was oh my gosh, that's genius. Yes. I would buy

1 (1h 4m 39s):
that inspired by that feedback that's decided to see if she could make something good enough to sell. Well,

3 (1h 4m 45s):
I got my prototype as far as I could on my own and like I said, I was very rudimentary and I knew I had a great product concept, but I didn't know where to go from there.

1 (1h 4m 56s):
So best started looking for someone who could help take her Matt concept to the next level. She found a designer in Salt Lake City in early 2018 and a few months later. She received a revamp design in the mail

3 (1h 5m 9s):
and I don't think I've ever had more emotions in my life than when I grab that envelope and took it the house to open. It up and try it out. I opened the package. I pull it out. I take off the plastic wrapping and I set it on my countertop and I couldn't pick it up it instantly stuck before I even press down on the suction cups or anything it was stuck there and I thought this is awesome. It was

1 (1h 5m 31s):
exactly the product Beth had dreamed of but now she had to figure out how to find the money to make

3 (1h 5m 38s):
more my stepdad gave me a loan and I use my savings and I sold a car. Our and scrounge together the money to do the first production run

1 (1h 5m 50s):
that's also launched a Kickstarter campaign to drum up interest. She actually didn't end up meeting her goal of $45,000. But she says that was a blessing in

3 (1h 5m 59s):
disguise. I couldn't have done it. I just couldn't have done it. I didn't know how much goes into manufacturing and production and all the costs involved with making molds and and the timelines I would have I would have probably

1 (1h 6m 12s):
sunk, but she didn't and since last year. Has sold almost 2300 busy baby mats, which translates into around 60,000 dollars in sales. And as for her two-year-old son Christian, definitely her biggest spokesman

3 (1h 6m 27s):
people often approached us and say, oh my God, that's so cool. Where did you get it and he'll look up and say that's my mommy's busy baby Matt.

1 (1h 6m 35s):
That's Beth in BO her product is the busy baby Matt. And if you want to find out more or here previous episodes had to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org and of course if you What to tell us your story go to build dot npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe at Apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcasts. And while you're there, please do give us a review. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or at guy Roz our show was produced this week by Casey Herrmann with music composed by rum Tina or Bluey. Thanks. Also to Canada slim. Julia car Nissan has Mexican porn evil.

1 (1h 7m 15s):
Grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Sequoia Carrillo. I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this. This is NPR.