2 (0s):
Hey really quick before we start the show. You will really want to hear this because if you are a fan of 90s music you may want to fly from wherever you are in the country to attend this upcoming live show how I built this is coming to Seattle to Benaroya Hall on Thursday, March 26, and we are going to tell the story of sub pop. I'll be talking with Jonathan poneman and Bruce pavitt the founders of sub pop the iconic label behind artists like Nirvana Soundgarden Fleet Foxes Death Cab. And so many more for information or to get your tickets go to NPR presents dot-org and I hope to see you in

1 (38s):
Seattle. It's gonna be so

2 (39s):
exciting. Okay onto today's episode, you know, you can learn a lot about your business but hanging out at the cash register and just you know, listening to your customers, which is actually what Ron Shake did many many years ago at it. This small bakery. He was running in Boston. Basically, his customers would ask for one thing over and over and over. Were in fact they asked for this thing so often that Ron decided to totally expand what he was offering at the store and that decision. Well it eventually led him to build one of the most popular fast-casual brands in the US. We first ran this incredible story about two years ago. If you haven't heard it, you will love it if you have it is totally worth hearing again.

2 (1m 23s):
Here you go. We were

1 (1m 27s):
making spinach croissant. We by the spinach Frozen. We didn't have a way to get rid of the water and somebody came up with the idea. Well, let's buy a dozen clothes dryers and we'll put the spinach in the clothes dryer that will dissipate the water was a great idea until one day. We blew the top off the the dry area. I get ended up with the spinach in all three thousand square feet of the production space.

2 (1m 55s):
From NPR it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm Gyros and on today's show how Ron Shake built a successful bakery called. Oh, bom pan, and then took a big bed to build an even bigger restaurant chain Panera. Grand shaykh isn't a household name like say Howard Schultz, but you could argue that what Howard Schultz did for coffee Ron Shake did for cheddar broccoli soup or the asiago cheese bagel because like Howard Ron wasn't just focused on a product.

2 (2m 46s):
He was interested in creating a space of place where people could hang out for a long time. Maybe even have a PTA meeting or social Gathering and really linger over that. Bagel or cup of soup. This is the famous third-place concept that both Howard Schultz and Ron Shake wanted to tap into and that's how Panera became one of the fastest-growing restaurant chains in the world. In fact, if you'd invested the $7,000 in Panera stock in 1999, you'd be sitting on more than half a million dollars by 2017. Now the thing is if you Metron shakes a in high school This is not the path you have predicted for him.

2 (3m 29s):
Ron wasn't even interested in business. His passion was politics. His parents were raging liberals and Ron grew up going to rallies and volunteering on campaigns all over New Jersey. He eventually went to Clark University where naturally he majored in politics and he was quickly elected to student government and that could have been Ron's life except for one day when something happened to Ron and a group of friends something kind of Small but something that when you look back on it probably changed his entire life.

1 (4m 3s):
Yeah, so we were in a local convenience store called store 24 across the street from the main entrance to the Clark campus and they accused us of shoplifting and toss this out.

2 (4m 14s):
That's a saline. Could we guys just being Rowdy or any other wild

1 (4m 17s):
earning know we were shopping but I came back to campus and I was in my dorm room with a couple of friends and I said, you know, why are we shopping their house? Heck can they treat us like this where what supports that store. We said, what do we need? And what we can do we can do this ourselves. We can have our own convenience store. And I said, you know, this isn't going to be that hard. Let's go do it and we approached the university they weren't so keen on this but I move the question the student body they voted in support of it. And I basically agreed to spend that summer between my sophomore and junior year opening this convenience store guy.

2 (4m 54s):
Wow, so what do you guys sell

1 (4m 56s):
we Sold everything from drinks to Munchies to cookies and candy and you know our system manager would come to my apartment at 5:00 in the morning. And we actually would go to this deep discount supermarket and buy I don't know 10 or 15 baskets full of merchandise that we stock the store with and we hire 20 or 30 different students to work there. I will be very Frank and steals more interested in that store than I was in my own academic

2 (5m 33s):
life and and your guy who's still focused on public policy and government but I guess this was kind of cool. You liked you kind of liked doing business you like running a business.

1 (5m 46s):
Yeah, and you know, I didn't see myself as that kind of guy and it took me a while to make sense of that but in so many ways running a business Is no different than a campaign. In fact a campaign is a business that that essentially has one day in which it ends a business is a campaign that goes on and never ends.

2 (6m 12s):
So at this point in his life, Ron wasn't quite sure what he wanted to do business or politics, but people around him saw how much he loved running that convenience store and a lot of people said. Hey, why don't you get an MBA? So Ron, did he enrolled at Harvard Business School in 1976 and when he finished unlike a lot of his classmates who wanted to banking or Finance Ron decided to go into retail and he took a job in the midwest at a place called the original Cookie

1 (6m 41s):
Company. 20 stores and shopping malls, we grew at about a hundred and twenty-five. I took the job as the third year of the NBA what I mean by that is I took a job as a district manager. Basically I ran 10 or 15 of these cookie stores half the United States and I spent my time running around the country and I ended up opening thousands of these cookies stores around the country.

2 (7m 8s):
So at a certain point and you see you're learning about the cookie business, I guess and then whatever. A certain point you get this idea. Like hey, wait, I can do this myself. I can have my

1 (7m 17s):
own cookie store. Yes, and I can literally remember traveling across Indiana. I'm a way to Fort Wayne to open a new cookie store and it hit me and I said, why are we opening this in a mall? There's a huge opportunity to open these in an urban setting. Why don't we open one and I can remember going to my boss. I remember him taking me to meet the CEO of the company. I said I want to open an urban cookie store and he looks at me. He says we don't do that here. We open wall base retail units and I thought to myself. Well, if you're not going to do it, I'd like to go do it why shouldn't we and I'm the kind of guy who if I say I'm going to do it.

1 (7m 58s):
I want to go do it and it led me to actually resigning my job and I moved back to Boston and I started looking for real estate and the reality was nobody. Would least me space for cooking and find Annie soon

2 (8m 15s):
for a cookie store because they thought it wouldn't make enough money to pay the rent because I had no credibility here. I

1 (8m 21s):
had no real money. I had you know, no balance sheet to sign a lease. And so I went to my dad and I said, I want my inheritance whatever it's going to be I want the opportunity to use it and I had about 25,000 dollars. My dad. Essentially. Let me gave me $75,000. And that $100,000 became the grubstake the equity that allowed us to build that first 400 square foot cookie store. Wow in downtown Boston. What did you name the store? We needed the cookie jar and I can remember we took the Tollhouse recipe right off the bag.

1 (9m 1s):
I bought a small mixer and I would pass out cookies in front of the stories. We were building it and I start to adjust the recipe based on what I learned talking to

2 (9m 9s):
customers and you were the baker you were making love. Cookies

1 (9m 13s):
yourself? Yeah, we opened there were three employees. I mean it was me and two folks. I will never forget that day. It just seemed like people never stop walking coming in and purchasing we have 50,000 people day going by and I'll never forget it. I

2 (9m 29s):
got to the end of the day as people a day walking past the stores foot

1 (9m 32s):
traffic. Yeah, but I got to the end of that first afternoon. We opened at 1 o'clock guy and by 6 we closed and my back was hurting and legs were hurting and I can't Money and I realized we had only brought in $400. I mean you forget when we talk about business what it is to sell 400 batches of cookies at a buck each and the amount of energy and work that goes into it. I mean that that sounds

2 (9m 57s):
pretty good though. I mean especially for the first day

1 (10m 0s):
well, you know guy you the the reality of the cookie business and basically any businesses, you got to pay the rent the staff is essentially going to be there. So the question is what your umm, and I was there maybe four or five months, you know, we were surviving weren't making a lot of money was a fun gig but I wanted more what was your vision for

2 (10m 24s):
cookie jar. Did you imagine it being like that Cookie Company worked for in Ohio that it would be a big chain of cookie stores. Was that what you were thinking long-term? You know,

1 (10m 34s):
it's so funny. I have never started with a tight goal in mind what I have always done. To this day still do I see an opportunity? I weighed out into the water and I try to figure out where that opportunity is going to take me. It's a little like body surfing when you go on vacation you go to the ocean, you know, you get out far enough away from Shore you start to watch the waves come in and then you choose a wave and you think that's going to be a powerful wave and then you get on that wave and you see where it takes you and you start to navigate and negotiate your way too short and so for me. Me the cookie store was not an end.

1 (11m 15s):
But a means to take me to the next place. I just love the process of figuring it out. I love the doing of the work. I was working a hundred hours a week and and it never felt like work. It was Joy. But

2 (11m 32s):
you also said just a minute ago that you that it wasn't enough that you wanted more. So what like what was your plan to take the cookie jar, you know to the next level.

1 (11m 41s):
Well, it was really interesting. I mean I saw these 50,000 people a day going by but nobody bought cookies before 12 noon and I thought to myself. Wow, what can we do with this? And I thought you know, why don't we put in French baked goods they seem to be growing in popularity people were buying Inquests on and the like and I went to a local to a company called Old

2 (12m 6s):
bump. It was a small just a local Boston chain, like two or three

1 (12m 9s):
located at that point. Well, they hit three locations and I became their license 84 the one square block around my

2 (12m 17s):
little cookie. So in other words you sold what their

1 (12m 20s):
croissants? Well, I actually converted my store to where it had two logos. It had the old bumper logo and it had the cookie jar logo and and you could get French baked goods that we baked on premise or you could get the cookies in the afternoon and the thing started doing very well, but as an operator and I'm an operator and operators a gout runs these businesses, you know, which of your vendors are any good and which aren't and these folks at Obama pain. It was very clear to me. They were out of control, huh? I love their product. Their product was great. But as a business, they were disorganized. They sometimes they delivered Times they didn't sometimes they build me.

1 (13m 1s):
Sometimes they didn't to this day. I'm sure I still owe money. They just didn't have the basic processes and disciplines and that's typical in many small businesses and I saw a powerful opportunity and I thought to myself. Wow, I really couldn't straighten this business out. I really could operate this. So what ended up happening guy? I became friends with the gentleman who was running the three Obama Penza guy later became my partner. Sir, Luke a new cane and it was clear to him and to me that oh bomb pain was not going to be able to continue growing or staying in business there. And so I came to them and said look it I think I can fix this.

1 (13m 46s):
You give me 60 percent of the company you and your investors keep 40% I'll put my cookie store which was making money and with your thrill bomb pens and we'll create a new company and it was in that process that we created. What became

2 (13m 60s):
so so once you did the deal with with Lou and obon pan, what did you do? Like, how did you even

1 (14m 5s):
start? Well, I knew I knew how to fix their business, huh? I was committed to doing whatever it took to get this thing off the The ground so after we took over a bone pain, it was a mess, you know, we didn't have a way we were making spinach croissant. We by the spinach Frozen we didn't have a way to get rid of the water and somebody came up with the idea. Well, let's buy a dozen dryers like hair dryers are no clothes dryers and we'll put the spinach in the clothes dryer and that will dissipate the water from from you know, frozen spinach. Well, that was a great idea but

2 (14m 43s):
frozen spinach into

1 (14m 45s):
Tires. Well, we let it defrost first guy, but we put the Frosted spinach in clothes dryers letting it run off. The water was a great idea until one day we blew the top off the the dryer and ended up with spinach in in all three thousand square feet of the production space. I

2 (15m 3s):
used to love those spinach croissant sat. Oh Bond pad,

1 (15m 6s):
you do know how they were made. Did you wow, but I can literally remember guy we didn't even have the ability to maintain our equipment. Moment and I would use my auto mechanic to help fix the equipment, you know who else to call hm, and we had a dough divider that was essentially being held together with baling wire and paper clips. My auto mechanic was trying to keep it going and we're using a hanger as the handle on this dough divider. I was in a bakery at about 3:00 in the morning. All of a sudden you see Sparks come with this dough divider and this guy the individual who was working on the dough divider jumps like a deer that have been shot and he falls on the ground like a Raggedy Ann doll.

1 (15m 58s):
Wow, and I and everybody else in the production area came running over to this guy and I can just remember thinking to myself please dear. God let this guy survived without know I've certainly flashed in my mind Bakery shut down, you know Baker killed. Yeah, I could have Imagine all and we're all over there in this this x Vietnam veteran tattoos all over his body working in the bakery comes over and starts to do mouth-to-mouth resuscitation on him pounding on his chest and then all of a sudden this guy who's on the floor opens one eye and he says we could please take your tongue out of my mouth and and that's something that's what I knew. We were going to be, okay.

2 (16m 39s):
When we come back here on took. Oh, bom pan from a small business in Boston to a publicly traded national chain, and then how he put all of that success on the line to grow another company Panera Bread stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible first to zip recruiter hiring used to be hard multiple job sites stacks of resumes.

2 (17m 28s):
But today hiring can be easy and you only have to go to one place to get it done. Zip recruiter. Zip recruiter sends your job to over 100 of the web's leading job boards, then zip recruiter scans thousands of resumes to find people with the right experience. Invite them to apply to your job. Try it for free @ zipper Cooter.com. Our thanks also to athletic greens athletic greens is a daily nutritional beverage for active people athletic greens contains 75 vitamins minerals Whole Food sourced ingredients prebiotics probiotics adaptogens and more Tim Ferriss the USA cycling team longevity expert Peter diamandis athletes and top performers start their day with athletic greens.

2 (18m 15s):
Go to athletic greens.com built to receive 20 free travel packs with your first purchase.

1 (18m 25s):
Women in America have long vied for the highest political office the presidency this week on through-line how things have changed and not for female presidential candidates throughout American history through line from NPR the podcast where we go back in time to understand the present.

2 (18m 45s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So something you're going to notice about Ron shake and the story of how he eventually builds Panera Bread is just how many times along the way he sees New Opportunities or as to improvise and adapt again and again and again, Ron comes to a point where he has to make a big pivot and transform his business and in 1985 3 years after Ron acquires a All French bakery in Boston called Oban pan a business. That's really struggling. He manages to turn things around with his partner Lou cane but it's still a small business.

2 (19m 26s):
In fact, Ron himself works at the sales counter during the day but doing that actually helps them figure out almost by accident his next

1 (19m 35s):
opportunity in 1984 1985. I would be in a restaurant working and I'd have a customer walk up to me guy and say what? I have that back at I say sure and they say slice it. I'd hand them the loaf and they pull out a bag from the local supermarket from a local Stop and Shop and they put roasted turkey and maybe cheese on it. And you know, you didn't have to be a Harvard MBA to say. Wow. The real thing here is that the baguette is not the end. It's the platform to sell sandwiches and and my whole view of business if you really feel Because I'm listening you will see amazing things.

1 (20m 18s):
You'll learn amazing things and these customers in their behavior were showing us the opportunity and so in 1985, we created the first French Bakery Cafe in the Copley Place Mall in Boston. So you decided that you were going to

2 (20m 34s):
make this a new experience a new open pan experience where people could come and eat lunch and buy

1 (20m 41s):
bread. Yeah. We were going to go from being simply a bakery to a bakery cafe. Say right and almost instantly this broken-down company became very hot people wanted this. I can remember the second day that we opened in Copley Place. We had 50 people in line before we open the doors. And were you serving there? We were serving sandwiches and some soups made on our bread and croissant but they were differentiated kinds of sandwiches. They were roast beef and boars on on a real French baguette. It would be roasted turkey and Brie cheese and I think what Obama pain was providing and I don't think we had the language for it back then but what the bakery cafe was was an Between down and dirty fast food.

1 (21m 33s):
Yeah and fine dining. Yeah, and for people who were working in White Collar jobs increasingly in urban settings. This was the first example of what we later came to call fast-casual. This was an attempt to do something that was better but in a quick service mode, so so once you sort of

2 (21m 53s):
stumbled on this idea of creating cafes and bakeries, it was Off to the Races you just I mean at that point it was clear that you were going to begin. In a pretty rapid expansion

1 (22m 3s):
well guy. We you know, as soon as we came up with this idea of a bakery cafe, we saw all kinds of interest in that we became hot, you know, every major office building wanted a French bakery cafe, and we found we developed big competitors Pepsi came after us they decided this was going to be the third leg of Pepsi food service and they'd created something on the called La Petite Belanger Sara Lee came after us. They bought a chain. Michelle's bag and they were going to open 400 stores. There was a company in your part of the world down in DC called Vie de France. Oh, yeah, and they were off and running and we were quite frankly the smallest of them

2 (22m 44s):
and the interesting part to me guy. Yeah is

1 (22m 47s):
every one of these large competitors had people with resumes that would run rings around our guys all of them had far more money in announced they were going to open

2 (22m 56s):
more stores. Yeah, but every one of

1 (22m 58s):
them hit the wall what they

2 (22m 59s):
didn't have is our People

1 (23m 1s):
were much more connected. Our guys weren't worrying about their next career move. Our guys were committed in this deep and profound way to making this concept work. So we ended up out operating all these larger companies and by 1991 we were validated when we went public Morgan Stanley took us public and we really had won the battle to be the dominant Bakery Cafe operator in America.

2 (23m 31s):
Alright, so something something happens early in this period as shortly after you go public which is a one-pound acquires this small chain of st. Louis-based sandwich shops called the st. Louis Bread Company. What's the story there? Why did you buy this like small chain? And st. Louis was it was the idea to turn them into Obama pens know I you know, I

1 (23m 52s):
talked to everybody in our industry and there's nobody I don't learn from and I was asked by an investment Bank to meet several gentleman who owned a company called st. Louis Bread Company and it hit me. These were 19 stores in St. Louis doing volumes almost as much as we did with a no bomb pain but doing so in Suburban st. Louis and it struck me. This was an opportunity to acquire st. Louis Bread Company and maybe we could build it into 300 400 500 stores in the Suburban Marketplace while Obama was our Urban strategy. So in November of 1993 we bought the st.

1 (24m 33s):
Louis Bread Company those 19 stores for 23 million

2 (24m 36s):
dollars are looking at this thing and you're thinking hey wait, we can use this as a way to get into the Suburban Market. What was the st. Louis Bread Company doing that was different than Oban pan. Why would it ever appeal to Suburban consumers more than a one pan? Well,

1 (24m 51s):
it's interesting guy the st. Louis Bread Company was in location sites that were significantly larger and that in Able to have shall we say A Gathering Place or chill business? Sin Louis Bread Company was generating volumes nearly as high as oh bom pain but doing so in real estate that cost half as

2 (25m 11s):
much is the is the chill business like literally like to chill out you mean when you say

1 (25m 17s):
that? Yeah, we call it the Gathering Place for chill business. I was called third place, but basically it's you know, when you when you when you don't want to go back to the office when you want to placed to read a magazine to do. Your bills to go on Wi-Fi. Where do

2 (25m 30s):
you go? Yeah, it's like the Starbucks. This is the Starbucks model, right? Yes, the the difference between

1 (25m 35s):
us and Starbucks and Starbucks their tight spaces. So you generally go in with your headphones on and try to separate from everybody else Panera because we have the space. It's the kind of place you really do want to sit and do an interview. It's a kind of place that that for a Bible study group or a team meeting. You can fit six eight ten people at a time.

2 (25m 56s):
All right, so you choir st. Louis Bread Company. Going to be the sort of the Suburban alternative to Obama pan and you will not going to give it the name of on pan. It was going to be st. Louis Bread Company or did you initially did you immediately realize you're going to rename this thing?

1 (26m 13s):
Well, we renamed the concept Panera Bread in all markets other than st. Louis, but we renamed it Panera Bread because as we went to New Markets people often thought st. Louis was more associated with Clydesdale horses and beer. Then

2 (26m 28s):
it was a bread right?

1 (26m 30s):
And so we wanted an empty vessel a personality we could form and our view was we had bought this there's something good happening. Let's take a couple of years and study

2 (26m 41s):
it. So would you do at that point

1 (26m 44s):
so we went off and I literally spent two years on the road with yellow legal pads talking to people and it was very clear to me. I'm always searching for what's the deeper Trent post-world War II fast food was special. Fast forward 10 1990 was 60,000 drive-throughs in America fast food had become self-service gasoline stations for the human body. And the reality of it was that there were many consumers there were holding their noses when they wanted the fast food. They wanted more than a lot of food cheap and it was very clear to us the same phenomena was happening in bread and you start to see the growth of specially bred in the east coast and the west coast and we began to understand that this nomina offered a powerful opportunity.

1 (27m 31s):
Somebody was going to dominate specialty food and with the power of combining with the specialty bakery. We saw the potential to do

2 (27m 38s):
it. So at a curiosity in that by 98 you're watching st. Louis Bread Company era really start to grow. Do you remember how many stores you had at that point? We did you expand Beyond those original 19 Yeah by

1 (27m 51s):
1998. We roughly had a hundred and fifty stores and I was having one of those moments that all CEOs Of self-reflection and frankly, I was kind of bummed. I was looking at Panera Bread as one of four divisions in this multi-divisional restaurant concept get a bundt pan. I had oh bump No.1 pain International. I had Panera and I had Obama pain manufacturing and I was with a friend and I said, you know for every hundred people who talked about having a nationally Dominic concept one ever makes it to do so is so difficult, but I see this one has that potential and my friend looked at me and said Ron what would you do if Panera owned Obama pain not?

1 (28m 37s):
Oh bom pantone's Panera and I said, you know, I take all the resources. We had put it against Panera becoming a nationally dominant brand and I take myself and the very best people we had and I go down there and make it happen. You are

2 (28m 51s):
proposing to sell Oban pan. I was imposing to sell everything other than Except for per your seat. Yes, and all the human resources and

1 (29m 3s):
myself and go down and make this happen.

2 (29m 5s):
So basically you're saying these out of the four sub businesses. Let's get rid of these three take the cash and pour it into Panera because that's the place. That's the thing that has the potential. Yes. So you go to your board and you say let's do this and your board is looking at you like you're nuts because they actually got into this business in because of Au Bon Pain

1 (29m 26s):
literally that's what happened guy. It was a huge boardroom struggle because I had two votes are Venture capitalists had three and all of them had invested in Obama Pena. Let's just say there were very heated discussions. And if I hadn't pulled this off, I probably wouldn't have stayed as CEO of Panera.

2 (29m 44s):
I mean you had a guess when you sold a lump and it was like 250 stores something like that about 250 stores and the Panera only had a hundred and eighty so you were you really were downsizing, but you thought we need to downsize in order to The load and growth but I wasn't downsizing I was

1 (30m 1s):
focusing I could see the potential of Panera in retrospect. It looks brilliant because the stock has been up a hundred fold since then but going through it was horrible. I mean those businesses. Oh bump him was like my first child. Yeah. I birthed it. I grew it. I lived it. I loved it. But sometimes you just have to March forward. You have to know what matters in Panera's What mattered? And you have to get it done. And so we lived through the sale of all three other businesses over a year and a half and we change the name of the public company from Oban pain to Panera and off we ran and back

2 (30m 41s):
then you could have bought our stock

1 (30m 44s):
for three and a half four dollars a

2 (30m 45s):
share. Why didn't you tell me? Why didn't you call me? Then

1 (30m 48s):
Ron, you know guy. I was tellin everybody nobody wanted to listen then

2 (30m 52s):
three bucks a share ended up selling for 315 to share my

1 (30m 57s):
God, the truth is nothing. It's

2 (30m 58s):
proved until it's done. So you you are taking a big risk in 99 when you sell a bond pan by 2003 Panera's doing a billion dollars in sales. Are you doing a Victory lap? Are you like high-fiving people and saying see I told you

1 (31m 17s):
guys I never do a Victory lap and the reality is right. The time to worry about tomorrow is today and my job is to discover. What's going to happen tomorrow. Mauro I have what's called a Retailer's nightmare. I have a fear that that somehow some way nobody's going to show up tomorrow and then what you know, I get up on the stage, right and I speak in front of 5000 Panera people. Yeah, and I sit there and I think to myself as I'm speaking my God, these people are counting on us to make the right decisions their mortgages their kids education their livelihoods their lives. Their careers are counting on us to make the right decisions. So I'm continually asking myself where We going to be in three and five years.

1 (32m 0s):
What do we need to do to get there? How do we make sure we don't make a mistake? How do we care for this? How do we store it in the right way?

2 (32m 7s):
What's interesting to me is that this growth are just explosive in the early 2000s and I guess by 2009 pinheiros opening like a new store every five

1 (32m 17s):
days basically every three days and it's

2 (32m 19s):
insane. It's a middle of the worst financial crisis. How did that happen? I mean, how did the the the financial crisis and the collapse? The economy not affect you guys.

1 (32m 30s):
Our whole view was to make smart bets and one of those smart bets comes from a contrarian perspective pre the recession pre the Great Recession. The whole world was in a go-go kind of context. Everybody was Levering up their balance sheets putting on debt borrowing money to buy back stock grow grow grow. At that time. We held back real estate costs were high. We didn't lever up when the recession. Didn't hit as Warren Buffett put it. That's the time you make a fortune. Our concept was still strong people were still visiting us. We decided to invest our resources and growing even more quickly during the recession real estate costs were down 20 percent construction costs were down 20 percent simultaneously.

1 (33m 18s):
Most of our competitors were ripping cost out of their p&l trying to chase their costs down as their sales were descending. It was a vicious cycle. We said this is a time to build additive advantage and ultimately we tripled the stock through the recession.

2 (33m 36s):
I'm Ron, I don't I don't want to end with had asking you about about Lou Kane your longtime business partner. Yeah, because it seems like you guys have this amazing like very successful partnership and and I know Loop has to weigh in 2000. But how did you guys do that? Like, how did you because most people most Partnerships breakdown people fight. They get jealous angry they get resentful like did you Did you have an agreement? How are you able to work so well together. Well, first

1 (34m 6s):
of all describe low Lou was our version of Blake Carrington from Dynasty. He was direct from from Central Casting. Wow, and he looked the part people love love and loo probably was at his best in relationships and building relationships. And and I was the guy who who really thought deeply about the business who ran the business and made it happen. And Luanne eyes partnership worked because we understood each other. I own, you know, six times more stock than him but most of the community at that point undoubtedly thought the company was loose.

1 (34m 47s):
I was 20 years his Junior. I was the guy who, you know work with low. He was a Harvard College a major fundraiser for Harvard. He was on the comment on staff in the Marine Corps and Lou was able to through his relationship. Ships develop the real estate and he at the real estate and I could turn into something and so we were perfect for each other and both of us till the day. He died took care of each

2 (35m 16s):
other. That's pretty amazing. So last year Panera sold was acquired sold to a German company JB holding. So it's now a private company again. Yes. Why did you sell real simple

1 (35m 30s):
because what had allowed us to have Have this powerful success was his ability to make long term transformative smart bets. The reality is in the public marketplaces. I was deeply worried. We would not be able to continue to do

2 (35m 43s):
that. When you were on Wall Street to answering the Wall Street. You could not do that. No, I you know what the truth is. I

1 (35m 48s):
probably could because I voted 17 percent of the

2 (35m 50s):
stock and I had this

1 (35m 51s):
reputation this credibility

2 (35m 54s):
the problem was what happened if I wasn't there. Yeah, and I'm 64. I'm not going to be

1 (35m 59s):
here forever. How does Panera continue to do the things that Created value there is a pervasive sense of short-termism that has invaded our markets. The reality is when you have such short term pressure on our CEOs, they react and what that ends up meeting is cost-cutting and they avoid the kind of transformative of events that drove the success of Panera anything of value when you have a hundred thousand employees as we do and you have as many stores as we do takes time takes years. And so the reality is as a CEO as a leader. And I've got to figure out where the world is going. I got to know how the world is unfolding and I got to make sure my company is positioned as the world arrives

2 (36m 40s):
there. You can't do that.

1 (36m 42s):
So easily in a public company

2 (36m 43s):
you toward the end of 2017 you you announced that you are stepping down as the CEO. Are you finally now that you are kind of slowing down and stepped out from the day-to-day stuff able to enjoy mean you also became rich guy. You didn't grow up that way. Are you able to Enjoy some of that you know money is freedom. And so

1 (37m 6s):
I wouldn't I wouldn't be foolish and tell you I don't enjoy it. You know, I've often been on these panels where I'm the token entrepreneur and you know at Business Schools in the like and say, oh, isn't it so wonderful, look what you created and they usually talk about the money and I tell them look at you don't understand, you know, if you don't like the people you work with if you don't like the doing of the doing the creative process of it, you're never going to get out there. It's not about going to lunch at the club. It's not about the financing and you better be clear about the entrepreneurial life the business own Jew. You don't own it. And this business was with me. It still is every minute of my life when I'm in the shower when I'm sleeping.

1 (37m 50s):
That's the way you develop it and that's the way you grow it and that's the way you run it. And if you're not willing to pay that price you don't want to do what this is all about.

2 (38m 1s):
Ron Sheikh he was Yo for 36 years before officially handing over the reins of Panera Bread in early 2018 late in 2017, after Pinero and private again and twenty years after selling album pan to focus on building out Panera the company actually bought back. Obon Pan. The two brands are once again part of the same

1 (38m 25s):
family. Do you have to be DV lunch at Panera? I'm in Panera go. I don't know four or five times a week now or 5 pounds down. Yeah, my kids are in another four or five times. So we still love Panera

2 (38m 49s):
and please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from one of our sponsors of how I built this square space dedicated to helping you turn your cool idea into a Modern web site visit squarespace.com and use the offer code NPR to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. What's good job, as you know, February is Black History Month and all throughout that month mpr's codes, which is going to be running a special series

1 (39m 21s):
about the history of black resistance because as long as black folks have been oppressed in this country, which is, you know forever. We've also been fighting back. Listen And

2 (39m 31s):
subscribe. Hey, thanks for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and today. We're updating a story. We ran about a year ago, and it begins in Queen Creek, Arizona Lisa. Dalton was dating a software engineer named Brian and Brian is blind and one day Lisa was at his house looking through his pantry and making a shopping list. He had 18 cans of refried beans and didn't know it. So Lisa decided to reorganize nice gesture, but also a big mistake he had you Memorization based system to organize what he had in this pantry and in my manhandling the goods I had to completely mess them up.

2 (40m 12s):
Brian was forgiving me said it's okay. You didn't know but Lisa she felt awful. I felt like melting into the floor, but she also thought there has to be a better system for Brian's Pantry. So she started to research and she found a few Solutions like putting Braille on an index card and then wrapping it around a can with a rubber band. But that seemed wrong for a guy like Brian. I just thought this is not the level of household. He has stylish dude. I wouldn't want him to have to do that. Okay something to know about Lisa. She actually sells customized and commemorative bricks using stamps. She makes with a 3D printer and as she tried to figure out how to solve a problem like Brian's Pantry.

2 (40m 54s):
She thought what about using my printer to make reusable labels. And so she did she came up with something that's kind of like those Livestrong. But with Braille on the outside something you might slip around a container. It's a rigid plastic. It has a little bit of give in it for you can just slide it on and then they pop right off now Lisa had kept all of this a secret. So when she gave Brian the labels kind of cracked up and his face changed and he's like, that's weird. But that's really cool. And the next thing he said was hey, you should really sell these So Lisa started working on more Braille labels for all sorts of cans and jars and after a few months she She packed up her prototypes and she went to a convention hosted by the national Federation of the blind.

2 (41m 39s):
She didn't really have any expectations. She just wanted a little feedback but instead people kept coming to her booth and then they'd come back with friends and say hey check these out and one woman asked Lisa if she would sell her a few of the prototypes. She had packed her husband's lunch and grab the wrong container. She packed him a beer. I mean, I

1 (42m 1s):
know how mortifying that

2 (42m 3s):
is and To know that you potentially meet a job ending mistake over something so simple that's got to be terrifying and that day talking to the people at the convention. It was a revelation. I got to the car that day and I totally cried it was ridiculously moving the stories how they've been trying to solve that problem and how they wish that this had come out 20 years ago. So she went home and built a website. It went live in October of 2018 and now Lisa as for Braille labels for three dollars each and the name of the product can do labels. I just thought this would bring a lot of Independence to people who are also wanting to be able to do their own things.

2 (42m 44s):
I thought these are yes can do things this past year National Braille, press a publisher and platform that supports people with visual impairments started to sell can do labels to keep up with the growing demand. Lisa's now recruited a friend to help with the printing if you want to find out more about can do labels.

1 (43m 3s):
Here

2 (43m 4s):
previous episodes head to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org. Of course. If you want to tell us your story build that npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. And while you're there. Please do give us a review. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org, and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this our show is produces week by Casey Herrmann with music composed by rum team that are Bluey. Thanks also to Sequoia Carrillo Candice limb Julia Kearney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is rainy toll. I'm Kyra's and you've been listening to how I built this.

2 (43m 50s):
This is NPR.