0 (1s):
Hey Prime members You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music Download. the app today. It's Sky Ross. Here on the Wisdom from the Top podcast, I talked to leadership experts and some of the world's greatest business leaders about how they lead, innovate, and transform the people around them. If you're trying to make it in business or just wanna think more like a leader, this show is probably for you. Listen now to the Wisdom from the Top podcast, From Luminary and npr.

2 (32s):
One of my favorite quotes is If. you wanna understand the entrepreneur study, the juvenile delinquent, cuz cuz they're saying, you know, this sucks, I'm gonna do it my own way. And that's what the entrepreneur does. They, they just say, this is wrong, I'm gonna do it this other way. And that's the fun part of business. Actually, I love breaking the rules

0 (58s):
From npr. It's How I Built This, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs idealist, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz and on today's show how Yvon Chenard went from pounding hot metal in a converted chicken coop to founding the outdoor clothing brand Patagonia. And why today he says he does not want your money If I'm Chenard isn't the kind of entrepreneur who's gonna wow you with a PowerPoint presentation or a snappy elevator pitch. He's basically a surfer, a kayaker, and a mountain climber who sort of stumbled into the role of businessmen.

0 (1m 43s):
And he's also pretty, how can I say this? Eccentric, but in the best possible way, if Vons never had any interest in becoming rich, he's actively worked to slow down Patagonia's growth and profit margins. And yet, despite his best efforts to keep it small, this little clothing company he started 50 years ago has turned into a huge business.

2 (2m 7s):
Well, I never intended to start a business, it's just, I, I just have this knack that every time I look at a product, I look at it and I think, oh, you know, I can make something better than that. It could be better. So every time we went climbing, we'd come back with ideas on how to improve the climbing gear, which was very crude in those days. And so, you know, I became a blacksmith. I taught myself blacksmithing so that I could make some of the climbing hardware that I thought would be better than what's available.

0 (2m 37s):
You were literally like pounding hot pieces of metal into shape.

2 (2m 41s):
That's exactly right. You know, doing it in my parents' backyard and then my father helped me convert a chicken coop into a little shop. Huh.

0 (2m 50s):
So what, what were you making there?

2 (2m 53s):
Well I was making, you know, peons those metal spikes that you pound into cracks and I was making the carabiners, the snap lengths and hard goods like that.

0 (3m 2s):
Yeah. Cuz I mean at that time mountain climbing was still, I mean, it wasn't what it is today. It wasn't like this huge commercial enterprise, right?

2 (3m 8s):
No, they were probably 250 climbers in the country. Wow. Yeah. And all the gear came from Europe and, and it was pretty poor quality. Like the peons were made to be used once because the Europeans looked at climbing as conquering mountains. Hmm. And you just leave all the gear in place to make it easier for the next group. And, and we were brought up kind of the philosophy of John Muir and, you know, thorough and we felt like nature should be left alone and you should do a climate but leave nothing behind. And so I made peons out of better materials that could be put in and taken out and used over and over again.

2 (3m 48s):
It was a lesson in, in quality I think because the European peons were selling for 15 cents a piece and mine were a dollar and a half.

0 (3m 58s):
And I guess you did this for like 10 or 10 or so years.

2 (4m 2s):
Yeah.

0 (4m 2s):
Were you doing well?

2 (4m 4s):
Well, yeah, we had 80% of the market.

0 (4m 6s):
And, and you, I guess you had no intention of ever making it that, right?

2 (4m 9s):
No, not at all. I, I didn't respect business then. I had no interest in business whatsoever. I was a craftsman, but, you know, we weren't making hardly any money. I mean, we were making about 1% profit at the end of the year. We were basically paying ourselves by the hour.

0 (4m 25s):
So how did you guys branch out from, from climbing gear to cl?

2 (4m 29s):
Well, I was on a climbing trip to Scotland in the winter. I was walking by some shop and I saw a rugby shirt in the window and I thought, wow, that's pretty cool. It's, you know, it was real colorful. It had blue and red and yellow and made really tough. So I thought, wow, this make a really great shirt for climbing. You know, the collar kind of keeps the gear slings from cutting into your neck. And, you know, at that time active sportswear for men was basically gray sweatshirts and sweatpants. That was it. I mean, men did not wear anything colorful. And so I started wearing this climbing and everybody was going, wow, where'd you get that? And so it's kinda, the lights came on. I thought, well maybe I ought to import a few of these from England and see if they'll sell.

2 (5m 13s):
And sure enough they sold. And then I started making some climbing shorts and pants and one thing led to another and I realized it's a lot more profitable than making peons.

0 (5m 24s):
So how did you come up with a name Patagonia?

2 (5m 27s):
Well, in 68, I, I did a, a six month long trip from California down to South America and we drove and, and surfed all the way down to coast, down to Lima and then sold the surfboards and then climbed volcanoes down in southern Chile and Skeed off of 'em. And I kind of fell in love with that area of Patagonia, you know, in those days nobody even knew what Patagonia was. I mean, kind of like Timbuktu, you know, how many people know where Timbuktu is. And so I, I decided to call it Patagonia because I wanted to make clothing for those kind of conditions, you know, Cape Horn and

0 (6m 4s):
Like super high winds cold. Yeah. Crazy temperatures change in weather. Yeah,

2 (6m 9s):
Exactly.

0 (6m 10s):
What's interesting is that, is that like you did not know anything about clothing?

2 (6m 15s):
Yeah, right. I didn't know anything about clothing. I learned everything by kind of, if I get an idea, I immediately take a step forward and see how that feels. And if it feels good, I take another step, it feels bad, I step back. You know, it's different than people with a scientific view where they think everything out to the nth degree before they make a move. So I, I learned by just doing, you know, one of the first products we made was a pair of climbing shorts. And I made the pattern for it. I knew nothing about pattern making, I just took a pair of shorts apart and I kind of looked at it and I, and then I wanted, you know, make a really tough pair of shorts. So I used Canvas from outdoor furniture or something and I had this Korean woman working for me and she had to sew it on a walking foot machine, which is the kind of sewing machine that you use for sewing leather cuz the, the fabric was so thick.

2 (7m 8s):
And, and when she was done with 'em, she stood 'em up, they stood straight up. So we named 'em standup shorts and you know, it took about 50 washings to break 'em in, but we still make those shorts. But you know, of course not as heavy as they were. It,

0 (7m 24s):
It seems like your main motivation was to just make stuff that you would wanna wear and use yourself. That, that nobody was making stuff good enough and you were just sort of like, I, I guess I have to make it.

2 (7m 37s):
Yeah, you know, I I I used to do every conceivable sport and then the people that worked for me were all sports people. So we knew what we wanted. You know, I, I've heard somebody say that If, you wait for the customer to tell you what to do, you're too late. So we were our own customer and I think that was the secret of coming out with products that a lot of the products people didn't even know they, they wanted or needed.

0 (8m 3s):
When you started to do this and you had to hire employees and you had to form a company and you had to deal with payroll, like, did that start to scare you?

2 (8m 12s):
Oh yeah. Yeah. That was pretty scary. And we made a lot of mistakes and in fact, we were so successful in the late eighties and stuff that we were growing too fast. We were growing 50% a year and you can't do that for very long before you run outta money basically on retained earnings. You can't do that. And so we were all ramped up to grow 50% and we only grew 25 or something, which doesn't sound bad, but when you've built all the inventory for, for that and you don't make it, it's pretty rough. And then there was a recession then and, and the banks wouldn't give us any more money. In fact, I had to lay people off, which was really hard because we're a family style business.

2 (8m 59s):
We knew everybody working there and that, that was really tough.

0 (9m 3s):
Did you have moments during those periods, the ups and downs where you thought Patagonia might fail?

2 (9m 10s):
Oh, absolutely. We didn't know whether we were gonna make it or not. We couldn't get any loans from anybody at, in fact, my accountant introduced me to some mafia guys who wanted to loan me some money at 18% interest, which I turned down. But what saved us is, is we got some personal loans from some friends and pretty much fired some management that got us into this problem and turned things around.

0 (9m 37s):
Why do you think it happened? Was it just bad luck? Was it just the economy or was it, was there a strategy that didn't align with us? I think we were,

2 (9m 45s):
We were just going for growth, you know, not saying no, it's just growth can creep up on you. I mean, we were just opening more and more dealers, we were opening our own retail stores, you know, nothing goes forever. And in fact, that's why the faster a business grows, the faster it dies also. And so once we got out of this, we decided to put ourselves on a growth program so that we would be in business a hundred years from now. So all decisions from then on were made as if we're gonna be here a hundred years from now. And so it's slowing down the growth saying no to a lot of opportunities and just being more responsible.

0 (10m 25s):
Like, like how

2 (10m 26s):
It just, I don't Prime the pump. I don't, we don't advertise in Vanity Fair to get new customers or something. We, in fact, our advertising budget is one half of 1% of sales. And so I wait for the customer to tell us how much to make. One year we'll grow 3% another year we'll grow 20%. It's not this smooth curve like public companies who have to grow 15% exactly every single year or else their stock goes down. You know, there's two kinds of growth. One where you grow stronger and one you grow fat and you gotta look out for that growing fat thing.

0 (11m 11s):
Yvon Chenard, when we come back, how he slowed growth by telling his employees to go surfing. It's How I Built This from npr.

3 (11m 30s):
Do you spend sleepless nights worrying about being submerged in quicksand, being attacked by an unrelenting swarm of killer bees, or how you'd outs swim an angry giant shark? I'm Anthony at Tamnick and I'm here to tell you to stop worrying and let me an anxious and overly informed comedian be your guide to solving your most worrisome what ifs. Don't panic. A new comedy podcast from Wondery leans into our most absurd anxieties and diffuses them with humor and actual advice for how to deal. Should you find yourself facing your fears, you'll laugh, learn and possibly sweat profusely. Enjoy. Don't panic on the Wondery app or wherever you get your podcasts.

3 (12m 12s):
You can listen to, don't panic early and ad free on Wondery Plus join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple Podcasts.

0 (12m 27s):
It's How I Built This from npr. I'm Guy Raz. So after Patagonia came outta that tough period in the early 1990s, Yvon and his team started to focus less on growing and more on just lasting as a company. And they started to do things like use more environmentally friendly material. And they also started to do something a bit weird for a business. Instead of telling customers to buy their stuff, Patagonia kind of told them not to.

2 (12m 56s):
Yeah, I believe that this company is the resource that I have and that I should use that resource to show a different way of doing business. In fact, we now have the largest garment repair center in North America. We'll repair every single piece of Patagonia no matter how old it is, indefinitely. In fact, we've got a truck that's going around the country repairing people's clothes no matter whether they're Patagonia or not. And, and we're trying to teach people that you don't throw things away, you, you repair 'em. And then we, we've committed ourselves to owning the product forever. So when we sell you a jacket, we still own it.

2 (13m 38s):
If, you get overweight or you're tired of the color or whatever you don wanna get rid of it, we'll help you sell it to somebody else. If breaks down, we'll fix it. If it's finally, you know, completely shot, you give it back to us and we'll recycle it into more garments. And so it forces us to use fibers that can be recycled. It forces us to design, say a jacket that you can replace a zipper. Cuz it's very easy to design one where you can't replace a zipper. It's changed the whole way we do business.

0 (14m 10s):
Yeah. So like what about you? How many, how many Patagonia jackets do you have?

2 (14m 15s):
You'd be surprised. I, all my stuff is years and years old. I'm, I'm sitting here talking to you, my pants are probably seven or eight years old. My shirt is probably the same, but you know, it's, it's kinda interesting. A friend of mine went to a garage sale in Jackson Hole recently. And, and there was this jacket that we made about 10 years ago and it was Purple Men was great shape. The woman wanted $30 for it and so he offered her 15, she took it, then he went on eBay and a guy from Japan said, Hey, I'd like to buy that jacket, how much do you want for it? Oh, you know, make me an offer. He said, well how about 750?

2 (14m 55s):
So actually these things keep their value,

0 (14m 58s):
Which is pretty amazing. And I mean, the thing is like a new Patagonia jacket is not exactly cheap. I mean, none of your stuff is, well yeah,

2 (15m 6s):
I mean we have a lifetime guarantee and we can't make things cheaply. We're trying to make the very, very highest quality we we can. And it's, you know, it's like organic food is cost more than regular food as it should and it causes, you know, less harm the environment And so let people pay for that. And I'm not interested in, in coming out with a line of inexpensive clothes. You know, it's kind of like eating meat. I eat meat but I eat a tiny little bit at a time. I don't eat a 16 ounce porterhouse. And I think with clothing we're telling people, look, think twice If. You're gonna buy a jacket at the skiing, buy one that you can also wear over your suit coat in New York City in a rainstorm so that it doesn't sit in the closet nine months a year.

2 (15m 54s):
And, and so own, own fewer things, but really good things. But

0 (15m 58s):
Is is a part of, you still conflicted over this idea that even with all the responsible things you do, you are still part of the consumer world?

2 (16m 9s):
Yeah, no, that we certainly are. Yeah. And that's why we try to kind of put a spin on it by, you know, telling our customers to think twice before they buy anything. Not just our product, but anything,

0 (16m 22s):
You have no college degree. You're, you have a business degree. You're not like, you are not a businessman, but you are. I mean, you became one and I've, I've read that you call, you've called yourself a reluctant businessman, but do you feel uncomfortable with that title?

2 (16m 40s):
No, not at all. Because I think what I did is once I decided I was a businessman, I decided to really study up on it. I studied every book I could on Japanese management styles and Scandinavian businesses. And cuz I, I thought there had to be a different way of doing business and I still wanted only work for part of the year myself. You know, I, I take off from June until November, I'm gone. I I got a place in Jackson Hole and I go fishing every day and I call in maybe three times in the five months that I'm gone. People know that if the warehouse burns down, don't call me. What can I do?

2 (17m 20s):
You know what to do.

0 (17m 24s):
But how, how, how are you able to do that?

2 (17m 26s):
Well, you know, I, I heard a great thing on NPR actually about this woman at Stanford who studies aunts and she said that, you know, aunt Colies don't have, they don't have bosses and everyone knows what their job is and they get their job done and compare that with dictatorships. And so a lot of companies are top down management and it takes a tremendous amount of effort to run those. So what we decided to do is just hire motivated young, independent people and leave 'em alone. Hmm. And I mean, I, I wrote a book called Let My People Go Surfing and it's all about, we have a policy that when the surf comes up, you drop work and you go surfing.

2 (18m 8s):
I don't care when you work, as long as the job gets done. And you know, I've had other companies come to me and say, oh, I love that idea. I think I'll institute it in my company. I say forget it, you'll fail because you have to start with the very first person you hire. And I've had a psychologist study our, our employees and they said, oh, I gotta tell you, your employees are the most independent I've ever seen in any company. In fact, they're so independent, they're unemployable anywhere else.

0 (18m 39s):
Yeah, I mean I was, I was reading about the company in the seventies, you guys were doing maternal and paternal leave. People could take in their infants, you had take care for the staff and flexible work schedules, things that we, that even to, to this day today are still not that common in in in all companies. You were doing this 40 years ago.

2 (19m 1s):
Well, yeah, I mean we wanted to have our kids with us at work, you know, put 'em in a cardboard box on your desk and, and that worked for a while but then got some screamers and so my wife, you know, started a childcare center and, and we didn't wanna just somebody just babysitting these kids, you know, we recognize that zero to five is the most important learning time of a person's life. And so it's not a babysitting service. They, the kids that come out of our company are the best product that comes out. Not one's been in prison yet.

0 (19m 40s):
I mean, all these things cost the company money.

2 (19m 45s):
Well if we're gonna be here a hundred years, you know, it's, we're not gonna sell out. We're not gonna go public. And so it's good business. I mean I have probably 70% women working for me. I have women in all upper management and I don't wanna lose them.

0 (20m 3s):
Where did you, I mean a lot of the people that we talked to on this show are motivated by, you know, wanting to change an industry or change the way business is done or to change the world or to make money, you know, and I think everybody would agree that they wanted to make money that isn't you. I mean, where did you, and where do you find the motivation to make this company run and thrive?

2 (20m 27s):
Well, you know, one of my favorite quotes is If. you wanna understand entrepreneur study the juvenile delinquent cuz they're saying, you know, this sucks, I'm gonna do it my own way. And I have a background of, I was always the shortest guy around. I could play sports pretty well, you know, team sports, but when it came time for a actual game, I would fumble the ball. And I realized that the best thing to do is invent your own sports, then you can always be a winner. And so that's what the entrepreneur does. They, they just say, this is wrong, I'm gonna do it this other way. And If, you wanna be successful in business. You don't go up against Coca-Cola and you know, these big companies, they, they'll kill you.

2 (21m 13s):
You just do it differently. You figure out something that no one else has thought about and you do it a totally different way. And, and so breaking the rules, you have to be creative and that's the fun part of business. Actually. I love breaking the rules.

0 (21m 28s):
But I mean, you still must live by, by certain rules, right? I mean, I mean is there like a, a philosophy that that kind of guides you?

2 (21m 35s):
Well, I've been a student that kind of zen Buddhism most of my life I believe in. You know, the more you know the less you need. I've been fishing, fly fishing with one fly, I mean one type of fly in different sizes. And I've limited myself to that for a whole year. And I've caught more fish than I've ever caught in my life. I realize that all of these hundreds of thousands of different fly patterns and different colors and shapes and everything are totally unnecessary. You can replace all of that with knowledge and technique. and it is a good lesson for me. and it try the hardest thing in the world is to simplify your life cuz everything pulls you to be more and more complex.

2 (22m 18s):
And so I think what I learned from fly fishing is that if we have to, either we're forced or we decide to go to a more simple life, it's not gonna be an impoverished life. It's gonna be really rich.

0 (22m 38s):
Van Chenard, founder of Patagonia, he never took a penny of investment, by the way, still owns a hundred percent of the company. And because of that, the company doesn't make their numbers public. So despite the fact that endless growth may not be Yvon sch Bernard's thing, Patagonia reportedly did three quarters of a billion dollars in sales last year. Their best year ever. Hey, thanks for listening to the show this week. If, you wanna find out more or listen to previous episodes, you can go to How I Built This dot npr.org and If, you have a chance, please subscribe to our show through iTunes and let other people know about it.

0 (23m 18s):
You can also write us directly@hibtnpr.org or tweet us. That's at How I Built This. Our show is produced this week by rum Arab Lui, who also composed the music. Thanks also to Neeva Grant, San Mh contour. And Jeff Rogers. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I, Built This from npr.

1 (23m 40s):
Did you

0 (23m 41s):
Ever consider becoming a A priest?

2 (23m 45s):
A priest, or

0 (23m 48s):
Like moving to a monastery?

2 (23m 51s):
Not at all.

0 (23m 59s):
Hey, thanks for sticking around because we are now at the part of the show where we hear about your stories, the things that you are building, and this week we have a story from Stateline, Nevada.

5 (24m 10s):
Hi, my name is Cassie Burnside and I'm the owner and founder of Fat Co.

0 (24m 14s):
Yep, fat Co. And why would anybody wanna put the word fat into the name of their startup? Well, you have to go back a bit because about four years ago, Cassie started to notice something that kind of bugged her.

5 (24m 26s):
I would go shopping and I would look at labels and look at ingredient panels and not be able to read anything or pronounce anything. I had no idea what these ingredients were. And

0 (24m 37s):
She was especially bothered by products that go directly onto your skin, like deodorant and lotions and creams. But then she thought maybe I can make some of those things myself and use, you know, old fashioned ingredients.

5 (24m 50s):
Ingredients that we used a long time ago in soap making and candle making. And I started wondering like, why don't we use them anymore? Why did those things go away?

0 (25m 1s):
And here is where fat comes in because Cassie realized that animal fat, it used to be a main ingredient in things like soap and lotions. And so she decided why not make skin products with beef tallow the fat from a cow?

5 (25m 16s):
You chop it up and you cook it low and slow and rendered tallow is the liquid fat that drips off of the hard fat during that rendering process.

0 (25m 26s):
Just to be clear, Cassie does not do this at home. She gets her tallow from a company in Colorado that specializes in rendered fat and then she mixes the fat with other oils and fragrances to make things like body butter and lotion and those kinds of things.

5 (25m 41s):
They're nourishing, they're nutrient dense, they're very concentrated and a little goes a long way.

0 (25m 47s):
Kessie actually took a big risk about two years ago when she quit her engineering job to start Fat Fat Co. But last year she made close to $700,000 selling her products online and she says all the friends and family who told her this would never work, this is crazy and weird. They're not saying that anymore.

5 (26m 5s):
I can't lie. Even my mom told me I was a little crazy and now she's, you know, she's our biggest fan. She will go to her grave saying she was customer one for Fat Co.

0 (26m 14s):
We absolutely love hearing these stories from you. So please tell us about yours. Go to build.npr.org, that's build with ad.npr.org, and let us know what you're building. And thanks. As the end of the year approaches, a lot of you have been asking about the best way to support How I, Built This. So first of all, thank you for asking and it is pretty easy to do. You go to stations.npr.org, you find your local station and you make a year end contribution. Or even better, you become a regular monthly donor. And when you do, please tell them that How I Built This sent you.

0 (26m 55s):
So find your local station@stations.npr.org. It takes like two minutes. It's totally tax deductible. And please do tell them How I Built This sent you. Again, that's stations.npr.org and thanks.