0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor checker. Want to diversify your workforce and change the future checkers background checks reduce hiring bias because the past shouldn't define what's ahead more@checkr.com slash NPR. So how much did it cost you to make that music video?

2 (24s):
I ended up costing 10 grand. If I had known that I wouldn't have done it. And it wasn't until about February that I kind of, it almost felt like waking up after a dream and, you know, watching my savings account go down basically to zero. And I was like, I'm going to upload this video to YouTube. It's going to get a million views. And I knew that that video would bring in maybe a hundred bucks

0 (59s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz. And on the show today, how Jack Conti his frustration with the music business led him to launch Patrion a crowdfunding platform where fans can support and connect with creators for just a few dollars a month. At some point you might get tired of hearing me say that every great business idea often starts as a problem in need of a solution. But one reason I keep coming back to this is the sheer almost stupid simplicity of it.

0 (1m 45s):
Like it's an equation you could explain to a six-year-old frustration equals idea equals action equals solution. Think about Jamie seminar who worked out of his garage. He needed to see who was at the front door. When the doorbell rang to decide whether to get up and open the door or stay put. So he built a video doorbell for himself, and then he turned it into a business called ring. Melissa Butler couldn't find bold and bright lipstick colors. So she created her own. And then turn that idea into a business called the lip bar. Mike Roddenberry had to bike 17 miles to high school.

0 (2m 27s):
So to make that journey easier, he turned his bike into an electric bike, and that idea eventually became rad power bikes and Jack <inaudible> problem. That was a problem that at first glance doesn't seem that problematic back in 2009, he and his then girlfriend now wife, Natalie formed a band called <inaudible>. And in September of that year, they released a cover version of Beyonce, single ladies, and they made a video to go with them. This video got millions of views and their YouTube channel blew up.

0 (3m 12s):
They were doing media interviews and selling some of their music on iTunes. So you're probably wondering like, what is the problem? Well, having lots of followers and viewers doesn't necessarily translate into a sustainable business, especially after all the middlemen take their cut. So Jack set out to solve this problem. And he wondered, is there a way for artists to make their art in a sustainable way without a big record label or publisher or studio backing them? And the answer he came up with is Patriot Patrion is a platform that connects artists with their most passionate fans, fans who willingly pay a monthly subscription to support their favorite artists since its launch in 2013, patriarch has attracted about 200,000 creators, including some names that you might know like utuber Jackson bird or the musician beardy man, or the podcast Chapo trap house, but mostly Patrion helps support people.

0 (4m 18s):
You've never heard of ukulele teachers, graphic artists, film, reviewers, science, fiction, writers, fantasy footballers, and that's sort of how its creators Jack Conti and Sam yam envisioned it for starters, both Sam and Jack had creative instincts from very early on. Jack grew up in the bay area where he was fascinated with puppetry and loved making his own animations. Sam grew up in Pittsburgh where he worked as a waiter at his parents' Chinese restaurant and actually really loved programming his calculator. And from a young age, both of them were also really into music.

0 (4m 58s):
Sam played classical piano and Jack started out playing jazz. In fact, their mutual love of music might be why they were paired up as roommates when they started their freshman year at Stanford in 2002.

2 (5m 13s):
I think it was just one of those relationships that, that was relatively, I mean, at least Sam, my recollection, it was like easy. Like it doesn't, it didn't take a lot of work. We, it just kind of, it just kind of worked. Yeah.

4 (5m 26s):
Yeah. I, I think we also sort of had a very easy going humor to, to us that we found maybe some of the same McCobb type things funny and the same friend groups that, that eventually brought over, I think really resonated with me too.

0 (5m 42s):
So what, what were you guys studying in college? Jacqueline? Let's start with you.

2 (5m 46s):
I studied music, you know, my whole life I'd been on the arts had kind of been like the side thing, but I was on the, you know, the science and math kind of track growing up. And I love physics in high school. I thought I wanted to be a physics major when I got to college. And then I remember getting to this, like the next level of physics and I was sitting in a class and I think movies often show you like one moment of realization in life is rarely like that life is usually like a slow burn, but this was really wonderful moments of realization for me sitting in this physics class where I was like, this is not what I want to do.

2 (6m 26s):
And I just, I was just thinking about songs. I was thinking about my music theory class. I was thinking about other things and that's where my brain was going and I didn't want to do physics. And I, I remember like sitting on a bench after that physics class for probably 45 minutes, I just sat there and just thought about what that meant for me. Cause I was, I was, it was kind of one of those moments in college that feels pivotal, you know?

0 (6m 57s):
So Jack, you were studying music and Sam, what were you studying?

4 (7m 0s):
Yeah, I came into Stanford, not really knowing to be honest, ended up studying computer science. Honestly, I played a lot of video games as a child and then I was into computers.

0 (7m 12s):
All right. So you are doing computer science and Jack you're doing music. And I'm just curious to, at any point in college to the two of you sit around and start to kind of mull over the possibility of starting a business together or anything like that. Was that ever a conversation you ever had? Never.

2 (7m 32s):
And Sam did start businesses. Sam, you were doing that in and out delivery thing in the

0 (7m 37s):
Burgers. I

4 (7m 38s):
Was, I was, yeah,

0 (7m 39s):
It was awesome driving in and out burgers for people. Okay.

4 (7m 41s):
And create a website. I was driving burgers around and to campus. This is, does my senior year in particular pre door dash. Sure. Yeah. That I would love to take that credit.

0 (7m 51s):
You would take orders for burgers drive to the burger place and then deliver them to dorm rooms.

4 (7m 57s):
Yeah. To, to individuals. It wasn't super well thought out again, just, you know, riffing on ideas here,

2 (8m 3s):
Semi, why are you ashamed of this? This was an awesome businessman. It was so cool. It was a big deal. Like everybody knew about it. It was

0 (8m 10s):
Just mark up the burgers. I think he's worried he's going to get sued by, in and out for, for what he did in 2004 for whatever five. But I will say this. I don't think it's a great idea because a delivered burger is just not, you have to get a burger right off the grill. Like once it gets it's in a cards, in a box, it gets soggy. You get it to your house. It's not the same thing. Totally.

4 (8m 32s):
Yeah. Also the shock every time, every night that I would go to in and out in order like a hundred burgers or something and then how they would have to hold up for everyone else in line, not a good feeling. So

0 (8m 43s):
Not a good feeling. All right. So you've got this burgeoning entrepreneurial business and, and Jack, were you like any part of your mind in college about business or were you really just focused on music? No, I

2 (8m 56s):
Don't think I was thinking about business at all. I was, I was a part of the film society at school. And so, and I, and I was also, there was a recording studio on campus. And so I was learning how to use a recording studio. And I was also, you know, because I was part of the film study, I was making movies. So I would make a few movies a year and I would do soundtracks for other people and for myself. So I was, you know, I was a music major. And then, you know, in the, in the cracks I was doing music and film and, and all that kind of stuff. I was not billing businesses. Hmm.

0 (9m 30s):
So you guys both graduate in 2006 and, and Sam, I guess you, you go to work for, you're like the first of many startups and it was called Loopt and, and I guess it was like an early way to, to, to share your cell phone's location. What, what happened to that startup?

4 (9m 47s):
I ended up getting acquired. I was there for about three years. My takeaway from it, like early on, I was really interested because of the founders, particularly Sam Altman, who was the CEO there later, I became president of Y Combinator and we had a whole bunch of other impressive folks there. And I think just being around that talent felt very energizing.

0 (10m 10s):
So Sam, you kind of go off into this tech direction and Jack, I guess you kind of begin to pursue music. You've formed a bandwidth, your then girlfriend who's now actually your wife, I think right Natalie.

2 (10m 23s):
Yeah. We started a band called pop loose and, and even before then I had started using YouTube and uploading to YouTube and it kinda like, felt like something was working. So I'd, I'd put up a video and get a few thousand views. And that was the videos

0 (10m 41s):
Of

2 (10m 42s):
Me in my bedroom playing instruments. And so I would,

0 (10m 47s):
And people put videos up opening baseball card packages. So I mean, yeah,

2 (10m 52s):
I, I would, I guess what the videos kind of became was the video version of a song. I called them video songs because there was sort of two rules. It was inspired by the sort of dogma filmmaking from the seventies and like the, the rules where if you hear the instrument in the mix, if there's an instrument in the mix, you're going to get to see it. Oh yeah. You have to play it. Right. Yeah. It's like all direct sound and yeah, that kind of thing. And I just, I really liked the idea of taking some of the mystery out of audio production, because it really feels like magic. When you listen to a record, you know, you there's, all these sounds, you have no idea how they're made it. Just, you know, it feels like these people are geniuses just creating things. And there's, at least for me, it felt like there was this gap between like where they are and where I am.

2 (11m 36s):
And I just liked, I liked the kind of transparency of YouTube. I like that it felt like behind the scenes. And I liked the idea of kind of showing people like, Hey, this is how sounds are made. And here's what it looks like. And it doesn't have to be super glamorous. Like you can be in your pajama pants, on the floor of your bedroom, playing a guitar through a shitty amp that you got on sale at guitar center. And what kind of music was it? By the way, it was like hardcore rock, like aggressive, intense, like electric rock. Yeah. And people. Yeah. There's a market for that. Yeah. And so I graduated and started working on music and it felt like it was working. I would sell a few hundred bucks of MP3s. I used a site called Ejunkie.

2 (12m 18s):
So I would put up my MP3s for sale on, on this platform and where people buying them. Yeah. Yeah. I was selling, I was making a couple hundred bucks a month and I was, I thought like, okay, this could, this could turn into, you know, an income stream and I could do this full-time as a first time in my life that I felt like that would be possible. I remember like going back to that moment in college, you know, when I made the decision to become a music major, it was actually like a very depressing moment for me. Like I was committing in my mind, I was committing to a life of poverty. My uncle is a guitar player, a jazz guitar player. And he, you know, when I told him I was going to do this, he was like, Jack, the thing he said to me was like, don't do it. He was like, you can do anything else in your life. You're a smart guy.

2 (12m 58s):
And, and you can do anything else. He said, don't do this. It's crowded at the bottom is what he said. Wow. But I mean, you, you have this band going at the time. Yeah. We got the band going. When we posted a YouTube video on my channel at first, we, we didn't call it a band. We just posted a video on my channel. He said, Hey, this is me and Natalie collabing. And what were you, what was the video? It was, it was just the two of us with a song that she wrote called PAs Encore. It was mostly in French cause pumpkin Lucy courses. And that comes from her because she grew up in France and Belgium. I got it. Okay. And what was funny? It was, you know, we kinda tempered each other. Like we, we mitigated each other's extremes. So like she calmed down my kind of industrial screamo side and I kind of upped up some of the softness of it.

2 (13m 44s):
And the combo was just, it was cool and different. And like it had some of my aggressive production, but then she has this very soft voice and I think it was just kind of different sounding and people seem to really like it. And so, you know, the idea was, let's see if we can make a living out of this and right around that time iTunes came out. And so we started putting our, our music on, on iTunes. There's original music, original music. Yep. You know, we knew that that was kind of what we wanted to do. And so we, we just, and YouTube seemed like it was working. So we just started making more and more videos and putting those out. How did you get attention on YouTube? Eventually we produced a record for this singer songwriter named Julia Nunes.

2 (14m 25s):
And I was super inspired by Julia because she just had this huge presence on YouTube. And I learned that it came from covers originally. Ah, and she would put over covering big, like well-known song. Yeah. Cause which, which anybody can do. Right. Which anybody can do. Yep. Yeah. And that's kind of when I learned that YouTube is a search engine and so people are searching for songs that they know. And if they then see a cool band who is singing song, but maybe in a completely different way with complete different sound and they've ripped out the harmony and put it in their own harmony and ripped out the beat and put in their own beat, done it in three, four instead of four, four, or whatever it is, you can kind of get introduced to a new sound because you're coming from search traffic.

2 (15m 7s):
And that single thing is how we ended up like growing the band so quickly. So

0 (15m 13s):
What was the first cover that you put on YouTube?

2 (15m 16s):
It was, I think the first cover was my favorite things. We ended up doing it in, in five, four and did a cool arrangement of it. And, and, but that, wasn't the one that hit the one that hit was when we covered Beyonce. Single ladies.

0 (15m 31s):
Yes. I remember that. Well, yeah.

2 (15m 38s):
If we happened to meet, we knew that it was going to have a good shot at the VMs because it was such a great video and a great song. And when she was up for, for, you know, best music video. And so we, we, we covered the, the song and, and kind of just in time and put it out that night and then Kanye did that thing. We caught up at the VMs and Taylor swift one yes. And interrupted her. And it became this huge like internet meme and just got tons of traffic. And the video just exploded

0 (16m 9s):
Because people were searching single ladies. Yeah. I think that video today has about 11 million views.

2 (16m 19s):
It does.

0 (16m 20s):
Yeah. And you guys, and I've seen the video obviously, and it's, it's you guys like in like a bedroom, right? Like

2 (16m 26s):
Here's my childhood bedroom. Like, that's what it is. It's people in a room playing instruments, sinked up with the audio and like, it's funny. Cause in 2020, that's really nothing special. But, but at the time nobody was really doing that kind of thing. Like music videos looked like music videos. They looked like MTV and to see like humans in their bedroom, playing instruments and having it actually sound good was, you know, it was a little, it was different.

0 (16m 50s):
So that video blows up. And did, did you start to get contacted? I mean, I should say that you were, I know you run NPR that around that time, because I was the host of weaken all things considered and, and there was a weekend when I wasn't, I was like on vacation and you guys, sadly, I would, wasn't able to interview, but you guys were featured on the show. Did you guys get a lot of, a lot of calls?

2 (17m 11s):
We did. We, we, I mean, that was kind of the beginning of when pom-poms really started to take off. And, you know, we got calls from managers, we got calls from press and you know that when we came out with our second, like big one that kind of really took off, which was telephoned by lady Gaga. You know, we had, we released a record and, you know, at the end of the month we logged into our bank account and like we had sold 30,000 songs. And because we hadn't signed with a label, we owned all our own masters and therefore we owned all the royalties. So we, we locked in our bank account at 22,000 bucks in it. Wow. Which like coming out of call it, like after selling

0 (17m 46s):
And some iTunes, that's just people paying 99 cents for your on iTunes,

2 (17m 50s):
Just iTunes 22,000 bucks in one month. And like, that was when I was like, oh my, I thought this, we can do it like this. This could be a thing. And

0 (18m 0s):
Did, did, did you start to get record labels contacting you saying, Hey, you guys interested in talking to us? We did.

2 (18m 7s):
Yeah. We didn't get like hard offers from anybody, but we started to go down to LA and talk with them and, and we, we basically decided not to do that, but we did, we did talk with them and entertain it. We just didn't want to go that route. I mean, you know, at that point we were making a living, you know, when we started doing label conversations, we were making, you know, thousands and thousands of dollars per month. We were going on tour. We were, you know, reaching millions of people. We were

0 (18m 36s):
Performing in front of like big audiences. Yeah.

2 (18m 39s):
500 to a thousand people. Wow. So, I mean, not like, you know, we're not playing staples center, but like it's still pretty great. Yeah. I mean, when I grew up, like, I, I thought like maybe one day I'll play for a hundred people, you know? Like that was like, that would have been the coolest thing. And then here we are playing these clubs, you know, for like we played Fillmore, you know, in San Francisco, which is 1200 people, it was magic. It was the best thing ever

0 (19m 3s):
While all this was happening with Jack and Natalie, you're grinding away in some tech job. And you're watching these guys become like massive YouTube stars was that was like everyone from your, your year at Stanford, like people you knew, like talking about them, like, oh my God, you see Jack <inaudible> I got this YouTube video. It's got 11 million views.

4 (19m 21s):
I mean, yeah. The w I admired Jack, right? Like the, from my own personal experience, I'd loved art too, but I could never take on both that risk or even bridge the connection of how I could make that like a livelihood or a part of my life. And so seeing him be so successful down that path was, was so impressive. And I remember every time that we would catch up after college, I was just fascinated by what was going on with his life and how things were going.

0 (19m 48s):
Meantime, Sam, you had left, you had left your, the first startup you worked for and went on to found your own startup called ad rural. What, what was Admiral? Yeah,

4 (20m 4s):
I mean, thinking back on it, a lot of this was, was quite boring, but this was during the area when the iPhone was getting really popular and a lot of developers were creating their own games and whatnot. And in fact, my co-founder and my self at that time were also making these iPhone games and applications. And there was a lot of good money in advertising in that I know we created like this virtual pet game that ended up gathering actually millions of users at the time. And we were seeing a few thousand dollars come through and just ads being clicked on. And so ad world was just an effective way for these mobile developers to monetize.

0 (20m 43s):
So you learn from what I, from what I've read, you guys basically start this business in early 2009. And by the end of the year, you were acquired by a different company. Is that, I mean, to me, that sounds like a great deal, but I can't even imagine you were up and running that it's like really by that point or where you, it happened

4 (21m 4s):
Pretty quickly. Like just the explosion of even interest in this space. I think like there was a whole flood of developers who I, it was almost like a gold rush in a lot of ways because you had the iPhone and this new app store, and anyone could start making games and get it distributed to millions of users. And so when there was this interest in what we're doing, I think we are also caught off guard in some sense. And then also immediately sold the company that same year.

0 (21m 35s):
Did you sell the company? Cause it was just like an offer. You couldn't refuse, like you were just offered all this money. You were just like, oh my God, we gotta take this.

4 (21m 42s):
It wasn't all this money, but I think it was more than we had made, you know, independently previously than that. So the fact that it was a company that we knew to be very large in this space, there was a company called AdMob and then literally the month afterwards we were acquired into Google. Yeah.

0 (21m 58s):
AdMob was acquired for like $750 million by Google. Right. Exactly. And to be clear, that was not your money. You did not get seven or $50 million from Google.

4 (22m 7s):
No, we did not get 700. That would be okay if that happened. But we were part of AdMob at the time they were acquired. And so it felt like an appealing opportunity to, to be part of something that was going to win.

0 (22m 20s):
All right. So your business was acquired and, and you moved on and you actually went to, to the incubator called Dogpatch labs, where I guess your goal was presumably to come up with, with like a new idea. Yeah.

4 (22m 33s):
I mean, I had a F a few different things, but at this point I just want to start building again. So within those few years I built a number of things. I think this was sort of enlightening for myself to, in, in a lot of ways, I view those years as like the years of struggle, because I was there at the incubator. I was working across the table from Kevin Systrom. Who's building Instagram at that time. And we would come in, I remember actually having a bunch of chats with Mikey and Kevin about what they were thinking about with their business and all of that's really exciting. I think, as you all feel like you're in this shared suffering together until, you know, something like Instagram skyrockets, and then you realize that

0 (23m 17s):
Yeah, no one's suffering, so, all right. So you're coming, you're trying to come up with a bunch of different ideas. And when you say building things like just he'd have an idea and you start to try and build it, like code it.

4 (23m 32s):
I would code design launch. And this was during the time to where tech crunch disrupt was the thing. So you had this idea that if you got a business through and you could launch onstage, that would be making it. And so I had launched a business in that area. It was a company called chomp on, but we effectively allowed people to create their own group on. So it was a white labeling service. And it was interesting, like the whole group buying space was sort of coincidentally a flash in the pan to in many ways, all the Groupon is still around. And the takeaway for me was just how difficult and how, how much I should treasure if I ever had the, the good fortune of, of landing on a business that really resonated with like a community or a group of people.

4 (24m 18s):
And so most of that, my years during this time was, as I recall, just full of a lot of loneliness and development by, by myself in my bedroom.

0 (24m 32s):
I want to go back to Jack for a moment. So Jack, just like, I'm trying to understand what Sam is working on the startup space. You, I mean, you're making music with Papa moose, right. And, and at your peak, I'm just curious how, like how much money were you guys making? We did a,

2 (24m 49s):
About $400,000 in a year off of MP3 sales, basically. Wow. And it was, I think that that year in particular, I think it was 2010. Most of it was singles. A lot of it was licensing and brand deals. And we had a, we had a lawyer that we had brought on very early on, who was, you know, helping us negotiate these deals and work with, you know, work with brands. And we're very, you know, we're, we're both like music nerds and, and artists, but, but we, we absolutely were thinking about like turning this into a, you know, a sustainable thing. And so we, we ended up buying a house and we built a recording studio. We use the money to build a recording studio on the property.

2 (25m 31s):
And, and then that became kind of like the home base for pop blues for the next few years,

0 (25m 37s):
Sort of doing really well. And, and I presumably a lot of that money is, was coming in from iTunes sales. But then I guess like around what 2010, 2011 Spotify comes along and, and of course with Spotify, you can stream an unlimited amount of music for free. So what did that do for, for your revenue?

2 (26m 1s):
Yeah. The transition to streaming was really hard on the band. Our streaming revenue was, you know, a, a tiny, tiny fraction of the iTunes revenue, where people are paying a buck for a song, you know, with a stream, you get, you know, fractions of a penny for one stream. And it just, it wasn't, it wasn't one for one because the, you know, the user base wasn't there on Spotify yet. So we just, it wasn't the volume wasn't making up for it. And so, you know, the, the, the income started to evaporate, which was very scary because now at this point we had a mortgage.

0 (26m 35s):
So around that time, like 2011, you know, 2012, how are you making a living? Well,

2 (26m 43s):
What bizarre about it was, you know, our

0 (26m 45s):
Reach hadn't changed the reach, the have of your YouTube audience. And so on,

2 (26m 51s):
We were growing, we were getting millions and millions of views and more views, and then, you know, enter Spotify. And suddenly, suddenly we're like up a Creek in terms of revenue and, and, and what was amazing to me that, you know, I was watching this unfold over a period of, you know, a couple of years, what blew my mind was like, wait a minute. I'm not doing anything differently. As an artist, there is a system changing in front of me with that. I am not in control of it. It's just these changing systems. And my artistry is yielding different results, you know, with regard to my income. And that was like very frustrating to watch. And I look, I know businesses have to kind of like pivot and change and be innovative.

2 (27m 35s):
And yet I found myself like having to do all this gymnastics, you know, to, to, to keep up with the revenue stream. So I was, you know, selling hats and, and, and t-shirts, and we were selling dongles on a website. Yeah. And, and like, and then we would play some shows. And I met like the whole time I was thinking like, is my value to the world, like a hat with a logo on it. Like, that's not what I'm good at. That feels murky.

0 (27m 59s):
You were just selling merchant concerts and stuff.

2 (28m 1s):
And that, and I didn't, it bugged me that we had to do that. Cause I, I felt like that's not what makes me special. I just wanted to be paid for like, I loved iTunes because I could like be paid for my music, which is what, and I was, yeah. That, so, yeah, it was just one of those moments where we kind of realized that everything was changing in that, you know, three or four years from now, it would be completely different.

0 (28m 22s):
Meantime, what is Natalie doing? I mean, are you guys, you're still living together, you've got this house and a mortgage and are you earning enough money to at least pay her? But

2 (28m 31s):
Yes we are. But we're also watching where it's coming a lot out of savings, right?

0 (28m 36s):
So you're not at revenues, not increasing

2 (28m 38s):
At that point. Now revenue is not increasing. Revenue is decreasing at that point. So, so it was coming out of savings. But our, our roommate who was living at the house did this amazing thing and she was going to make an album. And she went onto this new website called Kickstarter and did a 30 day thing. We had never heard of it. And I remember the night that she turned her computer around at the dinner table and showed us, I think she had made $12,000 or $13,000 to make the record, to make the record.

0 (29m 16s):
And that really was what Kickstarter was started out for. You started for artists. I mean, we had Perry on the show a couple years ago, Perry Chen, that was the point of Kickstarter. It was to help artists make music or records or whatever it was.

2 (29m 28s):
Yep. And she did that and she got 13,000 bucks and got a studio and got a mixing engineer and made a record. And what was so cool about it to me was it was her fans, her fans stepped up and wanted the record and paid her to make the record. And I've just, that just felt right and felt awesome.

0 (29m 52s):
I know that you and Natalie did, did some solo projects in addition to the work you did with Papa mousse. And, and like I said, at some point she decides to do a Kickstarter to write, to, to raise money for her music.

2 (30m 6s):
Yeah. And that she ended up raising $104,000. Wow.

0 (30m 12s):
How did she reach that many

2 (30m 14s):
People because pop lose had hundreds of thousands of subscribers and we were getting millions of views. And so she, how did

0 (30m 21s):
You drive those viewers to the, to the Kickstarter, which was uploaded

2 (30m 24s):
YouTube video, Hey, everybody, I'm doing a Kickstarter. People went, wow. Dennis, like, yeah. Over a hundred

0 (30m 30s):
To make a record, to make her so, so you're thinking, wow, your mind's blown there.

2 (30m 36s):
I, I couldn't, I was so happy for it was so awesome. And meantime,

0 (30m 41s):
We're working on, on your own solo music too. And I guess you got interested in, in, in like EDM and, and that sort of genre and you, I guess you eventually wrote a track that you were really proud of and you wanted to make a video out of it. And this was, this is a track called pedals. Yeah.

2 (30m 58s):
It was kind of daft punky, like technologic, you know, and I, and I was, I was listing out all of my guitar pedals. That was the, the, the lyric, the only lyric in the song was just a list of all the pedals that I used to, to process guitar sounds the

0 (31m 13s):
Brands or the types,

2 (31m 15s):
The, make the, the models in the mix. So like the first lyric is hog pug, Vox, wah, octave, multiplexer, big man memory, Muff, boss, chromatic tuner. It was just like a list like that. Yeah. Just like a list of pedals. Yeah.

0 (31m 37s):
I'm watching this video right now and you're like, you're like aggressive in this video. You're like really like aggressively playing that guitar. Yeah. I mean,

2 (31m 46s):
You look a little scary. Like

0 (31m 48s):
When the kids saw you, they'd be a little scared of you check.

2 (31m 52s):
Yeah. I'm raging. Yeah. That's what music is.

0 (31m 54s):
I should mention to people who aren't familiar with it, their robots in the video, there's a conveyor belt of guitar, pedals passing by there's other robots as a spider robot. It's like in this kind of laboratory of robots, I imagine this is going to cost you quite a bit of money. It ended

2 (32m 12s):
The costing 10 grand. I didn't know that when I went into, if I had known that I wouldn't have done it, but I didn't have a budget. I wasn't being strategic. I see at the time I thought, like, if I go deep on the business side, I'm not going to do it. Like I, cause I I'll be staring at numbers that don't make sense. And so I'm going to just leave all that behind and I'm just going to do something crazy and creative. And so I decided not to budget, not to think about that and not to deal with any of the kind of constraints there. And so I ended up just spending like, you know, a hundred bucks a day at home Depot, you know, building the set and building rotating elevators. And where did you build the set in the studio that Natalie and I had built on the property and like I had to, like, I was not a carpenter.

2 (32m 58s):
So I was like trying to learn how to frame a wall and like, you know, I had to figure out how to cut wood angles. I got a miter saw, like I was just, I was flailing. I mean, this thing, like, yeah. You know, I was just trying to try to go and make it, but I was enjoying like, it was really fun. It was just, you know, I was trying to do it little by little, you know,

0 (33m 17s):
Did you decide to like, alright, if I'm going to make this, I'm going to do this Kickstarter thing, I'm going to put up a video and ask people to contribute to, to my, my project.

2 (33m 26s):
I was considering it, the problem with that was I didn't want to kind of, you know, the, the sort of the Kickstarter conceit was like, I'm going to do this big one thing and I need a bunch of money to pay for it. And that's not, I didn't want to do that. And I, I didn't, I didn't want to really force fit it like that.

0 (33m 44s):
You weren't thinking of this as a one-off you were thinking like, I need to steady like money to make

2 (33m 51s):
Projects, to do projects.

0 (33m 53s):
Yeah.

2 (33m 54s):
So how are we going to do it? That was the part of me that decided to not think of, think about that. And, and it was terrifying. It was, I, I remember being pretty scared about that. And I also thought like, look, if I start being logical about this, I'm never going to make something that's great. It wasn't until about February of 2013 of 2013, that I kind of, it almost felt like waking up after a dream and, and, you know, watching my savings account, go down basically to zero and then maxing out a couple credit cards and then feeling like I was almost like coming out of a dream or something, wait, yeah.

2 (34m 39s):
I felt like I was waking up. And I was like, suddenly, very terrified about like, what was on the other side. And I, the thought that I had in my mind was I'm going to upload this video to YouTube. It's going to get a million views. And I knew that that video would bring in maybe, you know, a hundred bucks

0 (34m 58s):
From YouTube ads.

2 (34m 59s):
Yeah. And I actually got like sick. I got like nauseated thinking about like all of this work and energy and time the robots, the set, the credit cards, the draining of the savings account, like all of that adding up and thinking like, I'm going to put this thing out and I'm going to get paid a hundred dollars. And I was, I was angry, but I was also like, I couldn't believe that that was, that we were all just that humans were just okay with this, that like, this is the, this is the system that we've designed for artists. It's like, yeah, you put up your, your thing that you spend your life on. And then you get paid a hundred dollars in ad revenue.

2 (35m 39s):
And then you put up your next thing. And I remember like thinking about what the hell was going on, where all these people who make things and put them online are th the economics of that failed to evolve with the distribution technology. So like the, the distribution happened first and the economic systems to support that didn't keep up. And so we were in this horrible phase where essentially artists are working for free.

0 (36m 13s):
So what did you start to think about? I mean, this is February of 2013 and you're clearly like gears are turning in your head. And what do you, I mean, is there an idea starting to form in your mind about how to solve this?

2 (36m 27s):
Yeah. I sat down at my kitchen table on a Sunday afternoon and I, and I, what I was thinking about was like, I like Kickstarter, but I want, I want to be paid every month because I need income because I make stuff every month that's valuable to other people. And at the same time, you know, I was seeing other websites start to accept, you know, like membership organizations, not necessarily websites, but like membership organizations like SF MoMA, or, you know, KQBD would do these pledge drives and it happened, it wasn't, you know, you have the option in many of those cases to set up a monthly payment.

2 (37m 8s):
And so I was like, great. Like, I just want essentially that system a pledge, right? Like a pledge drive. Yep. Yeah, exactly. And so I sketched out this like websites that my fans can do this. And then, you know, of course I was also looking at all these other YouTubers going through the same thing and podcasters and, and news and everybody, anybody who makes stuff and puts it online was going through the same thing. I was like, oh, this should just be a, this should be a thing like Kickstarter where anybody can set it up for themselves. And so, yeah, I sketched out, you physically

0 (37m 41s):
Sketched out like what the website would look like on paper.

2 (37m 44s):
I took out 14 pieces of printer paper for my printer, actually, probably more than that. Cause I didn't know it be 40 pages, but it ended up being about 14 pages. And essentially it was a recurring payment between a, a fan and a creator. And yeah, there was a whole, you know, there's like a content feed and like a login page and a homepage and, and the whole thing, it was, it was, I am a terrible designer. And so, you know, looking back, I remember these, these pages fondly, I mean, it was the worst. It sucked. Yeah. There's no way I could've done that by myself. And so that's when I started like calling various people to see if they could build this for me,

0 (38m 22s):
Including your former roommate, Sam.

2 (38m 24s):
Yeah. I called him up and he, and I was like, so Sam, I've got this idea and I'm really excited about it, but I don't, I don't want to tell you, like, do we need to sign an NDA or something? Cause you thought my idea is

0 (38m 34s):
So good. I cannot talk to people about this

4 (38m 38s):
Because they're going to steal it from me. I remember this too. Cause this was like over the phone. Right. And you didn't tell me the idea over the phone. So from my perspective, I was, again, as I noted before, I was just excited to catch up with you Jack. Like every time it was like, oh, I get to meet this celebrity. Who's who's just crushing it out on YouTube. So when we had arranged for the meeting, I wasn't so much in the sort of mentality that there would be this amazing idea. And, and this is what I would be dedicated to. I was more like, I'm curious what you're thinking about him and what you're up to Johnny.

2 (39m 7s):
Yeah. But wait, but Sam, Sam was like, Jack, nobody cares about your idea. Don't he was like, we don't need to do an NDA. Nobody cares. Ideas are trash. Ideas are worthless. Like we don't need to do that. And I was like, oh, okay.

0 (39m 22s):
I'm saying to you what you now know, which is ideas are a dime a dozen. It doesn't mean that it's easy to find a good idea. It's not, but they are it's execution. That matters.

2 (39m 31s):
It is only execution. Yeah. There are so many versions of Patrion that, that did not work. And they were the same idea.

0 (39m 38s):
All right. So you go to San Francisco to meet and you, and the idea that you had Jack, was it to convince Sam to help you with this? Or was it just to kind of bounce the idea off of him?

2 (39m 50s):
Oh, I wanted Sam to build it. I was in like hardcore pitch mode because other people had told me no, or just didn't seem interested. Yeah. Yeah. W I wanted Sam to do it and he would, he had just, he was right about to launch this new project and he had gotten a tech crunch article and he was, it was, it was about to come out. So he said like, Hey, I can't meet till Thursday because I'm launching this. Wow.

0 (40m 11s):
So what were you launching Sam? This was

4 (40m 13s):
A photography site that I was working with. This is

0 (40m 15s):
Like your fifth or sixth startup.

4 (40m 17s):
Yeah. I don't know if you can call my status, but a new project that I was interested in. And so I was like, Hey Jack, I, you know, I'm just busy. Maybe we can meet when this article finally comes out because all of launched it by that point. And, and that's what we set the target date for. So I'd gone up there again, just expecting mainly to catch up with Jack. And maybe you said to like, get some feedback on the idea that that's how you pitched it initially. Cause I remember being surprised when the switch went off and you started selling me on this and you were, you were really good Jack. I do recall like you just talking about the, both the problem that you and other artists were dealing with today and especially, you know, that resonated for me because I had seen how successful you had been as an artist.

4 (41m 3s):
I assumed you were already like, you know, dancing away on your yacht doing fine. So this, this is really interesting hearing this from

0 (41m 11s):
And what, what did he, what do you remember him telling you about it? So you, you convinced him not to sign that you didn't have to sign an NDA. You didn't bring it down.

4 (41m 19s):
I didn't see what I remember.

0 (41m 22s):
I mean, this is your roommate, Jack

2 (41m 26s):
So much hubris, like, so ashamed of that, steal this from you. I know it's so dumb.

0 (41m 31s):
All right. So you are sitting in this coffee house and what does he say to you, Sam? What does, how does he describe it?

4 (41m 38s):
Yeah, so the things that came together for me and now we're looking at about almost eight years ago, but like, it's kind of how Jack mentioned that Kickstarter was a thing already. And there were a lot of campaigns that were really successful on Kickstarter, but what resonated here was the idea that you were helping to support the individual versus a particular project. And for me, the reason that that resonated well first as someone who cared a lot about art in my past, but could never make it a career. I followed a lot of these people on YouTube. There were folks at this time that were relatively big one in particular. I remember that I talked to Jack about kina Grannis, who sort of wrote very personal music and, and very simple music.

4 (42m 22s):
And I remember thinking my head as Jack was pitching this, I would totally just give her money. I would just open my wallet and give her whatever on an ongoing basis, if it allowed her to keep producing her work. And I could just see this emotion being shared by all these other YouTube audience members. And so that's the idea clicked for me as soon as Jack pitched this to me, Jack, Jack remembers this too. The day of I'm like, we're starting this now. And don't tell anyone else about this idea. Don't

0 (42m 52s):
Make anybody sign an

4 (42m 53s):
NDA. No, no. Don't even sign an NDA. Just, just keep this to ourselves. This is it. We're going to go dark.

2 (42m 60s):
So I'm staring at the email right now that I sent Sam on March 10th. I just pulled it up March 10th, 2013. And it's just kind of like a summary of our agreement. And I think that's kind of what I thought it was going to be like, here's what I'm saying. Like, I'll just read one sentence of this. You agree to be, so we're talking about the agreement, here's what I'm agreeing to. Here's what you're agreeing to. And I'm one of the lines is like you agree to be co-founder and CTO of Patrion. You agree to build a, maintain the site as it is laid out in the wire frame, you will work on all technical and program and programming oriented aspects of the company.

4 (43m 39s):
Like it's just, this was your legal ease. No, I

2 (43m 41s):
Hear say for you in email. Yeah.

0 (43m 45s):
And did you guys have a conversation about how you would split the company? Did you say, was it just going to be 50 50?

2 (43m 50s):
Yeah. It's it's it's in this email, we agree to become 50 50 partners in Patrion.

0 (43m 56s):
I mean, win-win right. Because I mean, you get a technical co-founder and Sam, you get this guy who has kind of a pretty big platform already.

4 (44m 6s):
Absolutely. Yeah. I was, I was stoked, I think. Yeah. That email, which I did, I did read through. I think I just wrote back to you, Jack, what is it all caps or something? Yes.

2 (44m 17s):
I wrote this like long email at the end. I said, like, I know I said this before, but I just want to stress. How important is that? We communicate with each other about all aspects of the business in our relationship, as long as we're not hiding anything from each other, as long as we're telling each other something's wrong, we are greatly reducing the chance of hurting our friendship. I want you to feel a hundred percent okay. With talking to me about your, like the company, finances, your interest in the company, your ideas, your feelings, anything you like, this will lead to a strong partnership. That's nice. I mean, it's basically like, Hey, we're going to, we put our friendship, you know, first here. Yeah. You know, it was like this. I thought it was kind of a nice thing. And then Sam writes back all caps. Awesome. I agree to all of this. Okay. Let's go.

0 (44m 57s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Patrion launched with just three musicians, one of them was Jack and one was Natalie. And then Y slowly other artists started to get on board first by the dozens. And then by the thousands stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Checker. Want to diversify your workforce and change the future studies show that employment is the number one factor in reducing recidivism fair chance.

0 (45m 42s):
Hiring provides a path to employment for 70 to a hundred million qualified Americans choose checker for fast, accurate, and fair background checks that give people a fair shot at their futures. Learn more@checkr.com slash NPR support for how I built this and the following message come from Wix. E-commerce the international e-commerce platform. Weeks' e-commerce enables online stores to sell to customers worldwide in local languages and currencies with multi-lingual storefronts and in cart currency conversion sell globally to grow your revenue and give customers a local shopping experience in their own currency and language, go to wix.com/ e-commerce today and join more than 700,000 active stores selling worldwide.

0 (46m 37s):
Hate, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Ross. So it's March of 2013 and Jack Conti and his former college roommate, Sam yam have decided to launch a new crowdfunding site that will let fans pay a few dollars a month to sustain their favorite budding musicians, podcasters writers, and artists in Sam is so excited about Jack's idea that literally the very day they have that first meeting in San Francisco, Sam goes home to work on the coding.

4 (47m 11s):
I started working probably more passionately than ever on, on any other project. For me, it felt like a race. And I was just, I even had this fear. I remember that if we didn't move fast on this, someone else was going to do it and were now.

0 (47m 27s):
And for people that don't understand how coding works, what's the first step. Like, I mean, it's, you're essentially, it's like if it's like a bunch of Lego bricks, you start to build the, the, the base level of, of the building.

4 (47m 40s):
Yeah. Coding is, is what you do at some point. But what you're really putting together, our whole bunch of like designs and Photoshops and thinking through the psychology of like why a user would do this and that. And so I think the, the way at least I approached this particular project was sort of laying out all the main journeys of users and then painstakingly moving pixels around to get it to a level where you felt, okay, this is an experience that I think is gonna work

0 (48m 13s):
And it wasn't gonna cost a lot of money to get it off the ground.

4 (48m 16s):
No, I mean, I had launched a number of projects before. It was probably going to be a few hundred to $2,000 and I think we were splitting, I think it was in that email to

0 (48m 26s):
A few hundred dollars to a thousand, a few thousand dollars. You're saying, yeah, that was it. Yeah. Why was it so cheap? Is it because I, is it because normally the biggest fees would go towards a software engineer and Sam, you were basically the software engineer.

4 (48m 40s):
I think this was the case. You know, I grew up in the area, what startups were, where you had to rent hardware and setups your servers and co-locations, but by this point several years after that, you could launch an entire service off in the cloud. And that began with, you know, the Facebook apps and iPhone apps. And so by this era, you could launch very cheaply and then sort of scale up as needed. And for us, you know, our, the dreamland that I had in mind around what we were going to do was Jack obviously had had a huge plan to launch to his whole audience. And on top of that, he had this whole network of artists and creators, and we were going to be launching on day one with just millions of fans and, and artists talking about how you could support them on Patrion.

4 (49m 28s):
And so I wasn't even thinking about how we needed money

0 (49m 32s):
Through that would be Jack through the Pompa moose web, YouTube channel, essentially. Yeah.

2 (49m 38s):
In other words, we were going to, we were going to not pop, this is going to be my personal YouTube channel, which was where I was uploading all that electronic stuff. And so I was, I, yeah, the plan was like, I'll put up a YouTube video on my YouTube channel, send my fans over to Patrion. And that's kind of how we'll start. We also, you know, I did want to launch with a bunch of other artists as Sam mentioned. So we, we made a list of like 40, 40 or so creating a new

0 (50m 6s):
To call up. These are not like world famous creators, right. These are just, who have like pretty strong, local, small followings

2 (50m 14s):
Folks who I thought like, Hey, you're in the same boat that I'm in right now. And let's like, let's do this. Let's I think this could be valuable to you. And so, yeah, we made an Excel spreadsheet with, with those folks and I found their contact info and reached out to all 40 of them and, and, and all 40 of them said, no,

0 (50m 35s):
Oh, 40 of them said, no, all

2 (50m 36s):
40 of them said, no.

0 (50m 37s):
They were like, no, I don't feel comfortable asking people to pay me money crickets. Yeah. Were you surprised?

2 (50m 43s):
I was surprised, but I wasn't, I didn't think it mattered. I thought like, well, let's do it anyway. And people will come around. They'll they'll come around to this. So I wasn't, I wasn't like bummed about it. I just, I thought, okay, let's, let's do it ourselves. Let's launch with me. And my roommate also wanted to launch Lauren O'Connell was one of the first three creators on Patrion and Natalie wanted to launch two. So the three of us, yeah, my girlfriend at the time. So we, we launched with just the three of us on day one of patriarch.

0 (51m 15s):
And the idea was you would take this, this video for pedals, a song that you're working on, and that's where you would premiere it. You would premiere this video on YouTube or whatever, and get people to, to go to Patrion and support this video. Yeah. I,

2 (51m 32s):
At the end of the pedals video, I put a vlog where I told people about the idea and I said, Hey, I'm building this new thing. And I don't think it's just going to help me. I think it could help a lot of people and check it out and let me know what you think. And if you're, if you're up for it, join me on this, on this journey here.

0 (51m 54s):
So from the time that you guys met on March 6th, 2013, to the time you launched, how long was that? We launched the may.

4 (52m 1s):
I think Jack

0 (52m 2s):
And may. Wow. Yeah. So really quickly.

4 (52m 6s):
Yeah. We didn't have all the pieces there when we launched, but we had, it was good. We had enough. Yeah. We couldn't, for example, we couldn't process all the payments at that time yet. I hadn't hooked any of that up. We could accept your credit card. And so that would get saved, you know, very securely by the way, cause we were working at Stripe, but we hadn't built any of the logic to actually handle the processing of the funds.

0 (52m 30s):
And what did you ask for Jack in the video? You said, Hey, whatever you can do just to, to fund my work, please contribute.

2 (52m 39s):
I think I had four tiers, a dollar, $5, $10. And then the night before I thought, screw it, I'm going to put up a hundred dollars tier. No one's going to buy it, but I'll just do that where you can kind of do a one-on-one Skype session with me and I'll hang out with you. And a bunch of people signed up for the a hundred dollars here. A bunch of people signed up for the five and the $10 here, the average payment per patron was around seven bucks, which that really blew my mind. I was thinking maybe people will give me a dollar for YouTube videos, but the fact that on average people would give me seven bucks. I couldn't believe that.

0 (53m 19s):
What was the, like, what did you offer people? If you gave a dollar a month, you would have access to what if you gave $5? If gave 10, if he gave a hundred, what what'd you get?

2 (53m 28s):
So at $1 you got access to my patient only stream. You got first dibs on concert tickets at $3. You got access to my patient only stream, first concert, first dibs and concert tickets and video tutorials about audio production. I would just make these little extra tutorials and give folks access to them. And then a $10 was a Google hangout once a month with me and all $10 patrons. And then the hundred dollars was the Skype session.

0 (53m 55s):
So how much did you, did you get fans to commit to paying you per month?

2 (53m 59s):
Within the first couple of weeks, I passed $5,000 a month. Wow. And then soon after that it was, yeah, it was even more. And at the time I was making maybe two videos a month. So, you know, suddenly like very suddenly within two months I went from draining my savings account to making over a hundred thousand dollars a year for my solo career.

0 (54m 19s):
And Jack, did you envision continuing your career as a musician and, you know, continuing making music and, and building your fan base in addition to doing this? Or were you not quite, was it not quite fully thought thought through yet?

2 (54m 34s):
It was not strategic. There wasn't a five-year plan. There wasn't a strategy deck. It was just solving a problem. And, and so I don't know that I, that I had a clear vision about how the next year was going to go. I knew that we needed to build this thing. I knew that it was going to be a way that that artists could make money. I did think it could scale and help. A lot of folks. I didn't know how much work that was going to be

0 (55m 3s):
When you had, you know, you reached out to 40 people to, to sign up and all of a sudden know, and it's just you, your roommate and your girlfriend who are the only people on the site, how did you attract other people

2 (55m 15s):
When we launched? And this is how Patrion ended up growing. When we launched, I went onto my YouTube channel. I told all my fans about Patrion. And I said, Hey, go to this website. And of course, creators follow creators. So some of the people who watched my video were creators themselves. And when they landed on my patron page and they saw this random middle of the road YouTuber making six figures, they had that same mind blow moment that I had had two years before when Lauren launched her Kickstarter and they saw a new revenue model for professional creativity. And then those folks launched on Patrion and then they did the same thing. They want them to YouTube and they went on to their podcasts and they went on to, you know, they, they wrote on their websites and then that cycle just repeated and that's actually responsible for most of Patriot's growth.

2 (56m 3s):
Is that viral products.

0 (56m 5s):
And was the business model that you had kind of set in stone from the get-go because initially I think it was like, you would take a patron would take 10%. So 5% a platform fee and then 5% of payment processing fee. And did you kind of do the math and, and the financial projections and kind of come to the conclusion that that was the best way for you guys to reach profitability,

4 (56m 29s):
Check the check that we do the math.

2 (56m 33s):
No, there's there was zero projections. There was zero, no spreadsheets, no spreadsheets, no math. There, there was, yeah, there was, there was none of that. I mean, again, it's just very different than it is now. Now it's, you know, now we have, you know, FP and a and finance teams and we're forecasting out multiple years. Right. But that's yeah. Back then. No, we didn't have any that we didn't think about any of that. We were just making this thing, our first pitch deck,

4 (57m 1s):
Which I don't even believe we had any more because I remember building it on a webpage, just had all these emails that we had received from artists and fans about how exciting the idea was. So we weren't really thinking about like the, all the viability of the business at that point still.

0 (57m 17s):
And then I guess a month after you guys launched, you decide, all right, now let's go get some money. And, and Sam, you had already been through this process. You would already, he'd been through the process of raising some money for your previous startup.

4 (57m 30s):
Yeah. I actually was pretty optimistic and excited about this fundraising process. Again, this came back from the emails and the feedback and the creators and the fans in a way that, again, several years of me trying to build things had never seen this sort of passion around an, a movement or an idea. And so, you know, at the time, again, I'm naive, even looking back, it felt like in the back. And so we, we started off and we started pitching to investors.

0 (57m 58s):
And how, how much money were you guys able to raise for the, for the first round

2 (58m 1s):
At the time that the, the, I think at that round, the company was valued at 6 million. And so we ended up raising that first round, ended up being a 2.1 million at a 6 million valuation. So it was, you know, about a third, right?

0 (58m 16s):
And a casino. This is an important conversation to have because a lot of entrepreneurs listen to the show and we'd had founders on the show, who've said biggest mistake of my life. You know, Tristan Walker will say, I should never have raised money. Other founders said who say I was so important, so glad I did it. I got support and guidance. And I couldn't have built this without going to venture capitalists and, and taking the money. W w was it absolutely necessary? Could you have done patron without raising money?

4 (58m 43s):
I don't believe so. Jack. I think we needed that team in, in the early days as we were building it out. Plus I think the partners that, that we ended up working with were very much aligned with the spirit of our, our mission. And we haven't talked a lot about that, but at the time, this idea that we were trying to get artists and creators paid, that ended up filtering out a bunch of various investors who just didn't even want to touch the space of music or art

2 (59m 12s):
In particular. Yeah. I think it was really important. I don't think Patrion not, I don't think patron would not have gotten close to where it is today without that. I mean, even from that first day, Patrion started growing a lot and, you know, we needed to hire people to answer emails and, and help build features and scale the company. And we would not have been able to afford that without raising money. All right. So

0 (59m 42s):
You guys raised $2.1 million. And what do you do with that? Do you get an office? Do you get, do you start hiring people? What do you start doing with it

4 (59m 51s):
Roommates again, really? Yeah. We got a home office and no,

2 (59m 58s):
We got an office in Noey valley. Yeah. It was a two bedroom apartment and we moved in together. And at that point we hired Tyler Palmer, who was the first employee. And he hired a couple of folks, Cole and Tony who started building out the basically like the artist relations and the marketing and the, and, and the operations customer service side of the business. Yeah.

4 (1h 0m 22s):
Yeah. It was just our bedrooms. And then it was attached yeah. Out into the kitchen where we set up a few desks and they would come in every day and Jack and I would wake up and walk out into the office

0 (1h 0m 32s):
Initially the first, I don't know. I mean, you're getting more and more people to sign up, but from what I understand, like, even with the 10% fee, the processing and platform fees, it wasn't covering your costs.

4 (1h 0m 46s):
Yeah. No, I mean, w we were not profitable. I mean, 5% of the 10%, by the way, w wasn't didn't go to us, right?

0 (1h 0m 54s):
Yeah. It was for the pay Stripe and whoever was, yeah, exactly. So the 5% go into you guys, wasn't much

2 (1h 1m 1s):
Not a lot. Yeah. Which is, again, we, because we had that business model with a really low percentage, which, which came from this idea of not wanting to be another wedge between creators and their fans. Right. So we wanted to, to have a low rake. And so, yeah, even, you know, when the company was processing a hundred thousand bucks, that's only five grand for the company.

0 (1h 1m 26s):
So I mean, how, I mean, cause you had a runway $2.1 million and that was going to run out eventually. How long did that last you, before you had to go back out and raise money?

4 (1h 1m 39s):
We were cheap. I mean, again, even after we fundraised Jack didn't take any salary, actually. I don't think I took any salary on the first around either until, until after our second round. And we, we, we didn't spend much, that's why we rented a home as opposed to an actual office. So we didn't end up running out of that money. We had more than, I think a year of runway left as we saw the business ramping up and then went on to raise a, I guess a much more serious a series,

0 (1h 2m 9s):
A round that was in 2014,

2 (1h 2m 12s):
In 20, yeah. 2014. We raised the $15 million round.

0 (1h 2m 16s):
Meanwhile, Jack, you are the CEO of the company. And I'm curious how you kind of figured out how to do that job and because you were, I mean, you're a musician and you've got this part of you that I'm assuming you really want to pursue. Like how did you, first of all, w at what point did you, were you able to say, okay, I can't, I actually cannot pursue music. Full-time like, I can't like, I, I kind of have to make this a side gig.

2 (1h 2m 47s):
So first of all, it was a slow process. I think the desire to not take salary really came from a place of wanting to be a creator and wanting to continue to make art and videos and music. And a couple years into the company, it became very clear that I needed it to be my full-time focus, which was a really, really painful, tough thing because not only was this for me, not only did this decision affect me, but my wife, you know, we were partners in crime on this rock band that was kicking ass and getting millions of views and touring around the United States for big rooms.

2 (1h 3m 34s):
And like we were living the dream as creators. And not only was I abandoning my career, I was abandoning her by choosing to, to, to focus on Patrion and the moment where I basically stopped working on Pompe mousse and took a salary as CEO. That was a tough moment because I felt I was one of those kids in my twenties who was like, I am not going to be an artist in my twenties and grow up to be a business person in my thirties. That is not the kind of person that I am. I'm going to stay an artist in my life. And, and then I found myself running a business.

2 (1h 4m 15s):
Yeah.

0 (1h 4m 17s):
And, and, and so when you were, I mean like a year into this, you had no, no kind of no standards, right? Like you didn't have, you know, any particular rules around who could join what happened in, in 2014 that changed that, that, that kind of was like a shot in the arm. I mean, what are you guys were like, wait a minute, we need to have some kind of standards here.

2 (1h 4m 45s):
The thing that caused the debate was a website called eight Chan that launched on Patrion. Yeah. And they were using Patrion to fund the development of the site.

0 (1h 5m 1s):
And you started to look at the site and you saw crazy,

2 (1h 5m 4s):
Crazy stuff. Yeah. I mean, there, there was, you know, sexualized depictions of minors and things that we just, from a values perspective, it felt like that we should, there should be some thing in place to, to stop this from, from happening.

0 (1h 5m 25s):
So what did you do? Well,

4 (1h 5m 26s):
I recall this distinctly, because looking back, I'm sort of on the wrong side of history of this, but I remember feeling like, Hey, we had not sort of done this would be our first outright ban, which we had never done before. And it was a line that I was very concerned about. I even ended up on the call with, with the, I guess the founder of hen at the

0 (1h 5m 47s):
Time he doesn't like the Philippines or something. That's right. Yeah.

4 (1h 5m 51s):
And in my mind, and, and through, you know, the conversation with him to the, what was going on was he had built out a platform that was like very heavily emphasizing free speech. And he wanted to take down the things that were breaking the law. At least this is how he represented to me. And that's why I was sympathetic to it at the time. And I was concerned about our ask of creators to if they didn't have the intention to be uploading these, you know, I agree with like just terrible things, like how we could still support them in terms of the business that they were building or, or the art that they were trying to get shared.

0 (1h 6m 33s):
Yeah. I mean, this is really interesting because this is really the beginnings of certain people weaponizing the first amendment and this idea of free speech really turning it into a weapon and turning it against what it's designed to do, which is to, you know, prevent tyranny, but, but posting photos of children or, or even, you know, horrendously vicious and dangerous conspiracy theories is not what that's about. But, but it's easy to, I imagine it would have been easy for him to manipulate somebody like you with the argument that it's about free speech.

4 (1h 7m 11s):
Yes. That's how the argument began. And then there were other things that we had to talk to them about too, right. There was, there were communities that were sort of thriving, they're spreading hate. And so it started us really going down this path of like, when there is real-world harm and, and people getting hurt, what is, what is our role and responsibility? And I think that's where we started figuring out that we, we wanted healthy communities and, and we would have to lay out these guidelines in a very specific way.

0 (1h 7m 40s):
So how did you begin to write them down? What did you do? Did you like bring in an, a lawyer or outside advisors or, I mean, cause I imagine both of you guys had really good intentions. Like if I'm in the company, I'm going to be synagogue guys, we cannot do this. This is wrong. At the same time you've got investors, you've got to make money. I'm sure the HN community was probably generating significant revenue for you. So

2 (1h 8m 4s):
Yeah, the investors are, are super helpful here besides just the money. They connected us to people who had worked on these types of problems before Reddit had with stuff like this. Facebook had to deal with stuff like this still does and still does. And, and we got connected through those investors to, to a fellow who had wishes to, to remain anonymous even to this day, he'd built these very massive content policy and, and trust and safety and enforcement systems. And he worked with us for a period of two months to draft the first version of what became Patriots content policy, which was turned out to be about 40 pages was the first version of it.

2 (1h 8m 51s):
And to tell you truth, that was one of the most horrific two months of, of my life was well because the internet is, can be a dark place and there are really horrific things out there. And in that two months, we had to explore all of those cases real in the world on Patrion. And we had to have some very deep philosophical conversations about what are we okay with supporting and, and what are we not? And then content policies like anything else that accompany it's, it's a, it's a living, breathing thing that you iterate on and it changes over time. But that first version, you know, in the creation of that first version was a very difficult two months difficult

0 (1h 9m 37s):
Because it, you had to make specific choices about what you would accept and what you wouldn't.

2 (1h 9m 45s):
There are two reasons. The first was Sam and I, this was one of the first moments where we had fundamental disagreements about the business. And so it was challenging our relationship in a way that we hadn't dealt with before. Is that fair Sam? Like we, yeah, I think that's right. Yeah. Like we, we had to like have really intense values discussions where we weren't on the same page. And that was, that was really hard

4 (1h 10m 13s):
In particular too. We hadn't come up with even a framework for how we would get through these decisions. We were bringing in. I remember there were all these sessions where we would just bring in everyone from the company and there are all these different, like disparate opinions. And we couldn't figure out how to put them together because people were very divided even internally. And I think all of this just became very exhausting for both of us.

0 (1h 10m 37s):
So how did you, what did you come up with?

2 (1h 10m 40s):
The policy? You came up with the, the end state of this project working with this outside person that helped us write the first version of it was, was this content policy, which was a rules-based framework that gets to a level of specificity that I think most people are probably unaware of. Like for example, people say, you know, I've heard people say you can't define porn. You just kinda know it. When you see it. I beg to differ. You can define porn. We have spent quite a lot of time to finding corn in way more detail than probably anyone wants to hear about or go into and then do that across everything. Weapons, manufacturing, hate speech.

2 (1h 11m 21s):
What is harassment? You know, the output of this content policy was rigorous definition around what we meant by each of those things. And as many edge cases as we could think of that's how much detail you want to go into. Yeah.

4 (1h 11m 35s):
I think the perspective I always like to, I don't remember how we landed on this was that, you know, we're facilitating art, art should, in some sense, be bridging a lot of these divides and, and not increasing them like some communities would be doing. And so guided with that, I think, you know, we were constantly, as Jack noted, it was an evolving document, but at least we sort of knew directionally where we want

2 (1h 12m 1s):
To be.

0 (1h 12m 2s):
But I mean, you guys, because of this policy did alienate some of your better known podcasters, like Sam Harris, who was on Patrion and he decided to stop using it because he, he didn't support the policy. He said, you know, that, that, that it violated free speech. And, and, and, and you, presumably you talked to Sam about this when he decided to leave.

2 (1h 12m 26s):
Well, I talked with Sam many times, you know, he's such an incredible thinker. I respect him so much. And, you know, I was very clear about our logic and, and why, you know, why we have to have a content policy. And I think these things are complicated if you're not inside a company. I think, look, things have, over the last few years, it's become very, very clear, I think to, to people why companies need to have a content policy, but at the time his reasoning was the first amendment should do it. That's that should be the policy. And, and yeah, I mean, we, we disagreed. So, and, and we, weren't going to, you know, we, weren't going to change our minds to, to keep two or three creators as, as painful as that was.

2 (1h 13m 16s):
But again, like, I am really proud of our content policy. And I think, I think more folks, you know, should, should do that. Especially like emerging tech companies. I wish more folks did that. So, so look, it's a, it's a bummer. And I, I wish Sam was raising money on Patriot. His pitch was awesome and straight from the heart and right on. But sometimes, you know, you have values-based disagreements like that. And, and that's what happens.

0 (1h 13m 48s):
Putting out any idea into the world, especially a platform like this is going to create friction, right. Even though your intentions are good and by and large, it serves people well, there are going to be critics that's normal. It's part of the process. Our show gets criticized and you have been criticized for a variety of reasons. Let me just start with one of them or critique, is that actually almost nobody on the platform makes a serious living. And there was an article that came out in 2017. I think it was called no one makes a living on Patrion know it said something like, you know, 80% of the creators who shared what they earned make less than the federal minimum wage.

2 (1h 14m 24s):
Yeah. I'm not sure that's criticism as much as, just as like a, a statement, perhaps it was meant as criticism, but like Patrion, I think is solving a very specific, clear problem. One of the problems it's not solving is the demand curve. We can't solve supply and demand. W we're also not solving, helping everybody find, you know, new fans. These are really hard problems that other companies do way better than us right now, actually. And we were very narrow in our focus of what problem are we trying to solve? And the, and the very specific problem that Patrion set out to solve early was so you're a creator.

2 (1h 15m 8s):
You're reaching millions of people and you're getting paid a hundred bucks a month in ad revenue. Great. Patrion is the platform for you, but if you're not reaching a million people or it doesn't have to be a million, but if you don't have an audience, actually patron doesn't work so well for you at all. And so I think it's totally fair to like point that out. And I actually think it's important to be honest about that. Like, we want to be honest with, if somebody expects, they're going to come onto Patrion without having found a thing that, that, you know, resonates with people, you know, that's, that's not a problem that our product solves. And I actually, if we were to try to solve that, it would be incredibly defocusing. And I think we'd end up doing worse at, at our mission.

2 (1h 15m 49s):
And at the end of the day, you know, the, the thing is there are now tens and tens of thousands of creators who are, you know, making a lot of money on the platform and building media companies and leasing office space and hiring teams. And now there are creators making, you know, millions of dollars a year on Patrion. So, but we're not, you know, we're not going to solve the product market fit problem for folks.

0 (1h 16m 11s):
So one of the challenges that, that you guys have had to deal with over the years is how to roll out changes to your revenue model because inevitably users, you know, they don't like it when they get used to a certain system and it changes. But a few years ago, you, you kind of ran into some trouble when you announced that you were, you were going to shift the way that that processing fees were being handled. So I guess instead of the, the creators paying the processing fees, the patrons would have to pay them on top of a, of the subscription fees that they were already paying. And, and that caused a backlash.

2 (1h 16m 49s):
There were, yeah. So that you were very kind about it. Thank you. It describing the backlash about patrons paying fees. That was the worst product roll out in the history of the company. And it was, I mean, backlash, doesn't begin to describe how it felt from the inside. I mean, there was a tweet at me every two to three seconds for probably 72 hours, you know, equating me to the devil. I mean, it was, it was, it was very anxiety. Inducing

0 (1h 17m 28s):
Cannot be fun. It's not,

2 (1h 17m 30s):
It's no, it's, it's the opposite of fun, but, but we learned so much about, you know, our community and product development and, and communication and, and, and how to talk to our creators. And so the next time we, we rolled out something like that, you know, we literally talked to over a thousand creators first, which we did not do that time. We did AB tests and like, we got the data and the data showed that actually it was a great thing, but that's different than talking to a person and hearing them react to it and hearing their feelings about it.

2 (1h 18m 15s):
Like, you know, you can't just disassociate that from the product experience.

0 (1h 18m 21s):
Have you become profitable yet?

2 (1h 18m 23s):
Sam? Are we talking about profitability? I'll I'll yeah. So no patron is not profitable. It's tracking toward profitability. We're burning money every month, but actually the businesses, like very healthy, the financials are very healthy and okay.

0 (1h 18m 40s):
And to help the business, I guess last year, you rolled out a new payment plan for, for the creators, which is a tiered plan. So they, depending on like the level of service they get, they, they pay either like five or eight or 12% of the income that they get from the site. Is that right?

2 (1h 18m 57s):
Yeah. This new plan, the three creator plans that we rolled out have amazing adoption creators are, are, you know, opting into those, those more feature rich products. And, and so it's, it actually has like change the business. So like, we're going to keep adding features to those. So, I mean, if we're going to keep building out the product and building more things, but, but I think very, you know, very clearly like, yes, this is, this worked. This allows us to like scale and be healthy and be a longterm meaningful company.

0 (1h 19m 32s):
How many creators are on the platform now? Hundreds of thousands. Right.

2 (1h 19m 36s):
So a little over 200,000. Yeah. We're getting paid.

0 (1h 19m 39s):
I mean, I imagine that, that this COVID era has been a blessing for, I mean, it's a horrible situation, of course, but all of a sudden you've got people at home creators who cannot tour, who can't play in coffee houses, and you're not, you know, it's not like stadium level bands that are going on patron, but people who might play at a hundred people now, they can't do it. Have you had a massive spike in people onboarding?

2 (1h 20m 8s):
I mean, yes. W it's it's been, it's been wild to see. I mean, the pandemic has been such a brutal thing in the world and it's, it is so weird to think about, you know, it is true that it has benefited Patrion and, and that dichotomy is very strange for me. Like I th I think that the way I, I'm trying to think about it as, like, I'm glad something like Patrion exists to catch creative people right now in the, in a moment like this. So for example, AEG live nation, both canceled global touring operations. So very suddenly there are these creators who were looking forward at a year or two of, you know, touring and hundreds of thousands or millions or tens of millions of dollars of touring revenue that evaporated over the period of a week.

2 (1h 20m 57s):
Yeah. And so th the, you know, the level of launches on Patrion are what you could expect in a situation like that. Not only creators, you know, launching on the platform, you know, triple digit growth month over month and in podcasting and music and things like that. But, but also patrons, like stepping up and really doing their part. I think a lot of people are looking for a way to help right now, and, and patrons are too, and there's like a really easy way that they can,

0 (1h 21m 26s):
When you guys think about, you know, this path and where you are today, how much do you think that it has to do with the, with your intelligence skill hard work and how much of it is just

2 (1h 21m 35s):
Luck?

4 (1h 21m 36s):
I mean, my opinion on this is largely, like, if you're fortunate enough to be, to fall in, in order to build as part of a community that is this excited about an idea, I felt like if it wasn't us, it was going to be someone else. And so in a lot of ways, at least personally, I feel like very appreciative of sort of the, you could call it luck to of the timing and the opportunity to, to do this. I also think just to, to the general point of view your question, like, we wouldn't have been able to make it if we didn't work extremely hard from the get-go.

4 (1h 22m 19s):
Yeah.

2 (1h 22m 20s):
You know, I've done a thousand things in my life, 999 of them haven't worked. Patrion was one that happened to work. Was I smarter? Did I make better decisions? The patient like, no, I mean, it just was like, it was a lot of happenstance and circumstance and, and, you know, sound like killed ourselves to like, to, to, to, you know, do it. Of course,

4 (1h 22m 49s):
I love this attitude too, because it puts us in a place where I think both of us feel an immense sense of responsibility and that we have to be great stewards right. Of both creators and, and the opportunity and, and even our teams that are helping us along on this mission. And I think we take that very seriously,

0 (1h 23m 9s):
By the way, w one thing that we haven't talked about, which is like, quality, like how serious are you guys about the quality of the stuff that's on Patrion? I mean, because I mean, you've, you've been on YouTube. Right. And there's obviously, there's, there's great stuff on YouTube. There's a lot of really awful mediocre stuff on YouTube as well. I mean, does it, does it bother you if someone uses Patrion to put, like, I dunno, like terrible music or terrible art or whatever out into the world, like, or do you just not care?

2 (1h 23m 41s):
Oh, God. I mean, we would never just like judge the quality of somebody's art and have that be an input into a decision whether to include them in patient like that, that we would, of course never, ever do anything like that. I actually find it

4 (1h 23m 58s):
So awesome too, if there's something so tiny niche that only like a handful of peoples passionately care about. Right. I feel like that in effect is sort of how we've piggybacked off this whole movement on the internet that allows any community to find within an interest group. Some set of folks who care so deeply about that. So, yeah, like Jack said, like why, why in the world would we ever care?

2 (1h 24m 22s):
I mean, we, the, the beautiful thing about the internet is that suppose you're a total weirdo. Like, suppose you make stuff that like in your life, in your town, nobody in your town likes your music. Nobody likes it. Like only one in a thousand people, like what you have to make, like great on the internet. There are literally millions of people who will like your stuff. If your ratio is one in a thousand, you can get millions of fans and make hundreds of thousands of dollars a month. Like that is, I love that about the internet. I think that's such a special, weird, wonderful time in, in the development of, of humanity to, to, to be connected like that.

0 (1h 25m 8s):
That's check Conti and Sam yam co-founders of Patriot. What is the weirdest, most niche, Patrion site creator that you've seen? Like just the most odd niche thing that you can think of. One of them,

2 (1h 25m 25s):
My favorite examples of this was just like, I don't get AMR at all. I don't get it. Like, it doesn't work for me. You don't get it.

0 (1h 25m 33s):
Not, not at all.

2 (1h 25m 35s):
It does more of my brain is not tingling.

4 (1h 25m 36s):
Right. I'm getting the tinglies guys. I don't know what you're talking about.

0 (1h 25m 41s):
You have ASMR people on,

2 (1h 25m 42s):
On them. Yeah, it does really well.

0 (1h 25m 44s):
People pay for it monthly. Oh yeah. Maybe I should get on it. This gig doesn't work out for me. I'm doing SMR patriarch.

2 (1h 25m 52s):
Don't quit your day job.

0 (1h 26m 0s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week, you can, wherever you get your podcasts, if you want to write to us, our email address is H ibt@npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter, we're at how I built this, or I'm at guy Roz. Also on Instagram, you can follow me at guy dot bras. This episode was produced by Rachel Faulkner with music composed by routine Arab Louis. Thanks also to Liz Metzger, Derek gales, PC Howard, Julia Carney, Neeva grant, and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Ferris safari. I'm guy Ross. And you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.

7 (1h 26m 42s):
The world was shocked when pro Trump extremists stormed and sees the U S Capitol throughout this tumultuous era, the NPR politics podcast has been there every day explaining and making sense of the news. We'll be doing that through the final days of the Trump administration. As we all try to understand how this moment happened and what will come next

0 (1h 27m 2s):
Support for how I built this comes from 3m committed to protecting healthcare workers, globally. 3m employee. Chris knows that healthcare workers like his daughter may need to get up close to provide patient care. He's working hard to direct high performing personal protective equipment to hospitals and hotspots. So she and nurses like her can be protected while caring for their patients. Hear their story at 3m.com/improving lives. 3m science applied to life.

6 (1h 27m 34s):
The news moves fast. Listen to the NPR news. Now, podcast to keep up. We update stories as they evolve every hour. So no matter when you listen, you get the news as close to live as possible on your schedule, subscribe to or follow the NPR news. Now, podcast.