0 (0s):
Hey, it's guy here. And before we start the show, I want to remind you about the, how I built this summit happening virtually in your home. And this week, like, has you are hearing this and it's not too late to get tickets. If you're looking for practical business tips and advice, the summit has you covered. If you're looking to kick back in your couch and enjoy some inspiring conversations with leaders like Bernie brown, Gary Vaynerchuk, Sal Khan, Troy Carter, Cathy Hughes, and more the summit has that covered too. You'll be able to connect with others, expand your network, and we'll even have daily live-streamed yoga classes and other useful business sessions. Thanks to our event sponsors.

0 (40s):
This is your last chance don't miss out. Tickets are available this week@summitdotnpr.org. A big thank you to go daddy, the presenting sponsor of this year's summit and to our supporting sponsors, Dell technologies and bulldog online yoga. You only had a six month runway to test out this idea and make a decision. And either you were going to be able to go after it full time, or I guess you would be, would have to go back to your old job. Correct? How did you generate any customers or interest

1 (1m 17s):
In them? Very slowly. So before we raised any capital, we were funding this with our own money. And so it was small amounts spent on Google advertising, stupidly spending money on Facebook because neither of us knew how to do any of this. Right? I had no idea what I was getting into.

0 (1m 40s):
How many people actually bought insurance through you. Those in those first six months,

1 (1m 45s):
God, maybe 20

2 (1m 48s):
<inaudible> from NPR.

0 (1m 56s):
It's how I built this show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Roz. And on the show today, how Jennifer Fitzgerald dreamed up a new way to sell insurance and create a policy genius insurance marketplace that now has 30 million customers. Marketing is not new. One of the classic examples is the Michelin guide. As far back as 1900, when you buy their tires, they would hand you a guide they'd written full of suggestions for restaurants and ins to stop at during your journey.

0 (2m 41s):
And these days, just as many people associate Michelin with restaurants and hotels as they do with tires. But the idea of creating content around your brand is a must do really took off in the past few years as social media became a primary marketing tool. And so today it seems like every business from law firms to venture capital groups to food brands have a content strategy or are trying to develop one, for example, go to hubspot.com, a company that sells sales and marketing software. And you might think you've landed on a business school website. You can find all kinds of articles on how to build a brand templates to create infographics tips on marketing.

0 (3m 28s):
Same with glossy A's website into the gloss. It's basically an online beauty magazine that shows you how to properly exfoliate or dye your hair crazy colors. And with both of these examples, of course, you are eventually led to products for HubSpot it's customer relations management software and for Glossier skincare products and cosmetics. And it's one of the reasons why these brands often appear high up in search engine results. When you type in marketing or beauty tips brands like these have created so much content articles, guidebooks templates, usually for free, because they know it's a way to get you into the door and to differentiate what they do from their competitors.

0 (4m 17s):
And this is precisely how policy genius was able to become one of the biggest insurance brokers on the internet. About a decade ago when Jennifer Fitzgerald and swabbed alum came up with the idea to sell insurance online, they knew that they first had to convince people or rather their millennial target audience, why they needed insurance at all. And they did this by writing articles, lots and lots of articles and detailed explanatory posts on how life insurance works or why you need it, or the different types. In fact, when they just started out with a very tight budget, one of their earliest hires was a blogger, not a sales rep, not a marketing lead, but a blogger, someone to write articles about insurance on their website.

0 (5m 9s):
And for nearly a year, those articles were read by almost no one, but over time that content strategy would pay off. As the articles started to appear on search engines. When Jennifer and Francoise initially tried to convince investors that people would want to buy insurance the same way they buy airline tickets on sites like Expedia and kayak, there was very little interest, but today, nearly a decade on Jennifer is widely considered to be a pioneer in the burgeoning sector. Now known as InsureTech insurance technology. She's one of the very few InsureTech female founders who have raised more than a hundred million dollars, but selling insurance was not in her life plan.

0 (5m 58s):
Jennifer really aspired to be the us secretary of state or at the very least the us ambassador. She was born in the Philippines where her parents met her dad was stationed there with the air force, but eventually moved the family to the yeah.

1 (6m 13s):
Yes. My dad got stationed in Ohio. That was my mother's first time out of the Philippines was a Dayton Ohio in the middle of winter. So it could not have been a bigger shock for to this day and no disrespect to Ohio, but she just has the worst memories of a lie.

0 (6m 31s):
And you grew up kind of like every couple of years, every two years going to a different place.

1 (6m 38s):
That is correct. So we lived in Ohio for two or three years and then moved to Biloxi, Mississippi. We all crammed into a tiny trailer in Biloxi, Mississippi, because there was not family housing on Keesler air force base stayed there for a little bit, then moved to Albuquerque New Mexico. My brother was born there and then we moved to San Antonio, Texas. We're actually, there was a decent amount of stability. So we were in San Antonio for probably seven years.

0 (7m 9s):
So you were basically a military kid for, for most of your childhood

1 (7m 13s):
Till I was 14. So my dad hit 20 years when I was 14 and retired right after my freshman year in high school. He took a civilian job in Bluefield, West Virginia, which is a small town on the border of West Virginia and Virginia. And so at 14, the entire family moved from San Antonio, big urban city to West Virginia. Wow. So you're about three hours, three, three and a half hours from a major city, which is Charlotte.

0 (7m 50s):
Yeah. I'm looking at it on the map. You're right in the Appalachians.

1 (7m 53s):
Oh yeah. It, I mean, it is beautiful country. We were up in the east river mountains. I highly recommend anybody who loves like the fall foliage to take a drive through that part of the country during the fall. Cause it's spectacular, but it is pretty rural and pretty remote from any major. Like, so if you want to take a flight, you're either traveling to Charleston, West Virginia or Charlotte, North Carolina.

0 (8m 18s):
So, all right. So you grow up in this. I mean, you, you, you, you do high school in this tiny town in, in, in Appalachia, on the border of West Virginia and Virginia. And I imagine that this was not like you were kind of waiting to just graduate and then leave. Is that fair to say?

1 (8m 38s):
No, no. Yeah, no, no disrespect to the region. I had a wonderful time in high school. There made some great friends and really enjoyed my time there, but I've always been a bit ambitious and looking ahead to what's next and was counting down the days when I could go off to college and onto bigger, bigger scene.

0 (8m 60s):
And were you, when you were in high school, where would you sort of imagine that one day you were going to be, what if you did imagine that

1 (9m 9s):
I, in high school and through most of college, what I was envisioning myself was along the lines of secretary of state, secretary general of the UN. So just a couple

0 (9m 22s):
Of, you know, some, some small ambitions there. Yeah.

1 (9m 25s):
I very, I was very Tracy flick ish in high school.

0 (9m 31s):
So armed with this ambition to run the state department or maybe the United nations, or maybe both, you know, different times who knows, who knows you decide to go to college and presumably did you study like political science or something like that?

1 (9m 47s):
I did. I had a double major in political science and international affairs. And you went to college in Florida? I did.

0 (9m 55s):
All right. So you're in college and you're clearly sounds like you're heading towards the policy, that kind of policy world and, and, and, you know, maybe law school or something, but, but you were not looking at like entrepreneurship or business or finance that was not on your radar

1 (10m 12s):
At all. Absolutely not. I don't even think I took a single business or finance course in college. I took economics. It's part of the, you know, social sciences program that I was in, but not a single course in the business school.

0 (10m 28s):
Okay. So you, you graduated college and I guess you actually afterwards decided to go into the peace Corps. I did. I did. What was the idea like w what was, what was the attraction for you to go to go to the peace

1 (10m 41s):
Corps? It was part adventure, right? So just something completely adventurous, extraordinary getting dropped in another part of the world. So that was a big piece of it, for sure. Part of it was, you know, again, being very ambitious and a total gunner, looking ahead that the types of jobs that I wanted in the state department or in the UN required international experience. So you kind of have a catch 22 of how do you get international experience without having prior international experience and peace Corps is a good way to do that. And the third piece was more personal. You know, I was acutely aware of how lucky I was to having grown up in America to an, to an American, you know, dad and a mother who eventually became naturalized, but my mother grew up in pretty severe poverty in the Philippines.

1 (11m 29s):
So I was always acutely aware of just, you know, by luck of the draw, you know, being in a very privileged position and also just wanted to, you know, put in some time in service and the developing world.

0 (11m 43s):
So you ended up in Honduras, I'm assuming 22 years old. And where in Honduras, where are you

1 (11m 52s):
So training in the, on the outskirts of the capital city to go see kalpa? And then I was assigned to Santa Barbara, Honduras, which is a department Capitol city in the, in the west. So it's up in the mountains, coffee growing region, probably four hours away from the capital city, three hours away from the largest city on the north coast, which is San Pedro Sula. Wow.

0 (12m 18s):
So really remote. And what was your assignment? Where did you do?

1 (12m 22s):
Okay. I had a very atypical assignment in the peace Corps. So following my college graduation, I actually did some post-graduate work as part of a peace Corp prep program. So I studied urban and regional planning and got assigned to the urban and regional planning sector in Honduras, where volunteers are assigned to an embedded with local municipal governments to work on, you know, municipal projects, be it water and sanitation or public services or planning any sorts of assistance that the local governments need. So I was assigned to the Santa Barbara municipal government.

1 (13m 3s):
My counterpart was the mayor of Santa Barbara. And so I worked pretty closely with the mayor and the municipal corporation for, for two years, working on, you know, what eventually became digitizing their property tax records and overall information management in the municipal government.

0 (13m 21s):
It's sad. I mean, it doesn't sound like, I mean, I think when some people might think of peace Corps, they might think of like building houses or digging trenches or something, but like you were basically helping to digitize the property tax system for this town in Western Honduras.

1 (13m 40s):
I did. Yeah. All of their property tax records, all of their records about who should be paying for water sanitation. We're just on little paper, cardboard files in a filing cabinet. So they had no way to understand who was overdue. They had no way to send out bills. It was really reactive. So if somebody came in to pay their property taxes or their water bill, great, otherwise there was no way to, to collect or enforce that we're

0 (14m 8s):
Like the gears starting to turn you're in your head about business in any way at all. Or was it still really, very much about policy work that you were interested in a

1 (14m 18s):
Little bit? So what I ended up doing was creating a very rudimentary software system for the municipal government of Santa Barbara and had actually talked to a few folks. So there were some consulting firms down there who were working with the us agency for international development. They got wind of what we had done in Santa Barbara. We're talking about, you know, how do we replicate this and other municipal governments? And so I was like, huh, I wonder if you could make a business out of this and sell this software to other municipal governments, not just in, but elsewhere. And I literally had that thought for maybe a month and then put it on a shelf.

1 (14m 59s):
So I think that's where the gear started turning for me about business, but was still very much as, you know, set ahead on international development, international policy work.

0 (15m 10s):
So from what I understand, you spend, you would spend four years total in Honduras. And I know the last years you actually got a job at the world bank, but I guess from what I've read, like you weren't really into the whole bureaucracy of an organization like the world bank, right. Because right in big institutions, like, like that are sometimes bureaucratic.

1 (15m 33s):
They are after having spent a couple of years on the inside and seeing very mission driven, very, very smart and passionate people. But you are a gear in a very, very large machine that has inertia and doesn't tend to move very quickly or very, or drive a lot of innovation in the space that you're in. And, you know, I fast forwarded, what would my life look like in five, 10, 15 years if I stayed on this and it was looking more like, oh great. I would be a, a senior portfolio manager of, you know, one or two countries doing a lot of desk work. And that wasn't for me.

0 (16m 14s):
So you were, I guess at this point, like 25, 26 years old, and you decide, Hey, I better go to law school

1 (16m 24s):
Basically, as, as I think most people who go to law school do what I knew was I was going to do basically a hard reset of my career. Right. So moving away from the international policy international development world, I knew I wanted to do a hard reset and go to the business world after grad school.

0 (16m 45s):
All right. So you come to back to the U S you go to law school in New York and you go, and you work at McKinsey, which is the consulting firm, which a lot of business school grads do what, but they also ha I mean, they, they hire widely, they hire from a wide sort of range of industries, which is one of the reasons why they're so successful. What did, what was your, what part of McKinsey where you, where you working in, what did you, what did you do there?

1 (17m 11s):
So I was, my first assignment was with a big insurance company. One of the, one of the top ones in America, and that insurance company was in a lot of trouble because of the financial crisis. So they had a whole bunch of obligations that they couldn't meet, and it was threatening to bring down the entire insurance company. So they brought in McKinsey to help figure out what to do. So that was my very first engagement. So at a big insurance company,

0 (17m 38s):
Where were you? Were you in New York or no,

1 (17m 41s):
I was in, I was not in New York.

0 (17m 43s):
You can't say where you work. Cause then we would know the insurance company and then you signed an NDA that I guess lasts for the rest of your life. Correct. Don't these people at McKinsey know that they're messing up my podcast with good stories,

1 (17m 55s):
Suffice it to say it was a large fortune 100 insurance company that had life insurance, annuities, asset management, you name it.

0 (18m 5s):
Yeah. All right. So you go work for this insurance company and, and what, what did you start to, I mean, was it interesting to you?

1 (18m 13s):
It was fascinating one. This was my first real crash course in business, right. And this is a company that's fighting for a survival. That was interesting too, is this was my first get my hands dirty, like digging into a P and L we were trying to figure out where they could cut expenses. We were trying to figure out whether they could reprice certain financial instruments in a way that would be compliant and also preserve the business and also do the right thing for customers. So the complexity and the breadth and the depth of the problems that we had to tackle on a daily basis was fascinating and energizing in a way that I had never really experienced before.

1 (18m 58s):
So

0 (18m 58s):
You're fully at McKinsey. I think you started there in 2008. And so here's, here's a question and I'm sure you've gotten this question before in, in different ways. And so I'm asking a kind of a delicate way, cause it's, this is your life. This is what you do now. But insurance for, for those of us who don't know, I have a lot of insurance. Like, you know, I'm doing the responsible thing. I'm insured here, there, I got insurance, but it's, it sounds boring to me. Right. But, but, and I have to imagine that part of you thought it sounded boring at the beginning, but what was it about it that started to fascinate you?

1 (19m 35s):
It does sound boring, but once you start peeling the onion, there are so many interesting pieces to it. So I'll give you a couple examples, data science, there's nothing hotter in the tech world or in the business world than quote unquote big data and data science. Right? The original quote, unquote data scientists were actuaries, right? So these were people who were looking at mortality tables, morbidity tables, dating back hundreds of years, right. Because insurance has been around for hundreds of years and creating models to price that risk appropriately. So that's one piece it's interesting. The second piece that's interesting is the consumer problem, right?

1 (20m 18s):
So when you're selling something, it's easier to do it. If it's a tangible thing, like a pair of shoes, right. Or a really beautiful cashmere sweater or lip gloss that you can see touch, feel, see it on somebody else or something that's fun, right? Like a trip or an experience or travel insurance is none of those things. Right. You can't see it, you can't touch it. You hope to never use it. It's not something that's fun. In fact, it forces you to think about a lot of that. Aren't fun at all, such as a house fire or, or death, or getting hit by a bus. Right. So how do you sell something that does not check any of the boxes for something that people want to buy?

1 (21m 2s):
Right. So it's an interesting behavioral psychology question. It's an interesting marketing question. It's an interesting consumer insights question. How do you get this product that people should have? And people know that they need to have, but absolutely do everything they can to avoid thinking about it, get them to think about it and get them to get it right. And what I tell people is, listen, if you can figure out how to sell insurance to millennial consumers, you could sell anything to anybody full stop. That's an interesting consumer problem, easier than selling like a beautiful pair of Nike's like Nike sell themselves. Everybody wants, you know, the latest shoes or the coolest jeans that make you look skinny.

1 (21m 43s):
Right. Try selling life insurance. Yeah.

0 (21m 47s):
All right. So you are, are working on insurance. What are you? And, and by the way, I think at this time you meet the person who would eventually be your partner and then co-founder Francoise, right?

1 (21m 60s):
Correct. We both met at McKinsey. Got it.

0 (22m 2s):
All right. So now you're at McKinsey and you are kind of really into this industry. And this is what often happens with, we've had stories like this on the show where people go to a bait Bain or McKinsey or consulting firm, and they learn a lot about a sector and they start to say, well, you know, I'm, I'm with spending all this time at these companies. And I actually think they're not doing X rider, Y rider. They're not focused on Z. And, and it sounds like you and Francoise start to kind of talk about things that could be better, or does it kind of just land in your lap? How do you start to think about, wait a minute, there's something going on here.

0 (22m 44s):
Maybe we can do something.

1 (22m 45s):
Yeah. So we had, we started working together on insurance engagements and this was around 2012. That detail is important because the affordable care act had been passed all the implementing guidance and what it was going to look like had not been hammered out yet. So what happened was you had a whole bunch of insurance companies in the life and health space saying, oh, what does this mean? That they're now going to be these like state run and government run marketplaces at the time nobody knew what was going to be on these marketplaces, as it turns out it was a health insurance, but back then, there was an open possibility that it could be health insurance and disability insurance and life insurance.

1 (23m 35s):
Right. All of the benefits that you would typically get through your employer. So McKinsey had quickly spun up a practice as well as a marketplace simulator to these insurance companies around how to now move away from, you know, the brokered model where you're working with brick and mortar brokers who are, you know, putting health insurance and life insurance and disability insurance in the companies or to consumers. And now you're going to be directly consumer facing on these online government run exchanges. Right. And so we were, we were working on this and started talking about, you know, if these government run marketplaces and because they're government run, it's likely going to be super clunky and not great.

1 (24m 25s):
Why isn't there a private version of this, right. Why, why is this such a revolutionary thing that these insurance companies now have to be consumer facing online? That was the initial light bulb that we started talking about, you know, over dinner.

0 (24m 39s):
And it just so happened that the two of you started to date right. While you were there. Correct. And, and so as you do, you would share ideas with, you know, the person that you're closest with and, and he, he started to kind of, was he, did he have a bunch of ideas that just, you know, or did you have a bunch of ideas? H how did you begin to talk about maybe trying something on your own?

1 (25m 4s):
I did not have a bunch of ideas. So I was probably, I enjoyed McKinsey. I was doing well there, and I was probably, I dunno, a year or two away from making partner. I was happy. I was thriving. I, yeah, I was not, I was not dissatisfied to say the least. And I was wired to do well in an environment like that.

0 (25m 28s):
So what did Francoise, what, what, what happened, did he, did he say to you, Hey, Jennifer, we can do something on our own. Like, how did, how did the idea of even, you know, starting something in neuro begin? Yeah.

1 (25m 41s):
It was basically like that. So we were out of town, working at an insurance company. We'd have dinner every night and he'd start talking about, Hey, this could be something we should be thinking about this I've been doing research. I don't think there's a good alternative to these government exchanges seems like there's something we could do in insurance and distribution. And I said, sure, that's great. I don't know what it means to start a company or why I would leave a pretty good gig that I'm happy. And so was slowly, you know, as we started getting into it, talking about it, kicking around the idea more, I also then got promoted McKinsey to associate partner, which is the step before partner.

1 (26m 32s):
And I didn't like that role as much as I did being a manager of the team on the ground and being really in the problem solving piece of it. So that's, I think the thing that got me started with, huh, do I really to be, you know, not necessarily lifer, but a partner at McKinsey and really invest the next several years in that. And we ended up taking a leave of absence from the firm to work on an idea. Correct.

0 (26m 57s):
And is that what you say to them? You say, Hey, I want to get leave of absence where we've kind of thinking about our own thing. Yep.

1 (27m 3s):
That's what we said. And the firm was very supportive and said, okay, we'll, we'll see in six months or, or not. And so we took six months, worked on an idea, put together a very rudimentary prototype. And we're also, you know, testing, working together outside of McKinsey

0 (27m 26s):
Prototype for what, what was the, tell me what the idea was.

1 (27m 30s):
So it was to create an online marketplace that was heavy on advice and education for insurance.

0 (27m 39s):
Right. But not selling insurance while

1 (27m 41s):
Selling it. Yes. So you could actually like buy it through us, but it's also marketplace where you could compare, figure out what you need, get advice on insurance, because most people are not experts in life or auto or home or disability insurance.

0 (27m 56s):
I know this comparison may come up later, but is it fair to say that you were, you were thinking, Hey, this could be like Expedia, but for insurance, like, you know, something where you could just go and, you know, find a bunch of different competing policies, correct. And by the way, in 2013, when you started working on this, there was nothing like that out there.

1 (28m 15s):
Not really, no. You had a couple of lead generation companies that would put up a landing page promise you quotes or insurance, but then, you know, sell your contact information to either insurance companies or to insurance agents. You had e-health insurance that focused on health. And now largely just focuses on senior health and Medicare. Nothing. That was, multi-product nothing that was like full service end to end, right. From figuring out what type of insurance you need to comparing, what are the options that are right for you to actually getting the policy in your hands without getting handed off to an agent or an insurance company?

1 (29m 2s):
There was nothing.

0 (29m 3s):
So what did you guys do during that six month leave of absence?

1 (29m 7s):
Let's see, we read books like the lean startup, or at least I did, because I had no idea what I was getting into spoke to other founders and entrepreneurs to get smart on what we should be thinking about, not from an insurance perspective, but Hey, what does it look like during, during the first year or two of starting a company, and then building out that first prototype, which was basically a landing page, some educational content. We started with disability insurance. Cause we were like, well, let's start with the absolute hardest product, which is disability insurance. And then got appointed to be able to sell it on the backend with a handful of disability insurance company.

1 (29m 52s):
So that first six months to a year was seeing how the thing comes together and getting to a go no-go decision about, do we quit our jobs in McKinsey and commit our shifts to this? You know, what

0 (30m 6s):
Was it that gave you the confidence to, to quit and to start your own business?

1 (30m 12s):
So it was one the market and consumer research that we did, the more we did in terms of understanding of the consumer problem, the market size, the competitive landscape. I think the more comfortable we got that there was a big opportunity there, right. That nobody else was paying attention to. That was one and two, you know, it was, it's all boils down to timing, right? So at the time it was yeah, 35, you know, I didn't have kids, didn't have a mortgage, had some savings from my time at McKinsey and said, you know what? It's now or never, from that perspective, I thought, why not?

1 (30m 53s):
And just, and said, okay, let's do it.

0 (30m 57s):
When we come back in just a moment, had Jennifer and Francoise launched the company with about 20 customers and a name that no one could say, stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Microsoft teams, Microsoft teams is helping priority bicycles, reinvent the way they work. When the pandemic hit, the bike shop had to close their New York city showroom.

0 (31m 39s):
They found a way to reopen by doing virtual visits on teams. Now the team can meet with two or three times the number of customers then they could before. And people from all over the world can visit their showroom. Learn more about their story and others at microsoft.com/teams. This message comes from NPR sponsor, snack magic, a build your own snack box service, making it stress-free and easy for you to treat virtual event attendees clients or your global team to build their own snack box from over 500 snack and beverage options, whether it's one person or a thousand people send all your gifts in one simple email order and your recipients build their boxes online stack magic makes it easy to boost team morale and say, thank you.

0 (32m 28s):
Get 10% off with a code NPR and learn more@snackmagic.com.

2 (32m 40s):
What happens after a police officer shoots someone who's unarmed for decades in California, internal affairs investigations, how the police police themselves or secret until now listen to on our watch a podcast from NPR and K Q E D.

0 (33m 9s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's 2013 and Jennifer Fitzgerald and her partner or friend swab have six months to test out their idea and idea to build a user friendly way to compare insurance rates. And right off the bat, they decide to focus on an area that's kind of overlooked in the industry. Disability, insurance,

1 (33m 33s):
Disability insurance is income protection insurance. So if you were to get sick or suffering injury and couldn't work, it replaces your paycheck for a defined amount of time. Right? Right. So probably the most important type of insurance for, for working individuals to have most people are dramatically under insured here, right?

0 (33m 54s):
When it comes to disability, most people don't have enough yet. Yes. To do a lot of people think it's something you get after you're disabled.

1 (33m 59s):
A lot of people think confuse it with SSD, right? So something that the government gives you after you're disabled. And then I think it's terribly named because when you think of disability, you think of something like truly debilitating, right. And in fact, most disability is like, like a back injury or Crohn's disease is a big one, right. Where you can't work full time, but you're not completely debilitated from the condition. So I think that's a misconception as well.

0 (34m 29s):
And so what were you doing? Were you just finding people like that you knew to, and interviewing them about disability insurance? Like just kind of understand what you could do build?

1 (34m 41s):
Honestly, it was, we had our last engagement at McKinsey was with a big disability insurance company. So I think we suffered from a bit of recency bias and we said, let's try it out on disability insurance. First, we knew we didn't want to do auto insurance. Cause auto is just really competitive to do lots of agents going after that. So we said, let's try disability. We, you know, created a rudimentary website, rudimentary backend experience, and started messing around with online advertising on Google, on social media to see what it would take to get people to, you know, into the top of the funnel and pull them through to the funnel to be disability insurance buyers.

0 (35m 29s):
And did you have a name for the business?

1 (35m 31s):
We did. It was a terrible name. So the first name for the business was no owl.

0 (35m 38s):
No it owl like, no it all, but an owl that would know it all

1 (35m 42s):
Correct. And you're one of the first people to get it right off the bat. Wow. Oh, that's great. I

0 (35m 47s):
W you know what owl and owl your, like your logo.

1 (35m 51s):
Yep. It was, and it was, it did the Al have glasses like a wise owl. Yes. Like a wise old

0 (35m 58s):
Owl who knows at all, who can help you with your insurance needs. You got it. So, so you had a website and you had a, a disability insurance company that you're working with and you were like their agent. Basically,

1 (36m 10s):
We were working with a few disability insurance companies and we were yes. Appointed to be there, to be an independent agent with them.

0 (36m 17s):
And how did you approach him? Did you already have relationships with them because of your work

1 (36m 21s):
With, with a couple of them? Yes. And some we had to approach dependently. Was

0 (36m 28s):
It hard to convince them to, to, to let you work, do this? Or were they like, yeah, that sounds fine. Sure. You can sell our insurance and we don't care. However, however you want to sell it. That's fine.

1 (36m 37s):
They didn't get it. They just looked at us like we were going to be just another, you know, insurance agency, you know, located in New York city, they kind of didn't care how we got our customers. And so when we tried to explain, no, this is the model, this is different. I think for the most part, we were met with blank stares and saying, okay, I don't care how you guys get the business, but to keep these appointments, you have to write business. So they didn't care how we

0 (37m 6s):
Did it. And how did you, I mean, how did you generate any customers or interest for this?

1 (37m 12s):
Very slowly. So before we raised any capital, we were funding this with our own money. And so it was small amounts spent on Google advertising, stupidly spending money on Facebook because neither of us knew how to do any of this. Right. So Francoise had some marketing background, like maybe six months more than I did. So we said, okay, you're going to be in charge of marketing. I'll do whatever else. And so just trying to figure out how to drive online traffic, basically be via Google and Facebook in those very, very early days.

0 (37m 51s):
Right? How many people actually bought insurance through you? And in those first six months,

1 (37m 57s):
God, maybe 2050. Certainly, certainly no more than 20 to 50 people in those first six months. I'd never sold anything before. And we often talk about sales. Sales is the hardest job. And in business school, for example, in France, when I went to business school, they don't teach you sales. So this was a crash course in sales and customer acquisition. And so, you know, those first couple dozen buyers was absolutely thrilling. It was a real dopamine.

0 (38m 36s):
And you were just financing this yourself through your savings from your time at applicancy, right. Okay. Correct. Something that I, I, I read and I can't remember where, but I think it was something like one of the insights that you gained at this time. And I always think of Steve jobs I hear of this insight is that you, you sort of realize that you had to educate customers on something they didn't know that they needed.

1 (39m 0s):
Correct. Which is very hard to do

0 (39m 3s):
You, how did you, how did you kind of come to that insight? Because people would sit with you and be like, I don't, I don't know, disability insurance, or, you know, like how, how, how did you do that?

1 (39m 13s):
It was through a couple areas. One is once we got the first few visitors to our website, right. And we got them far enough down the funnel, but they ultimately didn't buy disability insurance. We reached out to them to say, Hey, could we interview to understand how you found us? First of all, why, why are in the market for disability insurance and why you ultimately didn't buy through us. Right? You read content, you got quotes, but you ultimately didn't buy. And we'd love to understand why.

0 (39m 47s):
So at this point, I assume you're thinking we need to raise money, right. To get this off the ground. And, and did you go out and look for money from VCs? We did.

1 (39m 59s):
Yeah. We knew we needed to build a team to build this platform and to work with us, to build and launch this business. So neither we did not have between the two of us enough liquid cash to pay for head of software engineering, to pay for a head of product design. So we said, great. We've read a dozen tech crunch articles about companies raising big seed and series a rounds. How hard could it be?

0 (40m 27s):
How much did you think you needed to raise million dollars? Million dollars? Okay. So you're in New York, you've got this kind of this cool idea. Let's say the Expedia for insurance. And that was that how you were kind of thinking about pitching it to, to potential investors. Yes. Okay. And, and, and you start to set up meetings with, with New York based VCs. We did how'd they go all

1 (40m 48s):
Night. I think we pitched every early stage venture capital firm in New York and got all nos. I think some of the feedback early on was actually helpful. I think our initial pitch was far too McKinsey in that it was heavy on data, heavy on research. I think our pitch deck might've been the only pitch deck in the history of pitch decks to have footnotes on every page about where the data came from, as well as a 30 page backup appendix, in case you wanted to know more about the data. And so I think one of the early folks that we pitched was like, guys got dropped the McKinsey stuff, and you have to tell a story, right?

1 (41m 37s):
You're not going to have a lot of time to really capture the attention and excitement of a potential early stage investor. So, you know, ditch the footnotes ditch, the 30 page back pocket appendix and, you know, focus on a really compelling story. And that was great feedback. So we went back to the drawing board, redid our whole pitch instilled got nowhere, still got a bunch of nos.

0 (42m 1s):
And w w what was the, like, why? I mean, it sounds like a really great idea of course, from T from 2021 perspective, but even in 2014, like Expedia kayak, people are using that. I mean, I have to imagine there were already marketplaces. There were marketplaces for insurance,

1 (42m 16s):
But nobody, nobody did startups in insurance. When we were pitching, there was Zenefits, which was on the employer benefit side. There was, I believe Oscar was then maybe you're after us focused on healthcare. Right. That was kind of it. And so we were pitching, you know, the associates at venture firms are the ones who take these initial meetings, right? Your average associate or junior partner is like 25 or 26. Right. And we would often get asked, is insurance a big enough market? I don't have life insurance. Why does any buyer, right.

1 (42m 58s):
I can't tell you how many times I heard that from a 25 year old venture associate say, I don't have life insurance. Is this, is this even a market need? Right. Or I don't have homeowners insurance, or, you know, I don't have disability.

0 (43m 12s):
Well, but that's the, actually, you know what, I'm not defending that in any way, because it's sort of shortsighted, but most people get life insurance once they have children. Right. I have to imagine that's the, so, so you, if you're 25, you aren't thinking of, I didn't have life insurance when I was 25. This is not something a 25 year old thinks about. So I understand that question.

1 (43m 35s):
Yeah. But as an investor, you've got to remove yourself from like what you use day to day as a 25 year old in New York city to think about the broader market opportunity. And at one point I got so frustrated with this question from a, you know, probably 26 year old venture associate who said, I don't have a life insurance. Is this a big enough need? And I think I snapped back. Well, you also probably don't use tampons either. And that's a big market

0 (44m 4s):
Phase two, right. Cosmetics see billion dollar market. Yeah. So, and, and was that dispiriting, I mean, you guys had it, you know, you had significant experience. You had a law degree from Columbia, you had worked at McKinsey and Francoise was a business school. Roger and McKinsey. I mean, was it dispiriting to here to basically to get no feces?

1 (44m 23s):
Oh, totally. Yeah. And you know, you're talking to too insecure overachievers and to get door to door shut in your face. It was discouraging, especially when you have been reading, you know, tech crunch. Right. Which is the highlight reels. So you don't see the failure stories, you see the success stories and tech crunch. And so we were looking at each other going, God, what are we doing wrong that everybody else seems to be doing. Right.

0 (44m 49s):
How long did you go through that period of, of trying to get VC money? Six months. Six months. Yeah. Wow. So, I mean, that's like six months of rejects. That's, that's hard for anybody. Did you ever ask yourselves, Hey, is this maybe a sign that we're not on the right track? Did you ever think that? Or did you just think they're all wrong?

1 (45m 12s):
Mostly thought they're all wrong. They don't get it. But you know, in your darker moments, we would think, God, what are we, are we missing something? Is this a sign from the world that this is not the right thing to work on? Cause the other, the other piece of feedback that we got. So again, people didn't understand the market or the opportunity insurance. And two, they looked at two McKinsey people and said, well, what did McKinsey people know how to do? Neither of you is technical. Neither of use a software engineer. You're proposing that. You're going to build a tech company. You've got zero experience doing that. And early stage investors bet on the team. And they really didn't have a lot of confidence in us as the founding team of a tech company.

1 (45m 54s):
Did it anybody asks you

0 (45m 55s):
About your personal relationship or does that not happen?

1 (45m 58s):
People asked for sure. And it was also, I think a reason for some of the early notes too. It seemed to me. Yeah. Cause it's,

0 (46m 6s):
I guess the risk would be from an investors perspective. If you guys split

1 (46m 10s):
Up, right. If we split up the business could split. If one of us is problematic, if we're still together, but the investors want to fire. One of us, that's harder because we're in a personal relationship. So I get it to, it's a very complicated dynamics, especially in the first few years of a company, which are so basically one or zero, right. In terms of, you know, life or death of the business.

0 (46m 33s):
Right. So w when you say that six month period was dispiriting at the same time, you had to still move forward and try to continue to sell disability insurance on the website. And how was that going?

1 (46m 48s):
It was around the clock. So we would man, the website, man, the phones, and then try to pitch in the late afternoons evenings. We had a few people working with us as a independent contractors that we were paying for while we were trying to figure out the funding situation,

0 (47m 8s):
After going to all these VCs and just basically getting turned down, I have to imagine a certain point. You need to raise money. If you're gonna make this work, what did you do? I mean, you, you needed to raise money. Where'd you

1 (47m 21s):
Go? Eventually? We said, you know what? If, if these early stage venture capital firms don't believe in, let's talk to people who do believe in us. And so we ended up raising a purely angel investor round from friends, family, and some McKinsey partners. Wow. How, how many people? Probably 50,

0 (47m 46s):
50, how much did you raise?

1 (47m 48s):
$735,000

0 (47m 50s):
From 50 investors. Now we should put that into context that that's like $10,000 check here. $10,000 check there. I mean, it sounds it's a lot. And for a lot of people, for most people, $10,000 is a, it's an insanely insane amount of money, but it also having 50 small investors is first of all, to just to get 50 small investors, you got to talk to 250 people, and then you've got 50 people want to email you all the time.

1 (48m 19s):
Yeah. Thankfully they were pretty well behaved. We manage expectations about updates, but yeah, we raised, so we fell short of our million dollar target. We raised $735,000. And we said, you know what, that's enough. Let's see how far we can stretch this.

0 (48m 40s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Jennifer and Francoise took that 735,000 launched their website full of helpful tips and articles for their customers and found out nobody was reading it, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

3 (49m 8s):
This message comes from NPR, sponsor Ford, introducing the Mustang, Mach II global brand director of electric vehicles. Jason Castro Yoda says that it was a daring move for Ford to make this new Mustang in all electric SUV.

4 (49m 23s):
The whole team just rallied behind that and really took on the challenge of how do we get people excited about better electric vehicles. And when you think about Mustang, it's, you know, one of the world's most renowned and iconic sports cars. So to bring our greatest hope forward, unintended, you know, we really wanted to be able to come out with a bang and make a splash and show everybody that Ford was very serious about electrifying all of our great products, you know, because this is really about the future of Ford as it is as much a singular product. And we want to continue to deliver that extra horse in the stable that, you know, Steed for every need. We've got a couple of great puns around it, but we're pretty excited about it to

3 (50m 4s):
Learn more about the creation of forwards, all electric Mustang, Mach II, go to ford.com.

0 (50m 22s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Ross. So after her initial six month test run of no it owl Jennifer Fitzgerald and her partner friend swap had a handful of customers and had just raised $735,000. And with that money, they could now officially launch the company while rolling out a whole suite of products.

1 (50m 46s):
So we decided to launch with disability, insurance, life insurance and pet insurance. And at the last minute, we were also able to put a renter's insurance offering on there. So we launched with life, disability, renters, and pet

0 (51m 2s):
And getting the insurers on because these are presumably big insurers. It was it hard or, or again, were they just like fine? You know, we don't care how you sell it as long as you,

1 (51m 12s):
So the life and disability insurers were mostly like fine. You know, I don't, I don't care how you guys get your customers, just get some customers and write some business on the pet insurance side that was more establishing direct partnerships with the pet insurance companies. We then had to get access to their rate filings for their products. And then I think, yeah, Francois in Microsoft Excel and a spreadsheet built the first like comparative rater and pricing engine for pet insurance, working through all the data in the pet file, the rate filing. So we got from the pet insurance company

0 (51m 52s):
And was the, website's still called nodal at that point, at that point,

1 (51m 55s):
No, I believe we had now changed our name to PolicyGenius. How did that happen? But Y after pitching Noel and getting a bunch of quizzical looks, and then people saying, what, what does that mean? How do you spell it? No, at all we realized, oh boy, this is not going to work. And I quickly did some research on how to name your company and what are the tests that you should subject your potential business name to. And there are some pretty straightforward heuristics. Like if you see it, can you say it? If you hear it, can you spell it? Right? Because when you hear it, like on a radio ad or TV, you need to be able to go directly to Google and type it in.

1 (52m 37s):
Right? Yeah. So puns plays on words, completely random made up words are tough. They don't work right. Or very common words like you can't name your company tree. Cause if you Google tree, you know, odds are, you're your little startups not going to come up. So after getting pretty smart about that, we're like, oh, no one Al is absolutely not going to work because nine times out of 10 people, aren't going to get it. They're not going to be able to spell it. So we went back to the drawing board and ultimately landed on policy genius.

0 (53m 8s):
As you guys were starting to pull all the pieces together, how are you getting attention? How are you getting anybody to even be aware of what you were offering?

1 (53m 20s):
A few different ways. So we did not have enough money to do any sort of paid marketing or advertising because you can quickly spend upwards of 730, $5,000 on digital marketing. If you don't know what you're doing, and you're not careful. So what we did in those early days was built relationships with personal finance blockers to try to get them involved, where the product, to get them to write about us on their site and to get them to refer their audience and their readers to us as the recommended place to get insurance.

1 (54m 1s):
There is a, a big conference that happens every year called fin con, where all the personal finance bloggers get together. And so we went to fin con put up a booth, had a few gimmicks. I think it's called fin con fin con. Right? So financial blogging conference, I think is what it stands for. We want it to be clever. And eye-catching so we did a play on Finn and shark fin. So dressed up in shark costumes, we had cupcakes at the booth with like shark fins in them, not psyched. It was kind of dumb, but you know, you need a gimmick to stand out. So we went to fin con and that was, that was a big unlock for us and where we got a lot of our initial blocking relationships and initial, you know, earned traffic and earned media coverage for the company.

0 (54m 55s):
One of the, the things that I think is really interesting about what you do. And I wonder if, if this was part of the plan for that beginning is content, right? Like you could have a, a website that just offers a bunch of different insurance policies. But what if I'm an investor, I would say, well, but 10 companies can replicate that idea. Like what's going to make yours different. Did you have the idea to, to, to create content articles and things like that from the very beginning?

1 (55m 23s):
Yes. And the fifth member of our team was somebody focused exclusively on content. So basically

0 (55m 31s):
Writing articles about, about insurance and how you should think about insurance. Correct. So the idea would be what to get people to come to the site, looking for advice like, well, like if I'm like, I look at like a spot on my arm, on my I'm like, am I dying? And I'd look on the computer and I go to web MD, right? The idea was you would go, you would just, somebody would do a search and then they would land on your site and find out information that's right.

1 (55m 56s):
Because insurance, as you probably know, it's a very considered purchase rate. It's not an impulse buy you. Don't wake up one morning saying great. Today I'm gonna get life insurance. And I know exactly what I want, how much I want and where to go. It's a pretty long decision journey. Lots of research involved because nobody's an expert on insurance, right? Even very financially savvy consumers don't know a lot about insurance. So we knew that a key part of our value proposition and a key part to our success was making sure that we had the right content and the right tools along every step of that journey. Right? So for most consumer purchases, it's not a multi-touch journey, right?

1 (56m 38s):
You want to buy a pair of shoes. Like you go, you go to the place where you buy shoes and you pick a pair that you like, if you want to buy flights, you know how to do that because you do it all the time, right? You go to Expedia, you go to one of the flight aggregators, you look at prices to go from a to B and you pick the cheapest one, right? People don't know how to buy insurance. People don't know how to shop for insurance. People have no idea what are the different types of life insurance, for example, and what's right for them. So we knew that great content and content that doesn't read, like it's written by underwriters was going to be a big part of our

0 (57m 15s):
Story. But that takes time, right. Because if it does, if you write content, you're not going to hit the top of the search right away. You're not going to dominate. Right. It's going to take time for that to kind of bubble up can take six months or longer.

1 (57m 27s):
Oh, it took years. Yeah. And insurance on Google is a very, very competitive space. Right. So it was, it took us and things like that. Yeah. It's one of the most expensive ad words that you can purchase on Google. The word insurance and insurance related terms can go upwards of 40, 50, $60 a click, click, click click, right. And on the organic side, right. You've got all the big insurance companies and we all know them because they spend billions of dollars on advertising a year. And you have a lot of other sites that are vying for organic real estate. So it took us, our content SEO strategy probably took a good two to three years to really start to see results in terms of our traffic and in terms of business results.

0 (58m 19s):
All right. So you have the, you basically have a in-house blogger writing content, but initially no, one's reading that content, right?

1 (58m 28s):
Oh yeah. Nobody nobody's reading the content. I think it was just also new for all of us. And we were just operating in this fog of war and under a belief that at some point people would be visiting the site and would be reading it. So, yeah, I'm trying to understand

0 (58m 45s):
How you measured, whether that was working or not, because you had such a small amount of money to work with and you're deployed like some of that money you're deploying for content, but how, how are you able to measure whether that was actually a good idea or that that was a good return on your investment at that, at that point,

1 (59m 2s):
We didn't, we operated on the first principles and the belief that this was long-term going to pay off, but that short-term, there was no valid way to measure it, that this was, this was a long-term bet, I guess,

0 (59m 17s):
Pretty early on in that first year, you, you, you got kind of a lucky break with some earned. You got to pick up an article the New York times about how you were featured in an article in New York times about disability insurance. How did that happen? Did you, did you guys contact the reporter? Did, how did, how did you even get in there?

1 (59m 35s):
A Francoise, I think tweeted at the reporter who was writing a column. I think he was talking on Twitter about writing column about disability insurance. And I think, I think the story is Francoise tweeted at him. He replied was interested to learn more because who'd ever heard of a tech company focused on disability insurance for consumers. And it all snowballed from there, he tested the product out, God quotes, and we got featured. And that was, that was our big break. The article went live and we had at the time a tracker that showed how many visits were on the website.

1 (1h 0m 15s):
So I think we literally went from, from zero to thousands within an hour of the article hitting the New York times website. And normally that looked like 10 people

0 (1h 0m 28s):
And, and people started to sign up just to buy insurance.

1 (1h 0m 32s):
I did to get disability insurance quotes guests. We had a rudimentary CRM and we saw the requests like, just start to fill up.

0 (1h 0m 40s):
So it was not done. It wasn't the CRM wasn't inputting that stuff automatically for you.

1 (1h 0m 44s):
Oh no. It was manual on the backend

0 (1h 0m 47s):
Just to translate you and the other people in the office, the three or four people were typing, like user data into the system,

1 (1h 0m 57s):
Into the system to get to generate quotes. Then we put those quotes into a custom PowerPoint presentation for

0 (1h 1m 5s):
The quiz, the requester. How long, how long did it take you to do that? It

1 (1h 1m 8s):
Took us three weeks to dig out from under the backlog that, that New York times

0 (1h 1m 14s):
Article. Wow. But didn't generate significant revenue or not really, not quite, we

1 (1h 1m 21s):
Generated a decent amount of revenue. Honestly. I think it was a lot of people who were just, you know, in browsing mode. So we also weren't necessarily focused on converting those shoppers. We were just so overwhelmed by the deluge of shoppers and we just wanted to get quotes out. So we didn't. So we didn't disappoint the readers who found us in the New York times. So we just were, you know, emailing out these PowerPoint, quote presentations, as fast as we could to get them out for. It was basically an assembly line for three straight weeks to get to everybody who requested quotes from us. How

0 (1h 2m 1s):
Long in, in that first year, before you, the money started to run out or you realized we got to actually try this again. We got to see if we can raise money.

1 (1h 2m 10s):
So we closed that $735,000 round in November of 2013. And we raising a series a round of capital in January, 2015. So we were able to stretch it almost. Yeah, a little over a year. I remember going into this next round of fundraising right. Far more confident than our initial seed round when we just had a very bare bones prototype and an idea and a pitch deck, because we now had had a team. We now have a functioning online website.

1 (1h 2m 54s):
We had New York times coverage. We have revenues. I can point to customers. We didn't have a lot of revenues. We didn't have a lot of customers, but we had some right. And I went into it thinking, great. We have proven everything that people questioned about us, you know, over a year ago. Right? And so there should be a more straight forward exercise. That was my mindset going into it. It was not enough for most investors. I think they still said, I don't understand the market. I don't know if this insurance is a big enough opportunity. This is great. Still not enough traction that we'd

0 (1h 3m 34s):
Like to see, by the way, how much money were you looking to raise? We wanted to raise $5 million. So what, what was the breakthrough? How did you finally convince somebody to, to read it? We found

1 (1h 3m 47s):
An investor. He operated a small, early stage fund out of LA and he got the thesis. He understood the space. He saw the opportunity. He's an investor who really likes big messy old-fashioned industries and insurance checks all those boxes. So he got the vision, he got us and, and we got lucky. That was the only term sheet that we got. The only yes that we got from the VCs that we pitched that round. And he's still on our board to this day.

0 (1h 4m 20s):
Hmm. Wow. All right. So you re ended up raising, I think about a little over $5 million for that series eight. And now you've got some real money, a lot to work with. I imagine you start to see more and more competitors in the space, right? I mean that you start to see other people getting into this space. And how do you, I mean, how, how, how did you start to think about differentiating yourself from, from competitors?

1 (1h 4m 52s):
We, we were still so small that, and it's such a big market that we weren't overly focused on that on the competitive side. I think I heard from another founder, or maybe some tech crunch article that most startups don't die by homicide. They die from natural causes. So we were focused on making sure that we were against our own vision, our own strategy, and building the proof points to eventually raise even more capital, right? Because this is an industry where a trillion dollars is spent every year. So we knew that $5 million wasn't going to get us to where we want it to go to in terms of the vision.

0 (1h 5m 37s):
And where are you, I mean, were you basically kind of looking to, to be that sort of insurance agent, that trusted insurance, because you know, people who have a relationship with an insurance agent usually trust that agent right. To, to, to, to work in their best interest. Is that what you were basically trying to be, but in a digital format,

1 (1h 5m 58s):
We want it to be the go-to marketplace and advisor on a digital basis for all financial protection. So it was building trust. It was building the marketplace experience. It was building the brand awareness out there to, to get consumers, to come to us, instead of trying to find a brick and mortar agent.

0 (1h 6m 18s):
And how did you start to roll out other products and offerings? Like how did you begin to think about that? At that point,

1 (1h 6m 28s):
It took several years before we decided to expand into new product. So when we launched, we had disability insurance, we had life insurance, we had pet insurance and we had one kind of offering for renter's insurance, right? When we launched life insurance is where we started to see signals of product market fit. We started to see more consumer traffic to life insurance. We started to see more revenues generated through the product experience for life insurance. So we said, you know what? This is where we're seeing product market fit. Let's focus, basically everything we've got on life insurance.

0 (1h 7m 10s):
Can you explain how big is the life insurance market in

1 (1h 7m 12s):
The U S life insurance? So if you, the insurance industry is split between property and casualty, right? So think home auto commercial, and then life accident health about $1.2 trillion of premium is written every year in the U S on insurance. And it's roughly 50, 50. So half is on life accident and health. So call it 605 to 600 billion on life accident and health.

0 (1h 7m 39s):
So sick five to $600 billion of insurance has taken out a year. People pay that in premiums a year, right?

1 (1h 7m 46s):
For life accident and health insurance. And how much of that is paid out a year on the life insurance side? Not too, too much, because most, most people don't actually claim on their life insurance policy. Oh. Because they, because they, they, they live, they live, they don't die.

0 (1h 8m 3s):
Yeah. So it's like, I mean, it's a huge, basically insurance companies make a huge amounts of money off life

1 (1h 8m 10s):
Insurance. We have much healthier profit margins on life insurance than they do property casualty insurance, where the claims are far more frequent. Right. Cause there's a fire or get a car accident and your car gets stolen. Correct. Wow.

0 (1h 8m 25s):
So, I mean, here's the other thing about life insurance, right. That's tricky is that, and I think it's why people tend to go with like big insurers. And even then, you never know, because if you're putting out, if you're, if you're spending, I don't know, several thousand dollars or more a year on life insurance, you have to trust that that life insurance company is going to be around

1 (1h 8m 47s):
If you die. Right. And what I would say is that there's not been any material bankruptcy of any top rated life insurance company. And I don't know a generation and there are state there state guarantee firms that even if a life insurance company were to go out of business, they are required to pay into the state guarantee funds to make sure that any claims would be covered. Got it. So in terms of where to put your money, life insurance is a pretty safe bet.

0 (1h 9m 17s):
Yeah. I'm wondering about insurance, right? It is a fundamentally unsexy area. It's like financial services is too, but how do you sell something? How did you, you know, how do you sell something that is so that's not, you know, a pair of Nike sneakers. So I mean, how much of, what you have, have had to do is to educate the consumer, spend lots of time, just educating consumers about, about this.

1 (1h 9m 48s):
Well, a big part of what we do is educate and link the insurance decision to life events, which is really what it's about, right? So again, life insurance or disability insurance, or homeowners insurance, isn't an impulse purchase. It's usually triggered by something happening in your life. Right? The biggest trigger for life insurance is having a child, specifically what we have found in our consumer research. It's having child number two because when people have their first child, they're so overwhelmed with now they're a parent, right? And getting through that initial period with child, number one, they actually don't get around the life insurance it's if, if, and when they have child number two, or if, and when child number one is old enough that they start to think about life insurance for homeowners insurance.

1 (1h 10m 35s):
It's typically the act of buying a new home and for disability insurance, it's typically switching jobs. And now you're looking at your benefits of your new job offer compared to your job that you're leaving. So what we have done is figured out what those life events and those triggers are, right. And build kind of an ecosystem of content and advice around that to link that life event with the insurance purchase and get them comfortable with what insurance they need, how much they need, and then to work with us to, to get it. I

0 (1h 11m 9s):
Think since you've, I mean, I think your latest funding round that was in January of 2020 raised a hundred million dollars.

1 (1h 11m 19s):
And now you are a

0 (1h 11m 20s):
Big player in insurance and selling insurance. Where are you seeing the most growth in from the consumer standpoint, who are the consumers as, is it mostly millennials who are now having kids and, you know, and, and are getting older, like where are you seeing the biggest growth?

1 (1h 11m 38s):
It is absolutely that segment. It is older millennials. So our average customer is 36 years old. And in that home, buying, having children married for a few years stage of their life. I think if you look at all the demographic trends in the U S markets, millennials will be 75% of the workforce, I think by 2030. So that's where most of the growth in terms of consumer purchasing power and just overall households are going to be millennial. And we say, millennial, you know, the oldest millennials are now basically turning 40. So that's that, that's who our customer is.

0 (1h 12m 20s):
I mean, when it comes to, you know, from your perspective and you guys get, you basically get a, a cut, right? I mean, you're an agent. So you get a commission when you sell insurance, like, like Expedia gets a commission when they sell an airline ticket. But from what I understand, you don't like that analogy anymore, right? You don't like the comparison with kayak or Expedia.

1 (1h 12m 38s):
No, not really. Because we believe that it oversimplifies what it is that we actually do. And buying a flight is really apples and oranges with buying insurance in that buying a flight is a high-frequency purchase. Meaning that you'll do it, probably at least in normal times, not pandemic times, several times a year. It's a low stakes in terms of, if you get it wrong, no big deal. Right? If you end up paying a little bit more than you should have no big deal, right. And it's something that you know how to do because you do, you do it so often buying insurance, it's the exact opposite on every dimension. You don't do it that often life insurance, you may be by at most two to three times over your life.

1 (1h 13m 23s):
It's not straightforward on how to buy and make that purchasing decision. Are you optimizing for price? How does price work? How does price work across the different flavors of life insurance, right? How do you choose between Prudential and Lincoln, financial and MetLife, right? Are there differences among those you versus Delta United American, like airlines, you, you know, that they're basically offering the same product, right? So in every single dimension you can think of insurance is different than buying a flight. And it's also high stakes, right? If you get life insurance wrong, that's a pretty high stakes decision, right?

1 (1h 14m 2s):
Your family's now faced with the worst case scenario of you, the breadwinner in your household dies prematurely and turns out you didn't buy the right life insurance, or you didn't buy enough life insurance and you got it wrong. And boy, did you get the worst possible decision wrong, right. Same thing, homeowners insurance, right? House floods. Whoops. You didn't know that home insurance didn't cover floods. Right? So that's why, you know, we've moved away from the analogy to kayak or Expedia because this is such a high consideration, high stakes decision that is not like buying flights.

0 (1h 14m 40s):
Jennifer, when you, when you think about where you're headed, I mean, you are offering you're you're, you're still, you're a vendor, right? I mean, you're selling for your third party seller. CA can you become an insurance company? Can you can policy genius eventually? Is that the idea that eventually you will issue insurance policies

1 (1h 15m 4s):
Eventually? Yep. We look at our journey similar to Amazon or Netflix, which started in the third-party world, consumer goods in the case of Amazon content, in the case of Netflix. And they eventually moved from third party to first party where they were actually manufacturing the thing that they were providing alongside the third-party products that they were offering. That is very much a road that we think about for our, the future for

0 (1h 15m 33s):
Us. How complicated is that?

1 (1h 15m 36s):
It's actually not that complicated compared to what we've already built. We basically have built everything that we would need, but for the balance sheet to actually take on the risk and reserve cash for claims.

0 (1h 15m 48s):
And I mean, presumably this is a highly regulated environment or aren't there like huge regulatory hurdles because you're not an insurance company. Now you're an insurance agent, presumably that's how you're classified. Right. But, but becoming an insurance company is a different, it's a whole different ball game,

1 (1h 16m 4s):
A whole different ball game. We're also subject to 50 state regulations on the distribution and agency side. But everything that we've built, if you think about the capabilities, right. How to acquire customers, how to underwrite customers, how to think about the risk of the customers across the suppliers, on our marketplace, how to manage those customers over their lifetime, because those customers are our customers, right? The end policy right now might be with progressive or MetLife or Prudential, but that customer is with us and is our customer. So we've built the technology to track them, manage their policies over their lifetime. So we've actually built out every single layer that we would need to also be an insurance company, except for, you know, the balance sheet to, to take on the risk.

1 (1h 16m 53s):
When

0 (1h 16m 53s):
You think about the, you know, just the, the, the journey you've taken and, and, you know, the decision to kind of leave the foreign service to that foreign service track and, and then go into consulting and then leave that and start this and the risks that entailed and what happened now and where you are. I mean, you're, you, you guys are growing really fast and I'm presumably you're heading towards profitability.

1 (1h 17m 18s):
We are heading towards profitability. And we are thinking about what's next for us on the capital markets horizon, and maybe going public sooner rather than later. Wow. Yeah. So,

0 (1h 17m 29s):
I mean, you could have a huge, I mean, I know, you know, not, everyone's comfortable talking about this, but you could have a huge liquidity event. I mean, you could, you could really, I mean, this could be huge. I mean, if it's a publicly traded company who knows, if you were to sort of look forward to where you were, you know, 20 years ago, or even 15 years ago and see yourself here now, do you think you would be surprised or do you think that you would think, yeah, that makes sense. I'm doing something like that. That's that's yep.

1 (1h 18m 1s):
I would be surprised that I would, would see myself where I am right now, which is an entrepreneur, a founder and CEO of a company that I built from scratch with my co-founder and early employees. That's now almost 600 employees is a leader in a massive industry and is thinking about going public. I, I would be very surprised even as, as ambitious and hardworking as I was in my late twenties, this, this, the outcome of this journey so far would have been a total surprise to me.

0 (1h 18m 39s):
How much of your success do you attribute to how hard you worked and how much do you think has to do with luck?

1 (1h 18m 47s):
That is always the tough question. I think the balance is always more toward luck, to be honest with you, because I've seen a lot of people who just work. So, so, so hard and you know, it's wrong idea or right idea, wrong time, or you make a couple bad decisions early on a few things. Don't break your way. So I, for me, it's all around luck and timing. Hard work is hard. Work is table stakes, right? And often, like if you get really, really lucky, you probably don't need to be as diligent and hardworking, but it's, it's, it's catching breaks and being in the right place, right time. Right? Idea,

0 (1h 19m 29s):
Jennifer Fitzgerald co-founder of policy genius. By the way, one thing we didn't mention is that before a policy genius, Jennifer actually tried her hand at stand up comedy.

1 (1h 19m 42s):
When I was a senior in high school, my parents offered me $300. And the terms of that deal were for me to do something nice for myself instead of going to my senior prom, because they just assumed I wasn't going to go there. Reasoning being well, honey, we just thought you wouldn't be able to get a date, mom and dad, if you ever ended up listening to this, I love you. But what the

0 (1h 20m 9s):
In fact, Jennifer says stand up, actually helped her in the early days of pitching to investors. Because the way you tell a story on stage, isn't all that different from how you tell it in a boardroom. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you're not yet a subscriber, please do subscribe to our podcast. If you want to write to us, our email address is H ibt@npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter at how I built this, or at guy Roz and on Instagram or at how I built this NPR or at guide dot Roz, this episode was produced by Rachel Faulkner with music composed by team Arab, Louie.

0 (1h 20m 53s):
It was edited by Jeff Rogers with research help from Derek gales. Our audio engineer was Gilli moon. Our production staff also includes Casey Herman, Liz Metzker, Farah safari, JC Howard, James DeLuise, Janet oo, John Lee, Julia Carney, Neeva grant and Annelise Ober, and guy Roz. And even listening to how I built this. This is NPR.

3 (1h 21m 21s):
This message comes from NPR, sponsor Ford, the all electric Mustang, Mach II, and a stock car race around a track. The stock car veers off toward a mobile pit crew harnessed to a moving flatbed truck. Visit ford.com to see a heart racing Mustang, Mach II receive an over the air update.