0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

White Lies (9s):
This is Chip Brantley, co-host of the NPR podcast, white Lives. Before we found the man in Vancouver, before we sued the State Department, before we snuck into the graveyard of a federal penitentiary, all we had were the photographs. Photographs of a group of Cuban men standing on the roof of a prison in rural Alabama. That's the season on the NPR podcast. White Lies

Enbridge Inc. (31s):
We Can't See Tomorrow, but we can hear it. And it sounds like a renewable natural gas bus replacing conventional fleets. We are bridging to a sustainable energy future. Working today to ensure tomorrow is on Enbridge life takes energy.

4 (47s):
We started to go through the stories one by one, and they were awful. And we were literally sick to our stomach. We're like, how in the hell are we gonna put out a publication tomorrow? Much less? How are we gonna do this on a regular basis?

0 (1m 1s):
A and by the way, a lot of people wanted you

4 (1m 4s):
To fail. It was a big deal. I was pretty cocky in public about what we were gonna deliver, but it was that bad. It was a dark, dark moment.

0 (1m 20s):
Welcome to How I Built this, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz, and on the show today how Jim Vanai walked away from a dream job to help reimagine journalism with Politico, and then 10 years later did it again with Axios. The business of news is, well, how do I say it? Clearly? It's a bad business. It's one of the hardest businesses to make sustainable or even profitable. Do you remember inside.com?

0 (2m 2s):
Back in 19 99, 3 big time journalists managed to raise 35 million for a site that went bust by 2001. Or how about Talk magazine? Tina Brown hosted a launch party on Liberty Island with some of the most famous people in America. And within two years, tak Magazine was no more. Even media brands we've had on this show in the past, like Buzzfeed and Vice Media aren't looking too healthy these days. Now I'm not pointing out these failures to pile on all the people who worked on these things were smart and talented and committed. The problem with most new startups is that not enough people are willing to pay for the news.

0 (2m 45s):
Which brings us to today's story because it happens to be a story of a successful news startup. Axios and Axios didn't reinvent news or somehow get millions of people to pay to read it. What founder Jim Van Dehi and his partners did was figure out how to target small but powerful communities of readers who also had money to spend. Lawyers, lobbyists, tech executives, Hollywood insiders. You get those people to pay a high subscription price for premium insider reporting, and you use the money to finance a bigger operation that covers a bunch of other stuff for the general public. That's the model Jim learned as a young reporter in Washington DC in the early 1990s.

0 (3m 30s):
Back then, he was working for a trade publication that only covered alternative fuels, but it was those small niche publications that seem to thrive. And by the way, still do. They only had to convince a small number of subscribers that they were indispensable and they could charge thousands of dollars a year. At the time. Jim Van Dehi wasn't looking to become an entrepreneur or a media mogul. He simply wanted to reach the top of the greasy poll as a political reporter. And in fact, he did. He became a star political reporter for the Washington Post. But by 2006, Jim saw that the future of political reporting and breaking news in general was moving online.

0 (4m 15s):
Why Reid? Yesterday's news in tomorrow's print newspaper. So a year later in 2007, Jim and another Washington Post journalist John Harris and a wealthy media mogul, Robert Alberton launched Politico. And Politico became a must read publication for the Movers and Shakers in Washington. But the problem was that despite having the idea and launching it, Jim Vanderheit did not own Politico. He was financed by Robert Albritton. And over time, tension between Jim and his benefactor grew. So in 2016, Jim left Politico to start Axios. And if Politico was mainly about politics, Axios was meant to focus mainly on media, tech and business, except the articles were written to be read and digested very quickly a concept.

0 (5m 7s):
Jim calls smart brevity through a combination of premium products for big spenders, brand partnerships, events, and advertising. Axios managed to figure out how to become a profitable news business. In just five years after it was launched, Axios was acquired by the media conglomerate Cox for over 500 million. Jim Vanai grew up in Oshkosh, Wisconsin, where his mom looked after the family and his dad was an accountant. He wasn't really into politics until he got to college. And when it came to schoolwork, Jim really wasn't into that either.

4 (5m 46s):
No, I was a terrible student. Graduated in the bottom third of my class was, you know, teachers would probably describe me as a troublemaker.

0 (5m 56s):
Troublemaker. A

4 (5m 58s):
Troublemaker for sure. Not well behaved. I just didn't, I didn't, that's funny. I didn't, until college. I just, I put so little thought into school or even like what I was gonna do with my life. Like I was a fun-loving guy. I think I got along with people, you know, cause I was interested, like myself. By the time high school I was interested in events and news, but I, I didn't like do homework or stuff, things like that, that normal kids did. Yeah. You know, even the first couple of years, like I was my, I got good enough grades to get into the University of Wisconsin Ash. Gosh. And then I, I turned in my 1.49, one grade point average and had myself on the verge of not being in college much longer.

0 (6m 39s):
Wow. What were you doing?

4 (6m 42s):
Two things, three things. Partying, drinking, and I worked a lot. I always had really good work ethic. I was, I probably even in high school, I worked 40 hours a week at a delivering

0 (6m 52s):
Where'd

4 (6m 52s):
You do? I delivered pizzas for the most play most part in high school. I did it at Little Caesar's and then there was a, a local restaurant called Red's Pizza. And so I'd work, you know, 40, 50 hours a week occasionally, you know, going to class and getting lousy grades.

0 (7m 7s):
So, so clearly you had a work ethic, but it was focused on things that, that you were interested in, like delivering pizza, making money, but not a work ethic on like your schoolwork, your studies.

4 (7m 17s):
Nothing, not until I found journalism.

0 (7m 21s):
How did, how, how, how did that happen? How did you get even like interested in journalism?

4 (7m 27s):
Well, it's funny cuz even when I wasn't interested in school, I did start to really get interested in politics and I really became almost addicted to cspan. So like at night I would come home, smashed from a party, and I would sit and watch agriculture committee hearings, which seems pretty loser, right? But I was just interested in the process and it was all new to me. And I, and I, something about it, like I intuitively got, and I was also trying to figure out, okay, what am I gonna do with my life? I'm a good writer. And at that time I also like sports a lot. And so I went to the, we had a daily newspaper. I was either cocky enough or dumb enough, or lucky enough that I, you know, was starting to think about journalism classes.

4 (8m 10s):
And, and the guy that ran the department said, I should go talk to the Oshkosh Northwestern to see if they have any jobs. I went in, talked to this editor, Joe Dill. I said, listen, I, I I know a lot about sports. I think I'm a good writer. I don't know how this works, but can you gimme some kind of test? And maybe if I pass it, can I have a job? And

0 (8m 27s):
This is the, but this is the university. This is a student newspaper at the university?

4 (8m 31s):
No, no, this was, this was the local newspaper. This a daily

0 (8m 33s):
Oh, oh, in Northwestern.

4 (8m 35s):
Yeah. And so he gave me a writing test in a, I did well enough that he hired me to basically work full-time as a, mostly covering high school sports, but a little bit of college sports. And then I was hooked. I was like, this, I'm gonna do this.

0 (8m 54s):
And, and how did you, you, you know, I mean, how did you know how to write?

4 (9m 1s):
I don't know. I mean, I read, read newspapers and I was really lucky because the gene hints who, who passed away several years ago was the, the professor of the journalism department. He took a real shine to me and was like, listen, just keep working. Like, if you can work 50, 60 hours a week, they, I can't teach you that. Like learn to work sources, learn to write a story, learn to be creative. And, and yeah. So I really took his advice.

0 (9m 29s):
I guess while you were in college, there was a, another small town paper, maybe nearby in, in a place called Brilliant in Wisconsin. They had a daily paper and you, you somehow got a job like kind of running this paper, which I think meant literally you were the only employee. You were the editor and the reporter and the photographer, and is that right?

4 (9m 47s):
Yeah, it's like, I mean, I, I I had decided, okay, I really like journalism, but I had this kind of suspicion that I'm gonna, sports is gonna get old. And so I called around to every newspaper and Brilliant news is one of the top of the list. Cause you know, obviously starting with a B and Zane Zander answers the phone and I explained, Hey, I want to come. I'm looking to do anything. I'll do it for free. Do you have any jobs this summer? And it was one of those moments of serendipity. I said, you know, I don't have a ton of academic experience in this and I've, I've done this one sports gig. And he's like, yeah, yeah, yeah. Can you run my paper? And I'm like, well, again, like I, I don't really, I've done, I've done one job at covering high school sports, I don't know that that qualifies me to run a newspaper.

4 (10m 34s):
He's like, yeah, whatever. He goes, my editor just just informed me that if he can't go to Finland for the next three months, he had some opportunity there that he was gonna leave forever. And I need someone to run my paper for, for three months. And if you will do it, I'm gonna teach you in the next week how to run a newspaper. Wow. I'm gonna teach you how to lay it out. I'm gonna teach you how to edit it, how to do photography, how to think about agriculture and the farm country that you're sitting in, and I'm gonna set you loose. And he did that.

0 (11m 7s):
What were you covering? How did you generate stories? Would you go to, like, was it like a town hall that you would go to? What do you remember?

4 (11m 13s):
I'd do everything from, you know, I, it's a small town, so I got to know the people in politics there. And it wasn't, again, it was, yeah. I don't know if it was cocky, naive, lucky. I just never, I was never insecure about it. Even though my first, I'll never forget my first, it is probably the only time I've ever cried at work. I, my very first edition, this is back when you would lay out a newspaper, you would do it on cardboard, right? And you would

0 (11m 39s):
Use, you cut 'em out. Cut

4 (11m 40s):
Out column. Yeah. You cut out the columns using a razor blade. And I, this, my first issue, I'm working 8,000 hours, I mean, whatever it was, was an Elon Musk Gowers to get this paper out. And I had had accidentally put column three in four, in four in three. So the only way you could read it, and it would make sense is if you went column 1, 2, 4, 3. And I remember sitting in my car and exhausted and reading this and realizing that I had screwed it up. And I, because

0 (12m 10s):
They, they already printed the paper when you gave them the, the, the,

4 (12m 13s):
It was done, it was printed. I, this is the printed version. And so that was humiliating, humbling. But even that, you bounce back and I just, you know, Zane was gracious and the people around him were, were generous in teaching me and, and having patience. And I, I loved it because it's one of the cool things about journalism. Like everybody has an interesting story. I don't care what it is. And, you know, you become a rockstar. Like you're the, you are the paper and yeah, it was just a, an an amazing master's class in, in running something.

0 (12m 47s):
Was that, was that experience, like when you finished that experience, right? Because I know you graduated from, from college in 94 and, and when, but when you finished that job, did, did you, was it clear to you that you were gonna become a reporter profe that's who you

4 (13m 2s):
Pursue? I was gonna be a, after that I was gonna be a political reporter in Washington.

0 (13m 7s):
Hmm. In Washington DC Yeah. Yeah. And, and you and you'd been there before on a school trip or never, never been there

4 (13m 14s):
Again. Again, it cockiness or being naive, probably more of the naive.

0 (13m 19s):
Hmm. I, I think during your senior year you applied to do an internship in Washington, DC with, with Herb Cole, who was a senator at the time. Senator from Wisconsin, of course. And I think, I think this may have been your first time in Washington, right? And in your first introduction to national politics.

4 (13m 36s):
Yep. It was awesome. I learned everything you could about, you know, how to deal with the press, but I also did all the grunt errands, so I learned all the tunnels and ways to get around Capitol Hill and where the offices and where the Hideaways and I just, I loved Washington, like, just loved it.

0 (13m 57s):
All right. So you, you get to DC I think in 1994, is that right?

4 (14m 0s):
Yeah, the, the internship was in the, the spring and then I went to Martha's Vineyard in mowed lawns and did landscaping with friends that I met Yeah. Through there. And then I moved out in, it would've been February of 95 is when I moved out for good to DC and I didn't have a job and I sent out hundred and some resumes and crickets for the most part, I wasn't, it was months. And so I ended up being working for a brick layer and I, you know, begged everybody from CSPAN to you name it for a job and just nothing,

0 (14m 34s):
Just mailing your app mail, mailing your resume in a manila envelope and waiting to hear back. And

4 (14m 39s):
Yeah, it's funny, I, thinking back about that, I, I'd sent the, the one interview I got was with cspan and I was really into cspan, like I said earlier in my cover letter had explained to them like changes I would make to cspan. And like, I've never thought, even, even when I became an entrepreneur, I never thought of myself as an entrepreneur. But I look back and I'm like, well, here I am, this young dumb kid trying to get a job as a bricklayer and I'm giving cspan ideas on how they might prepare their viewers by creating content in advance so they're ready for the debates that they're about to watch that unfold in, in these congressional hearings and such. And so when I finally interviewed with whoever I interviewed at cspan, they're like, yeah, I think you're a little too ambitious for us.

4 (15m 23s):
Hmm. And I'm like ambitious, like I'm carrying bricks, I have no job. Like I'll take anything. But anyways, they didn't hire me. But a, a company called Inside Washington Publishers did, and inside Washington Publishers is a collection of kind of hyper niche publications,

0 (15m 40s):
Newsletters,

4 (15m 40s):
Newsletter. Yeah, like pamphlets. Yeah. Like the pre newsletters, like paper newsletters, right? Yeah. And it, and New Fuels Report was the one that hired me and it was covering the alternative fuels industry. And that was an awesome job.

0 (15m 55s):
This is an interesting niche that some people may not know about, which is that in Washington DC certainly at the time, even now, there are these publications and later on you would kind of replicate this model with Political Pro. But the publications that were designed for very specific audiences like lobbyists interested in oil or lobbyists interested in the transportation industry or lawyers or people who, who were interested in a particular area. And they could, and, and they're, they were expensive, but a lot of like inexperienced reporters were brought into these places and they, they were basically churning out the content for them. And you were one of

4 (16m 33s):
'em. I was one of them. I mean, it's one of the little, it's one of, like you said, it's one of the little known training grounds for many of the reporters that you see around town today. And you learn because you have to learn how to do a beat. You have to learn, you're, you are covering a sophisticated topic for a sophisticated audience. So you can't just be you, you, you just can't be young and dumb. Like you have to pretty quickly become a decent reporter. And every industry, every city, every person has a story and has, there's drama, there's power, there's people, there's politics. And if you dig into it, the people that are living it, breathing it, doing it for a living, they have real passion around it.

0 (17m 14s):
And by the way, this, I mean this was all happening around 1995, which, which was a historic time in Washington because both houses of Congress had just shifted to Republican control, which was a huge story. It was like after 40 years or something. And so I guess that same publisher that that was doing, the Alternative Fuels Journal, launched a new one to cover Congress. And you like you started working on that, is that right?

4 (17m 42s):
Yeah. They started a publication called Inside the New Congress, which was created to cover the Republican Congress. And it was me, Charlie Mitchell, and then John Bresnahan, who just, who I worked with later at Roll Call later at Politico and now is one of the co-founders of Punchbowl. We were covering Congress, there was the three of us were often running, covering this new congress run by Republicans at a time where most reporters only had democratic sources. So while we were tiny and unknown and new, we were on equal footing with everyone else because they didn't know anybody in the Republican party.

4 (18m 22s):
And we got sourced up pretty quickly and we did some good stories. How'd

0 (18m 26s):
You get sourced up?

4 (18m 28s):
You know, you start calling people, you start figuring out like who has power? And you know, at the time I'm in my, you know, young twenties and I'm single and guess what most staffers are in their young twenties. And guess what they do at night? They go out, they play cards, they drink and you get to go out. And I just met everyone I could and tried to create relationships and try to understand power dynamics, try to get to know the members, read a lot, understand the issues. And I've always had a natural, once I got into journalism, a fascination with just like how people get use and abuse power.

4 (19m 9s):
Very interested in power. Like I just, yeah, I understood politics.

0 (19m 15s):
So, alright, so you're working for this publication and, and, and pretty, I think not too long, maybe within a year, I think you're hired by roll call, which is, which for people who don't know, that's the, that was at the time like the gold standard in, in Washington DC for covering Congress. That was like, came I think Monday and Thursday, I don't know, Tuesday and Wednesday. And it was, every congressperson gets it, every lobbyist lawyer, like they all read it religiously. They still might, I don't know. But that right, you were there with I think within a year of, of, of moving to DC

4 (19m 48s):
Yeah, I get there. I cover Republican leadership. It just happens to be one of the few moments in history that republican congressional leaders are the national story. I happen to be extremely well sourced in that space and I start breaking a lot of stories and stories that really echoed nationally and you know, especially around, like, I was the first person back then to report that Republicans were meeting secretly in the basement and trying of the capitol and trying to move money from a slush fund to, to lay the groundwork to Impeach Clinton. And it was a, I mean it was a monster, monster story back then.

4 (20m 29s):
And I'll never forget, someday I'll, I'll find the tape. It was big enough that I, they got called to be on the Today Show and here I am, I don't own like dress clothes. I had like this supper club sports coat, that plaid thing that was my dad's that didn't fit. And I looked at the time I was young, but I probably looked like I was 17. And I'm sitting here talking to Katie Couric and Matt Lauer and I couldn't be more scared and in over my head, but it was, it, it just captured the enormity of, of that story and of that moment. And it was just, it was fun. It was just, it was interesting. It was intoxicating and I was getting good at it.

0 (21m 14s):
In your, I mean, it seems, I I would imagine that your, your kind of ambition probably would eventually maybe to be like an editor in a newspaper, right? Because you, you were obviously really successful. You were. Cause when I think about my early career, I was like, I, that's what I wanna be. I wanna be a foreign correspondent and then I wanna be the host of all Things Considered. And then that would be it. Like, I'd be done. That'd be great.

4 (21m 36s):
Yep. I achieved my objective at roll call. I never had ambition to be an editor. I never had ambition to run anything. Like I never aspired anything beyond that. My dream coming out to Washington is I, if I could cover leadership in Congress for roll call like that, that would be it. Like I would've made it.

0 (21m 59s):
Yeah, but I mean of course you would eventually move well beyond roll call. Cause I think while you were still in your twenties, you get a job covering politics for the journal, the Wall Street Journal. And then after doing that for a few years, you got hired by the, like the top of the, the the Heat by the Washington Post is a political reporter. Yeah. It's a, for people who don't, you know, aren't interested or don't know much about this world, like it is high stress, right? Like the competition was absolutely fierce. So what did that mean that, were you just constantly just working the phones, like, you know, shouting at people if, if somebody else got a scoop and you didn't get it first?

0 (22m 40s):
I, what, what was your like, cause I think you are, I think you are a competitive reporter, right? I mean you are, I know you are

4 (22m 49s):
Very, very competitive reporter. You know, the both like, and like all reporters like competitive and then insecure about my standing. Like I would be in this, I would have a great story and I would live off that high for a day and then I'd be like, oh my God, am I, do I have imposter syndrome? Do I, like, am I ever gonna get another scoop? And, and a lot of this stuff I didn't realize until later in reflecting on it, I was what I was good at and probably what I was uniquely good at, I had learned at the journal, which is I was really good at fact pattern recognition. Like I could see three things that were happening in society or business in politics, and I could put them into a portrait that would give people some clarity of, of what and why things are happening.

4 (23m 38s):
And then I was very good at figuring out what moves will somebody else make next based on what I've seen them do in the past, which would then allow me to pick up the phone and call a member of Congress and say, I know you're meeting on this even if I didn't know they're meeting on it, because I know that naturally that's what they would meet on. So why don't you tell me why you're doing that? And it would, it's amazing how often that trick would get them to tell me stuff they otherwise wouldn't tell me because they think I already knew it. And like that little bag of tricks and an ability to write fast allowed me to be good.

0 (24m 13s):
You know, I, I mean here you are, you're working at the best possible place to be for a political junkie and a political reporter. And clearly you loved it and you still love it. You still live there in the DC area, but you know what, what started happening in 2006? You would leave, but, but what was going on? What would, why were you getting restless?

4 (24m 38s):
If you had asked me in May of 2006, are you ever gonna start a company? I would've looked at you like you're on L S D, like what are you talking about? Like, no, like I'm working at the Washington Post, but like later that month or early j I can't remember the exact timing, but somewhere after that point Google bought YouTube and it was like this aha moment for reasons I can't fully explain of. I remember going up to John Harris, who's my editor and looking around the newsroom and thinking about what was happening with cable TV and the internet. And I said, could you imagine if Eric Schmidt came to us right now and said, I want to take on the Washington Post, how much money would that cost me?

4 (25m 27s):
And I answered my rhetorical question to, to John saying not that much. If you think about what's happening before us, if we hired at the time, I said if we hired six of the best reporters we know and six rising stars and we hooked ourselves up to the internet and we took advantage of the fact that cable TV likes to have us on, I bet you we could compete with the post instantaneously. And it was like a light bulb went off. It literally went from never thought of it to, holy crap, I'm gonna start this company. Hmm. We jokingly called it Project X and started to really sketch out what would later become Politico.

0 (26m 8s):
Yeah.

4 (26m 9s):
And it led us very quickly and it probably only happened cuz it went quickly to a series of conversations. Like we, John and I are, John had been at The Post for 20 years. We knew a lot of people around town. We called people who had money. We said, Hey, this is what I'm thinking. Here's an idea. And because I worked at Roll Column, I understood the business, I understood that, ah, if you get really influential people to read content, you can sell ads to companies who care about their image in front of that audience of, of of DC elites. Yeah.

0 (26m 42s):
And

4 (26m 43s):
Basically pitched this. And every person that we talked to said, ah, not only do I like that, like can I invest? Hmm. And so we're like, wow, okay, now this is real.

0 (26m 54s):
Yeah. And, and I guess at this point you've got this idea, it's called Project X and it's gonna be like, I think I read that you were describing like, like the Yankees of political journalism we're looking at the Yankees together, right? Yep. So it would be political journalists, but it would be a publication for a very specific but influential audience that a certain kind of advertiser wanted to reach. So that, that was

4 (27m 19s):
The idea was to reach our thing was listen, if we can get the president and Nancy Pelosi to have to read what we're writing, we're gonna have a very profitable publication. And by the way, right, because of cable in the internet, we're probably gonna have a pretty large audience for this back then The Washington Post and Washington post.com were separate companies in separate buildings on two different sides of the Potomac. And I remember walking over to.com and they're looking at me like, oh my God, the paper people never come here. And I'm like, what are you guys up to over here? And oh, what's this like, oh, this is the traffic to the stories that you're writing. And I'm like, well, wait a second. According to your leaderboard, my story got more readers online than it got in print.

4 (27m 59s):
They're Yeah, yeah. That happens every day. I'm like, then why the hell am I spending all my time looking at the newspaper if I can get a much bigger audience online? And they're like, yeah, we've been trying to tell you all, but no one cares about the internet, at least people at newspapers. Yeah. And so, yeah, we thought if we could do those two things, we were gonna have a really successful publication.

0 (28m 20s):
Yeah. And, and I guess that at this point we've kind of reached a, a major turning point in the story because this is where you would begin a partnership with a local media mogul named Robert a Briton. He, he was, I guess basically the son of a, a very wealthy medium mogul himself who owned a bunch of like local TV stations and at the time, I guess was trying to launch his own political publication, but it wasn't coming together. Yep. And and from what I understand, he heard that you and John Harris were trying to do something similar. So, so then what did, like, did, did, did Robert like approach you and say, Hey, you know, why don't you do your publication, your political thing with me and, and, and I'll fund it?

4 (29m 8s):
Yeah. So this is the serendipity part. And you know, I remember telling Harris like, if this is meant to be, someone's gonna come along and hear about it. And you know, there's probably gossip around town that we're, we're thinking of doing something. And that's what those guys picked up on. And by this time, remember we had been pitching this to venture capitalist and pitching it to people in town. We had a very compelling case. Yeah. So by the time we meet with them, we've really thought it through. We never run a business, we've never done a budget or anything like that, but we had like a back of the envelope, a formula for how this could be a very successful company. And the Post initially I think looked at us like we were on drugs or we were aliens.

0 (29m 47s):
Right. They didn't think it was gonna be So

4 (29m 48s):
Would you say, I mean, I remember, I remember Don Graham saying, were you talking about Jim, you've never managed anything. You're not very often in the newsroom. You've never raised your hand to be a leader, and now you're telling me you're gonna start a competitor to the Post. I think they thought it was a, a, a joke or like the, a fanciful dream was their initial reaction until they realized that we were serious and then they got serious.

0 (30m 14s):
And, and by by the way, did you ever consider going to the Post and saying, Hey, let's spin off a company and I'll run it.

4 (30m 21s):
Well, they came back with that idea. They said, well, once things got real serious, they said, fine. What if we created a company inside the company and called it post politics? Don't do it there, do it here. If you think the Future's digital, build it out

0 (30m 35s):
Here. And they only came to you with that proposal once they realize that somebody else might actually finance this thing.

4 (30m 41s):
Correct. Yeah. And, and what we said to them was it just, it wouldn't work. Like you have this massive legacy operation with leaders who have, you know, a lot of power in big egos. There's no way that they're gonna make good music with us being an upstart internally at the same time. And by the way, by this point, we want to go do it and we want to do it on our own. Right. And you know, but they're, they're bringing it though at this point. They're bringing it. They do both the charm and then they do the intimidation. Right? Like, I remember me, you know, Don Graham and his leadership team calls us in and, and and explains to us why it's a dumb idea for us to leave. And, and Don who couldn't be a sweeter guy and a smart guy turned to us and just said, I've never said this to anybody.

4 (31m 28s):
You are making a catastrophic mistake

0 (31m 34s):
When we come back in just a moment.

4 (31m 36s):
What happens after Jim decides not to heed that very dire warning? Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built this.

HelloFresh (31m 59s):
Remember those New Year's goals you promised yourself you'd stick to HelloFresh is here to help you eat better by delivering fresh ingredients and easy recipes right to your door, taking the hassle out of dinnertime no matter your lifestyle or meal preferences. HelloFresh has recipes sure to please everyone at your table from fit and wholesome to veggie or family friendly. You'll always find something even the pickiest eaters will enjoy. I do a lot of cooking in my house and I always love trying out all the fun recipes HelloFresh has to offer. Like falafel, power Bowls, seared steak and potatoes with Barnet sauce and Southwest pork and bean burritos. Go to hellofresh.com/built 65 and use code built 65 for 65% off plus free shipping. That's hellofresh.com/built 65 promo code built 65 for 65% off, plus free shipping. HelloFresh America's number one meal kit.

4 (33m 1s):
Toy Story was the first fully computer animated feature film, but its genius laid not in just its groundbreaking graphics, but also in its storytelling. Viewers became emotionally invested in the journey of the character's Buzz and Woody. The stakes were high for Pixar because a new rival animation studio was gathering strength. Dreamworks was fueled by founder Jeffrey Katzenbergs Quest for revenge against Disney's C e o Michael Eisner. But Katzenbergs not alone in his desire for retribution Pixars. Steve Jobs also wants to out-maneuver Eisner and his Magic Kingdom. Hi, I'm David Brown, the host of Wondery Show Business Wars. We go deep into some of the biggest corporate rivalries of all time.

5 (33m 44s):
And in our latest series, Pixar has to contend not only with Dreamworks, the new kid in Hollywood, but with Disney's hunger for more control follow business wars. Wherever you get your podcasts, you can listen ad free on the Amazon Music or Wondery app.

0 (34m 6s):
Hey, welcome back to how I Built this. I'm Guy Raz, so it's 2006 and Jim is thinking of leaving the Washington Post to start a new publication and he's gonna partner with post editor John Harris and get financial backing from Media Mogul Robert Alberton. And still Jim's been told that if he does this, he'll be making a catastrophic mistake. So he's feeling the pressure

4 (34m 32s):
For sure. I mean I'm again, I got a wife at home, I've got kids and you know, we're, it's not a cheap market living in No. In Washington DC And so the risk was very high. I always calculated that, okay, but even if I fail, I'm a pretty good reporter, somebody's gonna hire me. And so I'd never, I didn't worry that much about the failure dimension. I worried a little bit about the public humiliation, but even that I didn't, I don't, I don't, I don't spend a whole lot of time caring what other people think about me. So that part didn't weigh that heavily, but it weighed very heavily on Harris. I mean, he very much wanted to back out and there was a moment that we now refer to as the, the famous coffee walk where he basically had convinced himself that we can't do this.

4 (35m 19s):
That he was gonna, he was gonna pull the plug. And, and we had always said like, we're doing it together. We're not one of us not doing it alone. And so he wanted to pull the plug and he comes over, we go for a walk and as I leave, my wife looks at me and she says, under no circumstances Harris is talking you out of this. My wife was a huge believer in it and I said, no way, no way will he talk me out of it. So we go get coffee and of course he talks me out of it. But I get home and my wife looks at me and she could tell instantly that I buckled and she jumped on her keyboard and you know, wrote up this note to Harris, to me and to Harris's wife and O'Hanlan. And she was quoting Churchill and Roosevelt and about seizing the moment and like moments like this only happened once, get in the arena.

4 (36m 3s):
And she, she, she saved us from ourselves.

0 (36m 7s):
I mean it was arguably a bigger risk for your partner John Harris cuz he was older than you. You were near your early third, mid thirties. So that's a normal time Yeah. For a lot of people to kind of jump ship and try their own, you know, their own thing and you can recover, you can recover and go back.

4 (36m 22s):
But I think that's right.

0 (36m 23s):
Yeah. For him it was a bigger risk.

4 (36m 25s):
Bigger risk. And he had more of a emotional attachment to the post. Like I had been there three years, he'd been there 20, like it was his only job. Yeah. It was definitely a easier move for me than it was for him.

0 (36m 36s):
Alright, so you connect with Robert a and he is gonna be the guy that will back this thing. Yep. And and the reason that you do this is because it's stability. You're gonna get a, he's gonna guarantee a salary and he's guaranteeing to put in 10 million in this thing, right. At the time. Yep. And there was no, it mitigated the risk.

4 (36m 59s):
Yeah, it was a, it was all about risk mitigation. But the most important thing is we had a building and we had money. And so when I went to recruit people from the journal, I could say look like here's a computer, here's an office. Like this is real, it's not some, I'm not doing it in my garage. This isn't, this isn't a garage band activity.

0 (37m 18s):
You, you and John basically were handed the reins to run the editorial side of Politico to kind of create it. And I think your wife gave it the name right? She named it, she gave the name, my

4 (37m 30s):
Wife named. Correct.

0 (37m 32s):
And, and Abri and Fred Ryan is the CEO of his, his sort of media company. They would handle the business side more or less,

4 (37m 39s):
Right? That was the arrangement originally. Yes, they would, they had business acumen, they had, you know, they had TV stations, they had set up sales organizations before. And so in the beginning it was very much a, it was a group effort. Right. And Robert, who, you know, if it weren't for his money and his courage in, in taking a chance on us, Politico doesn't exist. And I look back at like Al it was a miracle. A miracle that Politico worked.

0 (38m 9s):
Yeah. I mean with his, his money, obviously there was resources, right. I think the paper launches in in January of 2007. Yeah. So he's, he, because he owns these television stations, he had a building, I think just across outside of DC in Arlington. And that was where Politico would be located. And I remember those early papers when I would, when I, you know, know, read them online and, but it was a, it was a newspaper and it was online. I mean it was going to be a print newspaper and an online paper. Yeah. And from, from like one account that I read, you know, the night or the, in the nights before that first edition was launched, a lot of the copy was just crap.

0 (38m 56s):
It was terrible. Like you, you and John basically had to rewrite the paper.

4 (39m 1s):
We had a pact going into this. We said, never will either of us ask the following question. If you could do it over again, would you still do it? And we had stuck to it until the night that we're about to launch. And we look at all the stories. We're so busy getting everything put together. We never had time to deal with a copy. We knew what the lead story would be and, but you had an entire newspaper to fill and a website to, to, to load up. And we started to go through the stories one by one and they were awful. And we were literally sick to our stomach. We're like, how in the hell are we gonna put out a publication tomorrow? Much less?

4 (39m 41s):
How are we gonna do this on a regular basis?

0 (39m 43s):
And and by the way, a lot of people wanted you to

4 (39m 46s):
Fail. It was a big deal. I was pretty cocky in public about what we were gonna deliver.

0 (39m 52s):
What were you promising, by the way? What were you

4 (39m 54s):
Saying? I was just saying that we're gonna take on the post and like, like that people from

0 (39m 57s):
Why were, why were you saying that? Why,

4 (39m 59s):
You know, why would you say that? Oh no, I think John and others were asking me that at the time as well. Yeah. Like I am at this point in my mind, we are going to will this into existence and part of willing something into existence is, is having a little PT Barnum in you understanding that you need people talking about you, even if it's not always in flattering ways. You need to be part of the conversation. So the bet I was making was, I'm gonna be provocative. And definitely it came off I think to a lot of people as, as abrasive or cocky. And so we had tons of people cheering against us.

4 (40m 42s):
And so yeah, against that backdrop, we're looking at these stories and I remember looking at Harris and saying, if you could do it over again, would you do it? And even though we've promised not to ask that, and he said no way. But it was that bad. It was a dark, dark moment. But you don't, failure's not an option. Like anybody who started a company, failure's not an option. I don't have time for pessimism. All I have time for is activation and solutions. And we had enough fresh ideas and enough savvy reporters like Ben Smith and, and Jaymar, Jonathan Martin who were breaking stories and that other people were having to follow that we built up this momentum and a few things became very clear to us early on.

4 (41m 26s):
One talent matters profoundly. One good person, one awesome person is better than 10 good people. And we had a lot of them. We had a lot of these killer talents and I wanted to find those people and you wanted to keep those people.

0 (41m 45s):
But that took time. Took time. And when you're going out there saying we're gonna beat the Washington Post. Yep. And that means though, there's a lot of people really, you know, secretly hoping you're gonna fail. There's pressure there because you can't fail. Cuz that would be humiliating.

4 (42m 2s):
There's no entrepreneur who's done your show, who won't tell you that there's an insane amount of pressure. There's a, it takes a certain amount of lunacy to believe you can take something that doesn't exist and will it into existence. And so you by nature have some level of very high tolerance for stress and you don't sleep. I remember my brother coming and visiting and my brother, you know, knows nothing about politics at the time, doesn't pay attention to media, just came to, you know, to, to hang out and go to bars for a couple days. And I remember him looking at me getting, you know, going to bed at 12 and getting up at three o'clock and firing off a hundred emails saying whatever you're doing is not healthy.

4 (42m 43s):
Like what are you doing? Yeah. And it, it wasn't healthy, but it was, it was exhilarating. It, it's, it's, it's intoxicating. Like you either collapse from it or you, you thrive. And because of it being new and maybe a little bit because of the bravado, everyone was covering us. So there were stories on CNN and there were stories in the journal and others. So we were getting all of this earned media so that PT Barnum part of it was paying off. And so there was enough public success that it was clear we could be successful.

0 (43m 22s):
I I, I wonder, I mean, one, one of the things I wonder about is you, you, you get there and, and you're John Harris, who you worked with, he had managed some managerial experience cuz he was an editor. You had none. I mean, you were a reporter. Most reporters are, you know, they're one person bands, right? They're they're lone wolfs. Right. They're, or, or if they work in teams, but still they're, you know, they're their own boss usually. And now you are a manager, plus you were the kind of the star reporter. So you also had to report and oversee a team of young reporters and push them hard.

0 (44m 2s):
How did you learn to do that without being an asshole?

4 (44m 8s):
I don't think I was ever an asshole. I think I pushed people hard and did I push people to the limit? There's no doubt. There's no doubt. Like our level of burnout in that first year was exceptionally high. I never pushed people harder than I pushed myself. And I hired a lot of people who I knew were similar. Right. We ended up hiring Jake Sherman or Ben Smith. Like if you get the the right reporter who's motivated, you don't need to push them. Like they're pushing themselves. Yeah. And they're on fire for breaking news and getting scoops and the adrenaline that flows from it. But yeah, like I only, I didn't lead, like John had been a manager, John was certainly the adult in the room and I was more Vince Lombardi like, I'm gonna like pound, pound where I'm gonna work you, I'm gonna work hard.

4 (44m 54s):
I'm gonna, you know, I'm gonna try to inspire, I'm gonna try to like, I'd run around the room like, what do you got from me now? Like, let's get a scoop. Like, why did that person beat us? Like it became a joke to a point because I, I would do so, so much of it, but instinctively I felt that's what we, we have to somehow do the impossible. Yeah. And that's the story of, of every startup you're trying to do something no one's ever done before with a group of people who haven't done it together before. And in this environment we did it with the added layer of, we're under intense public scrutiny.

0 (45m 30s):
You know, I'm, I'm curious when you would tell reporters, like when, when new reporters came in and you would say, this is what a Politico story is, this is what makes us different. How would you describe it? What, what was it, what was a Politico story?

4 (45m 45s):
A Politico story we would say as, listen, is this an idea, an analysis, a scoop that the speaker of the house or the White House chief of staff would consider new revelatory, essential, illuminating. Like that was the marker. Like we were writing, we called it the bullseye of, of the audience. If we can get something that is so interesting to the most powerful people, it's gonna be interesting to anybody who cares about politics.

0 (46m 13s):
So here's what I'm wondering about, like Politico became, you know, a sort of a sensation in Washington DC quickly, and let, let's, let's be honest for a moment here. Washington DC can be very provincial, right? People can really be naval G and, and so, you know, it's also a great place to get attention because it is a small town in that sense. So people were talking about political, but it was, it was not making money. I mean here, here you've got Politico, you're writing your own stuff. It's really expensive to have all those staffers writing original pieces. And Huffington Post was at the, at that time kind of taking your butt, you know, and they were just aggregating articles.

0 (46m 54s):
They weren't even writing them. Yep. I mean was was there ever, like, did anybody internally just say, what are we doing? Why do we, why are we paying people to write stuff? Why don't we just do what they do?

4 (47m 3s):
I did not really, because we were starting to bring in revenue. The whole idea was if you can write things that members of Congress have to read, then these companies would want to advertise to reach those. And that happened instantly. So we started to get a lot of ad buyers, defense companies and financial service

0 (47m 22s):
Companies. But that was in the newspaper. Newspaper that was the print newspaper.

4 (47m 24s):
But back then, like that was enough. Like I

0 (47m 27s):
Don't, that was money numbers

4 (47m 28s):
That first year. But let's say we spent 10 million, I think we brought in three or 4 million in year one if my memory serves me correct. So it wasn't, there was money coming in and I think by year three we, we broke even or might even have made money that that third or fourth year. But back then, like I wasn't even that worried about the business. We wanted it to work. We were like about brand building, about hiring the right journalist, about getting people to take us seriously. And on that score pretty early on, it was mission accomplished.

0 (47m 58s):
Did did you, I mean, you know, obviously Abri, he knew going in that he was not gonna make money for at least a year, probably two, but there must have been pressure coming down to bring in money.

4 (48m 13s):
Yeah. I don't remember in those early years there being a whole lot of tension about revenue there. Definitely. Right. Started to have tension by between John and I and, and kind of the suits Robert and Fred just about how to run the company and how often do we need to meet. And

0 (48m 32s):
When did that start?

4 (48m 34s):
I wish I had a better memory on specifics, but I would say it started low grade around year three and got progressively more worse. Progressively worse. Yeah. It's not set up the way you would wanna set up a company. Right. Our CEO Fred is also running a massive local television empire tv. Right. And so,

0 (48m 57s):
Right. Cuz a Britain owned, owned a bunch of TV

4 (48m 60s):
Channels, bunch of TV channels. And so a lot of our leadership, a lot of our technology was coming from tv, which I didn't realize at the time, but very antiquated and a very throwback industry. And it started to become clear that, that that was the source of attention. I was like, there's no way that we could be a successful company at a national, international scale if we're running like a mom-and-pop shop or certainly running like a mom-and-pop shop back by a local TV station. Like we, we need like a full-time leader. We need a full-time technologist. We need to continue to, to grow and find new revenue streams. And like we were, that would be where, where we started to hit our sort of first period of real turbulence.

4 (49m 45s):
But up until then it was like, we're having a blast. We, for the most part, people are getting along and we're all trying to kind of figure out like who does what. And you know, then John and I are becoming our, you know, we're start to become leaders ourselves. We start to do a lot of self-appraisal. We start to figure out what are the weaknesses and like how do we create something that's more sustainable. Like we're not dumb. Like once you have turnover as high as we had and you have people writing stories about us being a sweat shop, we're not dope. Yeah. We know that that's not sustainable. It may have gotten us to where we were, but we were gonna have to create a culture and a company that could rely on something other than the maniacal energy of a few people.

0 (50m 29s):
I mean, it's interesting because the, the culture, right? I mean you talk about the culture and, and you, you mentioned this, this kind of the sweatshop stories that were coming out about Politico. And it's almost as if you, you anticipated that that churn would happen, that it was just gonna be, you know, sort of par for the course you, you to, to win. You had to operate that way. Or maybe not. I mean, if you were to do it again, would you have baked in a different culture from the beginning?

4 (50m 59s):
I can't express this enough. Everything that we did was based on intuition and instinct. And so I think at the crass level Yes. Like what is, what is the instinct that motivates people in trauma or turmoil? It is, it's, I'm, I'm not, failure's not an option. I'm gonna get out of this hole. And so all you're doing is like, I'm gonna fight today to win today and I'm not thinking about casualties. And it was made messier because we were in the media and the media co loves to cover media. And so yeah, any misstep would be amplified in a way it might not be amplified. And if I was trying to start a shoe company Right.

4 (51m 40s):
People wouldn't care.

0 (51m 42s):
Yeah. How, how was your, before things started to get a little bit tense, right? I think they started around 2010. But from, from everything I've read, I mean you and and and Roberton were quite close. You, you guys went out to dinner with your wives and you guys went on vacation together. I mean, you became pretty close.

4 (52m 1s):
Yeah. There's, there were definitely long periods of time where, you know, you listen, here're like a any startup is like a, a family. You're trapped in a house together and you know, your Harris used to have this expression that we've been in the car too long together like that that certainly is true at times. But Robert and I were, were were close at different times. We were friends. But you know, we started to clash. I mean, it's pretty well documented that I just, we had different values, we had different business styles and you know, at that point when you start to have success, egos emerge. Right? And people want credit or people want more input.

0 (52m 39s):
Yeah.

4 (52m 41s):
You know, our first big clash, I basically, at some point it was clear to me the company needed a c and, and to be blunt, I thought it needed me to be the ceo. Yeah. Because I had, this sounds so arrogant, but I was like, I was learning how to lead. I was really interested in the business I had to, I I had started to gravitate away from the coverage and much more towards how do you turn these things into scalable businesses. I had started to think about culture, you know, I started to bring in our team. So

0 (53m 11s):
What, what, what happened? I mean, you would obviously eventually become the ceo, which we will, I will ask you about in a moment. But when you were still in that first year right? And you guys were trying to figure out ways to, to grow your revenue, I guess you, you brought someone on to help you figure

4 (53m 28s):
That out, right? Yep. So I had went out on a limb and hired a guy, Roy Schwartz, who was at Gallup and had been a consultant, but was just smart as hell. And I'm like, you need to come and run our revenue. You need to, there's no way that there can't be a better way than this good old boy network. I need someone who's smart and savvy who could talk to CEOs, who can help companies think smartly about how to utilize our platform. And once I hired him, then, you know, we really had an alliance and became quite close. And he was just smarter than anybody on the business side at that company by 10 x. And we had decided we wanted to start a subscription business called Political Pro.

0 (54m 8s):
Yeah. Th this was be, I mean this really was going to become a significant generator of revenue. And this for, for people that don't know where it is, it, it's similar to what you did as an early reporter. I mean, it's like, it was a designed for industry people, lobbyists, lawyers, you know, who, who had a specific interest in a specific topic and, and political pro delivers what delivered and delivers this intensive, specialized information to them. And, and the subscriptions were like at that $10,000 a year, something like that. Correct. And so you didn't need, you didn't, you don't need that many

4 (54m 50s):
Subscribers. Nope. You need lobbyists, companies, lawmakers, they pay $10,000 a slot. Some big company who has 50 lobbyists might pay a hundred thousand dollars. And it's an expensive business upfront because you gotta hire a lot of reporters. You gotta hire

0 (55m 4s):
Like Yeah.

4 (55m 5s):
A real sales team because you're asking companies to pay, you know, tens of thousands of dollars for a subscription. And there was a real clash between, you know, Roy and I, and, and really Robert on the other side who just thought it was, we were wasting money. And that it, and John wasn't that enamored with it cuz he thought it was too wonky in terms of the, of the coverage focus. But we believe that you couldn't be solely dependent on advertising and, and to be a really big, durable company. Roy and I were super confident that you needed this subscription leg of the business. And eventually Roy and I prevailed and eventually Robert agreed to it. So to his credit, like while resistant in the beginning, he did fund it. And for us, like Politico was us, it was an extension of us.

4 (55m 50s):
So its success, its durability was, was everything. And I, we just felt in our bones that if we didn't have another, if we didn't have another revenue stream, and God forbid we hit economic turbulence and the, the ad market locks up that we could be in real trouble.

0 (56m 9s):
Jim, you finally get to actually become the CEO in 2014. And there there're different accounts, or I guess 2013 when, when Fred Ryan stepped down. There're different accounts of of that. And you know, I've read different interpretations from, you know, Robert Auburn's not here to time. And again, this is not a critique of him at all. I think, I think he's very successful and he's done some amazing things and made his mark certainly with Politico. And, but you know, from there, there, there are some accounts that said that I've seen that suggested that he kind of really didn't really want you doing that job.

0 (56m 49s):
That he, he sort of felt pressured to give you that job and didn't really think you, I don't know. Did did you get that sense at all?

4 (56m 57s):
Ah, for sure. Yeah. And there's no doubt, and again, like Rob, I think Robert would say it here and then at the time he might have been right. I think he felt like number one, like I had essentially demanded that I'd be ceo. I felt like I,

0 (57m 10s):
Well you started the thing,

4 (57m 11s):
I started the thing. I felt like I understood it and I felt like I can run this thing. And he felt like I couldn't, I think he thought, you know, I need someone more seasoned. I want someone with more experience in media. And so we had a mighty clash over it. But again, in to his credit, he was right that I had not, again, like I'd be the first to say I was a reporter. I hadn't run anything. Like until before I started to run Politico. The only thing I had run was the night shift at Little Caesar's In high school. Yeah. In Oshkosh. And so there was a big piece of it that you're learning on the fly. And I learned a lot in that period.

0 (57m 53s):
I actually think that being a reporter is, is good training for becoming a formal entrepreneur. Cuz there are entrepreneurial things you have to do. I talked about this with, with Don Katz, who started Audible. He was a Rolling Stone reporter, you know, for most of his career he was a writer. And what a lot of people don't realize is reporters, you really have to, you know, do things very quickly with limited resources.

4 (58m 18s):
Everything I know was a c e o I learned from being a reporter. Everything I knew as a reporter, I learned from playing poker. Huh. Right. So take it back to, to playing poker in, in high school and college like poker is so much about fact pattern recognition. It's about knowing when to take a risk. It's knowing about how to modulate emotion in complex and often tense situations and knowing that there's a decent probability that you're gonna lose. And like somewhere in that journey from poker table to journalist to ceo, I think those skill sets helped immensely.

4 (59m 4s):
Hmm. But by the time I became CEO, I was very clear that I'm not in this for the long haul. Like at some point I was always upfront with Robert, like at some point when I feel like the company can grow at 20% and we're not here, I'm probably gonna go that at some point I'm, I'm probably gonna, I wanna do my own thing. Like I, I have by this point, I'm, I'm, you know, Roy and Kim and Danielle Jones and, and you know, Mikey, like we're, we have our kind of own view of like what a company should look like and, and, and what its soul should be and what its values should be. What its morality should

0 (59m 40s):
You, and you could not make that happen because it was not your shop.

4 (59m 43s):
No way. It wasn't my shop, it was Robert. It's like Robert, listen again, like his credit, he's the one who bankrolled it when no one else would. And he took the risk, had political down down the tubes, it's his money that would've been lost. And so he owned it and therefore he had every right to control it. And you know, it's hard after 10 years you could have the best of intentions. It's very hard for that to end in a pretty way. And obviously it didn't end in a pretty way, but that's life.

0 (1h 0m 13s):
So what, what, what happened? I mean, I mean clearly you're starting to think, okay, eventually I want to run my own shop and, and you know, you are alluding to, you know, regret sort of, kind of regretfully how it ended. Well how did it end? What happened?

4 (1h 0m 28s):
I mean, it ended that we couldn't get on the same page about like how you would set up the company. Like for instance, it's very important to us that everybody should be able to share in the success, not just us, but the entire company.

0 (1h 0m 41s):
You wanted, you wanted shares distributed

4 (1h 0m 43s):
And to other people,

0 (1h 0m 44s):
Right? You wanted more ownership distributed.

4 (1h 0m 46s):
Yeah, both because we thought it was the right thing to do, but also it was getting harder and harder to keep talent. And so you wanted to bring everybody together, have everyone have upside in the company because

0 (1h 0m 57s):
People were getting equity and Buzzfeed, they were getting equity in other startups.

4 (1h 0m 60s):
They was. And it was like, it would've been a competitive advantage if we, if we could have done that. But it was more just a, like, it's a philosophy. Like we had a philosophy about what we wanted out of life and what we wanted out of a company that was incompatible at Politico and it just wasn't gonna happen. We wanted a very transparent culture. We wanted to be very clear lines of authority. And so in many ways it was more the power of that, of, hey, you know what, I think we could do that. I think we could go off on our own. I think we could raise money and we could build a utopian company. And it was that you're, you're you're almost again like that naive or that cocky whatever, somewhere in the middle of that that we could build a utopian company.

4 (1h 1m 41s):
And that lure of that was powerful. And by the time Mike tells me yes, if we do that, we're in and Roy says yes, come on, let's go do that. You know that it's gonna be successful. There's no company that Mike Allen is a part of and that Roy Schwartz is a part of and that wasn't gonna be a, a success. And that that more than anything else is, is is what led us to believe, okay, we, we can do this.

0 (1h 2m 10s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Jim and his partners design a new publication to stand out from the others and in the process stumble across an unexpected stream of revenue. Stay with us. I'm Guy Ross and you're listening to how I built this.

2 (1h 2m 36s):
We can't see tomorrow but we can hear it and it sounds like a wind farm powering homes across the country. We are bridging to a sustainable energy future. Working today to ensure tomorrow is on Enbridge life takes energy.

3 (1h 2m 60s):
Hey

0 (1h 2m 60s):
Welcome back to How I built this. So it's early 2016 and Jim is about to take another risk and this time he's gonna leave the business. He helped build Politico to start a new online publication and he's partnering with two colleagues, the finance guy Roy Schwartz and the journalist Mike Allen. And they wanna cover topics other than politics and do it in digestible chunks ready made for the internet.

4 (1h 3m 27s):
The data was unambiguous that most people were skimming and scanning and they weren't reading most of the words that any of us in the media were writing. And so it meant that people were just consuming content in smaller chunks. And that's the light bulb that becomes Axios. We're like, if we could solve for that, how can we help people, especially busy smart people, get smarter faster across more topics? Wow. If we could solve that, that would be a big company. Well the solution to us became very clear that the, what we come to over that period is this concept of smart brevity. We've gotta find people who have subject matter expertise in media, in business, in technology, in politics.

4 (1h 4m 10s):
And we have to figure out the most efficient way to deliver that. Ha smart brevity. So we come up with this architecture of, okay, what, what is the smartest way to deliver two or 400 words? And if we could do that, we're gonna do something different.

0 (1h 4m 26s):
Alright, so you have this concept, you leave Politico in January of 2016. And, and was there any, any, any threats or any sort of like, you can't do this or you can't go off and start your own thing? Or any concern that there might have been like litigation or anything? Or, or or were you pretty comfortable that wasn't gonna happen?

4 (1h 4m 50s):
Oh no, we thought for sure we'd be going to court. I mean there was tension, right? And, and, and Robert and others had sort of threatened if you take any information from here or if you replicate any of our ideas, I think by the time I left I had three lawyers, you know, like looking at my contract, looking at potential litigation, probably an overreaction cuz we never actually had any litigation. Yeah. But when you leave a company, especially when you leave with a, with some bit of tension, you have a cooling off period. You have six months where you can't really do anything. You can't start a new company, can't recruit, can't raise money for it. And you know, we were lucky we had enough money and, and to be able to, to to rest for, for six months and, and go figure out what we're gonna do.

4 (1h 5m 33s):
Not a pleasant place to be. I'm not a big sit around type a person. Like, like not like some people would love it. I wish that I loved it, I didn't love it.

0 (1h 5m 41s):
Right. He, here's, here's the thing. I mean, in, in 2016 right? Yeah. When you left, you were not financially set for life. Like you still had to work if, if it didn't work out. Correct. But you had a, you had a playbook, you knew right? You had done this already. You had, you had started a media company, but now really it was different because you weren't just going be dealing with the editorial side. You were gonna be running a company, the business side, everything. Yes.

4 (1h 6m 7s):
Like it could have flopped. You know, we went out and we raised money and I mean I in some ways was the worst person to raise money cuz I would tell every venture capitalist that I think media's the hardest space in America today. I think that most media companies are gonna go under and yes, if you want to get a 10 x return, I would get into healthcare or tech or energy stocks. I would think you have a higher degree of probability to make money there. But if anyone's gonna get you a 10 x return in the media space based on their previous record, I think we're the group of people who can do that

0 (1h 6m 38s):
Here. Here's a thing though, Jim, even even somebody with your experienced talent and platform, building a new brand is really hard. You, you're leaving at Politico, which was a massive brand by the time you left. And even with all the experience, right? I mean look at, look at Jeffrey Katzenberg and, and what was it called? Quibble, right? Quibble, right? I mean even super highly successful, talented people have a hard time building a brand. So what was, what was the way that you were gonna put this out there? Because to be successful you had to have an audience. Cuz without an audience you can't command high prices for advertising.

4 (1h 7m 17s):
Yeah, but we listen, we have Mike Allen, so like, let, we haven't talked enough about Mike, right? So Mike is one of the co-founders of Politico and he is a co-founder of Axios. He's maybe the most generous, gracious person in the history of American journalism. And he also has a work ethic that Will, has never been seen before and never will be seen again. He's written and

0 (1h 7m 37s):
Kind of a legendary reporter. He wrote the, the, this playbook that was became essential reading for people in Washington, DC and beyond. For

4 (1h 7m 45s):
Years, New York Times Magazine did a cover story called The Man, the White House Wakes up to, he's written a daily newsletter every day, but 10 days for 15 years straight. It's insane. I've never seen anything like it gets up at two 30 in the morning, bangs that thing out and it is read by the most influential people in the world. And so we knew that we had Mike and we knew that when we launched all the important people in Washington would read Mike. So that was like, as long as Mike is breathing and, and healthy and feeling good, we were gonna be successful. And then in that early day in walks this kid, Jonathan Swan, who no one knew about and he had been doing some good reporting on Donald Trump.

4 (1h 8m 28s):
And within like half hour of meeting him, I remember sitting in a room with Mike and looking at Swan who had I think three other offers at the time and looking at him and saying, dude, you were born to work for us. Like we are gonna pour whatever we have into you and I think we could be helpful. You, you have a gift that few people have. And he turned down everyone else and took a job with us and, you know, took upside instead of salary. And at that point then I, I'm okay, we're we're good. We're gonna be a really interesting fun company. And that was a cool thing. Like one of the things that that your, that your entrepreneurial listeners would enjoy is like, I don't know how people do it alone.

4 (1h 9m 9s):
Remember I had two co-founders for Axios. I have Roy and Mike and we have this beautiful professional relationship and I can't stress like anybody who's thinking about starting a company, really try to find a partner who you believe in, who shares your values, who compliments whatever skill set you have because there will be dark days and you're gonna want someone you trust in those dark days. And if you can find people who can handle themselves with class and character in the darkest of moments, you found yourself a gem.

0 (1h 9m 41s):
What was the, tell me about this approach you took, you call it smart brevity, basically. I mean to kind of distill it down to it's short articles. Yeah. Very short articles, but it had very specific principles. What, what, what made, made an article adhere to a, to the smart brevity model?

4 (1h 10m 1s):
Basically one of the genetic flaws in journalists is that they're not great writers and they often bury what matters and they often hide it in a vomit of words. And so we tried to create a, a structure that could make even mediocre writers at least clear writers. And so we, we tried to do is mimic the conversation I would have with you if I went to a bar. And if I did, what I would do is I would tell you something in clear language that I'm excited about that's new, that's interesting, that's illuminating. Then I would give you the context, the why it matters. That's our second graph. The why important.

4 (1h 10m 42s):
And then you would give me some kind of visual cue about whether to go deeper, which we call go deeper into the conversation. And if you go deeper into the conversation, you would like it to be hierarchical cuz you don't know when the conversation's gonna end. So make sure the most important information is distilled in the proper hierarchy. And we had seen from the data that if you take multiple ideas and break it into bullets, you're much likely to get people to keep reading and to retain. And so we broke it into bullets and having those founding principles made it much, much easier to run the company because those founding principles really haven't changed to this day. We're much bigger, we've created new business lines, but fundamentally all of those things were set in place five years ago and haven't changed that much.

0 (1h 11m 26s):
How important was the Trump era to the success of Axios? I mean, that was a boom time for news. Yeah, right. We know that for cnn, everybody, I

4 (1h 11m 37s):
Have mixed feelings. I have a, a mixed analysis. Like on the one hand it was really good for us because Jonathan Swan and Mike Allen and others were extremely wired into the Trump White House Trump campaign and we were able to break a lot of news and people were captivated by Trump. So we were able to elevate our brand for free at scale quickly. That's on the plus side. The minus side was one of the things we'd set out to do is we didn't want to be defined by politics alone. We wanted to be seen as a source of truth for politics, business, media, technology, other topics. It made it really hard because Trump sucked up all the oxygen, sucked up all of the traffic.

4 (1h 12m 19s):
People started to massively consume politics to a level that's not healthy for a normal human being's diet. And so the those two things were, were in conflict, but it certainly helped us, it certainly helped put us on the map.

0 (1h 12m 33s):
Yeah. How did you, I mean I, you know, obviously it's a private company, so you, you may not talk too specifically about about financials, but I mean, as you said, yourself, media companies are inherently risky. They're very hard to make profitable. And we're gonna see what happens over the next couple years with, you know, a lot of different media companies. But, you know, diversification seemed to be the, the answer for a while. You know, let's do events and let's do partnerships and licensing deals and podcasts and TV and, you know, we'll, we'll, we'll you guys would, even beyond that, you, you created a piece of software for businesses this based on the smart brevity model, like to help businesses write shorter emails and stuff.

0 (1h 13m 20s):
How did you, but that took some time, but out of the gate, how did you just drum up cash to, you know, to to, to bring in revenue? What was, what was the biggest driver of that?

4 (1h 13m 33s):
Yeah, I mean, two things. One, we raised money. So we, we launched with 10 million in cash and then because we had done political when we left, I probably had four or five companies call me and say, I don't care what you're starting, like we've allocated X amount to advertise with you guys. Like whatever, you're gonna start, we're successful, you're gonna, you're gonna be successful. And that's where most of the money came from in those early years. And then a great, like your entrepreneurial audience will love the story. Like we're a media company, we're doing well, we're 18 months into our creation and I start to get phone calls. Hmm. The nba, the basketball association, JP Morgan Chase, United Health Group, their executives start calling us and say almost identical things.

4 (1h 14m 17s):
Like they were in the same room and they said, listen, our executives all read Axios, but they won't read anything that we write internally. Will you teach us to write? Hmm. And our initial reaction was, no, we're a media company, go learn how to write somewhere else. But the more we heard that from people, I remember Roy and I turning to each other saying, man, like usually a market whispers, like this market is screaming, it is screaming at us. Hmm. And so we created a, a, a sister company inside the company called Axios hq. And the idea was to both teach smart brevity to companies, but then little by little we built a technology, AI power technology that took all the learnings from the newsroom about how to write an engaging headline, how to pick the right visual to get people to pay attention to content that matters.

4 (1h 15m 10s):
And we created a software that now, you know, hundreds of companies and the mayor of Austin and the school system in Austin, Texas, like tons of people, big companies, small companies, medium companies now use it HQ and smart brevity to communicate internally.

0 (1h 15m 27s):
Hmm. So, alright. I mean I, I think the, the, sometimes this comes, this can come across as an obvious question because, you know, why wouldn't you? But here you've got this thing that you launched in 2017 and it's doing pretty well. You know, it's, it's I think how long until you reached sustainability or profitability? How many years in,

4 (1h 15m 52s):
I I think by year two or by year two we're profitable, not by design. Okay. By the way, like we were trying to be in investment mode, the business was doing better than we thought. Hiring is tough in media, but we were, we were breaking even like we were doing, we were, we broke even I think year 2, 3, 4 or made a little bit of money. Like, but not, I

0 (1h 16m 12s):
Don't, right. So so you are, and you know, you've got all these revenue streams going. Yeah. And then, or in 2022 you sold to, to Cox Enterprises that they, they bought, bought out Axios I think for a little more than $500 million. Again, it can come across as an obvious question, which is why, why would you sell? Cause it's $500 million. Why not? But, but why, I mean, I mean, you know, you wanted, you wanted independence, you wanted to, to, to run your own shop. You're just four and a half years in. Why was it the right time?

4 (1h 16m 51s):
Yeah, it's a great question, especially given that, you know, five years earlier we wanted to control our own destiny, right? And we were very clear with people that we're a hard company to buy because yes, we're willing to sell a a, a substantial percentage of the company, but we want to run the company, we wanna run the business and we want a hundred percent editorial control. So that we told people along the way, listen, if you are fine, you know, buying out the shareholders and you're, you're paying a, a premium price and you believe in us and you believe in this culture, you gotta let us run the show for a long time. Like, this is like, there's nothing else that we want to do.

4 (1h 17m 32s):
Well long comes Cox Communications. They were, they let our series D so we had done a couple of rounds in between.

0 (1h 17m 40s):
How much did you raise in total?

4 (1h 17m 42s):
I think we were probably 35 to 40 million all in. But we're sitting there, we have a nice cash runway, we have a good company that's generating a, a a lot of growth. Cox becomes a Series D investor and they are just like, it's almost too good to be true. Like they're the nicest people. They're fourth generation company. They, you know, Alex who runs the, the company is just a, a great guy. He used to be in journalism himself. They make very clear that, you know, the terms you guys are talking about, that's something we could see ourselves doing. Like we have no desire to operate the company. We, we want you guys to operate it. And so it made the transaction, which is you, you could imagine you're selling your baby.

4 (1h 18m 27s):
It made what could have been very painful and torturous quite easy.

0 (1h 18m 32s):
What's your commitment? How long?

4 (1h 18m 35s):
I mean, I could leave whenever I guess, but our commitment to them is, you know, a minimum of six years and probably a lot longer. I think if you talk to the leadership of Cox, they would say, we hope these, these guys are here for, for 20 years running the company. And you know, I don't, you know, I'm 51. I guess at some point I'll get tired. I don't, I probably work harder today than I did. I dunno if I worked as hard as I did the, that first year at, at Politico. But I work a lot like I, because I love it. I get a lot of energy off of it. So it's, you know, I, I, again, I'm a, I'm a blessed guy. Like I've had a hell of a fun ride. I have a big ride in front of us. But like, it's just a, it's again, I I talk to college kids a lot now and I'm just like, man, if you could figure out a way like, or or to do a job that you would do for free that you love it so much, like that's nirvana that's winning the lottery.

4 (1h 19m 22s):
Hmm.

0 (1h 19m 24s):
You, you know which question is coming next? Cuz you, I know you've heard this show before, but it's still a, a question that worth asking after talking with you for several hours, which is, and you've alluded to this and in, in various points during the interview, you've talked about luck. How much, how much do you think luck got you to this point versus the grind? I mean, I'm, I'm tired, exhausted, just, just imagining the 18 hour days that you put in for two decades. So what do you, what do you, what do you, I don't know how much, how much is, is it about one and, and how much is it about the other?

4 (1h 20m 2s):
I just feel like people don't credit luck enough. That's why, why I hate the great man stories. These one person visionaries who willed something into existence that's bullshit. Like nobody wills something into existence alone. You have a lot of people who are helping you, who've helped you in the past, who are helping you in real time to do the impossible. And I don't think people appreciate luck of just being in the right place at the right time of having an idea that works now, that might not work tomorrow or might not have worked yesterday of running into the right co-founder. Like if I don't ask Jen Hurley, who's was working in our finance department about where she's going and she had not told me, oh, I'm going skiing with this guy Roy Schwartz, who's really interesting and you should talk to him about business.

4 (1h 20m 48s):
He's just a smart guy. Like that's pure luck. Like how did I have that conversation with her? And she pointed me to Roy, if we didn't have Roy Schwartz, Axio wouldn't have existed. Hmm. Or how do I end up on the Lido deck in Genoa, Italy during the trade protest when I'm working at the Wall Street Journal and I turn to the person next to me at 4:00 AM who looks at me and says with his beer in his hand for speed. And it's Mike Allen wanting to see who can slam a beer faster and starts a lifelong friendship. How do we have a spark of an idea to start Politico? And it just happens to be at that very moment the Internet's taking off and cable has an insatiable appetite and we happen to run into the right mix of reporters that can bring it into existence.

4 (1h 21m 33s):
Like so much of that is luck and it's perishable and I just don't feel like people appreciate that enough.

0 (1h 21m 43s):
That's Jim Vanderheit, co-founder of Politico and co-founder and CEO of Axios by the way, in 2021, Robert Aden, Jim's co-founder and the man who financed and owned Politico sold it to the German media giant Axl Springer reportedly for a billion dollars. And according to the New York Times, it was one of the most expensive media mergers in recent memory. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you wanna contact the team, our email address is ibt id wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this and mine is at Guy Roz on Instagram or at How I built this.

0 (1h 22m 24s):
And I'm at Guy Doro and don't forget to follow this show wherever or however you're listening to it, so you don't miss any new episodes. This episode was produced by Carrie Thompson with music, composed by era Bluey. It was edited by Neva Grant with research help from Sam Paulson. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Herman, Alex Chung, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, and Carla Estevez. I'm Guy Roz and you've been listening and how I built

3 (1h 22m 54s):
This.

0 (1h 23m 5s):
Hey Prime members, you can listen to how I Built This Early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon music app today or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear@wonderyshop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.