Wondery (0s):
Wondery Plus subscribers can listen to How I, Built This Early, and ad free Right. now join Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts.

Crowddesk (10s):
This message comes from How I Built This sponsor Crow. There's no shortage of volatility in business today from regulatory shifts to digital disruption. But volatility isn't your enemy doing nothing is you can uncover opportunity in uncertainty. Crow offers top flight services in audit, tax advisory and consulting to help you take on your biggest challenges. Visit Embrace volatility dot com to Discover How Crow can help you. Embrace volatility. Once again, that's Embrace volatility dot com.

Audible (48s):
Get closer to the best. you With Audible. you can enjoy all your audio entertainment in one app. You'll always find the best of what you love or something new to Discover. I recently listened to Mark Hyman's Blood Sugar Solution, which completely changed how I. Think about what I eat, when I eat it, and how metabolic health is connected to a long life And. as an Audible member, you can choose one title a month to keep from their entire catalog. Including the latest bestsellers and new releases New members can try Audible free for 30 days. Visit audible.com/built or text built to 5 0 0 5 0 0. That's audible.com/built or text built to 5 0 0 5 0 0 To. try audible free for 30 days audible.com/built.

Turbo Tax (1m 41s):
TurboTax makes all your moves count. And roughly 37% of taxpayers qualify to file 100% free with TurboTax free edition form 10 40 and limited credits only. File 100% free. Max refund guaranteed. See if you qualified to file for free@turbotax.com. See max refund guarantee details at turbotax.com/guarantees.

2 (2m 10s):
I think for me, what I most remember about that time was feeling really scared about the idea of leaving. But also I remember Christina like feeling pretty definitive that she was going to leave

0 (2m 23s):
Even though this, you initially came to her with this idea. Yes. She was the one who was more like, let's go. You.

2 (2m 29s):
Totally.

3 (2m 30s):
And there was a lot to believe in. There was a idea to believe in. There was a partnership to believe in and why not? We have every reason to believe this could be a huge success, but if it isn't, I know it's gonna be an amazing experience.

0 (2m 46s):
Welcome to How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, and the stories behind the movements they built. I am Guy Raz and on the show today how a radically simple idea kids close in basic colors and evergreen styles turned into an indie apparel company called Primary. Now a multimillion dollar brand in a crowded category, say in something like energy bars, it usually makes sense to try and stand out to focus on branding.

0 (3m 27s):
Same goes for apparel. It's why Balenciaga can sell a T-shirt for $500, even though the cost to make it might be 10. But the founders of primary, a direct to consumer kids clothing brand decided to do something totally counterintuitive. They built a company that is almost contemptuous of branding except for on an inside label. The word primary never appears on the clothing. The styles are basic T-shirts, jeans, hoodies, solid colors, timeless patterns, stuff that wouldn't look out of place in 1975 or 2025.

0 (4m 8s):
And finally, the clothing isn't separated by gender. No pink for girls or blues for boys. You just pick baby or kids. When Christina, Carbonell, Galyn and Gail and Bernard launched the company in 2014, they knew they were entering a pretty tough space. Brands like Carter's Children's Place, gap, old Navy, they dominate the kids apparel category and it's worth around $50 billion a year just in the United States. Trying to make it as a small independent brand facing those giants is really hard. And for many years it was a struggle for primary.

0 (4m 48s):
What Galyn and Christina were trying to do was to make high quality, long lasting basics for kids that wouldn't break the bank. The two founders like to joke that because their professional resumes are pretty similar, they are basically the same person. But while they both graduated from Ivy League schools, Galyn from Princeton and Christina from Penn, and they both went to Harvard Business School, their backgrounds are actually very different. Galyn was an only child and a top high school golfer in Indiana. Her dad was a physician and her mom was a homemaker. Christina, on the other hand, was the first person in her family to attend college and raised in Maryland by single divorced mom.

3 (5m 31s):
My mom at the time, my parents got divorced, kind of really had to start over. She had been, she was young and had been a hairdresser and had to start over, became a secretary and was working a lot.

0 (5m 41s):
Yeah,

3 (5m 42s):
I was definitely very self-reliant and had learned from my mom that it was going to be really important that I did well in school and that that was gonna be key to my independence. And one of the main lessons I probably learned from my mom, the thing she emphasized the most was be able to take care of yourself and to be specific. Never have to rely on a man to be honest. Yeah.

0 (6m 7s):
Yeah. And I mean, you were, I mean, you must've been a very good student in, in high school. You went to Penn for college, but did you go into college with that mindset like, I'm gonna go study economics, maybe get a job in finance and make a lot of money so I don't have to ever rely on anyone else?

3 (6m 25s):
I did. And also even in deciding where to go to college, my mom had instilled in me how important it would be, but she also couldn't really guide me on how to go about it or where to go. And so I remember buying a book of all the colleges and I pretty much skimmed the entire thing to choose what schools to even apply to. And was very fortunate to get into Penn and it was a huge turning point for me. Mm. In really creating my future.

0 (6m 55s):
So when you graduated, you went to go work for Kraft right? Outta college in sort of branding, marketing. And I guess I mean that this was the beginning of a path for you probably where you thought this is I'm gonna go work in corporate America and rise up the ranks.

3 (7m 12s):
I could not have been more excited. I really felt like I had made it. And I remember walking into the company store at Kraft Foods and being surrounded by macaroni and cheese and Maxwell House Coffee and all of these brands. Yeah. And, and and being able to buy all these things at a discount too. Yeah. Just feeling like I can't even believe I'm here. I I have made it.

0 (7m 35s):
And what did you do? I mean, tell me a little bit about your job at Kraft because you were there for, for like six, seven years.

3 (7m 42s):
I was, I got to work on a lot of really cool brands at Kraft Foods from Maxwell House Coffee in the beginning, which was fun. I remember going on my first advertising shoot in Montana and it might've been the second time I had ever flown on a plane. Yeah. And it was just so exciting. I also worked on brands like cereal brands like Fruity Pebbles, which was super fun. And later craft salad dressing was a brand I worked on. I have this story of what success looks like at at a big company when you're pretty junior there. And one of the projects that I worked on was I drove the initiative to put that lid on craft ranch dressing so that it's a slow pour rather than like all coming out at once.

3 (8m 31s):
Which is especially helpful for kids who like to of course dump ranch dressing onto everything. What

0 (8m 36s):
Do you mean the like the squeezy lid? Yeah.

3 (8m 38s):
Yeah, I did that.

0 (8m 39s):
You are the, you're the person behind the ranch dressing squeezy lid.

3 (8m 44s):
I am.

0 (8m 45s):
Wow. That should be the first thing on your LinkedIn bio that, that that should be the, like, that has changed the world in some ways.

3 (8m 53s):
This is what innovation looks like at big companies and I was quite proud.

0 (8m 56s):
Yeah. Alright, so you're working at, at Kraft and I guess a, a few years in Kraft actually sent you to get an MBA at, at Harvard Business School.

3 (9m 6s):
They did. Which was enormously helpful. At the time I was paying back quite a lot of loans from Yeah. Undergrad and so Kraft Foods sponsoring my MBA at Harvard was huge for me. Yeah,

0 (9m 19s):
I bet. And, and, and I read that after you got your degree, you, you went to work at Kraft for a few more years and then I guess you took a short break when, when you had kids, but around like 2007, I guess you felt ready to to get back into the workforce, but you didn't go back to craft. Right?

3 (9m 36s):
Definitely. So I was ready to work again and I came across a company that at the time was called 1-800-DIAPERS. And I noticed that it was located about 10 minutes from where I lived in New Jersey.

0 (9m 50s):
And had you, do you remember how you found out about it?

3 (9m 53s):
I saw a job listing for a role. It was not what I do. It was a a product buyer position. Yeah. And Mark Lori's name and email were on it. And so I wrote to him cold

0 (10m 5s):
And he was unknown. He, we know who he is. He was unknown on our show a few years ago. He's an amazing entrepreneur, but he was just some dude who at

3 (10m 13s):
That point, some dude with a diaper company. Yeah. And so I wrote to him cold and just asked him for a job. I had no idea what it would become. I had no idea who Mark and Vinny, the co-founders were pretty quickly though during the interview process, they shared their business plan with me. And this is my first exposure in my career to really entrepreneurship could not have known what an amazing example it really was and would be. But the business plan itself was, it was like a 30 page narrative and I'd never seen anything like it. It was, it was so well thought out. It was insanely ambitious. I didn't even really know what to make of it to be honest, but I thought it sounded cool. So I was just ready to give it a try.

0 (10m 54s):
At that time it was 1-800-DIAPERS became of course diapers.com and then quid z And and for people listening to this episode, you should check out that episode with Mark Lori. 'cause it is a kind of a MasterClass. So you go and work for them in in and what did you initially, what, what did you do for diapers.com?

3 (11m 13s):
I was their marketing director essentially, and I was part-time for about two weeks. And then it was clear that it was going to be full-time and you know, early memories, we were maybe five people at the time. So it was just a few of us in a small office. Okay. It's unbelievable

0 (11m 29s):
'cause it of course became a huge company with just five people.

3 (11m 32s):
Yes. Yeah. And, and I remember just saying, you know what, I'm gonna go see if I can make a new print ad for Parenting Magazine. And that first print ad that I did actually featured my, at the time, 2-year-old son standing at my front door with a box of diapers on the doorstep with the headline diapers and more delivered to your door.

0 (11m 53s):
Nice.

3 (11m 54s):
And that was the kind of thing I was doing for them in the very beginning.

0 (11m 56s):
Alright, so let's pause for a moment and move over to Galyn because this is, this obviously will make sense when we get back to both of you. Galyn. It's funny because you, you and Christina did not know each other, but you kind of had these weirdly parallel lives. Like Christina went to Penn, you went to Princeton and then you both went to HBS to study business and you also worked at Craft.

2 (12m 25s):
I did,

0 (12m 25s):
Yeah. Like not at the same time as Christina a after Christina had left.

2 (12m 29s):
Right. And in the same office I was in the Tarrytown office too.

0 (12m 32s):
It's like that movie Sliding Doors. Exactly. That's not, that's a terrible parallel. It's something it's,

2 (12m 37s):
It's not a bad movie.

0 (12m 38s):
So you would get, I mean you would go on to work for Kraft as, as you mentioned, and then Cole Hanh. So very different kinds of products, food, apparel. And was your sort of, were you ever thinking I'm gonna start my own business one day or were you thinking I really want to just be a brand manager for big different companies?

2 (12m 57s):
It's funny, sort of both of those at different points. I think like Christina, when I got to craft, I was like, this is it. This is like the career that I wanna have.

0 (13m 6s):
Free Macaroni and Cheese Forever.

2 (13m 8s):
Forever. I mean the Craft Store was no joke. Yeah. It was awesome.

0 (13m 12s):
Craft singles, grilled cheese sandwiches forever. Totally.

2 (13m 15s):
Well also, I mean you may remember this, but My Forever was the brand that I got to work on, which was Crystal Light on the go. Oh sticks.

0 (13m 22s):
Interesting.

2 (13m 23s):
Yes. So I grew up with Crystal Light, like in the pitcher, in the fridge, like every kid in the eighties probably. Yep. But then like the Innovate, my sort of version of craft innovation was these on the Go sticks that you would just like pour into your 16.9 knots bottle of water. And it was so delicious. And so, and it

0 (13m 40s):
Must've been a huge product for Craft. It

2 (13m 43s):
Was huge. It was really huge. It was a huge growth driver for, I mean the, the whole category was powdered beverages and so Crystalite sitting among like a lot of these heritage brands Tang and Country Time and you know, sort of brands that, that weren't as relevant. Yeah. So being on Crystalite on the Go was an amazing experience. Alright.

0 (13m 60s):
You were at Kraft for a couple years and then to Cole Han before you ended up landing at what became Quidsi, which was started as 1-800-DIAPERS and this is 2010. How did you end up there?

2 (14m 11s):
Yeah, so it's funny, I, when I was at Kohl ha I was working with a woman who told me about this sort of job posting that she had gotten from a recruiter for a merchandising role at a company called diapers.com. And at the time I was pregnant with twins, it was maybe like spring of 2009. And she told me she wasn't gonna pursue it. And I thought about it for a bit and I was like, actually, you know, if you wouldn't mind sharing that job description with me, I'd love to talk to the recruiter about it. And so I did and I ended up, you know, sort of going down to the office at that point was in Montclair. And so I went down and that's when I met Christina.

2 (14m 53s):
Alright,

0 (14m 53s):
So Christina, you'd, you'd been made head of marketing at Quizzie and were moving into, into leading the retail side. And, and, and the company was growing. You, you guys were launching like a bunch of direct to consumer websites. I think there's like soap.com and and wag.com for pets. So at the time, what were you hiring Galyn to do?

3 (15m 16s):
I think Galyn, as she said, was initially interviewing for a merchandising role. But ultimately we hired her to be the marketing director for diapers.com. And what I remember most, by the way, about Galyn in that interview was that she was pregnant with twins and could hardly breathe.

2 (15m 34s):
Oh my God. I was nervous and also just had like two humans like pushing on all my things.

0 (15m 39s):
So you started at, when you started at Quie Galyn, you probably took some time off pretty soon after 'cause you had two kids.

2 (15m 48s):
Yeah, well actually, so I think my last interview was like two weeks before I ended up having the kids. They were two months early and I remember they had been born, but were still in the NICU when Christina and Vinny called me to give me the offer and then I didn't start until after I had been home with them. So I started at the beginning of January in 2010. So had been home with the girls for like four months or so before that.

0 (16m 12s):
And that year, like seven or eight months down down the road, Quinze gets acquired by Amazon. So you become an Amazon employee?

2 (16m 22s):
Yes.

0 (16m 23s):
So just tell me a little bit about your relationship. You know, did you guys, I mean you were, how were you working super closely together every day?

2 (16m 31s):
We were, it was sort of an all hands on deck all the time. There was a ton of pressure to sort of continue the amazing momentum that we had already seen on diapers.com in terms of sales, but also to get all of these other verticals launched. So there was a ton going on. Yep. And so we worked really closely together and it was just, it was hard. It was really hard. We learned so much, but there was just a ton of pressure and, and we all loved it. I think I, you know, I think we all just wanted to make sure that we hit the, the metrics that we had in place and our plans were really aggressive.

0 (17m 6s):
You would ba basically work together for four years at Quie. I know Galyn you mentioned that at times you had, you thought about maybe starting your own thing Christina. Did you, was that in the back of your mind or, or not quite?

3 (17m 20s):
I think Galyn was thinking about it a little bit before I was, I knew that I would probably after seven, you know, to eight years that I was ready to make a move, but I was less clear that it would be to start a business of my own.

0 (17m 34s):
And Galyn, even while you were at Quincy was at still, was that ideas percolating in your mind or?

2 (17m 41s):
I think not quite. I think I was just open to ideas that popped up and definitely always thinking about what I wish for for myself, you know, in sort of a shopping experience or stuff for the kids or a service or things like that. I, I think just like, yeah, wouldn't it be great if there was like a travel service that could do La Lala? Like those types of conversations happened a lot, but not in a sort of serious way really until we had, we had the primary thought. And so then it became, you know, we sort of got to the point where we were both probably ready to leave regardless. And so we're either gonna do this or we're gonna sort of go our separate ways and get new jobs and what are we gonna do?

2 (18m 21s):
Alright,

0 (18m 22s):
Well let's, let's back up for a second. Rewind the tape and tell me about, about that idea. But both of you guys were moms so, and, and children change you. I mean, this happened to me like I all of a sudden found myself dancing at Mommy and me groups because, because you could, you know, it just, it frees you up to do things that you wouldn't normally do. Like you got outta shake, shake, shaking your boot, you know, and you, and you're doing it with your kid at the, and and it does change, it changes a lot of things in your life and often leads to business ideas. So just kind of walk me through the conversations that would eventually lead to like, hey, this is something, what, what do you remember?

2 (18m 58s):
Yeah, so I, I think what I remember most is that it was a pretty reasonable combination between the experience that we had had@diapers.com and just sort of personal experiences shopping for our own kids' clothes and sort of coming away with the, what if there was a diapers.com type solution, which in our minds was like amazing customer service, really easy to shop for all the great sort of right products that busy parents need that are also easy to replenish but sort of apply to the clothing category where I think personally shopping for our own kids, we were frustrated and you know, had a bunch of questions about like the market that existed.

2 (19m 39s):
So, you know, my kids are girls but they never liked Pink growing up. And I remember early on one year them wanting orange jackets for winter and I had to buy them from the like in quotes boys section because the sort of girl's coat offering was like pink, white teal. And so, and so that was just a like a, huh, that doesn't make any sense. Like these coats are basically exactly the same. These kids are four. And then I think the other big one was around just simplicity. Hmm. You know, Christina and I grew up with brands like The Gap and Benetton that sort of stood for these great go-to styles that were sort of timeless and not over embellished and not trendy.

2 (20m 24s):
Just great colors and great fabrics that all sort of like mixed and matched together and we couldn't find that for our own kids and we missed it. Yeah.

0 (20m 32s):
Christina, what do you remember, I mean, what was frustrating to you about, because I, I mean I'm thinking like when my kids were little I'd just, you know, we'd just go to like Old Navy or whatever and you know, buy a bunch of stuff there and like we, you know, you, you buy cheap clothes for your kids kids 'cause they're gonna grow out of it. And then, you know, ideally you give it away. But I don't remember like a lot of pain points just buying clothing for them. What was it, what was frustrating to you about that process?

3 (20m 59s):
It was true for me too that I was doing the same thing. I was just shopping at sort of the Go-to places at the time, the Gaps and Old Nas of the world. But I remember Galyn walking into one of these fun lunches with maybe a glass or two of wine and she started to talk to me about it. And it was less that I felt like there were these enormous pain points and more that we started asking these why questions that then felt like the light bulb was going off. Like she said, like, why is it only certain colors for girls and boys? Why are we making like crazy expensive clothes that are dry clean only for babies? Why do you have to, you know, why can't you rebuy something that you really like? 'cause it changes every single season.

3 (21m 39s):
All of these things maybe didn't start out as enormous pain points, but when we started talking about them, it just didn't seem to make sense. We had just accepted those things.

2 (21m 48s):
I think the biggest problem for me is that at a high level it felt hard and no fun. And when you're shopping for kids it just should be fun. And so that was the thing that I think always just felt like, ugh. Like, okay, every five seconds these kids need new clothes. And every time I go to do that, I don't know where to shop. 'cause I'm not really loyal to any brands in particular. There aren't any that I love and that I'm so excited to go, you know, check out and then it's like a little bit of a slog 'cause it's expensive. And so that to me was sort of like, there has to be a better way. And one of the things that we sort of rallied around from the beginning was that when we wanted parents, when they shopped at primary to feel like they won, which certainly wasn't a feeling that we had shopping at any sort of other clothing brands for our kids.

2 (22m 35s):
Yeah.

0 (22m 35s):
Christina what did you, I mean when Galyn was telling you about this concept, where did you feel like, okay, we can really do this different? Like this is the problem with existing kids' clothing and this is how we can solve it.

3 (22m 50s):
Yeah, there were two parts of it for me. One was being able to picture this assortment and the brand that we could build. And I could picture it right away. And what I pictured was at a time when clothing in general and kids' clothing included had become so complicated, so proliferated with, you know, slogans and over embellishments. What I pictured, and we sometimes described it this way early on, was like the Lego of kids' clothing. Hmm. I pictured these simple styles in these beautiful, solid colors, the full rainbow of, of every color and just how amazing that would be.

0 (23m 30s):
So like basic t-shirts and short sleeve polos and long sleeve shirts and you know, trousers, just hoodies. Just very classic designs that were timeless.

3 (23m 43s):
Absolutely. And what was interesting to us was that that was really exciting to us, but it was really boring to everyone else who was in this industry. Yeah. This was the afterthought to them, the basics were boring and, and remember that we had come from, you know, diapers.com,

2 (24m 0s):
Nothing's more

3 (24m 1s):
Boring than diapers. Clothing was like itself was, you know, a huge step up in terms of excitement and, and to us there was just a lot of parallels.

0 (24m 10s):
So when, I mean when you were like, you were talking through this idea, right? At what point, 'cause this is like, there's a difference between talking through an idea and then taking the leap, right? And saying let's pursue this and there's a lot that has to happen. So how long do you think before, before you got to the point where you're like, yeah, let's try it. Was it like six months, a year, three months?

2 (24m 36s):
I do think it was about six months from sort of like, here's the concept, let's talk about it a little more. Let's talk about like whether we'd wanna do it together. Yeah. And I think we decided that maybe right before the holidays and then we ended up leaving on Valentine's Day in 2014. Hmm. And so I think for me, what I most remember about that time was feeling really scared about the idea of leaving. But also I remember Christina like feeling pretty definitive that she was going to leave

0 (25m 10s):
Even though this, you initially came to her with this idea. Yes. She was the one who was more like, let's go.

2 (25m 15s):
Yes, totally. But so I remember feeling like there was this window that we both had where we had had these amazing jobs, we had this experience, we had these incredible role models and Mark and Vinny. And we had this idea that we really were passionate about and felt like actually we were pretty well suited to try. It almost felt like, not to be overdramatic, but like a little now or never on this idea. And also I think we sort of gave ourselves a pep talk that if we tried this and it didn't work, we could probably go get other reasonable jobs. And so I feel like I like closed my eyes and we actually quit together. I remember, and I definitely was crying

0 (25m 57s):
Christina, you were ready to to go. You were itching to try something new, but your mom had raised you to never be dependent on anyone to, I mean, were you in a position where, you know, if this didn't work out, you'd be fine.

3 (26m 11s):
I was by that point and I was grateful for that. And I do think that I felt like I was, I had earned it. I had finally reached a point in my life where I could take risks like this. Yeah. And, and why not? And there was a lot to believe in. There was a idea to believe in, there was a partnership to believe in. We had done enough thinking to really believe that there was a business model behind this. And I remember thinking to myself, we have every reason to believe this could be a huge success, but if it isn't, I know it's gonna be an amazing experience.

0 (26m 41s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Galyn and Christina's idea went from a business plan to a hugely successful launch. And how a few months later it almost fell apart because of a critical mistake. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This. As a business to business marketer, your needs are unique. B2B buying cycles are long and your customers face incredibly complex decisions. Isn't it? Time you had a marketing platform built specifically for you? LinkedIn ads empowers marketers with solutions for you and your customers.

0 (27m 22s):
LinkedIn ads allow you to build the right relationships, drive results, and reach your customers in a respectful environment you'll have direct access to and build relationships with decision makers. A billion members, 180 million senior level executives and 10 million C-level executives. 79% of B2B content marketers said LinkedIn produces the best results for paid media. And so many of the brands on How, I, Built This use LinkedIn to reach customers every single day. Make B2B marketing everything it can be and get a $100 credit on your next campaign. Go to linkedin.com/built this to claim your credit.

0 (28m 3s):
That's linkedin.com/built. This terms and conditions apply this episode of How I. Built This is sponsored by Miro. If you haven't heard of it, Miro is this incredible online workspace. Our team relies on it for a lot of our own brainstorms and processes and I think it's super useful to try out if you wanna build something great with your team. One of my favorite features of Miro is called the Miro verse. Sometimes starting work on an online visual workspace can feel overwhelming, but with Miro verse you can select pre-made boards for pretty much any use case, collecting feedback, running meetings, icebreakers. It saves you the hassle of building from scratch.

0 (28m 45s):
And what's really cool is that a new template has just been added this time for me. We partnered with the folks over at Miro to create a how to build a podcast Miro verse template to help kickstart your journey to making a podcast. Check it out and let me know what you think. Head on over to miro.com/ HIBT. That's MIR o.com/ HIBT. To check out our Miro verse template for yourself,

4 (29m 14s):
My name is Nazar, I'm from Washington DC and hands down my favorite episode of How I Built This was with Tristan Walker of Walker and Company. I can't tell you how many times I've listened to this episode, whether it be for a pick me up or bit of inspiration, Tristan's words and his faith just always seemed to do the trick for me. And I'm now on a similar path as a young black entrepreneur, one that was undoubtedly influenced by something Tristan had said, that episode, which is that you should do the the thing that you're uniquely positioned to do.

0 (29m 44s):
If you wanna share your favorite episode of How I Built This record a short voice memo on your phone telling us your name, where you're from, what your favorite episode is and why a lot like the voice memo you just heard. And email it to us at HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com and we'll share your favorites right here in the ad breaks in future episodes. And thanks so much. We love you guys. You are the best. And now back to the show. Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 2014 and Christina and Galyn have just quit their jobs.

0 (30m 24s):
They're determined to start a direct to consumer kids clothing brand. And the idea is to sell just the essentials in solid colors at an affordable price. And of course the first order of business is to write up a business plan.

2 (30m 40s):
I think we actually said to each other like, let's just take a week, like to get our hair cut to maybe go to the dentist to like catch up with the kids and then we'll start. So, so we had a little a one week catch up and then we felt like we needed to just immediately start working on the business plan. And so we found a space that we were really excited to work from. WeWork had just started around then and we sort of looked at it but it felt expensive. And so we actually both joined the Reebok Sports Club on the upper West side in New York and worked from there for like more, maybe six months or more. We met every morning like in workout clothes with sort of like the loose intent to maybe exercise that day.

2 (31m 24s):
We very, very rarely did, but they had great wifi and they had a cafe with delicious food. And so that's where we pulled our business plan together from the Reebok Sports Club.

0 (31m 34s):
Just working out and then having coffee, not

3 (31m 37s):
Working out. Not

0 (31m 38s):
Working out, not working out. Not working out. Okay, alright. Nothing, no judgment, not judging you. And the idea Christina from the beginning was to raise money, was to find investors and to see if you can start that way.

3 (31m 53s):
It was, I think we knew that we would need a significant amount of seed money in order to build a website and hire a small team. I think Galyn, at the time that we launched, were we

2 (32m 4s):
Six people? I think we were six, yeah. Yeah.

0 (32m 6s):
And so how much did you guys think you needed to raise?

2 (32m 9s):
Our target was $750,000 to basically get us to the point where we were ready to launch. So our first inventory by obviously some product development along the way and then mostly otherwise it was people who could help us build a website, could help us think through sort of the creative and what does the brand look like and also, you know, sort of start to get clothing designed and made.

0 (32m 33s):
So let's start with just the fundraising, 'cause I wanna break it down how you really got off the ground. I have to imagine two Harvard MBA's, deep experience in retail, in startups, in consumer and direct to consumer. This was like a no brainer. Like you guys walk in and you could raise the money pretty easily.

2 (32m 55s):
I wish that was true. Yeah, I mean I think we going into it guy, if we're being honest, probably thought kind of like you described like yeah,

0 (33m 9s):
I mean you knew Mark Lori, right? He was probably gonna in introduce you to a bunch of people. I mean your resumes alone, no brainer, right?

2 (33m 16s):
Yes. And and he definitely did. He and Vinny were, were so helpful with introductions. Yeah. But I think we like just grossly underestimated how hard it would be and also how being honest, like how much we didn't love it. I think communicating our vision when it was so crystal clear to us, we could like see it perfectly. Like communicating that to someone who, you know, had less experience in the apparel category, maybe didn't shop for their kids' clothes was hard. Yeah. And I think also it just felt like salesy to us. Like we had this idea and we often would walk into a pitch knowing that we needed to be like, and this is the most amazing idea you've ever heard. Yeah, yeah.

2 (33m 56s):
And, and instead authentic to us we were sort of like, yeah, well we have this, you know, we have an idea for a clothing brand that we think is gonna be pretty great. And so it just wasn't, it wasn't awesome out of the gate.

0 (34m 7s):
Were there, were there, I mean in, you know, in some of these meetings with investors, were there any investors who were like, look, you gotta put a logo on there, you know, you've gotta have a big p or something that, and were you guys, if you heard that, were you just like, no, the whole point of this is to not have a logo or, or to be sort of brand name focused.

2 (34m 29s):
Yes. This is maybe one of our favorite stories. And it was, it happened in the Reebok Sports Club in like one of their tiny phone booths that we had to fight people for every day. But an investor definitely early investor call suggested exactly what you said, that like the clothing needed to be recognizable on the playground. How could it ever work if it wasn't? But rather than suggesting a logo actually suggested that we put huge expletive zippers on everything. Like as an example

0 (34m 59s):
You just said expletive, they didn't want the zippers to have expletive.

2 (35m 3s):
No, but like huge effing zipper was like

0 (35m 5s):
Big zippers. The recomme giant zipper on like the hoodie.

2 (35m 9s):
Yes. That was, that was a recommendation. That's,

0 (35m 12s):
It's not a bad idea with it. Not a bad idea. I think I, I can see, I can see like a big fat zipper, like a three inch zipper.

2 (35m 22s):
Yeah. That's

0 (35m 22s):
Kind of cool.

2 (35m 23s):
That was, that was I kind a suggestion. Yeah, well that can be yours. That's a free, free idea for you guys.

0 (35m 29s):
I take, I'm starting my new zipper

2 (35m 30s):
Caroline, not today,

0 (35m 31s):
Big zipper big zipper.com. But, but so you know, but I understand the thinking behind it, right? I mean somebody is saying, can it be replicated? Can you actually protect your, your brand or product? You can understand the skepticism from some people initially when they're like, wait, it's just a basic shirt.

2 (35m 50s):
Exactly. And that for us it was like, yes, exactly. It's just a basic shirt and it's so hard to find. So I think that was part of it too, was that we kind of knew from shopping this category so much and and from all of our friends who were doing the same, that although it seems like it's everywhere and so easy to do, it just wasn't. And also I think as we learned and got into it by focusing on it, we could actually do it really well in a way that was sort of profitable and, you know, a solid business and a the basis of an amazing customer relationship where yes, a bunch of other companies could and do sell a basic white T-shirt sort of in the corner of their store. But it's an afterthought.

2 (36m 30s):
And so the experience around it and sort of the, the benefit of it is just very different for those brands.

0 (36m 35s):
And here the other question is, I mean the kids market is, it's an interesting market because of course unlike adult apparel, kids have to, you know, they grow outta stuff, they gotta buy a bunch of stuff. But I, I also wonder whether it's a more fickle market in some ways that like kids like one toy and then it's hot for a month and then that's it. They like nobody's talking about it anymore. You know, fidget spinners who's doing fidget spinners, right? Is there that kind of ephemeral quality to kids' clothing?

3 (37m 10s):
I think I would say that one end of the spectrum, sure there's a lot of fun in shopping for trendy fashion driven clothing and trying new things all the time. But at the other end of the spectrum you do want some go-tos. Some things you can count on. And one thing that we've really learned even more so over time about kids is that comfort really matters. And so when they find a legging that feels just right, you know, or a sweatshirt that is super comfortable, they wanna be able to get it again. And at all of our competitors, everything was changing even those basics every single season so that the next time around it was made from a slightly different fabric or it had a different fit or now it had a ruffle on it. And so for those go-tos, they just didn't exist in the same way everywhere else.

3 (37m 54s):
Yeah. And there is definitely a need for those, for kids and for parents so that you're not reinventing the wheel every time.

0 (38m 0s):
Do you just want a shirt without Bart Simpson on it?

2 (38m 2s):
Please, please. Or mommy's little slugger. That was our favorite, favorite

0 (38m 9s):
Slogan or I mean admittedly I bought when of my kids were little, I bought them like punk band shirts just 'cause I thought it was funny. Sure. You know the Ramones?

2 (38m 18s):
Yeah. That's all Ramones do as much

3 (38m 19s):
As you can before they can speak. Yeah,

0 (38m 21s):
Yeah. I just throw that on them. So, alright, so you have this, this, you've got the pitch and you also wanted in your pitch to offer the, the clothing for under 25 bucks. That was the idea. Everything was was under 25 bucks.

2 (38m 37s):
That was the idea. Yes. And oh my God,

0 (38m 39s):
These investors must have been like, wait, so you wanna no brand and under 25 bucks and you want my money?

2 (38m 46s):
In hindsight, it does sound funny. It, it's a, it's a tough proposition to get behind. But yeah, we, we wanted the clothing to just be clearly accessible. I think we wanted to make incredibly high quality fabric, durable, soft, all those things. But we wanted people to be able to buy these as sort of like easy, no-brainer go-tos. Not the cheapest in the market, but also not expensive.

0 (39m 10s):
Got it. Okay. So the idea was you wanted to raise 750,000, I think you actually raised more than $2 million.

2 (39m 18s):
We did, yeah. We

0 (39m 19s):
Feel, we did manage to find people who weren't

2 (39m 21s):
Skeptical. We did, we found some people, we followed all the breadcrumbs. I think, you know, we've said we had probably more than 50 meetings ended up with two sort of lead venture investors as well as like a bunch of friends and family who, you know, were sort of excited about the idea and, and wanted to to be supportive. So yeah, we raised two and a half million in that seed round. Alright,

0 (39m 43s):
So you get the two and a half million, this is June of 2014 I think. And with that money, presumably you want create a, you know, a number of different piece of apparel and you've gotta manufacture and you've gotta design them. So with that money, what did you initially do? I mean I'm assuming first thing you did was hire a couple people.

2 (40m 4s):
Yeah, we did and, and I think we started, well there were sort of two pieces of it. One was were the sort of things that we had had direct experience with before, which was sort of like the building of the website and creative, what do we want the brand to look like and the photography and things like that. And then the hardest work I think for us was just figuring out how to make great quality clothing, which we hadn't had any direct experience making clothing and just completely underestimated how hard that was to do when you had never done it before. And so that was the, the thing we spent the most time on was trying to figure out like who to partner with, what factories would make these clothes, how do we figure out what fabric to buy that led us to just ask for help from anyone we could who had any connection to The apparel industry at all?

0 (40m 52s):
Were either of you guys prepared to design the clothing? Did you feel confident that maybe you guys could sketch out some designs? Well,

2 (40m 59s):
Sketching, no, but I think we felt like we had a really strong point of view in terms of what we wanted the clothing to look like and we could reasonably represent it with, you know, combinations of things that we could shop in the market. We also had a really clear sense of what we wanted the color palette to be, which was another big differentiator. So yeah.

0 (41m 22s):
And just clear like primary color, yellow greens, blues reds.

2 (41m 27s):
Yes. All the colors. So when we launched, I think we had 35 styles in total and most of them came in over 20 colors. And so 35

0 (41m 36s):
Styles. So like what T-shirts gimme a sense of a of

2 (41m 39s):
Two. Yeah. So for kids it was t-shirts, PJs, leggings, pants, sweatshirts, joggers. And then for baby too, we had baby suits and zip footy PJs and and things like that. So that was sort of the crux of the assortment. We had a little cardigan sweater. Yes, pretty basic assortment.

0 (41m 59s):
And then I have to assume that during that time you're trying to figure out, trying to locate a factory or factories that could make this stuff for you at, you know, reasonable costs. So how did you, tell me about the process of trying to find those places.

3 (42m 12s):
So as Galyn said, we were way underestimated what it would take to figure out how to connect with factories and get the clothing made. And in the beginning we tried to do it ourselves. We we tried to get leads on specific factories and actually call someone there. Yeah. And we also learned that those are often secrets. People don't want to always share that information either. In the end we got a good reference to an agent and I think what we concluded was that we were going to need one, an agent who would be the intermediary between us and factories that they knew well and could connect us with

0 (42m 45s):
In China.

3 (42m 46s):
China and India.

0 (42m 47s):
Alright, so primary.com you launch March 31st, 2015, 31 styles for babies, girls and boys, everything under 25 bucks. Which sounds like a great deal. So how did you, how did it do? I mean obviously there are millions and millions of websites out there you launch and people have to Discover it. So how to do, initially,

3 (43m 13s):
First of all, the first thing we did from a marketing perspective is we armed everyone we knew, friends, family and investors with a personalized promotion code that gave anyone that used it free shipping for a year, which was kind of a yeah. Crazy offer. Okay. And that was a, a really effective way to just leverage everyone we knew to get the word out on day one.

0 (43m 39s):
What do you remember about the launch Galyn?

2 (43m 42s):
I think two things. There's one before and one after the immediate before the launch, Christina and I went to the warehouse to see like the sort of first delivery of you know, finished product that we were about to go live with and you know, we were opening boxes and pulling out product and looking at everything and

3 (43m 60s):
I,

2 (44m 0s):
I mean part of it was just so overwhelming that like we'd been thinking about this for so long and now we were actually here and here was our primary clothing. So really proud on one hand. On the other hand there were definitely a lot of products that we, we opened up and sort of looked at and were like, this doesn't look great. And so I maybe was crying a little bit also

3 (44m 21s):
Then,

2 (44m 23s):
And one thing in particular, I mean footie zip footies for us have become like a pretty core product. But like we opened, there were a few colorways of that zip footie and the feet had somehow been cut as like triangles. I'm not kidding, it was, it looked like little dinosaur feet on these zip footies and we were like, oh god, like we can't sell these what is happening? And so yeah, so there were a bunch of styles that just weren't weren't right And so, so that I remember very clearly and then like the actual launch itself, I just think like felt so exciting. My kids were staying with my mom and sent me the cutest video like go get a mom.

2 (45m 4s):
And that was awesome. And you know, our little team, there were six of us when we launched and we'd all been in the office late that night and it was just sort of like, ugh, we did it. And so it was just a huge like proudest moment.

0 (45m 18s):
I think I read you sold out your, for all your inventory in that first, you know, in a couple weeks.

2 (45m 25s):
We did. We sold through things more quickly than we thought. I think also we just had an enormous miscommunication, I think part of having never done this before ourselves on the lead times to get back in stock on things. Yeah. And so in our minds we thought that when we placed a sort of reorder that we would be able to get back into product in within eight weeks. And so we were very careful, we ordered, you know, enough inventory to start to last us at least that long plus some cushion and safety stock formulas and all the analytics. But the reality was that to place a rebuy, like we weren't gonna get product for like three to four months.

2 (46m 11s):
And so things got really scary because not only did we sell through it faster than we thought, but also to get back in stock on product was gonna be like two to three months longer than we thought it was gonna be. And so then all of a sudden we have huge momentum from the launch. We're so excited, everything's sort of like working to start and then we have no inventory for like a, a couple months and that was not good.

0 (46m 34s):
So you basically sell it out, which is great, but then you've got nothing right to sell for months.

2 (46m 42s):
Right, exactly. Nothing to sell and not a lot of cash runway. And we just somehow totally missed like maybe the most critical detail of all like the first two years, which was how long the lead times are to get product. And so yeah, I don't, I don't even like know how to explain it 'cause we, we just totally missed it.

3 (47m 1s):
We definitely missed it on getting in front of those lead times and we, I think also assumed it would be reliable and the reality is it just isn't always reliable. Things are late sometimes. So the result of it really was that our intended year one just didn't quite materialize 'cause we just didn't have the inventory for it. So

0 (47m 19s):
You had this amazing launch. Yes. But then it was like flat

3 (47m 23s):
And then we just had to almost go on pause. And so our plans for year one kind of got pushed into year two by we, by the time it got to year two we figured those things out. We were able to get the inventory that we needed and then we could have a more meaningful launch essentially. It was kind of a take two on the launch in some ways.

0 (47m 41s):
And that year, raising that money, I guess you guys had a, took a hit when one of your investors, something happened with an investor who, who had committed and, and then I guess pulled out what happened.

2 (47m 54s):
Yeah, even sort of with all of these headwinds little inventory happening, we knew we needed to raise our series A. We did a bunch of pitches again just like we had in in the seed round. Ended up connecting with an investor who was really interested. We were really excited about, had a term sheet that we had signed and we're just sort of waiting for the signature back when we, when we got an email that was something to the effect of, you know, hey guys, do you have a minute to jump on the phone? And that's never good. This is never a good thing.

0 (48m 29s):
Never good.

2 (48m 31s):
And so we jumped on the phone and yeah, the message was, you know, I'm so sorry but I have another company in my portfolio that is sort of pivoting into the same space and I can't make this investment now. And so more tears. That was like one of, I mean there were a lot of moments in that first year where we were like, oh well, like this is, this is over. And so that was really hard. Yeah. But I think to the credit of our existing investors from our previous round, they were able to sort of bridge us into the spring so that we could sort of go back out and raise a proper series A

0 (49m 14s):
I think you ended up doing about a million dollars in year one. Not, not bad at all, pretty good. But, but probably lower than what you were hoping.

3 (49m 21s):
That's exactly right. And it was a big learning a year for us as far as figuring out the marketing. We definitely had some Miss starts there too. We tried some ads on Facebook that basically flopped outta the gate. What do they

0 (49m 35s):
Say?

3 (49m 35s):
Well they said brilliant, brilliant basics under $25.

0 (49m 40s):
Brilliant basics under 25 bucks. Here's the ad. Yes. Simple. Exactly.

3 (49m 43s):
It was, and it was straightforward and it was the premise, but in the context of Facebook, it just didn't break through. And then at the same time, what was really interesting was from, you know, year one we were getting a lot of great feedback from the customers who had chopped us. And we were noticing that the things that they were saying back to us about what they loved about our clothing were better than our ads. They would say things like, no crappy princesses, I'm down.

2 (50m 11s):
Yeah.

3 (50m 11s):
So our next ad went out focused on our, our core baby suit product and said something like, not all baby suits need to say little slugger. Yeah. And it was a night and day difference that

0 (50m 24s):
Resonated with some,

3 (50m 25s):
With parents resonated. Yes.

0 (50m 26s):
Because it said not all baby clothing needs to say a little slugger. Okay, I get it. But here's, here's a question right There is obviously a huge market for that stuff. I mean you can go into, you know, old Navy or any, any store, I'm just picking that one and a lot of baby clothes say daddy's princess or you know, I'm the boss or whatever. I'm just, you know, something like that. You know. So there is a risk to putting out an ad like that, right? Because you are appealing just to a specific type of parent who doesn't like those, like, I don't like 'em. Is that a big enough market? So

3 (51m 1s):
There were two interesting things about it. The first point is that when we put that ad out there, that's exactly what people started talking about. Some people liked little Slugger and some people didn't. And they started talking about it and these ads were getting a ton of engagement and so it broke through and it was, you know, driving discussion. And the other thing I think we would say is that brands are not built by playing it straight down the middle. And so we felt strongly about leaning into our point of view. And our point of view doesn't have to be for everyone. And we're not against, you know, other brands doing other things. But we started to be pretty clear about the fact that we were no logos, no slogans, no sequence.

3 (51m 42s):
It was a clear position, a clear point of view. And the brand really started to be formed.

0 (51m 48s):
And when you, I mean one of the things that I'm, I'm curious about in terms of, of inventory is unlike a lot of apparel brands, you could probably overestimate, I mean, or or order more inventory than you needed because it wasn't like your styles were changing, these were evergreen styles, right?

2 (52m 8s):
Yes. And that was a huge benefit for us both in terms of sort of learning about demand from early on and not having to get it exactly right because we knew whatever we weren't gonna sell in that season, we could just keep on the site 'cause it wasn't going outta fashion. And also kind of resulted in a really great customer experience because we could lean into inventory confidently. It just meant that we were in stock at a really high rate. And so, you know, we wanted to make sure that for these busy families we always had the black leggings or the T-shirts that they needed. And we were able to do that because of this point.

0 (52m 44s):
So sort of year two, which is 2016, you're starting to focus more on how to market it. Right. And I think one of the things that you, one of the major changes or a major change you made I guess in 2016 is you basically stopped having boys and girls sections. You just went to the website and it was just ages.

3 (53m 4s):
That's right. And in retrospect it, I don't know why we didn't start that way. I think we probably did just think that we had to follow conventional wisdom there and how else will people know how to shop. But we had otherwise offered, you know, this assortment that was for everyone. We just offered it across boys and girls sections. And what was interesting was that our customers sort of called us out. We got notes from customers saying why even have boys and girls sections? And we were like Yeah. Why? And so we, we pretty quickly did away with those and started marketing just to baby and kids and have ever since. And

0 (53m 39s):
Yeah. And Gail, I'm curious to get your take on that. I mean, you know, we're living at a time where everything is unfortunately politicized, but I mean, was there any concern that by eliminating the boys and girls categories, 'cause most websites, you know, have men's, women's children, you know, I, I'm curious, were you worried at all about any kind of backlash around that?

2 (54m 3s):
So we actually weren't, I think like Christina said, it just, you know, the second we heard it, it, it made so much sense. It was just sort of one step further from, you know, wanting my girls to be able to buy Orange Jackets at the beginning. We, we did get some questions though, around the functionality, which is, you know, yes, every store has boys and girls sections, so aren't you worried that your conversion's gonna fall off? Or customers might not be able to find what they're looking for. And I think we just felt like maybe that could be true, but also we weren't worried about it because we felt like it wouldn't be that hard for people to find clothing because our categories were very straightforward and our site experience was, was good.

2 (54m 45s):
I think the other thing too, that I would just add on, you know, sort of showing kind of every kid in every style is just that we've learned from, from customers too, how meaningful it is for their own kids to sort of see themselves in our clothing. And so boys can feel comfortable buying anything they want. And, and same for girls. And so it, it just gave us a lot of conviction to keep going

Mint Mobile (55m 10s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Christina and Galyn and credit their close relationship. They've called it their superpower. It's one of the keys to their success. As co-CEOs stay with us, I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I. Built This. Your business gets to a certain size and the cracks start to emerge. Things you used to do in a day are taking a week. You have too many manual processes, you don't have one source of truth. If this is you, you should know these three numbers. 37,000 25, 1 30 7,000. That's the number of businesses which have upgraded to NetSuite by Oracle 25 NetSuite turns 25 this year. That's 25 years of helping businesses do more with less close their books in days, not weeks. And drive down costs. One, because your business is one of a kind. So you get a customized solution for all of your KPIs in one efficient system with one source of truth, manage risk, get reliable forecasts and improve margins. Everything you need to grow all in one place. Right now, download NetSuite's popular KPI checklist designed to give you consistently excellent performance absolutely free at NetSuite dot com slash built. That's NetSuite dot com slash built to get your own KPI checklist NetSuite dot com slash built on How I Built This. We love to highlight businesses that are doing things a better way so that you can live a better life. That's why when I found Mint Mobile, I had to share Mint Mobile ditched retail stores and all those overhead costs, and instead sells their phone plans online and passes those savings onto you for a limited time. They're passing on even more savings with a new customer offer that cuts all Mint Mobile plans to $15 a month when you purchase a three month plan. That's Unlimited talk text and data for $15 a month. Mint Mobile's network is crystal clear and ever since I switched to using it, I've saved so much money and you can use your own phone with any Mint Mobile plan and bring over your own phone number along with all your existing contacts to get this new customer offer and your new three month Unlimited wireless plan for just 15 bucks a month, go to Mint Mobile dot com slash built. That's Mint Mobile dot com slash built. Cut your wireless bill to 15 bucks a month at Mint Mobile dot com slash built. Additional taxes, fees and restrictions apply se Mint Mobile for details.

0 (58m 1s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So by 20 18, 3 years after launch, primary is growing fast. They're up to a few dozen employees and around 30 million in revenue. But how to keep growing is always in the back of Christina and Galen's minds all while trying to stay true to their brand and its style. One of the the questions I have is like, you didn't really have to spend a lot on I, I'm assuming new designs or am I wrong? Because so much of your designs are intentionally there to last forever. You're not like, or, or like at this certain point did you, did you guys have a conversation where you're like, Hey, you know, we should have like a fall line or a winter, like we should have, you know, maybe do these more sort of seasonal lines or something like that, or collections.

2 (58m 55s):
So many conversations. Yeah. Yeah, we did and, and I think it was once we started seeing this sort of loyalty and repeat customer base that was continuing to come back at a pretty predictable rate that we started to feel more comfortable and confident leaning into kind of extensions on the core of what we had launched with. It was some new categories that we felt were sort of big and that we had kind of earned a right to play in like outerwear and swim. But also, you know, we had customers too who loved us for the simplicity of our solid, colorful basics, but were also like, I don't know, maybe you guys think you could throw in a stripe or, you know, rainbows can be colors too.

2 (59m 40s):
And so then, you know, we sort of thought about it and, and stripes felt to us sort of almost as timeless and classic as solids in some instances. And so we started with stripes, you know, our rainbow stripe T-shirt was, was maybe one of the bestselling items we had ever sold. And so

0 (59m 57s):
It's like, it's amazing. It's like a shirt I wore as a kid,

2 (59m 60s):
Right? I know. Isn't that so fun? I

0 (1h 0m 2s):
Have that shirt based version of that. Yeah.

2 (1h 0m 3s):
Yes, it's so happy. But these extensions into sort of classic stripes and, you know, a star print or something like that felt reasonable. And so those were the things that we started to introduce more seasonally, but like 10% layers onto the, the core of the business, which was much more year round. I

0 (1h 0m 20s):
Mean, I'm curious about this idea of evergreen really, because I, I mean, what we think of as basics today, I think really we're thinking of like eighties clothing that really kind of blew up in the eighties, but how do you actually make something that is ever gonna mean, are, are you, are the things that you guys make identical to basics from the eighties or, or are there updates that make them look like they're of our time now?

2 (1h 0m 47s):
I think it's a combination and I think it depends on, on the style. So when we started, you know, sort of our concept of evergreen was that if we were gonna launch something, we needed to believe that we could sell it for at least five years, right? And so for us, I think it wasn't an, it had to be evergreen forever and ever, but like five year horizon. So it wasn't, you know, super trendy. But at the same time we're, you know, shopping the market all the time and, and making sure that there isn't anything we're offering that is, you know, suddenly outdated that we just need to take another look at.

0 (1h 1m 21s):
To me, the concept of evergreen clothing is actually kind of genius because fashion changes so much. Even things like when I was a teenager it was all baggy clothes, lot of baggy and then it went skinny. And then I'm like, I'm looking at my nephews and they're baggy again and, and my son's it baggy. Like he doesn't wear skinny. I, I'm still wearing skinny jeans like a weirdo, like I'm a middle aged man and I'm like, what, what, what happened? I'm like looking around, I'm like, I didn't get the memo. So I mean how do you adapt to those kinds of things?

2 (1h 1m 55s):
Yeah, I think I would say that we just continue to remind ourselves how enormous this market is and how many other people are doing those things. And so it takes the pressure off a little bit. Like a lot of people don't want the sort of like newest, latest trend and are just looking for the things that we were looking for when we started the company, which is solid, reliable, great quality, beautiful colored, you know, sort of gender neutral clothes that they can count on and come back to year after year as their kids grow. Because so many competitors aren't focused on that at all. We feel like there's just an enormous market still left for us even if we don't do a lot of the trend.

2 (1h 2m 40s):
So it helps to take the temptation away a little bit.

0 (1h 2m 43s):
Tell me about your, your relationship as co-founders. I mean Christina, you hired Galyn and I think both of you guys are co-CEOs if, if I'm not mistaken, is that right?

3 (1h 2m 56s):
We are.

0 (1h 2m 57s):
So how do you divide and conquer? I mean how do you, do you just sort of focus on areas that you're, each of you are separately more interested in?

3 (1h 3m 5s):
So we have one main way that we divide and conquer. Yeah. That has evolved over time in that is that Galyn focuses more on everything to do with the clothing itself from design and sourcing to merchandising and planning. And I focus more on the marketing and creative side. Beyond that I do think we probably just in different situations play to our strengths or things we feel strongly about. And so we worked together on all important decisions but in lots of areas of the company, from operations to our customer care team to you know, our financial planning and we just both get involved and sort of divide and conquer as we go.

2 (1h 3m 49s):
Yeah, it was funny for the beginning 'cause I think what we did see in the market was even co-founders that were, were much more complimentary in terms of their backgrounds than Christina and I who as we've said are basically the same person on paper. But I think we have worked together now for so long, so starting in 2010. So, you know, coming up on 14 years together we know each other really well and we trust each other so much and I think just respect each other. It makes it easier to work together because of those things. And so even in the divide and conquer, it's so helpful to know each other so well because we can use judgment on things where I know when I hear something, whether I can just go ahead and make the decision and Christina's probably gonna be fine with it.

2 (1h 4m 35s):
And we have gotten really efficient at knowing when to just like make a decision and go on our own versus bring it to the other person in an instance where we don't totally agree. We're both very happy to sort of let the other person, whoever feels strongly be the decider.

0 (1h 4m 52s):
How do you, I mean I think just this year, 2023 and the year we're talking will hit profitability, which is awesome. Congratulations. Thank you.

2 (1h 5m 1s):
But

0 (1h 5m 1s):
That's still stressful and stress can test any relationship. How have you guys withstood the stress of, you know, the ups and downs of the business? I mean, have there been times where you've had arguments or, or there's been tension between you?

3 (1h 5m 19s):
I think the first point we would make is that in those times of stress, it helps to not be alone. Yeah. To not feel alone. And so having each other usually alleviates a lot of that stress and we can work through it together, but do we have times of stress and tension? Sure. I think the rule between us that's been really important is that we never let that go on and fester. Yeah. So if we start to feel like some sense of tension or someone's, you know, getting annoyed, maybe we're just stressed that day, we'd make a point to talk about it right away.

2 (1h 5m 50s):
Yeah, I agree. And actually as an only child, like Christina has said that she feels like she's sort of like taught me how to have a sister where you can have arguments and disagreements and it doesn't mean that things are totally broken or, or not gonna work. It's just like part of how relationships are. And so I, I've definitely evolved

0 (1h 6m 12s):
There. There's so many things that you guys have done that have been counterintuitive, right? Like eliminating the, the the boys and girls section or you know, trying to, he built a company around primary basic clothing with primary colors, evergreen clothing and those two things have worked. There's a third thing you did, you instituted a four day work week. You are like France, you're like Sweden. I mean I love that. I think it's awesome. I wanna work one day a week actually. She do one day work week and six days of just, you know, hiking and hanging out with your kids, hanging out with my wife. But how, tell me why you did that. 'cause it, I I can hear a lot of leaders hearing this and thinking, okay, how does that work?

0 (1h 6m 57s):
So what was the, tell me the idea behind it.

2 (1h 6m 60s):
So the original idea actually was from a, a podcast and

0 (1h 7m 6s):
That you heard somebody talking about that

2 (1h 7m 8s):
We heard, so it was Youngme Moon who was a professor at Harvard Business School. She was talking about the four day work week and how she herself was sort of disappointed that it hadn't become more of a thing in the US and her, her sort of premise was that as a culture and a society, like the hallmark of advancement is more free time for people. But she hadn't seen that happening and just couldn't understand why. Yeah. And so then Covid happened and so I had this four day work week in the back of my mind and in those moments it felt sort of even more relevant. And so we just started with a little bit of an experiment that was just like we, we gave everyone Friday off.

2 (1h 7m 52s):
Like maybe just starting as one Friday off like a surprise sort of like everyone takes the day off tomorrow. Yep. And everyone was so appreciative. I think we all felt so much better coming back to work on Monday morning that we then sort of instituted that for like a month and then we did it for the whole summer. And then, you know, we felt like we weren't really missing a beat work-wise. It's also, it's always hard to know what the pro forma would've been been like, but could you have grown faster or could you have done more things working five days a week? The honest answer is who knows? But I think we just ourselves felt the personal benefit so much. The team was so appreciative and loved it so much that we decided to sort of keep it permanent.

2 (1h 8m 33s):
And the, the way we do it and describe it is, is not that no one's ever working on Friday. It's more meant to be sort of a catchup day where we don't have meetings and so it's just an extra day for people to recharge in sort of whatever way that means for them.

0 (1h 8m 50s):
I love this idea of a four day work week. I think it's awesome, right? But on the other hand, I can see the argument that a four day work week just limits productivity. That actually, and I don't know, I don't have the data on this, maybe I'm totally wrong, is you know, are you seeing changes in productivity?

3 (1h 9m 10s):
I think we would argue that it has benefited productivity as well as employee loyalty. Hmm. Which both have very tangible benefits for the company. And so again, to be clear, when we went from five days to four days, it wasn't like we were strictly saying you will now work 32 hours a week instead of 40 hours a week. The idea was to offer people very meaningful flexibility by having no meeting Fridays and allowing them to recharge and take care of personal things on that day and otherwise get their work done. And what we're finding is that people are getting their work done, they're meeting ambitious goals.

3 (1h 9m 50s):
We, you know, are having a great year this year for example, going and will be profitable. And we're doing that with a very productive team that is also very loyal. Most of our team has been here over four years.

0 (1h 10m 2s):
So in a sense, I mean it is like another way to retain, we know this like when you lose an employee, it's a pain. It's expensive because it's expensive. You gotta retrain somebody new, it takes six to nine months to get them up to speed. Employee turnover is not ideal for companies. This is a way to keep people, to incentivize people to stay I guess.

3 (1h 10m 21s):
Definitely. And you know, you often send surveys out to your team Yeah. About various things and it can be hard to get them to do them. You have to remind them, when we sent out the survey about the four day work week, I have never seen anyone respond faster. We got responses from the entire team within about eight minutes and I think that they were maybe terrified that we were considering doing away with it and just wanted to make sure we knew how much they loved it. And yeah. And all of our actual surveys about employee satisfaction, I think the two things that our team sites the most are our mission and the four day work week.

0 (1h 10m 57s):
I saw a story recently about how Columbia, I think it's Columbia Sportswear, they're shifting their manufacturing out of Asia to Central America because of Covid. Sort of that experience taught them that like this is, you know, you can't really bridge the Pacific as much as they thought they could. And it's interesting they're opening all of these factories and, and Mexico apparently is really benefiting from this. A lot of factories opening in Mexico, in Guatemala, central America in Peru. Is there a world where you would look to, to this landmass here, north, south America to to bring more of your manufacturing there just, just in case there was a disruption?

2 (1h 11m 34s):
I think potentially we have looked at it a little bit so far and sort of where we've netted out at least to date is that because those regions just have sort of less access to cotton, it is a little bit harder on both the development front but also the sort of transport of the fabric which, which you would need to potentially import into those countries before you make it. And so it adds a little bit of complexity. With that said though, we're still curious about it, it's hard not to be when, you know, the lead times of getting something from Guatemala are three days on the water versus three weeks.

2 (1h 12m 14s):
And so it's definitely sort of on the radar. But for now I think we're sort of firmly in, in Vietnam and India with still a little bit of production in China.

0 (1h 12m 23s):
Tell me a little bit about the end game here. I mean, you know, when you ever go to investors, obviously, you know they're giving you that kind of a timeline and they want a return eventually. And usually that means selling or going public. What are you thinking Galyn? I mean, you know, you know, that's the trajectory. So it has to be in the back of your mind what, what's gonna happen or where it's gonna go.

2 (1h 12m 50s):
It's definitely in the back of our minds, I think I would say from the beginning, even though we did raise venture capital money and, and we sort of understood what came with that. Yeah,

0 (1h 13m 2s):
I think you've raised about $60 million over the course of the years, right?

2 (1h 13m 5s):
Yes, exactly. Yep. We started this brand because we wanted to be the next gap. Yeah. And not because, you know, we thought that there could be like a quick exit or you know, some sort of like quick cash and then we're onto the next idea. And so we've always had probably a longer term mindset than maybe a lot of our investors. But I think the other thing is that like the investors that we have, they believe in us and they believe in our vision and they actually hugely to their credit, haven't been antsy for an exit because I think we all see the possibility here and, and now that we've hit profitability, you know, sort of feel even more so that, that we're really onto something.

2 (1h 13m 53s):
I think at the same time we feel excited about getting to where we think we can go faster. Which doesn't necessarily have to mean raising more money, but the idea of having a partner at some point in the future who maybe has some deeper pockets than we do and who also has had experience in additional distribution channels or physical retail or international or you know, sort of other growth areas that Christina and I and our team haven't had direct experience with would be great. And so those are things I think that we will be exploring over the next couple years.

2 (1h 14m 33s):
Just in terms of sort of next steps,

0 (1h 14m 35s):
So tell me about where you see this brand in. I mean you mentioned Gap, you know, gap started in the late sixties and you know, it was a different time and and Gap is Gap. I mean it's, it has problems but it's obviously an iconic American brand. You're now in year eight. So take me to year 15. Where do you see primary, what do you want it to be?

3 (1h 14m 58s):
I think when we look at the big players out there that have been around for a really long time, we think we can be a half billion to billion dollar brand just like they are. I think the question is how to get there. The fact that depending on how you approach it, it could take a really long time or it could happen a little faster. Yeah. Right now in our quest to get to profitability, which is happening this year, the truth is we're probably in a, we're in a mode that we sometimes refer to as steady Eddie. Yeah,

0 (1h 15m 28s):
Yeah, that makes sense.

3 (1h 15m 30s):
Right? Which is, I mean, especially in this market and even otherwise, right? You wanna be able to, you wanna be in control of your own destiny and that's the way to do it. We built something we believe in so much, the last thing we wanna do is blow it up for no reason. We don't need to add undue risk to this business. And at the same time we don't want it to take 30 years. And so it's honestly something we're still navigating and whether we end up having an opportunity to do that with a partner or with further investment could very well be part of it.

0 (1h 15m 59s):
When you think about the journey you guys took and how you met and you know, and where you are today and you've got, you know, a pretty awesome brand that you've built and a company that's growing, how much of of this place you're at now do you attribute to to luck? And how much do you think has to do with just the hard work you put in and, and you know, your decisions and skills?

3 (1h 16m 22s):
Definitely a combination. I think examples for us of what has felt really lucky are, I mean, first of all, just meeting the right partner. A lot of people would like an amazing partner, but they're like, how do I find one? And, and you know, sometimes when you want to find one, you can't just go find one. And I think those moments that that hit you, that make you, that are just the spark of an idea. I mean those are just lucky moments. The fact that Galen's girls couldn't find the orange jackets, as annoying as that was at the time, was the, the spark, you know, of an idea that I don't know if we would've come to otherwise. And at the same time, I think we would certainly say in e-commerce in particular, if anyone thinks it's glamorous, it just isn't.

3 (1h 17m 6s):
And to be successful in e-commerce, I mean it is just a lot of grinding it out, a lot of like blocking and tackling how many more cliches can I use? It just, it just is. And so I think that there's no way that an enormous amount of hard work isn't necessary to be successful in this industry.

0 (1h 17m 29s):
Galyn

2 (1h 17m 30s):
I think we've just learned too how important timing is to whether something can work or not. And so I think probably on balance, I lean a little more luck as the answer. And I think too, so many founders and companies have like worked so hard and had a good idea and been really smart about it, but it just didn't quite work. And so I think, yeah, there's a little bit of like, we've, we've been lucky on the timing and some of the decisions that we happen to get right? 'cause I think the, the difference between like a company that makes it and a company doesn't often comes down to something like really small.

2 (1h 18m 12s):
So feel very lucky to be where we are.

0 (1h 18m 15s):
That's Galyn Bernard and Christina Carbonell Galyn. They're the co-founders and co-CEOs of primary, by the way, of all the different colors they sell. They say one of the most consistently top selling for both babies and kids is black. Apparently it's pretty hard to find black in children's clothing. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. This episode was produced by Casey Herman with music composed by Rum Arab Bluey. It was edited by Andrea Bruce with research help from Chris Maccini.

0 (1h 18m 56s):
Our engineers were Robert Rodriguez and Josh Newell. Our production staff also includes Neva Grant, JC Howard, Kerry Thompson, Alex Chung, John Isabella, Sam Paulson, Carla Estevez, Katherine Cipher, and Malia Aga. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This.

Wondery (1h 19m 22s):
If you like How I Built This, you can listen early and ad free Right now by joining Wondery Plus in the Wondery app or on Apple podcasts. Prime members can listen ad free on Amazon music.

0 (1h 19m 34s):
Before you go, tell us about yourself by filling out a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Wondery (1h 19m 41s):
Being an actual royal is never about finding your happy ending, but the worst part is if they step out of line or fall in love with the wrong person, It changes the Course of history. I'm Aisha Skidmore Williams. And I'm Brooke Sifron. We've been telling the stories of the Rich and famous on the Hit Wondery Show, even The Rich, and talking about the latest celebrity news on Rich and daily. We're going all over the world on our new show, even the Royals, We'll be diving headfirst into the lives of the world's kings, queens, and all the wannabes in their orbit throughout history. Think Succession meets the Crown, meets real life. We're going to pull back the gilded curtain and show how royal status might be bright and shiny, but it comes at the expense of, well, everything else like your freedom, your Privacy, and sometimes even your head follow. Even the Royals on the Wondery app or Wherever, you get your podcasts, you can listen to even the Royals early and ad free Right now by joining Wondery Plus.