1 (0s):
Hey, it's guy here. So what are some of the key traits that successful entrepreneurs have in common? Why do some people succeed when others fail? How do you build something with no connections? No money and no experience. And can you learn to develop the skills and traits? It takes to become an entrepreneur well to find out the answers to all these questions pick up a copy of my new book. It's called how I built this and if you love the show, you will love this book. Book, and if you order before September 15th, I'll send you a free autographed book plate to put inside the book just visit Gyros.com or how I built this.com to order or pick up how I built this wherever you get your books and thanks.

1 (52s):
We unboxed some of the first bikes out of the containers and I went out for a test ride on one of the first bikes and like something's off here what's going on here? And I realize that the factory had installed the brakes backwards. And

2 (1m 5s):
so the front brake was on the right and the rear brake was on the left. So we spent a week straight with three of us in the company at that point like just to get those bike ship unboxing every bike. switching the brakes around who

1 (1m 18s):
is it was a doozy from NPR is how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built I'm guy Roz and on the show today how Mike rotten boss slapped a battery and a motor on his bike. So he could get to school faster and then went on to build the biggest electric bike brand in the US rad power bikes. The Holy Grail of marketing is Word of Mouth recommendations.

1 (2m 2s):
Sometimes Word of Mouth can be engineered think Tupperware parties or a friend who has a side hustle selling Mary Kay cosmetics, but really powerful word of mouth marketing happens organically and it's usually products that marketing Guru Seth Godin would call extraordinary you might be familiar with Seth's Full cow theory, basically, no one notices an ordinary cow in a pasture but a purple cow you would stop your car to see that and then you would tell all your friends about it. It's part of the reason why Tesla doesn't have to spend a whole lot on Advertising if you know someone who owns a Tesla you probably can't get them to stop talking about it word of mouth is also how all birds will shoes got so big so fast.

1 (2m 55s):
The early adopters who bought them loved telling all their friends how comfortable their feet were and the same principle applies to our story today because if you ride a bright orange red Power electric bike through town people will want to ask you about it. How do I know? Well, this is kind of where I become a character in the story a few years ago. I was looking for an electric cargo bike that I could use to take both of my kids to school on. I wanted something sturdy enough to handle a few cases of wine and groceries. But Zippy enough to get me around town fast. The problem is that many electric cargo bikes are expensive more than three thousand dollars.

1 (3m 40s):
But in my search I came across a review for the Red Wagon bike made by Rad power bikes. The review was good. But most importantly the price was right considerably cheaper than anything else I could find so So I bought it and everywhere. I went someone wanted to ask me about it, especially when my kids were sitting on the back and the farmers market the library the BART station where I parked it Dads Moms grandparents. They wanted to know more several of them even asked if they could give it a go, which I happily oblige. Well, it turns out that this phenomenon is the secret to rad power bikes success.

1 (4m 23s):
Just five years ago. In 2015 Mike Redmond ba launched an Indiegogo campaign to build the first rad power bike today. His company has about 25 percent market share in the u.s. Ebike space making rad power bikes the largest e-bike seller in the country last year. The company did almost a hundred million dollars in sales and this year. They're on track to grow 300% In fact right now. There are more. More red Power bikes on order waiting to be delivered then the company has sold in its entire five-year history. And as you will hear a lot of that has to do with the pandemic.

1 (5m 7s):
Lots of people are looking for a quick way to get around town and electric bikes make it a lot easier to go up hills or long distances. But even though it sounds like this business blew up overnight my grandpa actually started building and selling ebike. More than 15 years ago as a high school student when he was growing up in a very rural part of California,

2 (5m 33s):
I grew up really out in the middle of nowhere in a town called Garberville in Northern California, and it's an area called The Lost Coast. And so there's a lot of dirt roads. There's very few even stop signs a little own stop lights and it's just an area is that covered by old-growth Redwood

1 (5m 48s):
forests. Wow, so you were basically born there and raised there.

2 (5m 54s):
Yeah. Yeah, the first five years of my life. I lived in an Airstream trailer on the property my parents yo bought on some sort of a lean and as they've slowly built the house up and you know that childhood home I grew up in it's still not finished today, but it was a really great upbringing organic garden on the on the property and just surrounding us everywhere. There was off-grid marijuana farms and the area was opportune for it just because it was so out there and out of touch from you know, Eddie so did you ask your parents?

1 (6m 26s):
Why they I mean you ever say why did you guys move out here to the middle of nowhere? Yeah.

2 (6m 31s):
I think I think it was the era. I think there was this, you know, they were part of that kind of move back to the land and that was during the back to the land area and when my parents moved there, I think that was what really when the movement was starting and luckily they taught me the value of hard work and career life, but I think there's this connection that was happening around music and spirituality and I think connecting with nature and so yeah, they were in a Volkswagen. Van and they just moved up to Humboldt County and your mom

1 (6m 58s):
was a nurse prisoners.

2 (6m 60s):
Yeah. My dad was a carpenter and my mom was a nurse. She was an ER nurse growing up and then she transitioned to being the nurse of my high school which was a bit of a coincidence but made for an interesting four years of high school.

1 (7m 12s):
So, all right, so your dad was a carpenter and what what did he do carpentry for like home renovations or what kind of work did he do when you were a kid and my dad was really creative

2 (7m 23s):
he was Featured in find home building magazine for a couple of the places that he builds so he specialized in building really unusual home. So he focused on round houses, like octagon-shaped houses and I grew up building with him, right? You know, I mean, you know, I would go to the job sites with them on the weekends when he was named to finish up on stuff. So I just I just grew up building with him. So I learned how to work with my hands and I do stuff with in that way for my

1 (7m 48s):
dad and presumably he can be made a living off that I mean that was that was sort of enough to kind of sustain. The

2 (7m 55s):
household it was it was hit or miss where we grew up construction opportunities were often on and so he ended up actually especially around in the early 2000s the end up transitioning to a full-time job at the local golf course, which is like kind of a rundown 9-hole course, he worked there as a maintenance person fixing sprinklers, you know, doing electrical maintenance jobs like

1 (8m 16s):
that. So from a pretty early age, you are kind of working with tools like helping your dad out.

2 (8m 23s):
Yeah, we would just wear. He grew up. It was often times. You need to fix it. You weren't going to be going to town and buying a new version of it. And like that's sometimes you have to dig out the well or fix the well pump right you're chopping firewood. You're fixing up the house, you know, you name it. It's just kind of more the country lifestyle

1 (8m 40s):
for it. Sounds like you don't have the money to pay people to hire people to mow your lawn or

2 (8m 44s):
to Fright. But if it's a car whatever yeah, definitely not I remember one time my mom walked out of the house and it was like a winter morning and I would climbed up on the roof and my dad. Dad was watching me at the bottom and a shingle had broken off the roof from a tree branch of the fallen on the house. And so I'm like climbing up these slippery shingles right on my mom's kind of yelling at me like John, you know, my dad's name is John Locke John. Why would you let him do that kind of thing? And so it's kind of Just The Way of the way of life back then was just keeping things together. Yeah.

1 (9m 14s):
All right. So you're grown up there and I guess around around time. You went to high school like your high school was kind of far away, right? It wasn't you can just walk there.

2 (9m 23s):
Yeah, so my high 16 miles away half of that was on country roads and half of it was on a highway 101. Wow.

1 (9m 31s):
So when you had to go to high school the expected mean the expectation was that you had to figure out how to get there like your mom and dad were not able to drive you there every day.

2 (9m 41s):
Yeah. So in my freshman year, I had a couple options right? I could try to bum a ride from friends, but that was challenging and inconsistent. We had a school bus, but same thing challenging an inconsistent the school Bus route took over an hour and a half just to get to school because right over 16 miles of Country Roads. Yeah, I couldn't afford a car then and eventually I did get a car but I couldn't keep it running because the car that I could afford wasn't going to be very reliable and sure enough blew a head gasket one thing after another and so it was kind of a little bit stranded

1 (10m 14s):
and do you like I

2 (10m 16s):
did? Yeah, so I was racing mountain bikes and so where we grew up about 4 miles away from my house had this amazing community park that had a Your 3-mile mountain bike Loop in it. And so from a young age. I was biking over there and riding laps around this park and I just totally fell in love with two

1 (10m 33s):
wheels. Was it possible to bike from your house to high school on a bike

2 (10m 39s):
because I was riding to school and back each day. I was doing that for training because I was actually starting to race and it was very competitive. And so I need to be putting on a lot of miles. My parents did not like that. Like they gave me a lot of freedom, but they did not like that you'll half of that distance was traveling. A freeway you have 70 mile-an-hour you're logging trucks flying by and I don't know why they gave me the thumbs up, but I think that does share with you kind of how dusty and kind of country. My grub

1 (11m 6s):
bringing was and and that tie took you a long time probably took you what 40 minutes or so at least. Yeah. It was

2 (11m 12s):
definitely like a an hour long ride because it was also really

1 (11m 15s):
hilly where I grew up. Yeah, so,

2 (11m 17s):
you know, I'd show up sweaty to school. I'm a teenage kid freshman or sophomore in high school at that point and I'm already struggling enough to Be the dork and showing up sweaty wasn't so

1 (11m 27s):
cool. I guess you start to think well, maybe I can make it easier if I had an electric bike had it. First of all, this is in like what 2004-5 something like that?

2 (11m 38s):
Yeah and 2005

1 (11m 40s):
and electric bikes thinking back. I don't even know if I'm even knew what that was in 2005. What did you know about electric bikes at that time? Yeah, you know at that point I think, you know

2 (11m 52s):
three or four years earlier I had as a Ten year older and 11 year old I started saving up for something that I really really wanted. And and this thing just so happened to be a electric scooter that was for sale in the Saw Shop in towns, like the shopping sold sit chainsaws also had an electric scooter on

1 (12m 8s):
display like a stand-up scooter.

2 (12m 10s):
Yeah, just like you pneumatic tires, but definitely a small like kind of child-sized electric scooter, right? So I had this experience where I saved up for this thing. I got it and I just wrote it non-stop for a couple years and I just kind of fell in Of with electric vehicles from that goofy little scooter. It's just the Simplicity. I think of just a a battery in a motor and a control system and it's just get almost like magic right

1 (12m 34s):
and you thought maybe I can do something like this for my

2 (12m 38s):
bike. Yeah. I kind of went to kind of researching online and kind of poking around a little bit and I started to see some people doing conversion kits so they'd find electric motors and batteries and they figure out a way to attach them to a bike and I also found that There were actually some e-bikes that you could buy then to the problem was just like today most e-bikes are really expensive. Right and just to be

1 (13m 1s):
clear. The idea was that you would have an electric bike that would operate like a motorcycle or you wouldn't have to pedal or was it a bike that where you still would have to Pedal? Yeah. I

2 (13m 13s):
really wanted a little bit of both. I wanted a hybrid because I needed to be training but I wanted to be able to go further and like get to school are breaking a sweat. Yeah fast. Yeah.

1 (13m 22s):
So what do you do like Fifteen had converter but bike it to an electric

2 (13m 28s):
bike. I just started with off-the-shelf stuff, you know, like searched online kind of figured out what it would take. So that was a little bit of stuff from RadioShack some stuff. I ordered on eBay. I had an old mountain bikes. It was like it was the mountain bike that I've used for my previous racing season. So it's pretty beat up and scratched up and so is it a really great donor bike for the first project? I found the electric motor that I put on it. I found that on a website like I was able to buy one and Airship it by DHL. I'll Express

1 (13m 55s):
and and this is by the way a motor for a bike or a motor for motor for what was the motor designed for?

2 (14m 0s):
Yeah. So the motor was designed for a scooter like a scooter that you would see hauling a hundred pounds of cargo in Asia as an example

1 (14m 9s):
like the acidic acid on scooter that you would sit on.

2 (14m 12s):
Yes, it would be a scooter. Okay, and you know a motor controller from some kind of DIY a kind of hacker and Canada, so I had imported and ship that to myself and then I found Acid batteries that are used as a starter batteries on motorcycles and so I strung three of those together and make 36 volts and that was really the PowerPoint for the first prototype,

1 (14m 34s):
huh? And how long did it take you to convert your mountain bike into something that had electricity.

2 (14m 43s):
It was not So Glamorous, so I'd say this process. I think it was about nine months and probably 12 failed prototypes later and I had an e-bike that I could actually get to school with, but I couldn't get back so I'd have to To get to school and then kind of sneak around and try to find a place to plug my bike in the back and charge it up while I'm in class room today

1 (15m 3s):
because 16 miles like that battery will just conked out right

2 (15m 6s):
after that was like yeah that was pushing it. How did you know

1 (15m 11s):
how to do this the cat? Did you know what parts to put where and what the plug-in where like had you been taking things apart for a while and you have yeah how

2 (15m 22s):
yeah, I was I think it was really Equal parts of session because I was I was so in love with this idea of building electric bikes. I was just spending like every night late into the night before my parents would like, you know yelling at me out of in the shop. They see like you ought to get to bed kid and it was the other part of it really was just growing up building stuff. You know, it's just always doing stuff for my hands and you know, I had some good guidance from online forums like some of the early DIY like, you know of community stuff, so I was kind of just really sponging off of this forum Community online. We're building electric bikes that were affordable and high power finding ways to get parts off the shelf and finding ways to import parts from countries where you electric two, wheelers are more common

1 (16m 5s):
back then so you come up with a prototype to get you to school and how does it work? I mean it did help you pedal. Was it? Is that what it did it made it easier for you to Pedal it to go faster. Yeah, the the first couple

2 (16m 20s):
versions didn't help that much. I think you'd make it a mile or two before. You'd blow a sensor or fry something. And you know, I remember a couple times having to hitchhike back to my house throwing my bike in the back of a

1 (16m 33s):
neighbor's truck or something that was driving by

2 (16m 35s):
but each iteration it started to become more and more

1 (16m 39s):
effective and

2 (16m 40s):
frankly, like the first time I really was able to like ride the whole way to school. It was an overwhelming sensation of Freedom. Like I think that was just something I was so excited about was this feeling as a young person like looking for Mobility Freedom like this ability to go. Go and do what you want to do and learn and you'll feel life for yourself. I just really captivated by that from day one. He

1 (17m 0s):
likes so how fast did it go?

2 (17m 4s):
The first bike did about 30 miles an hour and wow, it really is and it shouldn't have gone that fast considering a lot of the parts were held on with zip ties and duct tape

1 (17m 15s):
was a safe

2 (17m 17s):
fish. Yeah. I've got some scars. I got some remnants still from a lot of those early prototypes, but I think as each iteration You went on they got a little less sharp around the edges and a little bit more tied together.

1 (17m 29s):
How much do you think this ends up costing you to put this together?

2 (17m 33s):
Yeah. I mean I was I was thinking every dollar I had in two parts and you know, so I had meaningful Financial skin in the game I think back then but you know, keep in mind that that's probably a $500 or $1,000 worth of investment between parts and the are shipping costs to kind of import some of the

1 (17m 50s):
stuff. So this work you this actually got you the school faster and You plug it in at school and then ride it home and I guess not surprisingly your local newspaper about this is really cool and they wrote an article

2 (18m 4s):
about you. Yeah, it was so much fun because it was people were stopping me when I was in town to ask me about the bike and and yeah the local newspaper did like a little story on us and I think I got a some fun nicknames kind of early on the ebike guy think different things like that. People came to know me pretty quickly.

1 (18m 21s):
So, all right. So you do this and cut. Years in still in high school you decide to found a few to start a company that would take someone's regular bike or mountain bike and then convert it into an e-bike. Does that did that happen? Because people were asking you to do this for them.

2 (18m 38s):
Yeah. I just I think the first person it was like a friend of the family. I was at the bank and you know, I walked outside and they were looking at the Vikings like oh, hey Mike, how's it going was? Oh, you know. Hey, man, and I think he said like what's this all about? How cool is this like, well, can you build me one? And I was taken aback. I remember it's kind of being dumb founded in the moment and like yeah, I guess so like I guess I could build you one.

1 (19m 2s):
They probably got a good deal because you didn't even know how to price

2 (19m 4s):
it. Yeah it just to get it to work. I think I probably blew up a few fuses and just to get a functioning bike outside hers customer.

1 (19m 12s):
So did you start to get more and more people asking you to do this? Yeah, the first customer I had

2 (19m 17s):
actually ended up trading

1 (19m 18s):
the bike for ATP

2 (19m 20s):
like an actual like TP that I lived in for a summer on my parents property. Trading stuff back then that was pretty typical where I grew up and I wanted Mobility Freedom and I also, you know at that age. I was really in love with the idea of like I could live in the backyard and like I don't have to live with my parents this summer. Yeah. And so yeah, I think I was showing one of the first prototypes often a local fair in town and it's like a partly a farmers market and partly a craft fair and I was going to add a little boost setup kind of showing off my bike and this woman came by that was selling teepees

1 (19m 51s):
and she took a

2 (19m 53s):
liking to the ebike and I was Because that your TV Booth over there because I saw this first came from can like nothing's really cool. Right? I love it. I want a TV Booth I want

1 (20m 2s):
it was this by the way, what were the was a made out of like animal skins? What

2 (20m 7s):
canvas? Yeah, this was a this. This is a vegan TP. So this is a canvas TP. Yeah.

1 (20m 13s):
Oh my God. I'm a vegan TV. Wow, and she said hey you make me one of these I'll give you one of my vegan teepees.

2 (20m 20s):
Yeah, and I lived in that TV for a year. I lived in an hour into Winter and you realized pretty quickly that you have to be pretty hard thing to live in a teepee in the winter and in Northern California. So I moved back in with my parents pretty quickly. Assuming that TP had no indoor plumbing. Oh no. Oh, yeah. That was the that was the apple tree that was next to it. Right?

1 (20m 43s):
Alright, so you get the teepee for the bike. You start a business you call it rad power bikes after you see after name my grandpa you said. Hey, I'll do this for people and was that basically it?

2 (20m 54s):
Yeah, really? Ali grew organically and slowly and so like the TPP trade happened, right? And then the next thing was another guy that was local. He was really creative and really active guy but he was also he had late-stage Lyme's disease and so he's Mobility was a little bit impeded and he also lived up a really steep hill and so this is my second customer somebody that had like actual physical Mobility needs. So that was a really a great exploration and a great experience for me and I think for the customer to which was like we might kind of went to You know Town together figuring out the right configuration of like a comfortable seat a more laid-back geometry for the bike and more power to get up the hills.

2 (21m 34s):
And so that build that project was really influential to the future of kind of rad powered bike specifications like over

1 (21m 41s):
Mike's. So at this point when you really turn it into a business was it just you running the business? Yeah. Yeah, so I was just hanging

2 (21m 50s):
out and you know late into the night each night of my basically parents woodshed. Ed where I had kind of like a soldering table setup and a little stand for the bikes and so I was just kind of cranking away on bikes they're going to one at a time and I ended up posting an ad in the local newspaper that I think they ended up cutting me quite a deal on it because they just they knew that I didn't have a dime to my name and just started getting flooded with increase and was mostly Word of Mouth though like the newspaper ad wasn't really doing much. It was a lot more just like the last person I built a bike for told their friends and they would contact me.

1 (22m 20s):
All right. See you making these bikes like just if people would want one they would Bring their bike in and you would just convert it.

2 (22m 27s):
Yeah, and other times they didn't even know where to start and so often times I was guiding the customers through the process made reach out to me and they'd say I love this idea of an electric bike, but I have this application for it. Like can you build me one that will do these things? Like they were like, I need to carry stuff like if they were on a farm they work on a farm. They need to carry stuff for ya, or they want to pull a trailer with their dog in it behind them. Like this is really what fueled meets this building e-bikes one at a time for

1 (22m 52s):
people. And by the way, did you You did you make some money. Yeah,

2 (22m 56s):
so I you know, I had to pay my own way through undergrad and go it was it was totally sufficient for me to pay rent and like kind of go on my own. I didn't even move in the dorms and mood right into a house when I first started in

1 (23m 10s):
college, so you decide to when Sam for you go to college you decide to stay close you want to Humboldt State University and you go and study industrial design. It wasn't that far away right couple but how many miles from where you grew

2 (23m 23s):
up? Yeah. It's an hour. A half north of where I grew

1 (23m 25s):
up. So when you got to college, did you keep your business going did you keep converting bikes for people?

2 (23m 32s):
Yeah. I was working nights and weekends doing conversions, you know the business it was still very small. It was just me building bikes one at a time, right but it was it was a good income. It wasn't six figures but I was you know, one of the reasons I went to Humboldt State was because I got a partial track scholarship as well. And so that was important. So I was running the 800 meter at Humboldt State as well at the same time. So it's kind of it was a mixture of scholarship mixture of the income from early days wrap our

1 (23m 59s):
bikes. So when you went to study industrial design, you're thinking electric cars were you thinking hey, maybe I'll go like work for Tesla one day because by 2012 I mean of course didn't have the model S or the model 3 and you know, that's tough, but they already had a viable think they already had the first like the Roadster out were you thinking maybe that's a place at work one day. Yeah.

2 (24m 21s):
I was I was just really eager to be a part of The electric vehicle Revolution. I just felt like this was there was really no other outcome. Like I thought electric vehicles are going to become king. I just felt like from society environment like all these reasons why we're going to need electric vehicles why we needed them desperately then and why we need them just as desperately now, that's where I wanted to take my career.

1 (24m 42s):
Did you think of yourself in college as like a future entrepreneur or did you think I'll just learn this may be figured out and get a job somewhere. Yeah. I was

2 (24m 51s):
always very entrepreneurial and so I had Added another company in the electric vehicle space in my junior year of undergrad actually how and so I was I was running this other company and this company is called Golf Board and it sounds pretty literal but it's literally an electric skateboard that use on golf courses,

1 (25m 8s):
but was it was like a golf cart scooter?

2 (25m 11s):
Yeah. So I'd started building off-road electric skateboards with some friends in town who are also electric vehicle nuts like myself. And

1 (25m 20s):
yeah, I see a picture of it you standing on golf courses. It's like Skateboard basically where you could put your golf clubs in the front and there you go. You don't need a whole golf

2 (25m 30s):
cart. Yeah, and one of those guys had taken this prototype within that we had built they brought it on a vacation with them in Hawaii and they were writing it by going to the beach or something. Right and he ended up crashing on this prototype and it was just because they hit a pothole and he ended up crashing in this gravel lot and he was all cut up and bleeding and he like gets up and he looks up and famous surfer Laird. Hamilton's like running over to like help him out. So it's a really odd grouping things that happened in a row, but layered had been playing golf on electric skateboards in Hawaii with a good friend of his who was a really famous entrepreneurs guy named Don wildmon who's the founder of Bally's Total Fitness.

2 (26m 14s):
And so these two guys that lived in Hawaii together had been riding electric-powered skateboards on golf courses there but our art electric skateboard prototype was better for that. It was four-wheel drive. So like it was hung great for use on Turf and we started a business together like me a couple buddies from my hometown and layered and Don wildmon.

1 (26m 34s):
Wow that mean this is just such an incredible story your sling meet them. And then you guys actually went on to build a pretty solid little company right like like it did pretty well, right?

2 (26m 46s):
Yeah. They Don wildmon funded us right out of the gate. We found a manufacturer in New Jersey to start kind of commercializing the Addict and this was my first kind of real taste of building a real business with a team and lamb called first entrepreneurial

1 (27m 0s):
experience. So what was your position where you the CEO of the company or the chief designer or both or what?

2 (27m 7s):
So I was the one of the founders and Iran product development. So I was really from day one. I was hoping with a lot of stuff but then I'm kind of as the business grew we started bringing on a management team. And so we hired a president. We hired a CEO, you know, so I was trying to get surrounded by people that have been there done that in ways that And but I was able to go really deep on the product development the commercialization part of the

1 (27m 28s):
project. So I'm assuming you know, you've got some equity in it, but probably a little bit Yeah, I

2 (27m 34s):
was a major shareholder out of the gate and we were fortunate that we didn't raise a lot of money for that company from day one. So I did learn the value of being careful with Equity from there and like making sure we could maintain the vision of the company kind of protect the mission. Yeah, but as we brought in more and more senior people into the company it did start to Become more and more like, you know, I was a minority voice within the organization. And so that was part of the reason why I ended up leaving Gulfport aside less say in the direction of the company and Cheerio. My love for Golf Board is still alive to the standings an amazing product and it and frankly a great team, but I was controlling less and less that the destiny that company even the direction of product development started to kind of shift more towards management.

2 (28m 17s):
Mmm time. You

1 (28m 18s):
still have rad power bikes and it sounds like you kind of in your mind you're thinking you know this. Poor thing it's great. I love it, but I don't feel like it's really my company. Like my company is rad power bikes, but I can't just keep converting people bikes into e-bikes. It's just doesn't make sense.

2 (28m 37s):
Yeah, you know, I think this really was when the lightbulb moment happened for me at you know, I was I had always been riding e-bikes to this whole time and I was riding e-bikes and building e-bikes and it really was my true and deepest passion. I was visiting my aunt and uncle for I think Thanksgiving or something and where do they I live in Phoenix, Arizona and Phoenix. Okay. Yep, and so sleeping on their living room floor. I wake up in the morning. And for some reason I just had this like I said lightbulb moment. I had seen a Fat Tire Bike. It's just it's a bike that you pedal. It's got a really big tires on it yet and those started to become popular in like 2012

1 (29m 13s):
2013. So yeah, I remember seeing those

2 (29m 15s):
there a dog to Pedal right? There's big huge tires and they're super comfortable in a really cool looking but they're really hard to pedal. And so that's that's what I thought like. That would be a great platform to combine everything that I've learned about e-bikes to make a flagship product. That's commercialized. I think I spent the whole morning asking my own Clinic questions. Like I sketched it on a pad and I was asking them. What do you think of this? Would you ride it? What color would you want it to be if you had one I think my aunt said candy apple red and you know, sorry Aunt Jackie we have never built a candy apple red bike, but maybe one day we'll build you a special one. But no that was the moment right then is just kind of you know, I I learned that lesson pretty early on is like getting out of your normal Zone traveling visiting factories visiting customers.

2 (30m 1s):
That's as smooth had a lot of our best ideas.

1 (30m 4s):
Why did that Fat Tire Bike? Why did you look at that bike and think oh, this is perfect for an e-bike. What was it about that bike that made it perfect in your mind. All the early customers that have been coming to

2 (30m 15s):
me. They all wanted bigger and bigger tires. And so they would all say they don't most like start off they'd say, I won't really big comfortable tires because the roads are rough. That was a theme. I kept hearing time and time again, and then there's something else about the big tires that I really liked which was that e-bikes. Normally you don't even know their e-bikes because they're silent just looks like someone riding a bike just going a little bit faster. Yeah, but the fat tires were just so eye-catching. And so I thought maybe this would help Propel the popularity of electric bike something that really gets you out there kind of like a silent version of a Harley-Davidson. Yeah, it's Bodacious right everyone looks at you and it's like it's They're fun. And so when you combine this fat tire the Comfort the durability with an electric motor you can have the best of both worlds and that was kind of this special kind of launch point for the

1 (31m 5s):
brand. And did you think maybe I could just buy a bunch of these fat tire bikes and just convert them into e-bikes was that was that your initial thought?

2 (31m 13s):
Yeah. I remember immediately just getting online and trying to search out where I could kind of have these things made and a vast majority of bikes were manufactured across Asia. And so that's where I started to looking I started Reaching out to vendors reach out to factories and I was using my rad power bikes email address to reach out to them which no one had ever heard of so I'm surprised any of them even got back to me, but sure enough a few of them did

1 (31m 37s):
what were you asking you were asking them you were inquiring to see if they would build a bike to your specifications?

2 (31m 45s):
Yeah. I started out by gauging what it would cost to build a normal electric bike. If you were to actually have find a factory building on an assembly line. That's I just never gotten a taste of because I had been building all of our bikes, you know, like I said one at a time and so this was a new exploration for me. So that's how it

1 (32m 2s):
started. All right. So this is what like 2014 and did you think you know, this is what I should do. I should convert this business where I'm just retrofitting bikes into a an e-bike company.

2 (32m 15s):
Yeah, so it's started by looking for sources. And then the next thing I did though is I called tie up

1 (32m 21s):
Ty Collins. This is your childhood friend that you know from Kindergarten preschool.

2 (32m 26s):
Yeah, so, you know Ty Collins came on as my co-founder in 2015 is just This brilliant guy and I mean to give you a sense we have really aligned values and we've really lined values because we both went to the same Montessori preschool. And so we grew up in the same Hometown and and he's a polar opposite to me when it comes to work skills. He's a marketer digital marketer by training by Background by career and I was really a product guy right a product CEO. And so we had had grown up together went to preschool together. I live with him in college in college. He was helping with some branding some of our website stuff. And so he was there with me all along supporting me and he believed in e-bikes a long and I think we had even talked about during the quarter College days together like got to be cool to really go big with this thing one day when it was the right time and after college, he went to San Francisco and underwent kind of this like six or seven years of blossoming and to becoming a great It's marketer and when I first had this light bulb moment, I figured he's the guy to call.

2 (33m 29s):
He has run the your marketing and sales side of the

1 (33m 31s):
business. All right, so you call up tie and you say tie. I think we should do this. And what is what does he say

2 (33m 38s):
Ty and I have really aligned values for also Polar Opposites that eyes generally very careful and I'm really action-oriented and sometimes I go too fast. And so when I called tie, I thought he was going to say yes, but I thought it was going to be a careful. Yes like Like I'm into it, let's do this, but let's ease into it. Right and it was actually the complete opposite. He's like I'm in tell me when you want to start. Let's get this thing going and it was because he seen what the corporate world was like he wasn't tapped out but he had seen how fun this would be to be entrepreneurial and I take these skills to his own business that was a huge accelerant. Like I was committed. I was like I'm doing this but then when he was that excited and eager to get going I was like, this is a really thoughtful.

2 (34m 24s):
Guy normally and if he's that excited we better get going.

1 (34m 27s):
Yeah, this is 2014 e-bikes really big in Asia like in China, they were all over the place and people been riding it for years there, but not really in the u.s. They had not really been a big thing yet still really kind of Niche at that point. You have

2 (34m 45s):
the most of the e-bikes that were out there in the market were built for the European standards actually write and Run 2014. And so they were 50 watts of power they didn't have throttles. It really skinny tires. So we saw this path to build a bike. That was a lot more. It was just built for these, you know, the Western world where of rough roads and high traffic speeds and people want power and that's kind of what we want to go build.

1 (35m 13s):
So you have this idea. How do you I mean the first step is you gotta raise some cash to build a prototype or to get a factory to agree to make them because I'm assuming if you want to put in an order with a factory, they're not just going to make you one or two or five or 10 bikes. You gotta be put in a big order, right?

2 (35m 31s):
Yeah, you know, I have emails going back and forth with probably a dozen different factories and right we had a good sense then of what the minimum unit, so we're going to be for an order and the pricing and Is frankly no other way for us to get it off the ground except for crowdfunding

1 (35m 46s):
and how much money did you need to raised in order to put in an order?

2 (35m 50s):
We had a minimum of about $40,000 that was kind of our Target because if we had done that we could have filled about a half a container of e-bikes and done a less than container looks shipment. We didn't know what the campaign was going to do. And we wanted at least to be able to just just fund some initial units and get a production run going to get a sense if there really was a market there

1 (36m 10s):
meantime, you are designing the bike.

2 (36m 12s):
Absolutely, we knew going out of the gate. We wanted to be more powerful than you know, it's in the name right rad power bikes. So we wanted to be 750 watts. 750 watts is the federal legal limit for e-bikes to be treated like a regular bike. So you can still ride them without having to get

1 (36m 28s):
a license for it. Right?

2 (36m 30s):
Exactly. Don't need a license your registration. You don't need to drive it. Yeah. So that was our Target our Target was to build, you know, this 750 watt ebike with big tires on it, right and yeah get it out there in the world, but Other thing we found was really important was to make it really simple to because we couldn't afford to have 10 different versions. And so we just had one size fits all and we made a white one and a black one and the bike was a little bit absurd in the sense that these huge tires on it. It also had a throttle on it, which was bringing super unusual back. Then most e-bikes are only assistive. So as you're pedaling it helps you out a little bit Yeah, but our bike had a full-on Twist throttle on it like you would have on a scooter or a motorcycle

1 (37m 12s):
and and was that ebike like I think people don't fully understand like you pedal assist like you get on it and you just like fly you really take off. It's it's like being a superhero is like being is like being Superman on a regular bike all of a sudden you've got like super hero Powers

2 (37m 28s):
Yeah, and what we've always seen we've always called it at least from the early days as the ebike grin and that's what you see on someone's face when they come back from their first test ride because it is unbelievably freeing feeling and it's frankly a little bit shocking.

1 (37m 43s):
Alright, so you've got this prototype down your goal is to raise $40,000. It's you and Ty and then you bring in another friend marimar white Espen who's marmar, by the way.

2 (37m 56s):
Yeah, so marimar and I were in a relationship at the time and she was helping run operations for the

1 (38m 2s):
company. So the three of you decide to launch this Indiegogo campaign to raise $40,000 first of all, how did you get the word out? I mean, I mean you guys are not Forgive me be you are didn't know you have any connections. You didn't have a platform. He was just just you guys and living in Northern California. How did you get people to even become aware of this?

2 (38m 23s):
Yeah. I got to give credit to tie on this one because he's he's an amazing brand marketer. And so that was a big piece from day one is like we launched that campaign fast. Like we were like we're doing this we're going to go live and I think we got the Indiegogo campaign up within 90 days or a hundred days like that, but it was also this has always been a word. My mouth business and so that was always kind of wind beneath the wings for the brand even from right when we launched the campaign. It was like we were seeing comments on the Indiegogo campaign friends telling friends to come look at the campaign like you got to get one of these so we can ride together. And so that's been a big piece of the growth from that Indiegogo campaign

1 (38m 59s):
forward. So you launch an Indiegogo this campaign goes viral. Yeah, because the video what the video Promises you a bike for. What what did you have to put in to get a bike?

2 (39m 11s):
Yeah. So we were we Essentially giving the bikes away. It makes a good way to look at it is we needed to get the fund that first production run. We're selling them for 1,200 or 1,300 bucks each. I think like that and you know, we had this conservative goal of 40,000 which would have gotten as going and we also ran the campaign for 30 days rather than the normal 45 or 60 days for a campaign because frankly we wanted to just quickly get a taste if this was yeah, like what customers are really looking for we had no idea what kind of legs this would have and within 30 days, right? We had done think over 300 people at signed up. So we did $320,000 in and pre-orders. Yeah, and

1 (39m 50s):
what was the promise to turn around? Like 6 months?

2 (39m 53s):
Yeah, we think it was about six months to

1 (39m 55s):
fulfillment see race three hundred and twenty thousand dollars to Indiegogo. First of all, I mean, so some people listen to this I think woohoo, that's amazing. Incredible. You probably jumping up and down. It's also a huge burden like you got off of fill all those orders and All those people and all those emails if you've ever done an Indiegogo or put money into one and I have you know that you're going to be like, where's my thing? Where's my bike? Where's my product

2 (40m 23s):
Oh, man. Yeah you I remember sweating constantly for everyday running up to the campaign and I thought that that was hard just getting the campaign launched and but boy, oh boy, like that's when the hard part really

1 (40m 36s):
started. When we come back in just a moment how Mike took his first factory-fresh ebike for a test drive and why it went very very wrong. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible first to 3M who's using science and Innovation to help the world responded covid-19.

1 (41m 19s):
3M is on track to produce two billion respirators globally by the end of 2020 in addition 3 m is also maximize production of other Solutions, including biopharma filtration hand sanitizers and disinfectants. Learn more at 3M. Cam / covid 3M science applied to life. Thanks. Also to eat trade trading isn't for everyone but each trade is whether it's saving for a rainy day or your retirement. Each raid has you covered they can help you check financial goals off your list and with a team of professionals giving you support when you need it.

1 (41m 59s):
You can be confident that your money is working hard for you get more than just trading with each raid to get started visit. If ETrade.com podcast for more information E-Trade Securities LLC member finra SI PC thanks also to Comcast business whether your customers want more or your office is closed don't bounce back bounce forward with internet speeds of up to a gig and update your bandwidth with a few clicks. Learn more at Comcast. Business.com. Some days reading a bunch of headlines just isn't enough.

1 (42m 39s):
You need to look the new sink in on consider this and peers new Daily News podcast. We can help you do that each day in about 10 minutes. You can find out not just what happens. But why and what it means consider this new episodes every weekday afternoon from NPR Really quick before we get back to the show, you know, one of the Hallmarks of economic crises like this one is that people actually start businesses slack betterment. Even Air B&B all companies. We featured on this show. We're all founded during the last economic crisis and a lot of people are talking about using this period now as a chance to reimagine what they do and if that's you well, I've written a book that you might find helpful.

1 (43m 26s):
It's called what else how I built this and I wrote And for anyone who's starting a business thinking about starting one or just looking for inspiration and ideas from the incredible stories in the book The how I built this book is designed to be that voice in your head cheering you on when you're feeling like you just want to give up the book is based on interviews with hundreds of leading entrepreneurs and it traces how to start a business or pursue a big idea and how to avoid the big mistakes along that Journey. You can get your copy of how I built this wherever books Sr sold including Amazon Barnes & Noble Target and your local Indie bookstore and also by visiting guy Roz.com or how I built this.com Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR.

1 (44m 18s):
I'm guy Roz. So it's 2015 and my grandpa and his partner Ty Collins have 300 ebike orders to fill from their crowdfunding campaign. And at this point they've moved rad power bikes to Seattle and they're working with a factory about 6,000 miles away in China.

2 (44m 40s):
So I had placed the order before even visiting the factory and so I quickly got on a plane. And you got my butt over there to try to oversee production and be a part of the production process took you'll learn digest get a feel for this new partner. We were you know buildings relationship with

1 (44m 56s):
made this point china had already had a lot of experience with ebike. So what were the challenges that you guys had in getting these

2 (45m 4s):
mate? So we actually ran into a problem. Once the bikes arrived to Seattle as we unboxed some of the first bikes out of the containers and put them together started doing Quality checks, I went out for a test ride on one of the first bikes and it's like

1 (45m 19s):
something's wrong. Something's off here what's

2 (45m 21s):
going on here? And I realized very quickly that the factory had installed the brakes backwards. And so the brake was on the right and the rear brake was on the left. That's the standard in other countries, but not in North America. And so we had specified everything in the bill of materials and this all the spec sheets and quality documentation, but that was the one thing we didn't speak because we just assumed everyone does it the same Way, so we spent a I think a week straight the three of us in the company at that point like unboxing every bike switching the brakes around it was it was a doozy just to get those bikes shift.

1 (45m 57s):
Wow, and the bikes that you delivered to customers that I think they maxed out of what 25 miles an hour. All right.

2 (46m 4s):
Yeah, the Paula price for 20 miles an hour.

1 (46m 5s):
Yeah and pretty much from the beginning. I guess your decision was let's make this a direct consumer brand. Let's let's just have a website and figure out how to get people to buy directly from us instead of sell the bike shops and use Distributors. Why did you decide to from the beginning to go that

2 (46m 22s):
route we needed to get the brand out there. There is no bike distribution Network. That would have taken these two young guys with this kind of absurd looking bike in some ways traditionally bikes have always been sold through dealerships and the dealership needs to make margin right to pay for rent and pay for their employees and operating expenses. You have a distributor. In a country, right? They have a markup and so direct to Consumer is the way where we could really get the brand started kicked

1 (46m 52s):
off. Will you able to fulfill all those orders on time the from the Indiegogo campaign?

2 (46m 58s):
Yeah, it wasn't absent of a lot of long nights and you know Blood Sweat and Tears but we did we got I think we got them all fulfilled on time. You'll plus or minus a few weeks, I think and it did quickly become frankly totally out of hand like just being able to have timely responses to MERS and so we ended up posting our first job, you know, and our first job was a customer service agent position. So here's my question if that

1 (47m 23s):
$320,000 that you got through Indiegogo went to pay for all these e-bikes. Basically you were subsidizing the bikes because people were getting them for at cost or even less than what it cost you to produce them. So you were you never whole lot of cash left over after those bikes were sent out. How did you I don't know. Where did you go from there?

2 (47m 46s):
Well, we had a Shopify already up and running by the time we launched Indiegogo. That was just a great tool for us because it was really easy to get it launched and it really limited this huge barrier to entry so we wanted to run the campaign on Indiegogo because we get a lot of eyes on it. Yeah, but then you're right. We needed to have Revenue at a more sustainable margin right away. So right after the 30-day campaign ended on Indiegogo, we switched on our websites, you know ability to accept orders we No was going to happen. We didn't know if raising the price from the crowdfunding price and going up to fourteen ninety nine, which is the price the Red Rover still sells for today. It was going to work like we didn't know if we were going to see customers still excited to adopt one of our

1 (48m 30s):
bikes and how did you guys get the word out? I mean was it ties sort of skills as a digital marketer that's been just a

2 (48m 39s):
huge component of the traction that our brand has gotten from day one. Is that because we're a direct to And because I had this background in your performance and brand at a digital marketing we were able to just immediately get eyes on the site and that was still complemented right with this word of mouth thing that was going on is like it's like a ski, do you know you don't want to buy one ski to you want a bite too so you can go with your friend. Yeah. You see the same thing with e-bikes which is it's a lot more fun to go ride with a

1 (49m 7s):
pal. So you basically hang your shingle out on Shopify and then a slow trickle of order start to come in

2 (49m 14s):
the first day. I think we got one order come through the site and that was really exciting because 1 we learned that the website was working and and to we realize if people maybe someone out there's willing to like that $14.99 price works for us and it was a sustainable margin for us. And so we knew if we could sell bikes at that price. We could build a robust business. But if there wasn't any traction then we didn't know what we're going to do.

1 (49m 38s):
Yeah, because you could be out of cash pretty soon.

2 (49m 43s):
Yeah really quickly and then They too came around and I think we sold three bikes right and like wow, okay day 3 comes along and I think we sold 15 and each day that went by I remember having I think my heart rate has never been faster than those that week following our crowdfunding campaign transitioning to website sales.

1 (50m 4s):
All right, so meantime, it is like 2015-2016 ebike still are not not quite taken off in the u.s. Some, you know, you got some early adopters and stuff, but you were thinking of Of this because I think most people still think of bikes as a form of exercise in some cities. It's a form of transportation. I'm a bike commuter been a bike Commuter for I don't know 20 years. You were promoting this as a as a utility right as a transportation tool not as a Leisure thing.

2 (50m 34s):
I think one of the first things we ever copy wrote was this term it's built for everything and price for everyone and this was kind of an early tenant within the business, which is that, you know, it's almost like a Swiss Army. And I for Leatherman of e-bikes and at a price that allows for Mass adoption

1 (50m 50s):
in your mind. Who was who was your Target customer?

2 (50m 54s):
It was people just looking for Mobility. We really were targeting people getting around their ranch or running to get in the mail or taking their dog for a walk or run into the store just to pick up groceries or the pharmacy. It was just a lot more about just mobility and under 20 mile under 30 mile kind of

1 (51m 10s):
trips. You know, I mean one of the things about about this was this wood allow people who are maybe not in great shape to ride a

2 (51m 18s):
bike. Yeah. This has been just a the most compelling part of our story so far and I think what really drives a lot of our team members, especially the customer facing ones that see these stories all day long every day from people that are adopting Red Power bikes and becoming part of the ebike movement is like it's not just Transportation its health and wellness as well. You know, I think you'll hear maybe people that write e-bikes being called quote-unquote cheaters. Because they're not pedaling on their own but actually nothing could be further from the truth because you're actually out there and you're going further you can pedal as much as you want to and our customers find that it just reduces the barrier to entry into cycling and they end up getting way more exercise.

2 (52m 1s):
I think I've seen studies talking about how you actually get more exercise writing an e-bike and you do get a regular because you write a more often.

1 (52m 8s):
Yeah. I mean people call me bike riders cheaters need to understand they are not very producing any carbon emissions. There's a carbon-free way of transportation. Like it's nuts. You know that came a point around 2016 17 were VC money started pouring into like bike stations. And and then it was AB electric scooters. And now it's you've got electric Vespa style bikes going into cities. And did you guys start to think? Hey, maybe we should partner with cities and get our bikes in cities as like a something people could rent

2 (52m 44s):
frankly. We've been just Everyone with the man as full paying customers that want to own their own bike. And so we never got pulled into the share economy conversation and we just were hearing something very different from our customers. They wanted to own their bike. They wanted to customize it themselves. They want to different features on their bikes than what was available on share bikes. And so yeah, we never went down that path.

1 (53m 6s):
So all right, so you were basically just financing the business through sales through just the cash flow that was coming through right? That was what was it? Fueling the business we had

2 (53m 18s):
in the first years of in 2015. We did a million and a half in sales. So we did three hundred thousand on crowdfunding and the 1.5 for the year. We were a bootstrap business right for so long, but we did have two local guys in Seattle these amazing entrepreneur / Angel Investors that joined us in 2015 and started a function is kind of a quasi board

1 (53m 39s):
of directors with me and and they kind of gave you some Angel cash and and advice as well.

2 (53m 45s):
That's right. Yeah, there was a small Angel investment and the role that they played with so pivotal in those early days because they were kind of the first adults in the room and these guys were named Hugh Holman and my curtain and they had ran a really successful Seafood Company. They pushed us to take chances learn adjust and do a lot of things that we weren't comfortable doing and have like one really fun example. I remember fondly was the in one of our early meetings of the Mast tie they said tie. How much do you spending on marketing each month, right? Right Ty comes back to him and says I think we're seeing the thousand dollars a month. And one of these guys looks back at me says a thousand dollars a month. That's crazy. It's like you need to double that and I remember Ty looking back at him dumbfound like double the budget.

2 (54m 29s):
No way. Are we going to spend that much money on marketing? And so we doubled it and sure enough the amount of eyes on the site doubled and what were you spending the

1 (54m 38s):
money on like Instagram and Google and Facebook? Yeah. That's

2 (54m 42s):
exactly it kind of just different digital channels. This is a people Movements, like I think the people of this room

1 (54m 48s):
ready and eager for a solution like this. But I mean, that's something that not just about about red wagons me. I'm just curious like why do you think it all of a sudden took off? Why did people start to say? Hey electric bikes what was going on?

2 (55m 3s):
I think there's so many factors impacting this ebike revolution that's happening now, right and there's so, you know bike shares a good example here. We actually saw bike shares being Observe an advertisement for our product because people were seeing about you know thousands of bikes in the streets and maybe they were trying them and if they tried them we were hearing from our customers saying, you know, I tried one of these share bikes but it really love to see what a real e-bikes all about. You know, that's not I think that's what we were hearing like almost verbatim.

1 (55m 34s):
Okay. So here's a question. A lot of people ask us about founding companies which is complicated. We've got co-founders you started this business when you were 15 basically Red Power X is U but now you're sharing the company with Ty. So how did you divide up the work and the responsibility

2 (55m 54s):
ties got a really amazing marketing brain and I was always way more on product on it like product Innovation and Manufacturing. And so it was actually it was easy for us to break the workup because we have these complementary skill sets, but we're also totally opposites and you know opted in many ways opposites complement each other, but we've also learned in all the Management training we've done together that actually makes it really hard and right it's a bit of push and pull because he is very thoughtful and sometimes I'm very action-oriented and bridging into Reckless and my speed at which I go at problems. And so it just has sometimes made decision-making hard. And so one of the big learnings I've kind of taken away from the last awesome five years of tie has been acknowledged the tension and address it head-on.

2 (56m 42s):
Like don't let it build up pressure because You might think it's not creeping out into the rest of your team's work, but it does and so you as co-founder. Thank you really do have a commitment that you have to make to your employees that you like. Make sure that's a healthy relationship because with every relationship there's especially co-founder relationship. It's important that that's healthy because it does trickle down to the rest of the company. So

1 (57m 7s):
I think by 2018 you are doing 45 million dollars in Revenue. Did you start to get a lot of investors? Contacting you and saying hey can what's the deal can we invested like was disaster to happen to you? I

2 (57m 22s):
always felt it was really important for us to keep our heads down. Just kind of keep building value and keep us on the track with really bold Mission as a business and I didn't want anyone to kind of change that trajectory and so we were careful for a long time as a business, but the frequency of people contacting us did increase a lot and and through that increased frequency. We started to see see a lot of really special Partnerships potential start to form your people that were investing in our mission not just investing in a kind of a short-term run at the bank and that's when our conversations first started with potential

1 (57m 59s):
investors. I think you took your first asset investment in March of 2019. You got some funding from the guys who have founded seattle-based Zulily and and Blue Nile you were doing fine without any outside investment, but did Needs yes investment to really bring red Power bikes to the next level.

2 (58m 20s):
There's two big things that pushed me over the edge on enthusiastically like racing into this partnership with the founders of Zulily. They've also built Blue Nile together two of the world's best e-commerce entrepreneurs one we got this tastes early on in the business of having great advisors in the company. So that was one reason the second reason every single summer. We were out of stock and we For long periods of time weeks on end. So we were attached constrained like we needed to be able to order more inventory near the tail end of each year to be prepared for the upcoming summer. And so it was those two things that you just made this a total no-brainer for

1 (58m 59s):
us. I'm just trying to figure this out because it sounds like you knew this was going to work and that's probably true. But you sound like it maybe I'm wrong you sound like you just didn't have a whole lot of sleepless nights.

2 (59m 11s):
There's been a ton of sleepless nights have been anyone that knows me knows that. I don't really have a life outside of the company even still today in this business. It's like the

1 (59m 20s):
speed at which were growing

2 (59m 22s):
a huge piece of learning I've taken away is that

1 (59m 25s):
usually you get comfortable with things being different almost

2 (59m 27s):
every day. I used to say things are changing a lot every month or every quarter but really it's just getting comfortable with change and that takes time you're building out whole totally new departments or building new supply

1 (59m 41s):
chain Partnerships for bringing on new investors, like all this stuff

2 (59m 44s):
has a Small you are the more likely all the stuff is to sink your ship and your less equipped to deal with it. Just because you haven't developed that muscle like how to process some of these emotions or these changes

1 (59m 55s):
Timber like any specific thing that happened that got you just stressed out

2 (1h 0m 3s):
in mid 2018, right? We're growing up really fast and we had a lot of bikes on order compared to

1 (1h 0m 10s):
our balance sheet and all of a

2 (1h 0m 12s):
sudden tariffs hit us really hard. Yeah, he bikes were part of the section 301 tariffs. So like I said, we had all these bikes on order and then all of a sudden all of them are going to cost us 25%

1 (1h 0m 25s):
more. That's our whole. Margin. That's like that's that's

2 (1h 0m 28s):
everything that we had to reinvest in the business and it was almost

1 (1h 0m 31s):
overnight that this happened it felt so

2 (1h 0m 34s):
unfair that intent of the tariffs were to encourage domestic business and domestic hiring

1 (1h 0m 40s):
and have the total opposite effect on us your word growing headcount like crazy. And all

2 (1h 0m 45s):
of a sudden our Administration right tells us that actually we're going to go ahead and take this pool of investable capital that you could use to

1 (1h 0m 54s):
fund more inventory and hire more people

2 (1h 0m 57s):
what are going to go and take all that right? And it's a really did feel like a direct hit on the our mission and our mission is to decrease emissions and make Mobility zero

1 (1h 1m 6s):
missions, right and like and so it felt

2 (1h 1m 10s):
horrible. It was all-consuming for months on end trying to figure out how to deal

1 (1h 1m 15s):
with it. How is it resolved ultimately?

2 (1h 1m 18s):
Well, we had been

1 (1h 1m 19s):
diversifying manufacturing at that point where it's we already had bikes

2 (1h 1m 23s):
being built in Taiwan and starting to build bikes and other parts of Asia outside of mainland China it so that that works continued and its accelerated since tariffs came into

1 (1h 1m 34s):
place. But frankly, we have it

2 (1h 1m 37s):
like a big part of the, you know, raising additional Capital navigating this with our banks around our lines of credit that It's just been a huge digital pressure on the business and it's impacted our ability to scale

1 (1h 1m 53s):
and so because you're making fewer products in China, you're not subject to this

2 (1h 1m 58s):
tariffs. Yeah, so our diversification efforts mean that less and less of our bikes have been subject to the tariffs. But at the same time our production in mainland China has also been increasing so on a percentage basis it's fewer but on a total unit. It's actually more. The supply chains for electric bikes. They don't exist in America. They're not going to exist.

1 (1h 2m 21s):
Yeah, but I mean despite all of those challenges 2019 was I think a record year for you mean to do you remember what your Revenue was in 2019?

2 (1h 2m 32s):
We were nearly a hundred million sales last year.

1 (1h 2m 35s):
Wow. So you're thinking incredible, you know and and then 20 20 hits and all of a sudden covid. Locked down and the whole economy starts to collapse when that started were you nervous about what was going to happen to your company

2 (1h 2m 54s):
for rad power bikes covid-19. The impact started to hit us right in January Yeah. So basically all of our employees across our factories and Taiwan and China and Southeast Asia, they were impacted first. So we really just focused in like, what could we control and what could we could work on there? So we just focused on caring for those teams and still trying to Make sure they're safe healthy and still able to produce bikes in the cases where that was a possibility and so it was like batten down the hatches on supply chain

1 (1h 3m 25s):
and then what I mean, so you knew that something was going on when it actually cuz you're in Seattle Seattle was the epicenter of we forget it was the epicenter of covid for a while. Were you worried that this was going to you know, you guys are going to get hit,

2 (1h 3m 38s):
you know, we've always been a pretty hardcore office culture fragrance fun. We all bike into the office together. We have really A huge bike parking lots outside versus a car parking lot and Ed. This is something we had a lot of pride in that. We like came together as a team each day. And so yeah, you're right the first days I think there was a nursing home where there was the first case covid-19 is if this horrible event happened in this and we started to see it spread wider and wider and we immediately had to transition right? We had to Pivot our whole plan for the year. I mean, it was really like bam out of nowhere came straight to home like the Seattle's worry of hundreds of employees is Our headquarters location. It was the epicenter number one in the u.s.

1 (1h 4m 19s):
Meantime, the opposite happened to your company that's been happening to many companies is that you saw sales Spike all of a sudden there were like insane number of requests for e-bikes which makes sense because people don't want to use public transportation right now. They're nervous by getting on credit Subways. What did you start to see sales? All of a sudden Spike initially

2 (1h 4m 42s):
when Seattle was the epicenter right? We win? Into total cost control mode. Actually, we ended up cutting our forecast for the year and a half and as each week went by sales kept

1 (1h 4m 55s):
taking up right and

2 (1h 4m 57s):
it was a really fortunate for the company because we didn't need to lay anybody off and went the opposite if since then we've actually I think we have over a hundred open rolls right now and wow yo and those are across Supply chains sourcing right customer service focused roles. It's really we ramped our customer service team from Like 40 people 214 or something like that and we've been ramping teams as fast as we can to keep up with customer inquiries

1 (1h 5m 25s):
give me sense in percentage increase in demand this year.

2 (1h 5m 28s):
So April of 2020 we've done tuner 97% or bike sales that we did April 20 19300

1 (1h 5m 38s):
percent

2 (1h 5m 40s):
year-over-year and take a for context. We're business that has grown. And more than a hundred percent per year for the last five years and we're planning for another year like that take a business like that right triple it again. And so you can imagine just it's been a lot of work. It's hard work. It's fun work, but we're just in the business of delighting our customers and that's been really hard since the man has frankly spiked.

1 (1h 6m 5s):
What's the waitlist now for a

2 (1h 6m 6s):
bike the waitlist varies by model, but for some of our more popular models right

1 (1h 6m 12s):
there as long as four months,

2 (1h 6m 15s):
And this is not your as this is not a small business or a small supply chain that were running anymore. Right? We have bikes are being built across factories across four different countries, and we're spending a huge amount of time on supply chain Innovation. We think a switch was flipped on the light has been shed. Oniy bikes as a tool for the masses. Yeah, and so now it's not so much about just keeping up with this demand that has spiked from covid-19 people working from home. Shopping from home looking for social distance your ways to get around but this is a switch that was is flipped on it's not turning off for years to come. And so the work we're doing now is just all about planning for that future demand.

2 (1h 6m 59s):
It's not about planning for next Summer's orders. It's help planning for the orders 10 years from now

1 (1h 7m 4s):
frankly. Will you open up brick and mortar shops?

2 (1h 7m 8s):
We found that our customers were really eager to try our bikes before they buy them and some customers obviously. Are getting referred by their friends and they're buying online and shipping direct to door, but we found there's a whole other set of customers that really wanted to try before and see which bike fit them the best which model is really for them. And so that's why we opened our first retail store back in 2016 and had a lot of success with that and so we actually did have a plan to launch more retail stores this year that's on pause and but next year you'll start to see some more stuff come out where we're going to experiment with different formats and kind of the new world were

1 (1h 7m 45s):
in And you know, I think Red Power bikes are now the top selling e-bikes in the u.s. Is that is right.

2 (1h 7m 51s):
Yeah, that's right. Yeah, yo, we estimate we have about 25 percent or more of the North American Market. Wow, and the other 75% is I think made up of about a hundred other companies and you know, we think that what we're building can become the Ford the Toyota the Volkswagen all combined into one of this whole new Mobility movement. And so we're not Stone building a couple hundred million dollar business, but we have a lot bigger aspirations. Is that pinky bikes to the next thing to be the solution for the future

1 (1h 8m 24s):
Mobility. Do you envision a future where most cities are are Carlos like Amsterdam, you know where you basically can't really drive anywhere and people are just using e-bikes or bikes. There was a month

2 (1h 8m 37s):
where Seattle was completely shut down right? There was there's very few cars on the road. It was a devastating time. And it was also remarkable to see how livable streets could become without cars everywhere. And so there was a month there where I was going to the grocery store to get essential stuff and it was Frank. I was riding in the middle of the road. It was amazing. It was just this it was the safest I've ever felt out there now, that's the future that I want to see. I want to see a future where everyone can feel that everyone can feel safe going from point A to point B and do it without carbon emissions. Wow.

1 (1h 9m 14s):
I mean you started this when you were like 15 and I should mention you are because you wouldn't know but just hearing this your your 30, right? Yeah. Yeah, it's rare that we interview people at such a young age. It's such a young point in their lives because you know, we want to tell the full story of a business and a company but this is business been around with your 15 for 15 years. What's going to sound pretty remarkable to a lot of people to discover that you now have a business that is going to what you're probably projected to do to 150 million dollars. Sales is here. Maybe more.

2 (1h 9m 45s):
Yeah. Well, I you know, I I just said keep in mind this not just me leading this company. You know, I like I run the company but I've frankly an amazing set of Executives who bought into the culture and they see the same vision I do and so I think that has been a big part of this mission that we got into it really early. Like I was right there kind of the dawn of the ebike Revolution. I think that's been a big part of it, but the bigger part has been around identifying areas that I need support as a young entrepreneur.

1 (1h 10m 13s):
Or you mean you can do like 10 more busy can start five more companies. I mean most startup entrepreneurs are like the average is like 39 40. Do you see yourself in this business for the rest of your professional life?

2 (1h 10m 28s):
Yeah. This is the question that came up and all of our kind of fundraising conversations. You have people that are joining the business and they want to know what they're going to be in for here and I'll tell you the same thing that I've told all these folks. It's that this is the most fun. That I think I could ever have it's what I want to commit my the rest of my life too. And it's also really hard but I learned early on that no matter what you doing. Like it's going to hurt in some ways and it's going to feel great in others and we all have to work tirelessly to achieve this Vision because it's a big one. We're going up against big Auto Big Oil. We have big opponents and we got a lot of work cut out for

1 (1h 11m 6s):
us like when you think of your your journey and what you built it sound like an overnight success story, but of course now, We know it's not it started when you're 15, but really, you know from the time of the Indiegogo campaign today. It really is remarkable how quickly this company is scaled. But do you think that a lot of this has to do with just how hard you work and how skilled you are or do you think some of this is just because you got lucky.

2 (1h 11m 32s):
Yeah. I mean we definitely could not have done this without luck and timing but I think hard-working grit are there definitely been a foundation of this business. It's been a pure passion of mine since I was a Youngster and you really are fanatical owners.

1 (1h 11m 48s):
Yo

2 (1h 11m 49s):
there what's what's driving us now is like we just have to keep up with demand and we also have to innovate and build the future. And so that's going to take a lot of work and and the company that becomes synonymous for electric bikes in the future of Mobility is going going to be the one that takes an early mover Advantage like rat has and I think we're all set up to do that. But gosh, I hope we have some more luck along the

1 (1h 12m 11s):
way. That's my grandma's founder and CEO of rad power bikes. And by the way, even though the company limits the bike speeds to 20 miles per hour. There are many many YouTube videos that show you how to hack the system and get it up to speeds closer to 30 miles per hour. Not that I would personally know anyone who actually did this. I'm assuming you have a car right? I have a

2 (1h 12m 41s):
2009 Toyota Tacoma. It's currently sitting in one of our back parking lots in our buildings with a dead battery because I haven't driven it

1 (1h 12m 49s):
about 10 months. Wow. So you're pretty much all ebike all the time.

2 (1h 12m 54s):
I'm olly olly bike and I have been since I was 15 and how they got to school every day until I got to college every day and it's how they get to work every

1 (1h 13m 2s):
day. Thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or at guy Roz. You can also follow me on Instagram. That's at guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by JC Howard with music composed by rum teen Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Candice limb Darris Gales, Julia Carney, Neva. To and Jeff Rogers. I'm Gyros and you've been listening to how I built this.

1 (1h 13m 45s):
This is NPR

2 (1h 13m 50s):
a whole lot of people say they believe in so-called peaceful

1 (1h 13m 53s):
protesters marching as long as it doesn't block traffic for too long holding up signs and chanting as long as it's all polite. But what about when things get a little

2 (1h 14m 2s):
more

1 (1h 14m 3s):
divisive we're talking about going on strike. Listen to the codes which podcast from NPR.