0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

1 (9s):
What if the greatest tragedy of your life was just covered up? I have never seen any, anything like that before or after. This is the story of the worst Marine on Marine friendly fire in modern history. A story kept from the public. It's like, what did y'all have to hide?

2 (24s):
Listen to NPRs embedded podcast and its latest series taking cover.

0 (30s):
If car designers can make cars look like anything, why are there so many boring cars? Nissan dares to design what others won't. By approaching each project in a completely different way. Nissan Design gives you everything from the adventurous frontier to the Z's iconic sports car styling to the futuristic aria all in one brand. Each Nissan vehicle has its own story and identity. Nissan knows that thrill isn't just about zero to 60. Thrill should start the moment you see a car from the arc of the roof to the way the headlamp meets the grill. Every detail of a Nissan vehicle is designed to get your heart racing before you ever press start. Nissan knows what thrill looks like because they designed it into every vehicle they make.

0 (1m 12s):
Learn more about the 2023 lineup@nissanusa.com. If

3 (1m 17s):
You're struggling with stress, burnout, anxiety, or have trouble sleeping, cerebral can help. Cerebral offers 100% online personalized mental healthcare plans that include therapy and medication management. You can choose your clinician from cerebrals, vetted and trained team of experts and attend all your sessions from the comfort and convenience of your own home. Get started with or without insurance and only pay one flat monthly rate. And for mental health awareness month, this may, you can get an exclusive 50% off your first month with cerebral.com/wondery. That's cerebral.com/wondery for 50% off your first month.

0 (1m 58s):
Hey, it's guy here. Just before we get to our next episode, a quick request, please do subscribe to how I built this. However, you get your podcast, whether it's iTunes or Google Play or Stitcher, wherever, please click subscribe. And then every Monday you'll get the new episode right to your smartphone. Thanks.

5 (2m 21s):
You have to be so very careful about who you discuss your hard times with because those who love you and care for you the most, like your mother, like your best friend, they'll give you the worst damn advice in the world. You need to get a job. You shouldn't be sleeping on the floor in a sleeping bag

0 (2m 46s):
From npr. It's how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Ross and on today's show why Kathy Hughes refuses to take no for an answer and how that helped her build one of the biggest African-American owned businesses in the country. So you might have never heard of Kathy Hughes, but the company she started Radio One. It's the largest African American owned broadcaster in the US and it now has more than 50 radio stations and media outlets all across the us.

0 (3m 34s):
Now, Kathy didn't exactly stumble into this line of work. She grew up in the 1950s in Omaha, Nebraska. And even when she was little, she couldn't stop talking about what it was that she wanted to do.

5 (3m 49s):
I wanted to be the first African American to have a syndicated radio show. I've had that desire since I was 8, 9, 10 years old. Oh wow.

0 (3m 59s):
But this is what you wanna do from an early

5 (4m 1s):
Ages. Oh, from from childhood. It's so interesting when I go back to the high school that I graduated from, that every single solitary week sent a note home to my mother saying she talks too much. I'm like, I'm practicing for my future career. And I grew up in a household where there were six of us, one bathroom, and I did my radio show every morning in the mirror with the toothbrush. And no matter how many blows, my brothers and sister would, you know, heap upon my head when I finally opened the bathroom door so they could get ready for school. Yeah. I never came out of that bathroom every morning until I finished my radio show.

5 (4m 45s):
Everyone thought at that time there was something wrong with me. I mean, there are no black people in radio particularly no black women. Cuz again, remember, we're isolated in the middle of the United States

0 (4m 55s):
In the 1950s.

5 (4m 56s):
In the 1950s. Exactly. And so they thought I had a pipe dream. My nuns at my school described it as delusions of grandeur. Okay. Told my mother that she perhaps should seek counseling for me. Wow. Because I had this vision of being on the radio and people hearing me from coast to coast.

4 (5m 16s):
Yeah.

0 (5m 21s):
Okay. So you have this dream and a lot of people think you're crazy, but you still wanna pursue it. But then as a teenager, I guess you're, you're 16, you get, you get pregnant.

5 (5m 31s):
First sexual experience. I'm in the doctor's office, he tells me I'm pregnant. I said I couldn't be, I've only had sex one time. He said, I hate to surprise you, Kathy, but it really takes one time. God arranged it that way. Were

0 (5m 43s):
You shocked when you found out

5 (5m 45s):
Arrested development? No question about it. I went into a shade of a state of shock, but I realized that I had a mission. I had an obligation to someone greater than myself. And I was determined that he wouldn't be a black statistic. I was determined that he and I would not grow up in the public housing that I had grown up in. I was determined that he was gonna have an opportunity, which meant that I had to be very serious of purpose while I was still a young teenager, a child myself. But

0 (6m 16s):
It's still pretty hard to, you know, to try to support yourself and your and your child.

5 (6m 20s):
Yes. But I'm third generation entrepreneur. Hmm. So I grew up having to work in a family business 110 years ago. My grandfather started a school after being the first black to get his e d D comparable to a PhD. And then my father was the first African-American to graduate from Creighton University with a degree in accounting. He opened up a tax service and I was in charge of the Prentice Hall ledgers, which were all the tax regulations that changed every week. I was typing at 10 years old. I was taking shorthand by the time I was 12 and having to be proficient at it because I was a staff person, my family kept imposing upon me to come to work.

5 (7m 4s):
Okay. So even though, you know, pregnant is 16, a mother at 17 sounds like, how did you do it financially? Wow. I was already working and I was very blessed. And I say this to young mothers, it's easy to be a teenage mama when the baby's still in infancy because all they do is eat, go to the bathroom and sleep. That's all they do. And cry a little in between. And so I could take him to class with me. Huh.

0 (7m 32s):
And so you actually, you, when you enrolled, you enrolled at university?

5 (7m 36s):
Yeah. And I took him along the University of Nebraska, Omaha.

0 (7m 39s):
And you would take him to class or?

5 (7m 40s):
Yeah, I put him, he'd be right in a carriage on the floor and, but it became a problem once he got up and start walking. And, and did

0 (7m 46s):
You, did you work at like the college radio station?

5 (7m 49s):
Yes, I volunteered at that radio station. It provided a voice for us in Omaha in a city that was severely segregated.

0 (7m 56s):
Yeah. I I I read that, that while you were there, you met someone who, at the university who basically like changed the course of your life.

5 (8m 6s):
Yes. Tony Brown, an African American host of Tony Brown's Journal comes to town Yeah. And said to me, you're wasting your talents in Omaha, Nebraska. You need to be where you can really have an opportunity to do what you wanna do. Which he knew was radio. Yeah. And years later, he was offered the opportunity to establish the Howard University School of Communications. He became the first dean and he asked me if I was interested in coming to Washington DC

0 (8m 39s):
So you moved halfway across the country? Yes. With your, I guess four or five year old son at that point. And just like you find an apartment and you start working in the city that you did not know

5 (8m 49s):
And got lost, I can't tell you how many times I would go out New York Avenue and get lost or I'd go out a street that his name changed. I ended up in Virginia some morning. He's trying to get towered. What, what

0 (9m 1s):
Did Washington feel like to, to you? I mean, you come from Omaha, Nebraska, which was

5 (9m 5s):
I wanna tell you about a letter I wrote my mother. Yeah. And in it, I told her that my eyes actually were tired at the end of the day staring at the greatness of black people. Wow. I had never seen so many wonderful people of color. Yeah. Doing so many wonderful things. I actually put in a letter to my mother that my eyes were tired at the end of the day of just staring. It was, I was in awe. Still am to be very honest with you. I mean, there's no city like Washington DC in the whole white world. World.

0 (9m 35s):
You, you had come to the city in the seventies from a predominantly white city to a city that was thank run by

5 (9m 41s):
With black people in charge. In charge. Yeah. Oh damn mean total. And, and wait, during my whole duration in the nation's capital, Italy gotten better. I've gone from watching a black mayor get elected to watching a black president get elected.

0 (9m 59s):
Okay. So, so you're, you get to Howard and DC and, and, and you working at the radio station there, right? I was

5 (10m 6s):
The sales manager yeah. At the

0 (10m 7s):
Station. And what, what, what was the station like? What kind of, what did they play music at that time? Like what was he

5 (10m 12s):
Doing? They played jazz one night. They did an 18 minute long piece of Pharaoh Saunders, and I think he held the note the entire time. Okay. All right. 18 minute jazz song. All you heard was this one. And I was like, I can't sell this.

0 (10m 33s):
So your job was to find advertisers to advertise on the Howard Station? Yes.

5 (10m 37s):
But also to help define how the radio station should be structured

0 (10m 41s):
And at the station at the time. Just, just a mess.

5 (10m 43s):
Oh my God.

0 (10m 44s):
It was a total mess. Yeah. So, so it was, it sounds like it was a kind of place that, because it was a mess, a young person like you, an opportunity in your twenties Absolutely. Could take it over.

5 (10m 54s):
Absolutely. And the fact that the, then Dean was a big fan of my work ethic. He said, you need to see, can you teach these kids how to work Like you folks from Nebraska work. I always believed that rising at 4:00 AM and then getting dressed and leaving by 5 15, 5 30 for the office, I, that was just my lifestyle and staying late. I have been reared to believe, which again, so critical for entrepreneurs that you don't stop based on what the clock says. You stop based on the accomplishment of the task.

0 (11m 30s):
You, so you're in DC with your son, by the way. How are you doing all of this as a single mom?

5 (11m 36s):
Well, you know what's, oftentimes people ask me, do I, if I had anything to do over, what would it be? It would be to have more children. It was easy with him. Remember I told you I started off taking him to college with me. So he had his first little tuxedo before he was outta grade school, cuz he was my date. I took him everywhere. Huh? I had a sleeping bag in my office. We'd have dinner together, we would do his homework. Then I put him in the sleeping bag until it was time for me to take him home. I didn't know anybody. I didn't have anyone to leave him with.

0 (12m 7s):
So what, what were you able to do at the station at that time? I mean, you, you get there in early seventies.

5 (12m 12s):
So many, so many, many things. The first thing was to create structure. So I realized that the first thing they needed was an understanding of the entrepreneurial opportunity given them.

0 (12m 23s):
So how, how are you able to grow it?

5 (12m 25s):
The quiet storm?

0 (12m 26s):
Tell me about the quiet storm. What is that? Well,

5 (12m 28s):
It was simply recognition of the fact that the city had a sizable population of single unattached human beings who still wanted to feel good about a Friday night or a Saturday night. All they were missing was, you know, the, the entertainment. So I structured a, a format called the Quiet Storm

6 (12m 49s):
Is your your,

5 (12m 52s):
That basically was a five hour presentation of entertaining you at home by yourself, keeping your company, company. You

0 (13m 0s):
Do that

5 (13m 2s):
With the selection of music before hip hop. If you were gonna be successful in the world of black music, you had to tell the story with your music. And so all I did was weave those stories together. What

0 (13m 15s):
Were you playing?

5 (13m 16s):
Oh, Sam Cook, Carmen McCray, the Ballers, basically.

0 (13m 31s):
How did that show take off? How did it become popular?

5 (13m 34s):
Well, I hit the right target demo

0 (13m 37s):
And I guess we should have mentioned that the audience was predominantly African-American.

5 (13m 41s):
Interestingly enough, my first audience was gay, predominantly gay. I put the first openly gay air personality on the air at Howard and almost lost the top of my head because of it. So the gay community absolutely loved the quiet storm. And then the black community migrated to it.

0 (13m 59s):
So, so people just started tuning in? Oh

5 (14m 1s):
Yes, absolutely. It was strictly word of mouth. And it went from like number 36 in the ratings to like top five. And then when I left, we were number three.

0 (14m 11s):
So you have this incredibly successful career at W H U R. Yes. And you decide, you know, I think I can do this on my own. Like what? What?

5 (14m 19s):
No, not at all. Not at all. There was a group of investors called the Washington Broadcasters and 32 board members and investors. They included some of the most distinguished black and white Washingtonians that had tried for well over a decade to get a signal that was dark back on the air. They had gone through millions of dollars and they could not get this signal on the

0 (14m 46s):
Air, but they wanted to revive a radio station.

5 (14m 49s):
Yes. They wanted this dark signal they had. Okay. But they had spent all, they had spent their money in all the wrong places. They approached me and offered me double what Howard University was paying me. But more importantly, they offered me the opportunity to build a station from the ground up.

0 (15m 7s):
So these owners, they they bought this station and they hired you to run it?

5 (15m 11s):
Yes, they hired me to get it on the air. Okay. Then they hired me to run it. Then they ran out of money. Okay. So they told me to shop a package for financing. And I said to them that that's not the responsibility of a general manager that I will do that if you give me an equity position in your company. And one of the members said to me, if you think that you're smart enough to own a radio station, you should do it for yourself. Wow. We're not giving you any equity in our station. He was being facetious, but I took it verbatim. Seriously. I was like, oh my goodness. He was right. I should do it for myself, Guy.

5 (15m 52s):
I'm not exaggerating. It was like a charge went through me. I said, oh my goodness. This person who's a multimillionaire, who I've admired, who's now probably in their seventies is saying to me here I'm, you know, barely 30, that I'm smart enough to do this for them. And he's challenging me if I think I should own part of their station, do it for myself. I say, thank you Lord. I hear you. I hear you. Wow. I literally, literally put all my papers in my case and skipped, not walked, skipped down the hallway from the board meeting. And they're like, what just happened? Did she have a nervous breakdown or something? I knew what I was destined to do.

0 (16m 37s):
Kathy Hughes, founder of Radio One coming up, the story of how she did end up buying her first radio station, the first of dozens. And how in those early days she lived, literally lived in that station. You're listening to how I built this from NPR Here on how I built this. I like to take a deep dive and learn about a company's life cycle. And of course its business practices, the things companies do to become successful. And you know what matters a lot. One word innovation. It plays a huge part in how a brand achieves continuous success.

0 (17m 17s):
And that idea innovation helps brands evolve and diversify their practices and products to meet the demands of their customers. A great example of this is Columbia Sportswear. They have made it their mission to produce innovative products that protect you so you can do what you love. They've perfected their fabric innovation and the design of their performance fishing gear known as Columbia pfg to stand up to time out on the water, especially in the hot sun. But how did they do this? Well, Columbia PFG works closely with athletes and fishing guides to test out their products and provide on-water feedback. And that allows Columbia to make better products when it comes to quality, durability, and comfort.

0 (18m 2s):
That's how Columbia was able to create these super terminal tackle vent hoodie. It's made with omni shade up F 50 sun protection, which helps prevent sunburn and long-term skin damage by blocking harmful sun rays. Columbia PFGs innovative products and technologies allow anglers and guides around the world to stay comfortable and protected from the elements so they can focus on their sport and make the most of every day on the water. If you're interested in learning more about Columbia PFGs innovative fishing gear, visit columbia.com/pfg. Columbia pfg proud to protect you and the places you love.

8 (18m 44s):
Unlock the power of streaming TV ads for your clients with Disney's Hulu Ad Manager, the one-stop self-service tool for businesses of all sizes. With Disney's Hulu ad manager, you and your clients can reach engaged streamers, access an endless portfolio of premium content and launch a campaign within minutes. You'll enjoy choice and control with industry leading planning tools and a single dashboard. Get started today with Disney's Hulu ad manager at www.huluadmanager.com/stream.

9 (19m 16s):
What's it like to grow up to become world famous? Who's amazing? Life is a podcast for kids and families each week Experience life through the eyes of someone who changed the course of history. You might be Walt Disney dreaming up crazy characters or Naomi Osaka winning gold on the tennis court. Maybe you'll be a famous spy or a Supreme Court justice or a basketball star in the nba. But for now you're just a kid facing challenges that'll shape you into who you are. Listen to who's amazing life on Amazon Music or wherever you get your podcasts.

0 (19m 58s):
It's how I built this from npr. I'm guy Roz. So it's late 1970s and Kathy Hughes has just walked away from her job managing a radio station to start her own. And she's looking for stations that are up for sale. And she happens to find one a, a Black Am station in Washington DC that had fallen on hard times. So she decides to buy it. What were they asking for it?

5 (20m 24s):
$1 million.

0 (20m 25s):
Wow. And this is like 1980?

5 (20m 27s):
No, this is 1978. We didn't get it until

0 (20m 30s):
1980. So 1978 to buy the license for this station, you had to come up with a million dollars. How much money did you have in your bank account at the time? Couple

5 (20m 39s):
Thousand, 10,000. It was $10,000.

0 (20m 41s):
So that's what you had more or less?

5 (20m 42s):
Yeah, that's what I had.

0 (20m 43s):
Was anyone else bidding for the station?

5 (20m 45s):
There was everyone at that time. Senator Edward Brook had just left the United States Senate the first time since you know, reconstruction days. A black

0 (20m 53s):
Senator from Massachusetts.

5 (20m 54s):
That's right. He was a bitter Muhammad Ali was bidding for it. Everybody wanted it. It was a nation's capitol.

0 (21m 0s):
You were bidding for the station against a former senator and Muhammad Ali. Yes. So how did you get

5 (21m 7s):
It? I had an angel Dewey Hughes and I were married at that time and he had worked at the station. So when Dewey went to the owner and said, my wife and I would like to buy this station, he said, where in the world are you gonna get the money? Yeah. So,

0 (21m 22s):
So where did you get the money? Like did you go to banks and and like ask for loans?

5 (21m 27s):
Yes. 32 of them.

0 (21m 28s):
32 banks said no, 32

5 (21m 31s):
Lending institutions.

0 (21m 32s):
And all of them said, no, we're not gonna give you the million dollars. And you showed them business

5 (21m 36s):
Plan,

0 (21m 37s):
You showed them like exactly how you were gonna make money and all of them said, no, we're not gonna give you the million dollars. They

5 (21m 42s):
Asked me questions like, did I plan to have any more children? Wow. They asked me if, didn't I think that I was too young to be doing this, taking on that level of responsibility. They asked me questions that had nothing to do more often than not.

0 (21m 59s):
How did you go to 32 Banks get rejected? Rejection after rejection after,

5 (22m 4s):
Remember I told you that my father was a cpa. I knew the law of averages. Yeah. I knew that if I kept asking a yes, had to come up.

0 (22m 13s):
So how did you get the yes

5 (22m 15s):
Female banker? First week on the job, Lydia Colon Chemical Bank of New York said that she thought that her first loan, her first week would be to a Puerto Rican. And she probably guessed that it would be a male cuz she was Puerto Rican. She said yes. And I just kept, by now, my presentation should have been taught in colleges cuz it was flawless. I mean, after 32 times of perfecting it. Okay. I mean I was, I should have gotten an academy award. I was so good at it. I kept convincing her and she said something to me that I teach all my salespeople. She said, please don't sell past the clothes. And I never forgot that cuz that was another one of those slap in the faces.

5 (22m 58s):
I was like, wow, she's absolutely correct. She said yes. I couldn't believe she had said yes

0 (23m 2s):
Once. She said yes. You kept selling her. Yeah.

5 (23m 4s):
Convinced the, exactly. That's correct. Right. I kept trying to convince her.

0 (23m 13s):
So you get the money and you buy this station and, and and what, where was it by the way? In DC What part of the city was

5 (23m 19s):
It? 1680 Wisconsin Avenue. And

0 (23m 21s):
You walk in there

5 (23m 21s):
In that part of Georgetown in the highest rent district of the city. So that's why I moved into it. Wait, wait,

0 (23m 28s):
Sorry. Sorry.

5 (23m 28s):
I moved into the radio. You moved in, you moved in. I lived in the radio station. You moved

0 (23m 32s):
Into live there?

5 (23m 33s):
I lived there. You moved Because I had to pay rent in Georgetown. And 1680 Wisconsin was then and still is a beautiful, valuable diagonally set on the corner piece of property. Made it real convenient to go to work in the morning. I walked down the hall.

0 (23m 48s):
Wait, so you moved in there with your son and husband?

5 (23m 51s):
No, I moved in there with my son. By then my husband was like, enough, I don't wanna do this.

0 (23m 56s):
So So your marriage fell apart.

5 (23m 58s):
Absolutely. The station broke us up. The debt was just overwhelming for him. He had never been an entrepreneur, never having been in business before even. So it was just me and the kid.

0 (24m 10s):
How many years did you guys, did you and your son live there?

5 (24m 12s):
Almost three. Wow.

0 (24m 14s):
That, that must have been hard.

5 (24m 15s):
No. Number one, again, remember the part of the story I told you that I was just in awe of Washington DC I'm in Georgetown. I haven't been able to move back there yet. Okay. During my struggling days, I had a prime corner. You would see the president having dinner at one of the restaurants. But I

0 (24m 33s):
Mean, you must have been under a lot of financial pressure. Right? So how did you deal with that?

5 (24m 38s):
When you have overwhelming financial obligations? The first natural human impulse is to hide. Yeah. To recoil. Yeah. Not return the call. Well, what I have been trained to do is play offense, not defense. So I would call my lenders and I would say, I know I owe you $10,000 this month. All I have is $1,250. I'm sending it to you as a token of good faith that I will repay you every cent that I owe you. But right now, this is all I have. And most of them said that they had never, ever interacted with anyone who let them know up front that they could not make the payment.

5 (25m 19s):
Wow. I think that it's the reason I've never been foreclosed on. I've never had to file for bankruptcy. And thank God I have never had a paycheck bounce. I've never had a business check. Wow. Nor personal check bounce. Because I tried to stay ahead of the issue of not being able to pay the debt. But

0 (25m 39s):
I mean, you had people like who were depending on you for salaries. Right?

5 (25m 43s):
I was running a 24 hour, seven day a week broadcasting facility with 14 full and part-time employees. Total 14 of us. And

0 (25m 53s):
You were one of the people who went on the, the

5 (25m 55s):
Only thing I don't know how to do is sp up the transmitter.

0 (25m 57s):
You had to go on the air. I had to. Because you didn't have enough people you could pay. Correct. And what did you do? You just opened up the the mics and started talking. Well,

5 (26m 5s):
It started off because we did what they call a format search. And we found out that what was missing in Washington DC was news talk from a black perspective. Huh? What that research did not tell us, as you well know, here at npr, it's the most expensive format that you can do. Yes it is. All right. Music is one person can play the music, read the news, do everything. It's a one person show in music. Yeah. When you talk about news and or talk and information, research is critical cuz there's always someone in your listening audience who knows more than you and just waiting there in the cut to catch it.

5 (26m 46s):
Okay. Oh no, that's not correct. Okay. You can't do it by yourself in this format.

0 (26m 51s):
How are you able to run the station, administer the station, deal with the stress of all that debt, and raise a kid and have a show? How many hours does the show by the way?

5 (27m 2s):
Four hours, four

0 (27m 3s):
Hour show every day and six, six to 10:00 AM How were you able to do all of that?

5 (27m 8s):
Because it was exciting.

0 (27m 10s):
But that's,

5 (27m 12s):
And when you said the stress of the debt, it wasn't stress. I had no doubt that I was going to pay them. I used to brag. I used to brag to my elite investor, syndicated communications. I used to say, I will be the most profitable company in your portfolio one day. And they were like, yeah, Kathy. Okay good. Okay, great. Keep that dream alive. Kathy, I used to tell them, you will make more money off me and my company than you've made off anyone. And now this is when I'm also telling them now I can't make my payment this month. If you think, oh, it's overwhelming. I've got all this debt. I can't sell anything. I'm working 18, 20 hours a day, then it's too hard.

5 (27m 54s):
You can't do it. But when you know that the day is going to arrive, when you're gonna have enough money to pay everyone, that's what you have to see in your mind's eye. That's what you have to believe. And I saw that. Yeah. I knew it. I could feel it. And that's when I was in the sleeping bag, cooking on a hot plate and washing up in the public bathroom in the radio station at 1680 Wisconsin. I felt it. I knew it. Wow. I just knew I had to hold on. And when you are starting off in business, you have to be so very careful about who you discuss your hard times with. Because those who love you and care for you the most, like your mother, like your best friend, they'll give you the worst damn advice in the world.

5 (28m 40s):
You need to get a job. You shouldn't be sleeping on the floor in a sleeping bag. What type of environment is that for a child?

0 (28m 53s):
Kathy, was the station profitable pretty quickly?

5 (28m 58s):
Seven years.

0 (28m 59s):
So what was it that made you guys profitable? How did you get to, how did you get to profitability? It's

5 (29m 5s):
What Dr. Martin Luther King said. You just keep sweeping the floor every day to the best of your ability. And one day the world is going to say nobody sweeps a floor better than her.

0 (29m 16s):
So is is that when you started to, to expand?

5 (29m 19s):
Yes. I realized that I could not survive with just a little thousand watt am that I had to grow. I either had to grow or I had to go

0 (29m 29s):
And, and which meant buying more stations. Yes.

5 (29m 32s):
Because our specialty is, we're turnaround artists. What they all had in common, taking

0 (29m 37s):
Over distress stations. You got

5 (29m 38s):
It. We took distressed properties and turned them around. Wow. Because we could afford 'em.

0 (29m 42s):
How, how did you get the money to buy 'em?

5 (29m 44s):
Again, if your lenders know that their money is good with you, they give you more. All right. Lenders don't invest in ideas. Everybody's got ideas. They invest in you. People loan money to the person, not to the business. Yeah. Not to the idea. They have to feel good about you.

0 (30m 4s):
How many stations did you eventually buy?

5 (30m 8s):
I think that we were up to think 35.

0 (30m 11s):
So what was the point where you said, let's go public, let's make this into, you have 30. I didn't five plus station.

5 (30m 18s):
I, my son went to Wharton and got his mba and walking across the campus of UPenn, my son says to me, do you still believe that we have to grow or go? And I said, of course. I believe we gotta grow. Grow. He said, then we have to go public. Wow. Because we've got to take a leap. And with the deregulation, 11% of all radio stations in the United States of America were owned by one company. Well, it's kind of hard to compete when you are over here with two or three. I mean, they would come into a market, they'd have five powerhouse radio stations with one format eliminated all the competition. Yeah. So we knew that we had to grow into scale.

5 (30m 59s):
We had to get much larger. So you had to go public. And so yes, we had to go public. We had no choice. A lot of people told us that they didn't think that that would be a wise decision for us. Tried to discourage us. We had a couple false starts, but it was the best thing that could have happened. And the other thing that we have done in our company is we stay in our lane. We are not trying to open a restaurant. We're not trying to go into concert promotion. We stay in the telecommunications industry.

0 (31m 35s):
So at at the height of, of Radio one, how many, how many stations did you guys actually have?

5 (31m 40s):
75 stations, which was the height when we bought a package of stations from Clear Channel 75 that had never been done in urban broadcasting before.

0 (31m 50s):
Were you able to retain a significant share of, of the ownership after you went public?

5 (31m 55s):
Yes. Not just own, but also the voting stock, which has again been a blessing. The same syndicated communications 37 years ago who sat down and showed me how to write my first business plan. They're still in business with me. Wow.

0 (32m 12s):
You know, one of the things that you haven't really talked about is, is discrimination. Because I mean, you must have faced a lot of it, not only as a woman, but as an African American woman in this business.

5 (32m 25s):
Yes. One of the, the issues that has always faced entrepreneurs of color is the lack of available capital for them to go into business or to maintain their business. I remember there was a bank in DC rigs and I had a big contract, but the payment was coming in slow. And it was so interesting because a black banker of that bank said to me, you would loan her $15,000 to buy a car, but you won't loan her $10,000 to make her payroll. And yet she has the contracts showing that the money will be coming in.

5 (33m 9s):
So often it's been easier for an entrepreneur to buy a new flashy car than it's been for them to meet payroll, which is a tragedy of us not having as many lending institutions in our community as we need and want.

0 (33m 24s):
You know, here, here's the thing that I just like, I still, I'm still trying to wrap my head around, which is you faced all of these challenges and you kept going, like, what? What was it that kept you going?

5 (33m 36s):
A belief in God? Because when you really believe in God, you can believe in yourself. As I said, that day, I quit my job not knowing where the next piece of money was gonna come from, where the next check was gonna come from. I knew that I would be sitting here today talking to you. I believed it because I believed in the power of the Creator. And I used to never, ever give a speech or accept an award where I didn't first thank God. And I still knew. But back then, when I first started, they said to me, nobody's interested in all that religion. I said, that's not religion, that's spirituality.

5 (34m 17s):
There's a big difference in my book between being loyal and understanding yourself in relationship to creation.

0 (34m 26s):
I have one last question for you. This energy, this glow, this joy, this passion, this intensity that you have and and this unshakable belief that it will work out. Is it something that you have that that is specific to you? Or do you think it's something people can actually learn? Oh,

5 (34m 48s):
Definitely an acquired skill. If you allow yourself to be bogged down and lose your enthusiasm, then you're dead in the water. But if you remain optimistic, cheerful, and committed to your goal, there's nothing that can stop you.

0 (35m 16s):
Kathy Hughes, the founder and chairman of the Board of Radio One, the company now has more than 50 radio stations across the country. And Kathy's son, Alfred, that little kid and the baby tuxedo who went on to Wharton, he's now the ceo. Hey, thanks for listening to the show this week. If you wanna find out more or listen to previous episodes, you can go to how I built this.npr.org. And if you have a chance, please subscribe to our show through iTunes and let other people know about it. You can also write us directly@hibtnpr.org g or tweet us. That's at how I built this.

0 (35m 57s):
Our show this week is co-produced by Ron Abdel futa and Ram Alu, who also composed the music. Thanks also to Niva Grant. Sonja Ur and Jeff Rogers. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This from npr. Hey everyone, it's guy here. We have an app at NPR that we really like. It's really great and we'd love for you to try it. It's called NPR one. You can use it to listen to NPR news shows and podcasts.

0 (36m 38s):
And as you do, it actually listens to you. It figures out what you like best and then gives you more of that. So you can download NPR one now. Try it out. You can find it on your app store right now.