4 (3s):
You know, I was feeling good. I thought okay. Well we can continue raising money for a while at some point we erase money from Google capital G is one of their investment arms and partner from that firm sat me down and she said nobody else will invest in this company. If you don't figure out how to make money, you know, you're not going to find a bigger fool where the biggest fool and that's when we that's for started kind of freaking out and try to figure out how how we're going to make money, but we had no idea how we were going to make money. From NPR it's how I built this show that innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements save them.

4 (51s):
I'm Gyros and on the show today have a perfect storm of skill and luck drove Luis Von Ahn to create capture then recapture and then Duolingo foreign language app valued at one point five billion dollars. Think about the small moments or decisions in your life that actually had a huge impact on how your life turned out. Maybe it was a conversation you struck up with the person next to you on an airplane. Maybe it was a party you reluctantly went to only to meet the person you'd eventually marry or maybe it was a decision to stay on vacation an extra day that sparked a new idea for Kevin Systrom.

4 (1m 35s):
It was a random remark from his girlfriend that made him decide. To use filters on Instagram for Blake mycoskie. It was a chance meeting with a group of young argentinians who took him to the countryside where he saw kids with no shoes that one day inspired him to create Tom's and for Luis Von Ahn. It was a free lecture at Carnegie Mellon University in 2000 will get deeper into the story a few minutes, but that single lecture would lead him to invent to ingenious new tools. The first was Captcha death captures those annoying twisted and blurred letters. You have to type into a website to prove you're human.

4 (2m 16s):
And the second one was Duolingo now the biggest language learning app in the world, which is now getting even more popular because people are looking for new things to do now that they're stuck at home both capture and Duolingo were designed to harness the power of crowdsourcing to solve problems, and I'm going to blow your mind here if you have ever typed in a Capture or used Duolingo? There's a good chance. You've taken part in a massive online collaboration that you probably weren't even aware of and it's amazing how Louise came up with all this but let's start at the beginning Lewis was born in Guatemala in the late 1970s both his parents were doctors and though he was surrounded by poverty and violence in Guatemala City Louise screw up in comparative privilege and as a kid, he spent a lot of time hanging out.

4 (3m 8s):
Out at the family business. My mother's Family actually had a candy factory. Everybody is always amazed at the fact that I grew up with a candy factory and you know, they think that it was like Willy Wonka or something. I was not all that much into the candy itself. I was into the machines because basically the candies made by these gigantic machines that you know pump out. I don't know how many thousands of pieces of candy per hour and basically all my weekends. I spend playing at The Candy Factory and I would take the machines apart. And put them back together. They would be some extra pieces after I put him back together. Usually on that. That would be a problem. What what what kind of student were you and will you lose school pretty easy for you?

4 (3m 48s):
Yeah. I was pretty nerdy. Basically. I was really good at math. Yeah Mass was just easy to meet I you know, what I would do during in the Summers is basically get either next year's or you know, a couple of years later math books and basically do all the exercises. Wow, it kind of came easy. But the way I really got good at is by doing hundreds and hundreds of exercises. So that's what you would do in the summertime Yeah. Anna was born. I mean, I was an only child I didn't have that much to do. This is remember. This is also pre internet pre-everything. So what was I going to doing man? That's what I did. I was putting playing cards in the spokes of my bicycle and buying Jolly Ranchers at 7-Eleven. Whoo, should the math books?

4 (4m 29s):
So you were did you just love math? I mean was it sounds like kids don't think about their future. They're not like I'm going to study math so I can be in tech one day like no must have We enjoyed it. I did it. I enjoyed it. It was it was like a puzzle for me. By the way. This is not the only thing I did. I mean I also played a lot of video games pirated video games in my Commodore 64 like about floppy disks. I'm floppy disks floppy disks. Yeah. That's right. I wanted a Nintendo when I was eight. My mother would not get me Nintendo. She instead got me a computer a Commodore 64 and I couldn't figure out how to use it. But eventually I kind of I read like the manual and stuff and I figured out how to use it more and then I figured out I could fire it other. Bowls video games and so I became a little Hub in my in my little neighborhood but these were not other kids were adults or kind of basically young adults who had a computer and they would come to my house and I would take their games and give them my games and exchange.

4 (5m 22s):
So I then I collected a pretty large number of video games, but this should mention right that I mean because your child attends pretty nice but but like as a kid, I guess or even as a teenager there was a Civil War in Guatemala, right? I mean, we know that today there's a Violence there and obviously there's violence in the US and other countries to but Guatemala has been particularly hard hit and he did it feel dangerous when you were a kid. Yes. It did. There was a civil war pretty much since I was born in in 79 to 1996. There was a civil war going on the whole time. It always felt dangerous when I was 15 or so, my aunt was kidnapped for ransom. I mean she was gone for seven or eight days people's cars would be stolen IRA.

4 (6m 8s):
Every couple of months somebody's car would be strolling in my family going out past 7:30 p.m. Was rare. Yeah, you need it to go out in a large group if you were going to go up at 7:30 p.m. And you know it I did have my house side walls and barbed wire and yeah, it felt dangerous. I mean, this is one of the this is one of the reasons I came to the US actually I mean IA, you know when I was after my aunt was kidnapped I thought to myself I don't want to live here. Yeah, and I guess you did end up leaving Guatemala for Because you went to Duke in North Carolina and you would you describe yourself as a like a math nerd in school. And and is that what you intended to do like to do something in math?

4 (6m 50s):
That's what I wanted to become an actor. I'm a math professor. I was pretty certain. I wanted to become a math professor, you know at the time. I thought the best thing that I can do is really learn a lot of math and I really loved it and I thought it was futile to learn how to deal with other people and it is interesting. Only because my job these days is 100% just dealing with other people and people's problems. Well, I'm just trying to understand this so so by becoming a math professor you thought hey, I wouldn't have to deal with people. I would just deal with like facts and data and numbers. Yes. Yes, and you know, I will do math research all day long and every now and then I'll teach a class but whatever that's like a tax, but that's what I thought. So, alright, so you are so you get your degree and you following this path to go into Academia and you go into a Ph.D program at Carnegie.

4 (7m 38s):
Correct. And I guess you go into computer science, right? Yes, I change from math to computer science because I visited a math grad school and what people were saying the professor was saying, oh I'm working on this open problem that nobody has been able to solve for the last 300 years and I thought hmm. I don't think I'm smart enough. I mean if you haven't done it and nobody's done it in 300 years. That's kind of not for me. Whereas when you visit in computer science. I mean, this is crazy thing people are like, oh, yeah. I saw the no problem yesterday. Well, it's a much younger field. Yeah, and so that I thought that was much more exciting for me at least. So you are I start 0 mm. You start your PhD program at Carnegie Mellon. I guess like really soon after you start you go to some talk by someone from Yahoo comes to campus to talk about Yahoo's a big deal in 2000.

4 (8m 27s):
Who is that? What's the story? Yeah, that was Serendipity again. Most of most of the things that have happened in my life are serendipitous. I was a first year PhD student. I had been at Carnegie Mellon for maybe two months I had The first thing you got to do when you become a PhD students find an advisor. I have found myself an advisor and we went to a talk together this guy from Yahoo was the chief scientist of Yahoo at the time and like you said, yeah who at the time was the the biggest tech companies out there and he came to give a talk at Carnegie Mellon and it was the talk was basically 10 problems that they didn't know how to solve it Yahoo. And I was an enterprising PhD student and I thought I'm going to try to solve these problems. And what was the problem that he said they had Yes, so the problem for this particular one was there were people who were writing programs to obtain millions of free email accounts.

4 (9m 16s):
So Yahoo, at the time gave out email accounts share for free and and some people but it would be good to send spam from Yahoo accounts. The problem is each Yahoo account only allowed you to spend like five hundred messages a day. So if you want to send 10 million spam messages per day, you just have to get a bunch of Yahoo accounts and from each one of them you send five hundred messages and The era I remember this we all remember this where you would get hundreds of messages spam messages about certain bodily enhancements. You would get messages about the hormone growth things. I mean baldness. I mean it was it was granted in Pharmacy manual in UI a great.

4 (9m 56s):
Yeah the spam it was a huge problem. Yep, and he was like, we can't figure out how to stop these computers or programmers from making, you know, just creating all these email accounts. - yeah, and so that was the problem and just to be clear these spammers were not physically setting up each individual email account. Now, they had written programs that would just set up millions of email accounts a day or however many per day. So I thought about it for weeks and months and I talked about it with my PhD advisor Manuel and together we came up with a solution which was the thinking here is look computer programs can get a million email accounts per day because well compute pouring from do things very fast.

4 (10m 37s):
Yeah. Also doesn't get bored right humans human can't get very many email accounts. So how about this? How about if we make sure that whatever is getting an email account is actually a human and not a computer program then we started thinking. Okay. Well, how can we distinguish between the human and computer? Yeah, and that's where this idea came came about. It's this idea of a capture where it's basically these distorted characters that you have to type whenever you're buying tickets on Ticketmaster or getting in my, you know an email account or Stuff like that the idea is that computer can generate one of these, you know, basically take some some letters put them in an image distort them and then you can give them out and it turns out that humans can read these what the time humans could read these very well lie still can but computers could not well we can't read them and human it can't be done.

4 (11m 29s):
I can't recast. I don't know. I don't know how much of a human you are. Now, they're like point to every stop sign point to every bridge. Yeah, it's changed, but basically at the I'm the idea was humans can read these distorted characters much better than computers. So let's give basically every time that somebody's trying to get an email account this give them a test to see if they're human or not. And you just started doing this on your own. Like did you tell Yahoo! Did you tell him or or we just like, this is fun. I want to want to figure this out like just working independently. I mean with my PhD advisor it was it was it became my research became a research subject. And yeah, we did not tell Yahoo, because it sounds like here's the kid getting the math. Mathematics workbooks in the summer.

4 (12m 10s):
It's like you just seemed like a fun thing to solve. Yeah, it was fun. And but that's like that's the core of the Ph.D program. I think, you know, you're trying to find problems that others haven't solved. I got ya in your this seems like a problem that other people hadn't solved so we were working on it and you called it captured. Did you name it? Captcha and how what does that mean? It's an acronym sounds like transferred to like to capture. Yeah. Now what? Yes, it's an acronym that sounds like capture which you know, the idea was to capture the you know, the Yeah, the computer program it stands for completely automated public Turing test to tell computers and humans apart. So, you know, it's just an acronym but now I think most people have heard of the word capture, but do not know what it stands for and you come up with this thing capture.

4 (12m 54s):
And what do you do? Do you like email this guy? Yahoo's I have got your solution for you you basically I mean we met him and we said hey, you know, we think we have a solution. Here's some code and you know, we explain how it works and what was amazing and now that I know how large Companies operate on how slow things move what was amazing is within about a week of when we sent them this year. It was already functional. Wow, you know life it was life. So I guess the problem that they had was so big that when they saw this they were like, okay, let's let's do it now. So they saw this know like - is great. And so you must have just done either like what 25 26 28 21 21 21 my God take a look bright see all of a sudden.

4 (13m 35s):
You're an overnight millionaire multi-millionaire. No, no, no. No, no money was no money exchanged hands. Wait you gave capture to them? You just said hey, here you go. Yep. I mean listen you gave it to a multi-billion dollar company just gave them capture. I didn't know how things work. And you know, the truth of the matter is probably a good thing. Yeah in retrospect. I mean, right who knows what would have happened but I you know, I don't have regrets but yes, that was that's what started happening and then basically every other website started, you know, they saw that it was in the front page. We also everywhere website started copying or making their own version and within a couple of years pretty much everywhere on the web. You know, when you have to get an email account when you had to enter comment on a Blog whenever you have to buy tickets on Ticketmaster, you have to enter one of these you were the guy you were the guy who made it really hard for dopes like me to get it right I had to constantly was annoying.

4 (14m 31s):
It is annoying people and every time that I would be at a party or something and you know, they would ask me what I did and then they would get me to explain my research I would Saying that I had done that and I would say what the hell it keeps the other party screw you screw you but some of the research you did. I mean you did actually write some software that you sold for I think for some money this time. I mean just like you just briefly explain how that happened and what you were working on. Yeah. I mean, this is it's funny. I mean at the time there was not called crowdsourcing but my PhD research was basically on crowdsourcing I had worked on capture where the idea was that humans can do some things computers cannot Yeah, so my PhD research was basically that finding things that computers could not yet do and then finding ways to get people to do them.

4 (15m 16s):
And in particular the main thing that I did in that time was the game and people love to play it but as they were playing at they were actually helping computers figure out what's inside an image. How does the game work the way that you're in work was this you went to a website and you got randomly paired with somebody else who had shown up to the website got it, and you were both shown the same. An image a random ends like an elephant an image from the internet the second you were told type whatever the other person is typing just start typing words. And if you are one of your words matches one of their words you both get points got it. What was interesting about this game is that the words that people typed. The only thing they had in common was the image.

4 (15m 58s):
So the words that people typed were basically related to the image because if you're told to do this, what are you going to type this into picture of an elf and you're going to take the elephant because you think the other person check also typing Can't so those words were really good labels for the image. We really good tags for the image basically. So I put it online. I program that millions of people played it and this was a game that was helping label all images on the web. Then at some point actually Google. In fact bought it. They just bought the technology and then it got implemented. They change the name from the ESP game, which I call it the ESP game because it's AES extrasensory perception. The idea was like tried to think what the other person was thinking to the very amazing name. Of the Google image labeler, which is much less interesting.

4 (16m 43s):
And and so they bought this from you and was that like life-changing money and he will you all of a sudden Super Rich? No, I was not super rich but it is it was good. Got it. Okay. See you you went on to earn your PhD and and you get a job at Carnegie Mellon, correct? Your young Professor, you're on tenure track. And by the way early on in your academic career, I shouldn't have seen this you are granted a very like one of the most prestigious Awards the MacArthur grant known as The Genius Grant basically, they pick a few people a year and give them like half a million dollars of unrestricted money to work on whatever they want. I mean has been mind-blowing.

4 (17m 24s):
Yeah that that was you know, I've gotten a number of Awards in my life. But I mean that was the particular that was probably the most impactful one example, just how I felt and also they do this crazy thing where they don't you have no idea that you're being Considered or anything and they call you randomly. Yeah, they figure out your phone number one. Do you pick up and then they just tell you have you ever heard of the MacArthur Fellowship you say? Yes, and then I just tell you and you're like, wow, what the hell first you think it's a prank. I thought it was a prank. Yeah, and I guess like around this time to and of this apocryphal or not, but I wraped Bill Gates personally called you to try to convince you to leave your job at Carnegie Mellon.

4 (18m 8s):
And to go work for Microsoft is that true that that is true like what they pick up your cell phone is like please hold for mr. Gates or will it was like he wanted along with pretty much like that. It was pretty much like that. I mean it was somebody, you know basically said that purse please hold for mr. Gates and we were like, okay and he gets on the phone and he's like Louis said Bill Gates here. That's exactly right. I had been an intern. I had been like a year and a half before that. I had been an intern at Microsoft. So I have good ties with Microsoft and they really wanted to hire me for Microsoft research. And so that is Bill Gates Ventura. I don't know 45 minutes to an hour trying to convince me to go there. I'm very flattered.

4 (18m 49s):
But you know at the time I just wanted to do my own thing to be a professor say no to Bill Gates what you were like. Oh wow think this is really pretty so nice. I'm so honored but I just you know, no I didn't actually say no I said I would think about it and then and then I said no to like a recruiter, but it was not easy. I mean he's A major hero of mine. I mean this he's just an amazing human being but I just wanted to be a professor at the time. I thought I want to do my own thing. I want to be a professor and that's what I wanted to do. Yeah was money important to you. I mean, you know, was it important to you to it matter and it interesting I guess it mattered more than it does now. It's nice to know that I you know, I could I could buy a nicer car at a nicer apartment or something is it was nice, but it wasn't it's never been my driving force.

4 (19m 32s):
I would say, okay, so you decide I'm not gonna spill Gates. Thank you. No, thanks. I'm not going Microsoft. Going to stay doing this work. So you are now what are you lecturing or you teaching classes? I was teaching I was teaching a huge class. It was called great theoretical ideas in computer science. It's just a fancy name is basically a discrete math class at people who don't do well they're usually change majors and and you're like not like John Nash, but I'm thinking about that movie you're in front of a like a big black border a whiteboard and Jing equations and problems in front of 250. Yeah slides had already been around so I used I used to PowerPoint I used to okay, I got that old right? I see. Yeah, you're right. Okay, so you're teaching and you had done capture and lots of people are saying hey it's annoying and you're like, yeah, I hear you and and people kept saying that to you like kept hearing that.

4 (20m 24s):
Yep. Yep. And and that's that's when I started thinking each time. You do it you waste about 10 seconds of your time and I just started this thought just came to me off. Wow how much time am I wasting of humanity? And you know, I did a little back. Of the envelope calculation realized about 200 million times a day somebody types of capture and that's when you get 200 million times a day times 10 seconds. So Humanity as a whole is wasting about 500,000 hours a day typing these captions and that's when I started thinking huh, relate it to you know, all my research that I have done. Is there something we can get humans to do while they're typing a captcha that is also useful and we get them to do something useful. Yeah, and it occurred to me that yeah, we could get them to help digitize books.

4 (21m 7s):
How did Sorry pause. How did you come to that idea? So like when you type in a random lent random letters from a captcha you were thinking. Hey, wait, how do we have a secondary use for this and maybe you know books digitizing books. How did you even have it even occur to you? I was thinking for a long time. Can we get people to do something? But at the same time kind of extract valuable computational effort from it until it finally occurred to me. Oh, there's all these projects out there trying to digitize all the worlds. Google has announced that I've really at the time it seemed kind of insane an ambitious project that we're going to take all of the world's book at everything that's ever been written as a hundred million books ever written and we're gonna put them online.

4 (21m 49s):
Guess what we're gonna do and now in this process the way the process works is you take a book physical book, then you scan every page and then the computer needs to be able to decipher all of the words in those photographs. Now the problem is that computers cannot record at the time could not recognize many of the words for 30% of of the words computer could not recognize and the reason for that by the way, which is this amazing thing is the same reason why computers could not recapture. So basically this looked kind of like distorted letters and and distorted letters are just inherently difficult for computers to recognize that you like that's the point of captcha. That's right. And so it occurred to me. Oh, wow. What if we just take the words out of a book that the computer cannot repeat and then we send them to people while they're typing captchas on the internet.

4 (22m 34s):
So basically next time you type a captcha the words that you see are actually coming from Book and whatever you enter is in fact used to help digitize a book. Do you remember when you came upon that idea was it was it like in a Flash or was it just like to the courtesy? Like remember I was I was driving from Washington DC back to Pittsburgh because I had been to some National Science Foundation panel or something like that. Then I spent the next, you know few weeks. Just kind of going over it and go over going over it and I thought okay this this will work. And you know, I started building the system, but then I recruited a guy who was his name is Ben more Irish. He was maybe a freshman in computer science at Carnegie Mellon. He was one of my students he was in my class in my large class.

4 (23m 17s):
He was the best student. I thought you you can help me build this and so together we built this system and that would take a scan of a book and extract all the words. The computer could not recognize and then send them as a catch now we We're going to go to big websites and we're going to tell them. Hey, look we have this capture service is free. It's better than yours. Yours is relatively crappy. This one's pretty good and we'll give it to you for free. But all we have to be able to do is see what your users can type are typing during this so that we get to digitize the books and did website start like start to use this tool. Mmm, you know, some small websites started using it the first largest I wasn't even large to the largest website for a while that was using us what's called online booty call.

4 (24m 3s):
Nice and they were to get an account in online. Boutique. All you had to do you have to type a captcha and it was our capture and every time every person that was getting an accountant online boutique all was starting to help digitize. God bless them. God bless them indeed and at some point I website that was relatively new at the time decided they needed to put a capture on there on the registration flow and they called us up and it was it was a website called. And they were relatively new and they were like Hey, listen, you know, we saw who we came across it. It seems like you have a good capture. Can we you know, can we put it up this in 2007?

4 (24m 44s):
Probably 2006 have yeah, you know, we said okay cool and they did it and that website was growing very fast. And so pretty soon. We just had a ton of people using our thing and then at some point I was giving a talk somewhere in Dallas about this system and how we could digitize books Etc. And the guy who was the CTO of the New York Times was in the talk and he said to me hey, you know what? We have a smart guy five of hundred and thirty years of content from The New York Times that we have not been able to digitize particularly because computers cannot recognize the words. How about you digitize it for us and I'm just just out of curiosity eventually. I'm assuming you thought this could make money.

4 (25m 25s):
We thought of that but we really didn't it was we kind of thought we could make money but we didn't know how and what happened is this guy? You know, he then sent me an e-mail. He said no I was Useless to at how much would you charge me to do this charge them to do what to digitize to help digitize their content and your old New York Times the the entirety of the New York Times archive. And so we know we kind of scramble and we had no idea how much charge them and then we just thought to ourselves. Okay, how much would this person have to pay people to digitize? Because the only other solution is people. Yeah, so we came up with something we said, okay divide that by 4. Yeah, and that's what would charge on it that we kick. The number we came up with was for every year of content. We will charge you 42,000 dollars for every year of content in the X.

4 (26m 8s):
Okay. Yes over every if you take one year all editions of that year will attend $42,000 digitize that whole thing. That's the number we came up with and then they said yes and how many years if that's like a hundred and twenty thirty years of yes. This is several million dollars of a contractor, but they said okay with paper you let's do it one year then another year then let's let's see what happens and so they sent us the first year we did it and it turns out because Facebook was Do using our capture. We actually we're digitizing relatively fast was how quickly would it take to digitize a year of a year was being done in about a week. What a week of people typing and captures could digitize a whole year of the New York Times.

4 (26m 47s):
Yes, so that's that's what was going on. I'm just here's here's a question. Right which is say I was getting on Facebook in 2000. This is like 2008. I think with the X approaches you right? Yeah. Yeah, so I'm on Facebook in 2008 and I sign up for it and I got to write a caption. And the word that I've got a decipher is anxiety except for my favorite word's and I type that in but how do you know how does capture know that I did that accurately? That's a very good question. I'm so what happens is for you. We actually give you two words we give you one is the word anxiety is a new word that we just got out of whatever the New York Times and then the other word is a word that we already have digitized.

4 (27m 29s):
We already know what the answer is for the other working and then we don't tell you which ones which we So we please type both. Yep. And if you type the correct word for the one for which we already know the answer. We assume you're human and then we also get some confidence that you typed the other word correctly got it. And if we give this new word to like ten different people and they all type the same, you know, the same word they all type of society then wait groans, right? Okay, then we know it's right. So your accuracy was pretty high very high. Yeah. Well, so within a week or so you get this first year of the New York Times digitized and then presumably they're Like okay, let's keep going. That's the right. And so what started happening is, they started sending us checks for $42,000 coming in pretty quickly night.

4 (28m 11s):
And and by the way, we had no company. Where nothing on at some point Carnegie Mellon got wind of this and they're like, wait a second. You're kind of running a company here, but not really because there's not even a company. Do you got to get out of here? Yeah. They had a standard deal that says, okay. If you're going to start a company based on on something that you came up in your research will take 5% of this company. And so that's what happened. So we just said, okay. You keep 5% will start a company and so we did we start a company. I got a lawyer. We formed a company and pretty soon we were making you know, $42,000 every few days and in did you call it recapture? It was recapture Inc. Yes. Did you leave Carnegie Mellon or did you stay on as a no? I stayed as a professor. This was a really a psychosocial everybody's biggest Professor Glenn who was also working on it with State as an undergrad.

4 (28m 55s):
He was like by then he was like a sophomore. He's saying just stayed as an undergrad. I stayed as a professor. This is side Hustle, but it was making quite a bit of money for us. It's not doing all that much in there. It's incredible. I mean you basically have a side hustle. We're all of the work is being done for you by people who aren't don't even know and wouldn't really care because it takes him two seconds and they're getting a free Facebook account meantime, they're digitizing the times and you're getting $42,000 checks every couple of days from the times. Yep. What happened? Looks like one of the most genius businesses ever like I can we can you beat After this interview is over to figure out a thing like this.

4 (29m 37s):
This is amazing. You don't give up your many of them boys. Is this incredible? Yeah, I would say it was pretty good. But then you know that that went on for some time and then actually Google in fact bought it for their own book digitization process. Wait, hold on. They approached you they saw this and they saw that this was really an eighth and they said to you. Hey, we can use this for artbooks digitization and and what they like through a number on the table. Yes, I mean multiple numbers were thrown in and out and in the end we decided this was a good home for it. So we sold it to Google and this time I did go to Google for two years. So I took a leave of being a professor.

4 (30m 18s):
Okay, so you were running this company the small business Google buys it from me, which is just incredible. You're still at this point. Really young. This is really life changing. Yes, especially since we didn't have we didn't have investors. I think it's all the money keep going through us and your startup costs were relatively low. Yeah. All right. So you get acquired by Google you are still a professor at Carnegie Mellon in Pittsburgh. But but you went to California to Silicon Valley to to go work at Google. I'm Google happens to have an office here in Pittsburgh. And so I was spending about half time here in Pittsburgh and a half time in California. And what were you doing a Google? Will you still just basically running recapture?

4 (30m 59s):
Well, the first order of business was to integrate re caption to the Google. Infrastructure that took about a year, but I was still a professor and even though I was on leave I still have PhD students and towards the end of that first year. I started getting very very interested in the project which happened to turn into Duolingo and and then presumably Louis. I mean given that you already turned on Microsoft like four years earlier, you are not going to become a googler you really I mean, this is part of the deal you had to go work with Google make this happen, but it sounds to me like you're so Restless. S you were not going to just work in a big Organization for I wasn't gonna do that. Yeah, it's not it's not my thing. I mean I kind of have to do my own thing.

4 (31m 42s):
What do you think? The reason for that is? I don't know. I mean, I you know, I probably because I'm an only child. I don't know. I just just Restless. I'm restless and I'm also obsessive I obsess on one thing and this is this is what happened with Google in the end. I mean, I was starting to get obsessed on this new project Duolingo and this is I just have to leave and by the way leave being caused me quite a bit of money because some of the recapture payment required that I stay there for three years, he and I did not stay for three years. So you had to give up some of the money but that's so in the meantime, you're still at Carnegie Mellon teaching and I guess you've got a graduate student there who would eventually become your co-founder at Duolingo.

4 (32m 25s):
I think his name is Severin hacker. Is that right? Severin hacker last name is hacker and it's like a movie named his name is Severin hacker and by the way, the way I met him I was literally sitting in my office one day there minding my own business and then this lanky guy shows up super tall and super skinny and he says hi. I'm Severin hacker and I just said what they didn't even parse it and then he just did hand gestures 7 he did a gesture that it's like basically cutting his arm. Yeah, so he was severing it. Yeah, and then hacker he just did like as if he was like moving his fingers like I've been with the Router and a typo Severin hacker.

4 (33m 5s):
Wow, and he said yeah, I'm here and I would like to do research with you kind of work with you and I said except sure your name. So amazing. I'll do it when we come back in just a moment Heloise and yes Severin hacker take the recaptcha business model and try to use it again to teach people foreign languages for free and how they discover that particular model is just not gonna work. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

4 (33m 49s):
Support for NPR in the following message comes from our 2020 how I built this lead. Sponsor Comcast business Dave silver is a co-founder of wreck a space for creatives Dave reflects on why the wreck Founders chose Comcast business to help power their Studios and workspaces. We could have hundreds of creators in our space. We could have 14 Studios book according music uploading to the cloud Comcast business helped us to provide. The experience that we were looking to provide to our members learn more at Comcast business.com Comcast business Beyond fast. Thanks. Also to stand for small and American Express stand for small.com.

4 (34m 32s):
Is your One Stop Shop for resources offers and tools to help your small business. Get back to business visit stand for small.com. Let's all close our eyes take a deep breath. Let it out and listen to NPR's all songs considered. It's a music podcast, but it's also a good friend and guide to find joy and troubled times here all songs considered with new episodes every Tuesday and Friday wherever you listen to podcasts. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's around 2012 and Louise has been working at Google for two years and he's got one more year to go to get fully paid out.

4 (35m 20s):
But he's itching to get going on his next project. So he walks away from Google early interestingly. What motivates me start changing quite a bit after the recapture acquisition because I really thought okay. I'm in a really fortunate. A short position in my life. I've now, you know, I don't particularly need to worry about money. Can I do something that helps people? And so I really started thinking about education and Severance fortunately was also very much into education. So we started thinking can we do something with education that gives it away for free and the thinking really was there's all these people that I grew up with in Guatemala very poor and a lot of people talk about education as something that brings equality to different social classes, but I always thought I was the opposite something that brings in a Because of what happened at least, you know in my case those who have money can buy themselves the best education in the world and those who don't barely learn how to read and write but you're thinking along the lines of like what is something that can be free, but that would kind of be self-generating.

4 (36m 21s):
So for example, many business models offer a free service with advertising that's Facebook's model. That's Google's model. They are capture your data which you get this service and return but you are thinking how can I create something that It cost people anything but that can be sustainable. That's that's what I was thinking. I was thinking can we make it sustainable? And can we make it free and language isn't particular changed. I mean dueling was a way to learn languages. We ended up going to languages particularly also because in both of our cases, we are not native English speakers ever and it was neither know who wears it from Jesus is from Switzerland. He's a Swiss German native speaker and so in both of our cases learning English completely changed our lives.

4 (37m 5s):
And I just knew you know, when I was growing up everybody Guatemala wants to learn English. Nobody could afford it and turns out that in most countries in the world. If you know English you can double your income potential so we thought okay, can we figure out a way to teach people languish in particular teach you English in a way that's that's free and but also self-sustaining like how can we make it so that it kind of pays for itself? Okay, so you've got this language you think language is where it's going to be at because that's that's how we can actually help people. Increase their income for example, especially in other countries and then the next question is. Okay. What is that? What is that thing look like Yep, that's what we were thinking and then eventually came up with this idea, which is pretty similar to recapture turns out today Duolingo does not work this way.

4 (37m 52s):
It is a good idea but it is a relatively impractical idea. What was it? What was it? So the idea was this we're going to give the service entirely for free but instead of having people pay us. We're going to get them to help us translate stuff. So look, they're all these companies that want to translate stuff. For example, CNN would like to translate all their news that they publish from Mr. Spanish the currently paying people to do that translation. We thought okay. What have we get these people who are learning English on our platform. What if as a part of their way to practice, you know the after they learn some stuff we told We Tell Em. Hey, here's the CNN article. Can you translate it in English?

4 (38m 33s):
You're learning English. Can you translate it into Spanish? And then if we get multiple people to translate the same thing and they kind of collaborate with each other to make a translation at the end. We'll we'll get a translation. Shannon we thought okay, we could sell that translation back to somebody like CNN and make money that way and and you would use the same technique as uses recapture like a 10 people got the same exact sense. You knew it was right have to be a little smarter than that. It turns out if you give a sentence to 10 people that I'll translate it differently, but generally yes. I mean we would use you know, kind of they had to be pretty close to each other then we also had another step where and the exercise to the person wasn't translate this, but tell us whether Translation is right or wrong.

4 (39m 15s):
Right? So some people would check the translations. But in the end we built this system actually, but we're pretty well that basically you could give it a text in English. They were people who were learning English or could be learning English and then they would be they would help translate it and then the system would pop out a translation that was made by people and the procession was very good. It's instead of CNN paying some translation service. They could just pay you and you again Like the New York Times has any 42,000 guys they would just have your students learning a language, but they would also be translating these articles into their native language. That's exactly what the idea was. So, okay. So you have this really great idea.

4 (39m 58s):
I'm by the way an end. I'm assuming you're funding the whole project right? Because yeah, it was a Carnegie Mellon project and it was being funded by a grant from the National Science Foundation and also from my MacArthur grant at Carnegie Mellon God and a funding at the time what it meant is basically paying for severance salary. Yep. And so at what point did you say the Severn? All right. Let's spin this out and start a business and figure out who you know, this wasn't also an interesting thing. I'm we okay. We thought okay. We're let's do this. This is a good idea where convinces a good idea. Let's do this. But the first thing we need to do is hire more people because the two of us just can't do it. So we started hiring people but it all inside Carnegie Mellon. We realized actually hiring people is pretty expensive inside a university and then we thought okay.

4 (40m 42s):
Well, what I need to do is apply for a bigger. Our grant from NSF the National Science Foundation and I started working on that and these Grant applications is like 30 pages long and you have to wait like a year to hear whether you get it or not. And it's like a couple million dollars. Maybe I'm so I was working on that and then suddenly I got connected to a venture capital firm Union Square Ventures. And you know, I talked to them about this and very quickly they get back to me and they're like, hey we could fund. Huh? I didn't have to write 30 pages. It was much easier dressed up money. So we thought they wanted to just they want in on this because well, first of all, you got a track record.

4 (41m 25s):
It was mainly the track record in retrospect. I know I know I'm gonna have a relatively good relationships like close relationship with the Union Square folks. I mean, they've now told me look we'd never thought this would work, but you had a really good track record. So why not they want to invest in you right? So when they approach you to so we want to fund this we want to invest in this and at this point you had not dealt with a now Outside investors in your we had not and also this this it was still not a company. So at that time we just start. Okay. Well, let's make it a company and let's take some funding. Yeah, and how did you do that? Did you was there I mean seven was your students it was there an uncomfortable conversation? Was it pretty clear? You're like listen, it was my idea. I'm the boss. So I'm going to have X percentage and you know Severn is just I think it's partly because he's Swiss or because he's a computer.

4 (42m 9s):
He's like, mr. Spock. He had the conversation with me either. Have it he sat down and he said I want us to write a contract but it's not a lawyer contract. I just want to write basically a Word document that we rights few lines long that just basically says what are understanding this and we're both going to sign it and we wrote down a contract that was just really simple. It's like will go in it half and half get and all this issues related to hiring we're going to do together all decisions related to I don't even remember what else but there's like three or four bullet point. Yeah, and then it just said his name and my name and we signed it and that was it.

4 (42m 49s):
So, all right, so you create a company and you got some interested investors and I think you raised like 3 plus million dollars from a bunch of different investors, right? It was 3.3 million, which at the time this was a normal series a to three million dollars from Union Square Ventures and 300,000 from a combination of Tim Ferriss and Ashton Kutcher Ashton Kutcher. He was like way The rest of Hollywood now everybody's see Ashton Kutcher Ashton Kutcher's very smart guys. Like I mean, yeah, it's where the game. I mean everybody now wants to be an Ashton Kutcher. They're like, yep, right. It's like there's LeBron James in this Serena Williams and there's any way all right. So Ashton Kutcher with that money, did you get an office?

4 (43m 33s):
Did you get a staff? And how many did we were able to hire a bunch of people? Yeah, we heard a few people we did get an office. Very close to Carnegie Mellon campus. Okay, and you know, we started working on it and at the time I'm pretty much everybody told us you're not going to be able to be Rosetta Stone. Like why would anybody use this? You know, we just got the same well because it's free. This is going to be free then that was our main selling point. We didn't know if it was going to work but we you know, we worked on it and we launched we launched Duolingo.com in 2012, and it was very fortunate that I had given a TED talk about this as soon as that went online. We got a ton of people come to Duolingo.com.

4 (44m 14s):
To trying to try it out. Yep, and it started growing pretty fast because it was a free way to learn a language and you know at the end of your lessons we would say. Hey, here's this article you want to help us translate it and we landed a contract with CNN and a contract with BuzzFeed that we are going to translate all their news from English to Spanish. By the way. How did you convince that mean it was it was a relatively easy or just cheaper? They didn't cost us any money, too. To get the shirts patients our users were doing it. We just said, oh, how much do you you know pay for at the time was like the pay like 10 cents a word. We said, I'll do four five five cents a word and it worked but you know, the translations worked and everything there was one problem the amount of money that we were going to make was actually relatively small and it's because translations are disappearing shitty business translation on this five cents a word but then pretty soon suddenly, you know, the people from BuzzFeed found somebody else that we do it for four cents a word.

4 (45m 14s):
Yes, it would and then we like fine we'll do for three ways to the bottom. It's a race to the bottom and then computers are getting better at it. And by the way, you you you I'm assuming you didn't want to found a translation service. You were founding an education company. That's right. And when one thing would realize this last we were executed on these contracts we realized that's where the money's coming from. So we're spending more and more of our effort making sure the translations are accurate as opposed to teaching well and it was there was no ads it was just a website initially and but You have a lot of people who signed up right like a couple of million. Yeah, exactly. We were growing it was good, but then a couple of things happen. The first thing that happened is we realized this was not going to be a great business.

4 (45m 55s):
The other thing that happened is I'm we hired one engineer and a summer intern they started on the same day on a summer and we told them hey the two of you you don't know each other we've heard these apps are the thing now instead of websites or they're starting to become the thing. You to make a companion app to Duolingo to Duolingo.com. Let's try that that's going to be your you know, kind of summer project. Let's make a companion app to Dueling the not come they came back at some point is that you know what it doesn't have to be a companion app. We can actually do all the functionality of Duolingo. We can fully learn a lot of aspects of the language from this app. So we developed it.

4 (46m 35s):
We launched it and we were at exactly the right time because there are other apps to learn a language in the App Store, but they were pretty Happy and also cost money and so very quickly is became the most downloaded education app of all apps. Well, and you guys were there like right as apps were like totally starting to explode. Yeah, that's right. And how are you? I'm just curious how I mean you did not have an I mean you're an educator your professor. But how are you building a curriculum in different languages where you have? This is great. I mean we are we didn't we had no idea. I mean we went and read some books about how to teach Languages and first of all, most everybody does not agree on what the best ways to teach a language and then so we thought okay.

4 (47m 22s):
This is pretty hard. Let's just take what we can from the books and put it out there. So I made the first Spanish course myself because I'm a native Spanish speaker Severn made the first German course himself and this is going to be just like kind of the gamification model where it was just Level Up Level Up Level Up level up. That's the other thing that we realized in the process when we started making the first First versions of the courses. We have people try it out and people would say. Oh my God, this is really boring. The hardest thing about learning learning something by yourself is staying motivated. So let's make it fun. So fortunately early on we made something that was both fun. And also thought your language got it.

4 (48m 2s):
All right. So you see you launch this thing. Is it pretty clear to you, you know by the end of that year by 2013 and I think you got 15 million users by the end of that year. Was it pretty clear to you that it was not going to make money was not going to be sustainable just by doing contracts with news organizations. It was it was an particularly because we couldn't figure out how to make the translation stuff work on our app just people couldn't type that much in the app it set up so we just could not figure that out and the majority of our users were in the app. So I made the difficult decision to cancel those contracts and forget about trying to make money and just race more venture capital and sure enough we We had some very good investors who decided to invest and that's how we were sustaining ourselves.

4 (48m 49s):
So you're basically sustaining yourself off investment cash. But did you feel like you had to you had to change your business model? I mean, you know this by the way has been one of those biggest struggles with Duolingo our mission from the beginning has been to give free language education. This is why we started the company that is the thing. There's an easy way to make money here, which is just charged for it. And so when we talk to investors, the first thing I would tell them is look but the one thing that will not change as I'm not going to charge for people to learn a language here and so you know people would invest and I think a lot of times they will invest in it they would think okay eventually they're going to charge yeah right now but I told them you know I'm not going to charge and so we we race funding and we raced at some point we had raised close to about a hundred million dollars Wow we must stop us hundred I mean you're not manufacturing a product in the Factory what?

4 (49m 45s):
I'm just thinking it's ones and zeros in a computer what you got timeline. So expensive here's the thing you want to hire really good engineers and really good designers and really good product managers. They are not cheap. I got you. You gotta pay him and that's that's the that's the expense right? He's the most expensive software engineers and the most expensive part of and but you're based in Pittsburgh. You're not based on California, correct? And you would think that because we're based in Pittsburgh deeper you yeah. Yeah, it's not true. There's a reason from the beginning we decided we were going to hire only the very best people and the very best people have offers from companies in California. And they say I have this offer that is for you know, I'm just graduated from college.

4 (50m 26s):
I have this offer. There's $430,000. Are you going to match it or not? Yeah on so what do you do but we had no idea how we were going to make money. I mean the first way we tried which was these translations. We had given up on some point we race money from Go on Capital cheese one of their investment arms. We raise money from them. I believe is 45 million bucks that were raised from them. Wow, you know, I was feeling good. I thought okay. Well we can continue raising money for a while like whatever. I don't know. I don't need to figure out how to make money we can just continue raising money for a while and partner from that firm sat me down and she said, you know, you're not going to find a bigger fool.

4 (51m 7s):
Yeah. We're the biggest fool in nobody else will invest in this company. If you don't figure out how to make money if you have zero plans to make money. Nobody else is gonna invest in this company and that's when we that's restarted kind of freaking out and try to figure out how we're going to make money. And that was a that was a difficult time for the company. Yeah, but I mean, it doesn't seem like it would have been that complicated because you could just run ads right? What were you I was a part of you was a part of you like ads. Yeah. Yes. We were very precious about this. We cared a lot about the user experience and Duolingo and We thought first of all we're never going to put ads in here.

4 (51m 47s):
Secondly, we're not going to charge people and basically Layla from Google was I well, I don't know how you're going to make money because these are the standard ways of making money, but you got to figure it out. This is an important point because I think a lot of businesses start out this way with really strong principles that seem right. Yep, but when you say that you actually kind of put your box yourself in because sometimes there are reasons to do some of those things in order to Compass the bigger goal, for example of delivering a free product you are completely right. So you had to basically do a 180 you have to have hard conversations with people and say Hey, you know, we got to start thinking about maybe advertising on our site and maybe we did at the time we had I don't know how many employees 60 but it's funny because the people we had hired early on they had offers from you know companies that were had much bigger names than us Facebook Etc.

4 (52m 42s):
And the reason they had come work for us as As they really believed in our mission of kind of given free language education. So we had ended up with basically 60 to 70 zealots all just one issue of free education. Yeah, the mission like we're here for the mission to this day. It is still like that, which is great. But we had a year of turmoil where basically we're like, okay. Well we need to figure out how we're going to make this sustainable because we're not going to be able to raise much more funding, you know, if we never make money up and so sorry, but this got to be a way to make money. EE and if you don't have money you don't even have a business we don't have a business and we're not going to be able to reach the number of people we want to reach at some point enough people got convinced that okay.

4 (53m 24s):
We'll put an ad at the end of every lesson. I remember we showed it to our head designer who he almost vomited get it. I mean two people say to you or did you get the feeling that like, I don't know people thought that you were selling out. Yeah, I think so. I know I don't think it's too many people because I think I myself went through a transformation that took me it took me several months to go against transformation. So I and you know, we put the ad at the end of every lesson and fortunately that actually gave us quite a bit of money. I mean as soon as we put that at a run rate went from zero to like 10 million books a year. Wow, one tiny a didn't even cover the whole screen was that company?

4 (54m 4s):
Oh, we you know, we use Google ads. Okay, so glad they came from everything like random random places not late-night booty call.com to help. No and soon after that we got a bunch of people who tell us. Hey, I don't like ads. Can I pay you to turn off the ads? Huh? And we thought okay. How about we launched the subscription service where the main thing is, you can pay us to turn off the ads it turned out and this is just we really just didn't realize this I'm just gripped has made us a ton more money than the ads. And and what what what was it? What would it cost to subscribe $9.99 per month? Okay, so a little bit More than Spotify but then put through that you could do any language you wanted any course with no ads, right?

4 (54m 50s):
And if you didn't want to pay you just have to watch The Arc the ads at the end of us and so all of a sudden you have people who are willing to pay some money, but still I mean we of course, I know we know the advertising model and podcasting and then it's still a small percentage of people when you got a freemium version, right? Even Spotify. Most people are still getting it for free. Free and dealing with the ads. Yes, so well at first it was very few. I'm by now. I mean it's been a couple of years since we added our subscription by now three percent of our users pay for the subscription, which is a lot because how many totally gizzards you have. We are locked them into the clouds.

4 (55m 31s):
Yeah. I mean it active uses right now we have about 40 million monthly active users and about 3% of them are paying subscribers. All right. Now here comes the the tough part, which is Duolingo of courses. Free so, you know, it's a three offering but of course even with free offerings there's this can be criticism and you know, there have been professors who specialize in this have said, you know, you can't really get that proficient with Duolingo. You know, I maybe I can learn some words or phrases but it's not doesn't really actually teach me a language. And before we dive deep into this just in general when you hear this criticism. Does it make you defensive or does it make you think like Maybe we got to make this a little better.

4 (56m 16s):
The truth is there's a lot of marketing out there that tells you that you can learn a language in nine days. This is not true. Actually learning a language takes years. Yeah. This is this is the first thing to to understand yet. Secondly, there's there's various levels, of course Duolingo teaches you pretty well from zero. So starting from the beginning to about intermediate depending on the language that you're learning yet if you want to use Duolingo done start from zero and get to the point where you're the poet laureate of that country that is unlikely to happen with Duolingo by itself that's just not going to happen but the way we see it is a we keep getting better and better be if you look at a any single method I mean take the for example the single method of u.s.

4 (57m 3s):
high school education Gap it kind of doesn't work very well how proficient are people who take Spanish throughout high school at the end of high school on average not that proficient right and our goal with dueling when we're not there yet what our goal is to get people from 0 to a level of the language is a level called B2 which is where you can get a knowledge job in that language hm you know Google for example employees software Engineers here in the United States whose English level is be too okay that is our goal we're not there yet so we interview James Park who created Fitbit and Fitbit the genius if it was it was like a gamified exercise right like people like I did 10,000 steps today or you know I made it it's hard to get humans to change habits so how do you get let's say a significant percentage of people to finish a language program yeah this is what we spend a lot of our time on and you know this is one of the things that when we get criticisms one of the things that they don't take into account is a lot of the research about how to teach a language is done with people who are in some sense held hostage in the classroom right yeah the hardest thing about learning a language is staying motivated so we spend a lot of of effort trying to make Duolingo more motivating are more fun and the way we do that is just by adding game elements I mean using doing a lot of people refer to it as playing Duolingo it's just it feels a lot like playing a game get a we get rewards you get like level up kind of thing that's exactly right and and and other things we do for example here this is another interesting thing we do we want you to use Duolingo every day I mean the truth is if you actually want to learn a language you got to turn it into a habit one thing that is really powerful for us to send we You notifications.

4 (58m 46s):
So we have a pretty sophisticated artificial intelligence system is one of the most sophisticated things we have that figures out when to send you a notification and what to say in them. Yeah, and for example, one of the most powerful things we you know, we've done is after about five days. If you haven't come back we send you a notification that says these notifications don't seem to be working. We're going to stop sending them for now. That turns out to be an extremely powerful way to get people to come back huh? Because they feel guilty that we're stopping to send a notification so that gets him to come back. Yeah. It's like holy get a hold people accountable. Yes. This is which is very hard. This is why people have personal trainers because otherwise you won't go to the gym. Yeah, but why would somebody pick Duolingo over any other language app, you mentioned Rosetta Stone for example, right and I'm sure you've looked at it and obviously your competitor, but They probably do a decent job teaching languages.

4 (59m 38s):
Who what why wouldn't you just like do that? Yeah. I mean before we launched the Rosetta Stone was the biggest thing in the world and everybody told us you're not going to be able to beat them yet by now. I would say we probably have 50 times more users than they do our revenues. Probably 5x the revenue. Oh my God something to that effect. Um, there's a big reason. It's the fact that we're free. And this is one of the things that our mission which is really giving free language education. I think it's actually good for business. Yeah, we don't spend very much in marketing. We have all these people 97 percent of our users don't pay us. Yeah, so it's just I think we just have this huge user base of people who are basically a marketing engine but a lot of companies in education eventually turn into marketing companies.

4 (1h 0m 25s):
Yeah for the following reason you realize man making improvements in how well you teach is hard and it really is very hard. It's it takes years so for every dollar you have You quickly realize it's actually better to spend your dollar marketing your product rather than making a product better. I've been hard liner on this we spend all our effort. Just making the product better. And the main reason is I think we're really in a kind of for the long term and I think in the long term the better product will win and this is why we don't spend so much money on marketing, please in December of 2019. Your company was valued at one point five billion dollars. Now we are all in a very different world a lot of the businesses that have been on how I built this are really struggling huge companies Airlines, you know products.

4 (1h 1m 15s):
They're in trouble. Some of them will not make it through this. Are you guys seeing a negative impact are you seeing people or or because people are stuck at home may be different. I mean Netflix is doing great. What's going on with you guys? Right because you're all remote working remotely. Presumably are all working remotely. Yes. I'm here just by myself. I came here to - yep, and we are closer to the Netflix and we are we're seeing increased demand like significantly increased. Yes significantly our Revenue has gone up about 50% So we used to make about 400 thousand dollars a day. We know make a lot $600,000 of wow, but the ad Market is drying up.

4 (1h 1m 55s):
Oh, yeah, but we make very little money from our ads most of our monies from from subscription is because people are sort of stuck at home. You're seeing people setting up for Duolingo. Yes. Yes, we are seeing that and the interesting thing is we see it. You know, we have users everywhere in the world. Only 20% of our users are in the US. We've seen it in every single Country and this is an a this amazing thing for the first country. We saw it obviously is in China as soon as there was no social distancing measures in China are traffic in China doubled and I kind of never thought it would happen anywhere else. But soon after that Korea was like that Japan was like that and Italy went like that the rest of A point like that and the US and so we're seeing massively increase the man because of this so so what's the exit?

4 (1h 2m 42s):
I mean you got investors obviously, they convinced you were convinced that you had to keep it sustainable and to grow it and now valued at one point five billion dollars and I know you're not public so you don't probably disclose your you know, whether you're profitable or not, but sounds like you're you know keeping the lights on pretty well. What's the end game at some point? You know, it's seller go public. The end game here is to go public. That's what we've been working towards. It's going to be very difficult to say these days when we're going to go public because you know with this whole covid thing the markets are really crazy. But we you know, we have the revenue now to be able to go public we are cash flow positive things and one of the things that I think is really important is the way I see it.

4 (1h 3m 29s):
We have so much more still to go. Yeah in terms of how much better we can teach and also teaching Stuff, we recently released an app to teach reading to young kids. It's called Duolingo ABC. I think this is a huge amount of impact that we can do with that. Yeah, so I mean to me, it's just keep going with the side. That's that's the goal. We given all of the things that have happened to you. I mean, you're incredible success how much of that do tribute to your intelligence and how hard you work and how much do you think it's because you were lucky I was definitely lucky. I mean, I'm launching an app at the time we launched the app was exactly the right time and launching an app in late 2012 was a really good time to launch an app.

4 (1h 4m 14s):
So, you know, I've been incredibly lucky. I think that that and I think just hard work on the same thing I get obsessed with the same thing. I mean I've done I've been working on Duolingo for now eight years and I'm pretty obsessive about it. So I think it's both That's Luis Von Ahn co-founder both Duolingo and recaptcha. By the way, Lee says that having a tech company based in Pittsburgh actually helps to attract top talent, even from places like Silicon Valley for starters the median price of a home in Pittsburgh. Today is about $180,000 in San Jose. It's almost 1.1 million dollars. In fact a while back Duolingo put up a recruiting billboard in San Francisco that simply read only On a home work in Tech move to Pittsburgh and thanks so much for listening to the show this week.

4 (1h 5m 7s):
You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can also write to us at H IB T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or add Sky Roz. Our show is produced this week by Casey Herrmann with music composed by rum team Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Julia Carney Candice limb, leave a grant and Jeff Rogers gyro. and even listening to how I built this This is NPR. How do we reinvent ourselves and what's the secret to living longer?

4 (1h 5m 48s):
I'm a new summer OD each week on NPR's TED Radio Hour. We go on a journey with Ted speakers to seek a deeper understanding of the world and to figure out new ways to think and create listen now.