0 (0s):
Running, a new business can be stressful. And. the last thing you need is to worry about unexpected accidents or lawsuits. So. if you are an entrepreneur or startup owner, don't overlook the importance of liability insurance. It's a critical investment in the success and longevity of your business. Protect yourself, your assets and your reputation by securing the liability coverage for your specific needs. With a customized liability insurance policy. you can face challenges with confidence knowing that you have a safety net in place. Take the first step in safeguarding your business today. Go to zen insurance.com/save 35 for a free business insurance quote, Get the low cost insurance protection you need from Canada s.

0 (48s):
small business insurance experts.

2 (51s):
Black perspectives haven't always been centered in the telling of America's story. Now we are taking center stage introducing NPRs Black. Stories Black Truths A, collection of black LED stories from NPRs podcasts. Search NPR, Black Stories, Black Truths, wherever you get your podcasts.

0 (1m 20s):
Okay, onto the show. And this week we're rerunning an interview from last fall with Jasmine Crowe Houston, her company Goodr partners with big companies to make sure their wastes well doesn't go to waste. Hope you enjoy. Hello and welcome to How I. Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. 34 million Americans don't have enough to eat and several million of them are children. And it doesn't actually make sense when you think about it because there is more than enough food to provide for everyone every day. In fact, 40%, 40% of all the food produced in the United States gets thrown away.

0 (2m 2s):
And. a lot of that food is perfectly fine, but every day Millions of tons of food are thrown out by restaurants, supermarkets, warehouses, catering companies, hotels and corporations. And many state and local laws make it really difficult to redistribute that food to people in need. And to make matters worse, all that food ends up rotting away in landfills that then produce massive amounts of methane emissions. Jasmine Crowe Houston is an entrepreneur who became obsessed with these very problems. In 2017, she founded a company called Goodr, which works with businesses to take unused food and deliver it to those who need it.

0 (2m 42s):
Now, before Jasmine launched Goodr, she was running an agency that helped black celebrities set up charitable organizations. And on the side she set up pop-up restaurants and parking lots to serve free food to homeless people in Atlanta where she lives. That experience would eventually lead Jasmine to start Goodr. You started an organization called Black Celebrity Giving. This was back, I think in 2011, around the time that you finished your M B A. Tell me, tell me about that. What was it? What was the idea behind it?

4 (3m 14s):
Yeah. I have been a full-time entrepreneur, which is crazy to think about Guy for over a decade of my life. Yeah. and I originally had this almost a consultancy where I was helping celebrities really define their giving blueprint, how they were gonna use their star power for good. and I built hundreds of nonprofits. and I would create all their programming, help them do their board training, finding their board members, creating all of their program descriptions and fundraising. And one of the things that started to become a really repeat cycle for me, I realized I was really busy around Thanksgiving, Christmas, and back to school.

4 (3m 55s):
But other than that, yeah. The rest of the year I was pretty much twiddling my thumbs.

0 (4m 0s):
And you were, you were busy during those times of years. 'cause that's when charitable giving kind of ramps up around those times of year.

4 (4m 6s):
That's when people tend to care. Yeah.

0 (4m 9s):
Kids going back to school, let's, let's get school supplies. It's Christmas time, let's get gifts to kids. The stuff like that.

4 (4m 16s):
Exactly. Yeah. And one of the days I said to one of my clients, and this is around Thanksgiving one year, and I'll never forget, I said, Hey, you know, the people that are standing in line for a Turkey in November are also hungry in October. Yeah. That this was not just a, you're only hungry, you know, two or three times a year. You could find yourself experiencing hunger anytime during the year. and I think that my, my celebrity clients were just really focused on playing football, basketball, you know, being HIBT, hop stars, r and b legends. And it didn't really stick to them.

4 (4m 57s):
And one day I was driving through downtown Atlanta. I drove through an area that was really highly populated with homeless populations. and I thought, you know what? I need to start doing something. And so I went home and I posted on Facebook. I'm starting this initiative called Sunday Soul. Every Sunday I'm gonna be feeding people, you know, come out and join me.

0 (5m 19s):
So, alright, so you, you were driving through the streets of Atlanta and you know, like you see I'm in the Bay Area and you saw Oh yeah. And housed people living in tents and people, you know, without regular food. You posted on Facebook that you wanted to, to feed people. And what, what was the idea that you would just cook a bunch of food and bring it to a location and and that was what you would do? Yeah,

4 (5m 42s):
The idea was that it would be like a good Sunday dinner. Like If, you go to you know, church or you're just relaxing, you know, whatever it is that you do on a Sunday, but you typically have that good Sunday meal. That was my idea, that I wanted to give people experiencing homelessness, dignity, and a really good meal. Yeah. And so it was a mixture of like a good soulful dinner and you know, old school music. So like the Temptations, the Jackson five, you know, Aretha Franklin, that was the mixture. and I would rent tables and chairs and linens and print out these menus that used to just be so funny. But I was letting people feel like they were at a restaurant even though we were in an abandoned parking lot or behind a building.

0 (6m 29s):
And so you would, you basically would have friends and whoever wanted be involved bring food and you'd serve what, like 50, a hundred people at a time?

4 (6m 37s):
Oh no, no, no. I was serving anywhere from three 50 to 500 people at a time. Wow. Yeah. So it was a big thing. Yeah. I would start doing the shopping on Wednesday and start doing the cooking on Friday for an event that was on Sunday. So it was a pretty big undertaking.

0 (6m 54s):
And you would do like pasta spaghetti and just, just things that you can make in large quantities.

4 (7m 0s):
Yeah, for sure. I got really good at making chicken and making pasta because of course before the, the food inflation, those were more affordable. Yeah. But it would be multiple things because that, that was the thing guy, I wanted to give people an opportunity to just have dignity and choice. Yeah. And so we weren't just giving them, Hey, here's this peanut butter jelly sandwich, you're hungry, just take it. So they got a chance to order an appetizer, a salad, an entree, two side items, and then they would get a choice of a dessert as well. So it was like a real restaurant.

0 (7m 33s):
And you would just set this up in a parking lot in Atlanta and asking people to donate. 'cause it probably was a lot of money to do that.

4 (7m 42s):
Oh yeah. It certainly was a lot of money. and I got smart. you know, I would start to, if I was gonna do fried chicken, I would order the fried chicken from like a grocery store and pick that up and, you know, ask different groups to pitch in like five, $10. I also put a lot of my own money into it as well.

0 (7m 59s):
Alright. So you, you basically decide on your own to basically feed people on the weekends. And, and a lot of times you'll see church groups do this or nonprofit groups do this. And you were just on your own, just thought, you know, there are not enough people feeding people who are hungry. You felt like you needed to, to do something.

4 (8m 21s):
100%. I felt like They weren people that were feeding people, there was a lot of initiatives, but I felt like people were not getting the dignity and choice that people like you and I have when we're hungry. It was just like, Hey, take this food. You're hungry. Have it and I want it to do better. I want it to essentially, you know, do gooder. I

0 (8m 41s):
Wanna just step back for a second to ask you in general about the, the problem of hunger in the US. 'cause you've given a Ted talk about this and everyone listening should go see it. It's so good. But I was and I guess I shouldn't be amazed 'cause I've been in this profession, my profession for more than 25 years, but 40% of the food consumed in the US is thrown away every year. That's what I read. Is that true?

4 (9m 5s):
It's true. And and that equates to about 80 billion pounds of food. 80. So

0 (9m 9s):
Billion pounds of food. A thrown away, thrown away, just thrown out

4 (9m 12s):
So. if you can imagine a billion, right? That sounds like a lot. And then you think 80 billion. I mean, this is a lot of food.

0 (9m 19s):
I mean that what, what is it? It's, it's not the food that we throw away from our plates. It's like things that the grocery stores and Costco and Kroger throws away. It's, it's ma right? Is that what we're talking about?

4 (9m 32s):
You know, it's from the farm to the fork, waste is taking place. So there's farmers that are having to plow things under. I mean, we saw huge instances of this during the pandemic. You saw those stories of Idaho potato farmers that, you know, had to waste Millions of pounds of potatoes because people stopped ordering. So you see that you, you see the food that's not perfect when it gets to this store. I can't tell you how many truckers give us calls all the time because if they're late, say they're sitting on in traffic because there's a bad accident on the highway and they get to that grocery store, that distribution center late, they can have the whole truck refused. And so now you have 18 wheelers of probably 20 pallets worth of food items that now these truckers are like having to figure out how They just weren get rid of it because they've gotta go and get another load of food.

4 (10m 23s):
It's the, it's the events that we go to. Right. How many times have you been to a wedding or a conference and you know, you're sitting in that ballroom,

0 (10m 29s):
The cruise ship. Imagine. Yeah.

4 (10m 31s):
Oh yeah. The cruise ships. I mean, I was at a conference maybe about two weeks ago, and you could see that they had planned for let's say a thousand people. I mean, They weren hundreds of tables and every table was already preset with a salad and bread on the table. Yeah. and I looked around and there must've been at least 20 tables that were completely empty.

0 (10m 51s):
Wow. Yeah. Yes. I mean, we've all experienced that. And, and so we're talking about it's, it's totally insane. I mean, we, we produce so much food in this country and waste so much food in this country. And so, so this is a fact. and I don't even know what, what percentage of methane and carbon emissions come from landfills in the US It must be very significant.

4 (11m 15s):
Exactly. Project Drawdown last year said that food waste was the number one thing that we could do to combat global climate change. And just to give you some aspects, food is the single largest source of everything that's in a landfill.

0 (11m 29s):
And just by being there broadening away, it releases emissions.

4 (11m 33s):
Exactly. It releases harmful methane gas emissions. And, and beyond that, I mean, when you think of where landfills are and you think about poverty and you think about health outcomes and social determinants of health, it's really bad.

0 (11m 47s):
Yeah.

4 (11m 47s):
On every level.

0 (11m 49s):
The second thing I want to kind of ask you about is how people are fed. Right. So there are, I'm, I, I'm, I'm in the Bay Area here has obviously a, a huge, you know, crisis, you know, with unhoused people. And it's shocking when you see it. You're in, you're in Atlanta. There's also challenges in cities like Atlanta, New York, Chicago, et cetera. Most people who, who cannot afford food, who who need to be fed, how do they get it? Where, where do they get it from?

4 (12m 20s):
Yeah, there's a lot of different resources. There's certainly churches and synagogues and, you know, that are, are feeding and having different programs on a, on a daily and weekly basis. There are soup kitchens that still exist. A lot of times if they are experiencing homelessness, they are sometimes in an a homeless resource program. So whether they're staying at a shelter, they're going to the shelter for certain times. It could be like, it's too cold outside or there's storms and they know that there are places to go where they can actually get food. And then there's people like me who are bringing food directly to people that are living on the streets on a daily basis.

0 (12m 57s):
Alright. So while you, while you were doing Sunday Soul, what did you start to see that you realized was a problem? I mean, were there gaps in, in what these other groups and, and organizations and agencies were doing that, that you saw? Did, I mean, did you see an opportunity to innovate in a new way?

4 (13m 14s):
Yeah. They, weren, They weren, a lot of things that I saw. One thing I started to see a lot of families that would be there on a daily basis. Every time I was feeding, they were there. And, and one time I talked to the family and I'll, and I'll never forget they were a family of nine, you know, so husband, wife, seven kids, and I remember I would say like, you guys are here every week. 'cause I watched them, you know, get outta homelessness, get into a house, you know, start trying to rebuild. And one day the dad said, you know, we have to sell our food stamps every now and then, just so we can pay our rent and I. I mean, that really, that stuck to me. And, and he wanted to know when we were gonna be there so that they could come and get food because it was a consistent good amount of food.

4 (13m 58s):
And he knew his family was gonna get a good meal. So I saw that, I saw that people were really desperate for food. So even if they had food stamps or all the things that we think make people have access to food, there's still a lot of struggle. and that people, when they have to make a choice, am I gonna pay for my rent? Am I gonna pay for my car payment? Am I gonna pay for medicine or am I gonna pay for food? Food is often the first to go. But the biggest thing that happened with this guy is I woke up one morning in February of 2016. So by this time I've been feeding on the streets for almost four years. And a video of one of my restaurants went viral. I had a 15 second video on Instagram that was nothing but just little pictures.

4 (14m 39s):
And they captioned it. Look what this group did for the homeless in Atlanta. Wow. And people started tagging me in the video and I woke up and there was like all these friend requests. And one of the reoccurring questions that people kept on asking me was, who donated the food? and I started to think like, I don't get enough of this food donated and I go to Google like so many people do. and I, I literally Googled what happens to extra food at the end of the night from restaurants. and I will say, I fell into the deepest rabbit hole. I, I remember like it was yesterday being up until almost four o'clock in the morning reading a Harvard Business School, their food law policy had done like a 83 page report on food waste.

4 (15m 24s):
and I'm reading through this and I am blown away with how much food goes to waste in this country. Thinking about the Millions that are hungry and realizing, wait, we waste all the food that could feed all the hungry. And it, it just was like a aha moment. Like, Hey, I've gotta connect these two.

0 (15m 45s):
We're gonna take a quick break, but when we come back more from Jasmine, Crowe Houston, the founder of Goodr. You're listening to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. Stay with us. Hey, it's guy here. And while we're on a little break, I wanna tell you about a recent episode of How I Built This lab that we released. It's about the company TerraCycle and how they're working to make recycling and waste reduction more accessible. The founder Tom Zaki originally launched TerraCycle, is a worm poop fertilizer company. He did this from his college dorm room. Basically, the worms would eat trash and then they would turn it into plant fertilizer. Now his company has since pivoted from that and they recycle everything from shampoo bottles and makeup containers to snack wrappers and even cigarette butts.

0 (16m 31s):
And in the episode you'll hear Tom talk about his new initiative to develop packaging that is actually reusable in hopes of phasing out single use products entirely and making recycling and TerraCycle obsolete. You can hear this episode by following How I Built This. And scrolling back a little bit to the episode, making Garbage useful with Tom Zaki of TerraCycle or by searching TerraCycle. That's T E R R A C Y C L E wherever you listen to podcasts. Welcome back. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This Lab. And my guest is Jasmine Crowe Houston, the c e o and founder of Goodr.

0 (17m 16s):
So you basically go down this rabbit hole, you discover what we've just been talking about, that all this food is wasted. 'cause most people don't know that. They don't know that 40% of our food is just ends up thrown away. Right?

4 (17m 28s):
I didn't know it. Yeah, yeah. you know, I didn't know

0 (17m 31s):
It. And so you start to read this and clearly the gears start to turn your head, you're thinking maybe this isn't a food problem. Yeah.

4 (17m 39s):
I think that's exactly what it is. And the, and the other thing that started to happen too, it was around the emergence of the food delivery. And you know, I'm like, wow, all this technology is being created to get food faster to people like you and I, but who's gonna build something for the have-nots, the Millions of people that don't know where their next meal is coming from, who's building for that? And we have all this food going to waste all these people that are going hungry. Why are we not trying to build something that will connect those two together in, in the interim, solve two really big problems. I mean, we're talking about all this food going to waste all these people going hungry and we're not, we're not solving it.

4 (18m 21s):
And that's really what I thought I could do. So

0 (18m 25s):
Basically you've land on this notion, this concept that, that it's really a logistics problem. Feeding people in the United States should not be, it should not be a struggle. There's more than enough food for everybody in the world. And essentially most of the time a lot of food that's thrown away is still perfectly safe, perfectly good to eat, right?

4 (18m 46s):
More than you would believe, for sure.

0 (18m 49s):
I mean, for example, there are rules, right? That govern like shelf life of food, right? Sell by dates, et cetera. I mean, on any given day you can probably go behind a supermarket and and see what they're throwing away. And m much of that food is perfectly safe and consumable, right?

4 (19m 7s):
A hundred percent. Still till this day, I probably get no less than three to four either emails, tags on social media, posts of people, everyday, people going to a grocery store seeing this perfectly good food that gets thrown out. I remember one time a lady, and, and it's, it's funny 'cause she, she said she actually got in trouble for it. But a Walmart in Atlanta, the power went out and I mean went out for less than 20 minutes, right? And because of that, they were throwing away everything in their freezers and everything in their coolers. And so she calls us and she was like, Hey, I don't know If, you guys can get here, but we're about to throw all this food away.

4 (19m 49s):
So we get up there, we bring like, I think we had like a U-Haul truck, one of our vans and I was, I mean the, everything that's in the freezer. So all this food, just all of it just going away. So I'm like, oh my God. Like does this happen every single day? What's funny guy is if we go to, if we go to Walmart or we go to a grocery store and we purchase groceries, what if we stop someplace else? Chances are We don't even make it home in 20 to 30 minutes, right? And we get home, right? We put this food in our refrigerator and freezer and it's perfectly fine. But because of this fear of litigation, this fear, I'm gonna get in trouble. If, you know, this food isn't perfectly great, it does go to waste. and I remember the day that we did that and we took that food to different senior homes and this had to be thousands of dollars, thousands.

4 (20m 36s):
I mean maybe 20, $30,000 worth of food that we were able to give to these seniors that would've gone to waste. And it was, it was perfectly good food.

0 (20m 44s):
Alright, so 2017 you decide to found Goodr. And the idea is, let me build a, a logistics company that essentially can find and deliver food to people who need it. First of all, I think a lot of people will be surprised to, to hear that it's a for-profit. It's not a non-profit, it's not a charity. So why did you decide to go, to go that route rather than, than a nonprofit or a charity organization?

4 (21m 12s):
Yeah, you, you know, and you know this about me, right Guy. I knew all about nonprofits. There was, yeah, that was the thing that I knew. I mean, I had been building nonprofits for however long, so that's that I knew the reason why I decided to go a for-profit route, as soon as I realized that it was definitely this logistics problem was that businesses were already paying to throw the food away. Like that's what I realized. That was kind of like the wave.

0 (21m 37s):
They were paying people to haul it off. They're

4 (21m 39s):
Paying people to haul it off this perfectly good food. They're paying companies to come and get it and throw it in landfill, which, oh by the way is terrible for our environment. A leading contributor to global climate change. you know, a huge problem in itself. And so I thought, wait, I'm gonna come and offer these businesses a sustainable way to deal with their waste. And it's gonna help their community. It's gonna save them money both via tax deductions that They just weren get for donating the food that's edible, but also by paying for excess waste pickups that they don't technically need. And They just weren help their community. They just weren. It's gonna be good on the environment. They just weren help feed people.

4 (22m 19s):
and that, that was a business. And, and for the first year of the business, every company that I spoke to was like, oh, we can't work with you because you're not a nonprofit. I was like, what? And then it started to make real business sense because they were already paying waste companies to throw the food away.

0 (22m 37s):
Yeah. And, and also, I mean, If, you were a nonprofit. You would be spending 95% of your time fundraising, raising money from anyone, anywhere.

4 (22m 48s):
Oh, all the time. Like I was, I would say 99% of my time fundraising. Right. And just never knowing, you know, when the next donation was gonna come, when the next grant was gonna come. It it, nonprofits are hard business.

0 (23m 1s):
Yeah. Alright, so you decide to run as a for-profit. And, and the idea was that that essentially companies, restaurants, grocery stores, catering companies, they're already paying people to haul away their food waste. And most of it, what we call food waste is actually food that hasn't been eaten, consumed, still packaged in many cases, many

4 (23m 24s):
Cases.

0 (23m 25s):
And so, so your, your idea was, well, why don't we just essentially be the waste management provider? Why don't we deal with that?

4 (23m 32s):
Exactly. That's exactly what I thought. And it was interesting because I, I didn't wanna use the term waste because to your point, this isn't all wasted food. A lot of this is surplus food. So we started offering a service, what I called surplus food recovery, your excess food. And what I told the clients that we were doing is we were solving their surplus food supply chain problem. Because right now they were just throwing it all in, in landfill. And what we could do is help that edible food get to people in need, but the food that was non edible, They, weren, other uses of that than putting it in a landfill. We could recycle it, we could turn it into animal feed, They, weren, other use cases for it, that it didn't have to go to waste.

4 (24m 15s):
And so that's what really helped us kind of think that we were a sustainable waste diversion company, but ultimately we handled the logistics of getting food to people in need.

0 (24m 24s):
One of the things that you decide to do is from the get go is that you're gonna be a technology company that actually, because this is a logistics challenge, you have to build a robust technology platform to deal with logistics. Like, if anyone like knows about u p s, they don't think of themselves as a package delivery company. They think of themselves as a logistics company, right? Like the logistics, like, like I think at one point u p s had drivers make fewer left turns and that just like saved them, you know, Millions of dollars a year just by that one little hack. You are a logistics company that happens to be delivering food to people in need, but you had to build a platform for it.

0 (25m 5s):
So how did you start, where did you even, how did you even begin to do that?

4 (25m 10s):
Well, I started hanging out around Jorge Tech. Yeah. and I entered into a hackathon as a team of one and literally started drawing out the wire frames. So this is what I think the first screen's gonna look like. These are gonna be the users. I would take advantage of everything guy, you know, any office hours when, you know, companies or big dev agencies were like on beach from a a in between a big project and they were offering office hours. I would go, I would get my friends to kind of come and be my team. 'cause I I'm a solo founder, but come and help me take notes and, and, and go with this. And I ultimately started entering pitch competitions and use that prize money to get the first version of the platform to market.

4 (25m 54s):
So that's really how it happened. and I ultimately ended up meeting someone at a coworking space that was an actual engineer who was like, Hey, I'll help you build this on this side. And we used an outsource dev agency plus him that was kind of like my product manager, but also still a, an engineer himself to get that first version built. and that is what I started using to sell to customers. But prior to that, it literally was a clickable prototype that I got built at that hackathon near Jorge Tech's campus that I used for almost a year to talk to clients about what this was gonna do. and I was just really honest with customers and saying like, Hey, you would be my first customer in this market, or you would be my first corporate cafeteria or my first airport.

4 (26m 42s):
And getting them kind of, of excited about this idea of like, we can end hunger together.

0 (26m 48s):
So the idea was that they would have a, the customer would have this app and they could like enter what they have available into the, into the app and then click go and then a delivery truck or pickup truck would come and take it.

4 (27m 2s):
Yeah. I mean I almost look at it almost as like a reverse, like Uber Eats or Instacart where we would inventory everything it is that the business sells. So all their food and food items. Yeah, we make it really easy now, you know, our technology's gotten so much more intuitive where they can upload their full menu in a matter of seconds. And now they click on the items, I have a hundred chicken sandwiches, you know, 200 chicken pizzas. And then they would push request pickup. And what our platform would do is calculate two things, the estimated weight value of all those items, as well as the tax value of all of those items at time of donation. And then once they requested a pickup, we deploy a driver depending on how much food they're picking up.

4 (27m 43s):
It could be a vehicle or it could be a truck, a cargo van. It really just depends how much food we're recovering. We get that food picked up and then we deliver it really close. So that's kind of our, our our big secret sauce, right? We're not gonna go from San Francisco to Palo Alto all this time passing, you know, hundreds of nonprofits in the, in the distance. So we keep the food really close, we get it delivered to the nonprofit, they sign for it like they would a u p SS package. The driver takes a picture of the donation That signature now generates for our clients a donation letter, a record of everything that was donated, and then a sustainability dashboard that converts how many pounds of food they kept outta landfill to what that means for c o two emissions that they've helped to prevent as well.

4 (28m 29s):
So that's pretty much the end to end. How that por portion of the business works.

0 (28m 36s):
Let me understand the business model. So essentially you go to a client, right? And you say you're paying somebody to take away this food surplus food anyway, why don't you pay us and then we'll take it and we will distribute it to nonprofits who will then make sure that people who need the food are fed.

4 (28m 56s):
Exactly. And we charge like, almost like a waste company. So a waste company, waste Management Republic Services, whichever they are charging based on volume, how often they're coming out, sometimes how many bins they're picking up. And so that is really the way that we looked at it as well. But our price is based on which vehicle. 'cause a a a car is definitely cheaper than sending out a tractor trailer. So we have customers that pay for a number of pickups per month from Goodr. So they're either paying for eight pickups, 12 pickups, 20 or 30 pickups on a monthly basis that they can use whenever they have excess food

0 (29m 35s):
And I guess the difference between you and a a waste management service is that they were, they're just gonna pick it up and dump it. You guys are gonna pick it up, give it to nonprofits, and then hand them a slip with their donation credit so they can actually exactly.

4 (29m 51s):
Write

0 (29m 51s):
It off. So they, it's almost like a rebate. Like they, they might pay you x a hundred dollars a month, but they might get a $25 rebate from the donation a tax credit.

4 (30m 1s):
It's even bigger than that. We typically see a four to 10 X R o I. So if they're paying us a thousand dollars a month, they are typically donating $4,000 worth of food

0 (30m 12s):
Wow.

4 (30m 12s):
On a monthly basis. So that, and, and you know, honestly, guy, that was what I thought most companies would wanna do it for. Like, hey, you wanna feed people, you want to get the tax deductions right? But honestly, the tides have changed and now everyone is concerned about ESGs and sustainability. And every company in in America now has a sustainability department. I could tell you five years ago that wasn't the case. I met with a really big company that just became a client of gooders. And they, they were one of those ones that were like, oh, we can never work with you because you're not a nonprofit. And I'll tell you, this year, they sent a message to our general sales inbox, right when I was the C e o graveling at their foot four years ago and said, Hey, like you guys have all these employees, you have a hundred thousand employees, you've got all these cafeterias.

4 (30m 59s):
Like, let us get the food and, and get it donated. And they literally wrote to us and it said, we are trying to get a handle on our food waste problem. I'd love to talk to somebody about getting this set up. That is what's happened. Now when I was talking about this four and five years ago, no one was talking about sustainability. No one was this, this idea of climate change and it seemed real. We also didn't have a pandemic where we witnessed Millions of people experiencing hunger that had never been hungry before. And so the mindset has changed. And this matters, this matters to people. People care about not wasting food and making sure that their neighbors have access to food.

0 (31m 38s):
We're gonna take another short break, but in just a moment we'll have more from Goodr, c e o and founder Jasmine Crowe Houston on helping businesses waste less food and feed more people. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This Lab

5 (31m 59s):
7:30 AM work starts in 30 minutes. It takes 25 minutes to get there. So you are at the door down the stairs, grabbing a coffee on the way The Breakfast of Champions. You glance down at your watch 7:58 AM your big meeting starts in two minutes. You've been prepping for it all month. You pause then remember, you are a champion, you've got this inhale cool mint and exhale confidence, Excel gum, do what feels fresh.

0 (32m 36s):
Welcome back to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz and my guest is Jasmine Crowe, Houston, founder and c e o of Goodr. I mean, you really c created a logistics company, a technology company in addition to being a service provider, right? Because you have clients. I mean, they're people who need, you know, their nonprofits are your essentially your clients. They need this food. I mean, I just try to get my head around all the challenges you had to face. I mean, you had to build a, a network of trucks and vans presumably to pick this food up in addition to building the tech stack.

0 (33m 17s):
Tell me a little bit about, I dunno about that, about the transportation side of this.

4 (33m 22s):
Yeah, it was, that was the craziest thing that we, we ever built. 'cause it was, it was almost a marketplace, right guy. 'cause on one side we're we have all this food, we've gotta match it with all these nonprofits and now we gotta handle the logistics of drivers, right? Yeah. To match with, with the food and the nonprofits. And so when I first started, I was, you know, spending all my time in like Uber driver and Lyft driver Facebook groups and I was trying to recruit all these Uber and Lyft drivers and, and then I thought, I need to just partner with some of these logistics companies that are already out there. Like your Ubers and your Lyfts and your door dashes and your roadies and have them, you know, get the pickup request and they go and pick up the food and I pay them.

4 (34m 3s):
And so that was like a, a smart thing that I finally was able to make happen in 2019. But at first, you know, the first year and a half we were only operating in Atlanta. We were using kind of owner operators, people who had their own vehicles Yeah. That could go and pick up the food and then we were paying them per pickup.

0 (34m 21s):
So basically you guys are kind of subcontracting to these, to these other companies and that's how you're able to scale it up.

4 (34m 28s):
Exactly. and that's how we could turn on any city in a matter of days. you know, we really spent a lot of time building out thousands of nonprofits in our network that can receive this food at any given moment. And being really smart. Like we have hundreds of churches and yeah, thousands of shelters, but we also have senior homes. So we spent a lot of time building that network and really building community and letting people know that we cared about them. and that was what really was the differentiating fact between us and a waste company. Yeah. We really focused on being like part of the community.

0 (35m 2s):
How do you deal with, I mean obviously we talked about how so much of this food is perfectly good food. The quality is still good, it's just, you know, it might be past, I, I drink milk and everything past expiration dates all the time, and it's perfectly safe. We all do it. But how do you make sure that once you get it, then it's handed off to the nonprofits that it's still going to because eventually it's, it's gonna go bad. So how do you manage the safety of the food?

4 (35m 29s):
Yeah, and you know, the safety matters every, it matters by county. That's one of the things that we learned early on. So we've spent a lot of time understanding how long food lives in Broward County versus Dade County in Florida versus, you know, Cobb County and Fulton County in, in Jorge because every health department is different. So we move the food really fast. We also require that all of our nonprofit partners have a, a pretty solid agreement in place with us. They have to be able to store the food. So having access to freezers and refrigerators. And we also have a whole nonprofits team that works closely with our nonprofits, make sure that they're able to receive the food. If they have any issues, they let us know.

4 (36m 9s):
And luckily in five years we've only ever had one nonprofit that said, Hey, we got some food that just doesn't look good. Yeah. And we were able to get that food picked up and then we were able to compost it. I thought about these things really early before I had any customers. I was building this nonprofit network, I was doing the r and d on how long the food lived. And then we're really intentional with how we communicate that message to our clients.

0 (36m 35s):
So as you sort of grow, right? and I know you've got other, I mean there are store like Goodr branded stores that, that are like churches, right? Where people can just go in and there's, it looks like a regular convenience store and it's, you can go and and it's free. It's free. But in terms of building a, a company that's not only sustainable, but but profitable too. Do you have to rely ultimately on other revenue sources or can you, can you make it happen purely with the fees that you get from, from picking up the, the surplus foods?

4 (37m 8s):
Yeah, we can 100% make it happen on our surplus food, on our waste stream business. I think when we started building these, these Goodr grocery stores and our popup markets, a lot of that was during the pandemic. Because as you can imagine, guy, all of our customers, you know, enterprise, corporate cafeterias, college campuses, stadiums and arenas, they were closed. And so it was like, how are we gonna stay in business? And the main thing that we were focusing on is like, how do we make sure that people have access to food? And so we started being really creative and bringing on some strategic partners like the N B A, like, you know, State, Farm, you know, different football players, basketball players that, that wanted to work with us to address food insecurity in this different realm.

4 (37m 54s):
I mean it, and it did prove to be a good source of revenue for us for a couple of years. But we really started to, to really hone in on, on how we started last year, which was on the surplus food and how do we get this food outta landfill? And as businesses started to go back and it's still, you know, up and down, everyone's not back in the office. There's still a lot of excess food that we're capturing just because the capacity of the office isn't at 100%. So we're seeing a lot of that as well. But yeah, we, we really believe that we're gonna scale nationwide and soon internationally strictly with this model because it's working. The multiples are great, it's, the churn is so low 'cause who wants to say like, Hey, I don't care about feeding people anymore.

4 (38m 38s):
Let's, let's keep putting our food in landfill. And so once customers get started with us, they really love it.

0 (38m 43s):
Alright. When you started this idea out, originally it came from the, these meals that you were making for people for 40 years and you were really connected to, to unhoused people and people who really were food insecure. Now of course you're, you've scaled this up. Do you have any, I mean, you know, you had so much person to person interaction with people directly affected and impacted by what you do. Do you still have that? Do you still get that,

4 (39m 9s):
You know, not to this, not to the level when I used to be feeding people on the streets is definitely different, you know, because that was, it was just so personal. Like when you cook a meal and serve it to someone and see them enjoy it and, you know, tell you like, oh, this is amazing. You should run for president one day. Like that level of enjoyment, you know, I do miss that. We, I do spend a lot of time still chatting with our nonprofits and, you know, going to visit them and, you know, making sure that they're good. So I, I get that part of it. But the, the people, you know, like being able to go to an actual person is not the same as, as it was when I was feeding on the streets. But I think I expected that as I grew, I think our, our impact is so much greater.

4 (39m 54s):
you know, when I was feeding three to 500 people every other week when I was feeding on the streets, now I could be, you know, providing three to 500 meals with every delivery and doing, you know, thousands of deliveries on a, on a monthly and daily basis.

0 (40m 8s):
Yeah. Tell me about, about the plans going forward. I mean, you've got, obviously this, you know, you, you are in, how many cities now are you in?

4 (40m 16s):
We're in about 34 cities right now.

0 (40m 18s):
Wow. Wow. 34 cities. And presumably plans to grow even more in 2023.

4 (40m 26s):
Huge plans to grow in 2023. Yeah, I mean I would, I I think I always tell the team like, Hey, 34 cities is great, 34 states is better with multiple cities in every single one of those states. So I think we're really trying to expand. I'll be honest with you guys, there's still some, some legislation that prevents us from going to certain cities. So we're, we're waiting for things like that to get better. But on the positive side, there are states like California, New York and New Jersey that are introducing legislation that makes it illegal for businesses to throw away their food. Wow. They have to recycle it or donate it. So that's the, the hope that we're gonna start, you know, expanding their, plus we've got some really big partnerships. You'll see a lot of that like the expansion with our current customers.

4 (41m 10s):
Sodexo Magic, we have a great partnership in place with Magic Johnson's joint venture with Sodexo. And so rolling out across all their locations. So I think it's really about expansion now, which is really why we raised some money to hire more team and to be able to grow our footprint.

0 (41m 27s):
You went into this and, and, and, and it was inspired by this idea that food insecurity shouldn't, should not exist. It should not be an issue in the United States 'cause there's more than enough food to feed people. But of course, like with any problem, it's impossible to solve it a hundred percent. But how much closer do you think we can get to sort of eliminating food insecurity if all of the excess food that is wasted is, is redistributed?

4 (41m 59s):
I think we could get really close. My goal has always been to reduce food waste by 15% of this country, which will provide about 25 million people with food. Which is that, that's crazy, right? We're saying 15 1 5, not 50. If I can reduce food waste by 15%, that would be enough food to feed about 25 million Americans. So that's, that's, that's our goal. People always say like, well you in hunger, I don't know if I will in my lifetime, this is something that affects one in nine people on the planet. So it's a huge undertaking. But I wanna be able to say because of Goodr, nobody in Atlanta, no one in San Francisco, no one in New York is hungry because we've created access to food at no cost to Millions of people.

4 (42m 44s):
and that, I mean, that is a real thing. I think a lot of times it's hard for people that, you know, have access to order whatever they want, anytime they want as, as it relates to food to comprehend that there are so many people that don't know where their next meal is coming from and that, and they live with these critical choices every single day. But we're really trying to, to make a dent in that.

0 (43m 8s):
And really, it sounds like you're convinced this only could have worked as a for-profit.

4 (43m 13s):
Oh, I believe it, it would've only worked as a full, as a for-profit

0 (43m 17s):
Because the efficiencies are just built in. It forces you when you know that, that there's money on the line, there's employees in the line, you've gotta make it work. You have got to make it work. There's no fallback, there's no funders, there's no donors. There's no philanthropic direction that requires you to do something in a specific way.

4 (43m 38s):
A hundred percent. and I mean and I think remembering that, that's where I started from makes a lot of sense to people. you know, 'cause people are always like, why didn't you become a nonprofit? And I've heard people that were like, oh, If, you were a nonprofit. You'd be getting, you know, billions of dollars in donations. And and sometimes I look at that right guy, I remember looking at like the, the donation report from a local food bank and one of the cities that we were in and in one year they had like a hundred million dollars in donations, you know, and, and I was like, wow. Like that's kind of crazy how much, how much money they get. And, and here we are, you know, trying to do so much with a lot less. But it's, it's a new model.

4 (44m 19s):
I mean, we really are disrupting two industries. Yeah. One, this seems really philanthropic. The way that this has always been solved is really, you know, charity. We're, we're donating money to the food bank. Our our company is gonna go and hold up a big check and pack some boxes and and that's what we do. And then we're also disrupting the waste industry, which was, hey, we're gonna send out a truck three times a week. We're gonna fill up your dumpsters with whatever you put in them and we're gonna go put it in landfill. And so to think that here we are, this company that's saying there's a better way to do both of these things. It's, we're a disruptor and I and I'm proud of that.

0 (44m 54s):
Yeah, for sure. and I, imagine you've probably had your fair share of, of people who are not so kind to you for that reason.

4 (45m 1s):
Oh yeah. I mean it's, it's funny 'cause you talked about my TED talk and when that first came out, I mean, it was just like the, I wasn't even expecting the, I would say the hate, right? Or, or like the negative responses that came from it. But it happened because I'm sharing my, my opinion, which is what Ted talks are all about, like thought provoking conversation starters. But people didn't agree. And yeah, I've had a lot of that like, you know, she should, you know, stick to feeding people on the streets and I'm not gonna allow technology to solve hunger. I mean it's, it's really interesting some of the comments that I've seen, but I've always said like, why would we not wanna use technology to do something like reduce food waste and solve hunger?

4 (45m 46s):
We can't just only use technology to meet our future husband and wife and, and to have social network. This is a real opportunity to use technology to do something good. And, and that's what I'm doing.

0 (45m 56s):
That's awesome. Of course there's gonna be pushback and They just weren be people who are gonna say, oh, this should never be a, a for-profit business. But I think that to your point, those approaches ha have been good. There's certainly amazing nonprofit and philanthropic churches and and nonprofit organizations do great work. But it hasn't not, I mean, if the problem hasn't been solved, we have to try everything. You gotta try other things.

4 (46m 23s):
I love that you said that. 'cause that's exactly what I think everything that's working now, whether it's food pantries, food banks, as I said in my Ted Talk, they serve an immense purpose and they're needed. you know, even with all of those things in existence though, guy, the fact still remains though. People are going to bed hungry tonight. Yeah. So we're not doing enough. And, and that's what we're trying to do here is do more and use technology to do good.

0 (46m 50s):
Jasmine, thank you so much.

4 (46m 52s):
Oh, thank you. I really appreciate it.

0 (46m 57s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to How I Built This Lab. You can follow How I, Built This on Apple Podcasts, Amazon Music, or wherever you're listening right now. The next episode is available right now. Or you can binge all of our episodes ad free by subscribing to Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts, or the Wondery app. If. you wanna follow us on socials? We're at How I Built This on Twitter and Instagram. And I'm at Guy Raz on Twitter and at Guy Raz on Instagram. This episode was produced by Katherine Cipher, with editing by John Isabella. Our music was composed by Tine Arablouei. Our audio engineer was Neil Rouch, our production team at How I Built This includes Alex Chung, Casey Herman, Carla Estevez, Chris Sini, Elaine Coates, Josh Lash, JC Howard, Liz Metzker, Sam Paulson, and Carrie Thompson.

0 (47m 49s):
Our intern is Susanna Brown. Neva Grant is our supervising editor. Beth Donovan is our executive producer. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This Hey Prime members.

0 (48m 29s):
You can listen to How I Built This early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If, you wanna show your support for our show? Be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.