0 (1s):
Hey Prime members You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon. Music Download the app today.

1 (9s):
Think of all the things you can do in 10 minutes or less. Scroll through social media. check your bank balance, make a sandwich or learn about the surprising economics behind all these things. The Indicator from Plan of Money is a quick hit of insight into the economics of business, work, and everyday life. Every weekday in less than 10 minutes. Listen now to The Indicator podcast from npr

Airbnb (30s):
Maybe. you stayed in an Airbnb before and thought to yourself, this actually seems pretty doable. Maybe, my place could be an Airbnb. It could be as simple as starting with a spare room or your whole place when you're away. You could be sitting on an Airbnb and not even know it. Maybe, your kid is heading off to college in the fall and you'll have an empty bedroom. You could Airbnb it and make some extra cash while they're away. Or if you have a vacation plan for this summer, that could be a good time to Airbnb your entire place. Whether. you could use a little extra money to cover some bills or for something a little more fun, your home or spare room might be worth more than you think. Find out how much at Airbnb dot ca slash Host.

0 (1m 15s):
Hey everyone. So the How I Built This lab team is taking a little time off for the summer, but don't worry, we'll be back in your feed with fresh How I Built This Lab episodes in just a few weeks. Meantime, I hope you enjoy one of our favorite episodes from last year with the founders of Wildtype. It's a company working on lab grown salmon, just like the real thing without the actual fish. So hope you enjoy it here. It's Hello and welcome to How I. Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz. Alright, so a lot of us have made the decision to either cut back or completely cut out meat from our lives.

0 (1m 57s):
For some people it's a moral issue around harming animals. For other people, it's health. And for me it's because the environmental impact of meat consumption. But I still eat meat and I still eat seafood. And admittedly, I have occasional pangs of guilt knowing that I'm contributing to a bigger problem. Livestock production is a huge contributor to global carbon emissions. Our oceans are being overfished and the huge amount of micro plastics floating deep in the sea are making their way into our fish and consequently into our bodies. So a good question to ask is, do we need to kill animals to create meat?

0 (2m 39s):
Well, until recently, the answer was of course, don't be ridiculous. But with advances in stem cell technology, we are coming much closer to a different answer. And that's a starting point for a company called Wildtype Foods based in San Francisco. Wildtype was started by two friends, Justin Colbeck and Aria Elfenbein. Justin was a foreign service officer who spent time in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Aria is a biologist and a trained cardiologist, but together they ditched their careers to pursue the idea of growing real salmon without killing a single fish.

0 (3m 18s):
Wildtype is not a plant-based substitute. The company grows real salmon from real. Salmon sells to form real cuts of sushi grade fish. And while you can't find their products in grocery stores or restaurants just yet, Wildtype is part of a growing number of companies hoping that within a few years, sell cultivated meats will become just as common as those plant-based substitutes. Aria Elfenbein and Justin Colbeck are with me. Guys, welcome to the show. Thanks so much for being here.

3 (3m 48s):
Thank you. Thanks for having us.

0 (3m 51s):
Let me start with you, aria. You were, you are a cardiologist. Yeah. Right? Justin, you, you were a State Department employee. You were, you've lived in countries all over the world. F first of all, how did the two of you meet?

3 (4m 7s):
Yeah, it's a, it's a funny story about how we met. We met in my first year of internships. So this was after I'd finished medical school and was just starting to, to train as a doctor. And there, there was a dinner that both Justin and I were invited to. And, and the idea of this dinner is that nobody knows anybody else at this dinner except the person who was hosting it. And I, I had never been to a dinner like this.

0 (4m 33s):
You were at Yale, right? Yeah, exactly. Postdoc work. And Justin happened to be doing an MBA at Yale at the same time. Right. It was around 2011. Is that right?

3 (4m 41s):
Exactly. Okay. And it was for me at that time, somewhere between 80 and a hundred hours a week in the hospital. But, but something about this invitation and something about the possibilities of just what could happen at a dinner where you don't know anybody else at this dinner. Right. Really intrigued me. And, and I went and, and that's when I met Justin. I, I ended up sitting next to him at this dinner.

0 (5m 7s):
And Justin, you were doing an mba. Tell me what you were thinking about doing. I mean, you, you had been at the State department and, and been a foreign service officer. Clearly you were thinking, maybe I'm gonna make a change, but what were you thinking about, about maybe doing, I

3 (5m 22s):
Had just finished an assignment in Ptca Province, Afghanistan, which is on the, on the Pakistani border. I was on something called a provincial reconstruction team, which is essentially what it sounds like in terms of the goal. And I had always had it as a life goal to get a graduate degree, kinda the first person in my family to go into college. And then being able to, to get a graduate degree seemed like something that I was very passionate about. And so I decided to take some time off from the State Department and, and do an MBA at Yale cuz it was this mission driven school. And that really appealed to me that it wasn't just about, you know, going on and working in an investment bank, but maybe having a big impact in the, in on the world, which is what drove me into the foreign service to begin with.

3 (6m 9s):
And so, to be honest with you, I showed up at school and I met these people that were, that had started companies that were making, it was basically like a, a netting that went over a bassinet and it would help reduce the incidence of child malaria. Hmm. And so somebody who started a company, employed all these peoples having this huge impact on the Planet and just had a, you know, a really big effect on me. And, and that was sort of the, the mindset I was in. When I sat down next to Aria.

0 (6m 36s):
Aria, you were a cardiologist and you were doing a, I mean, you already had your, your, your medical degree and you're doing residency at Yale. I mean, you were clearly on the fast track to becoming a prestigious cardiologist, maybe having an appointment at a university. When, when you had met Justin in 2011 at that dinner, was that where you thought you were headed?

3 (6m 60s):
Absolutely. So I had, you know, finished medical school. I had done a PhD mostly in Japan around the same time and in the same place where the discovery was made that we could create stem cells from ordinary skin cells that completely revolutionized the world of science. Mm. And I absolutely thought that my career would be one that would stay within academia.

0 (7m 27s):
The research you mentioned changed the entire conversation. Cause it used to be that you had to cultivate stem cells from like fetuses and there was a lot of ethical debate around it. Right, exactly.

3 (7m 36s):
Yeah.

0 (7m 37s):
And, and this research showed that you could cultivate stem cells through skin.

3 (7m 42s):
Right. and, you know, prior to that there was a moratorium on research in the United States on stem cells. And the future of, of understanding how these incredible cells grow, develop, and communicate with each other was really in question because of this. And so this, this incredible discovery really changed everything. It took all of those moral issues off the table. Yeah. And all of a sudden now we could understand how a cell becomes a neuron or a liver cell or any other part of the body, essentially adopt different careers for themselves.

0 (8m 17s):
So you were really on, on this path to becoming a heart doctor and really also doing research around therapy for, you know, for those with, with heart ailments. Right. Mean meantime, Justin, you know, you're maybe taking some time off from the State Department where you had worked in the developing world, getting an mba, and then maybe going back into that world, the two of you meet at this dinner and, and what you instantly connect that night.

3 (8m 42s):
Yeah. You know, it's, it's rare when you're an adult to, to make new deep friendships. Yes. I, I have found Yes,

0 (8m 49s):
It is.

3 (8m 49s):
Yeah. and you know, to, to me, this, this felt like one of those rare opportunities where you can really, you know, connect with someone who would be a, a lifelong friend. And I don't think Ary and I were initially thinking about, Hey, let's go start a business together. It was more, you know, a great deal of mutual respect, really different backgrounds. I had a great deal of curiosity about the work that he was doing. and, you know, we'd get together on the weekends and talk about things that we were interested in. And this idea started percolating a little bit, this sort of entrepreneurial spark. I guess. I, I remember very clearly we were having coffee in New York City. One morning we had this, we had this friend who came to us and said like, let's come up with a hundred ideas for businesses and maybe most of them would be really bad.

3 (9m 39s):
and, you know, we sat down Ary and I, and sort of started penciling out some ideas, not because we were serious about starting a company because it sounded like a fun thing to do on a Saturday morning. And through that process, hearing each other think about what really matters to us, you know, the silly ideas that we came up with on that list started to fall away and I think pair back into something that would later become Wildtype. Something that the two of us are extraordinarily passionate about.

0 (10m 8s):
Justin what were the kinds of business ideas that, that the two of you were talking about? I mean, were you, were you sort of listening to what Aria was working on and, and, and saying to yourself, Hey, this is interesting. The stem cell stuff is really revolutionary. Maybe there's something there. Or was it was, were you talking about business ideas that were completely unrelated to that?

3 (10m 26s):
Oh, this is so embarrassing, but why not? I mean, it's, this is makes for interesting radio, right? We had, we had a few ideas on there, just to give you a sense of the range. Like, one of them was of an idea to create a, a new kind of neti pot that we would call the sch nozzle. And the idea was, you know, doing a Neti pot is actually very good if you're feeling congested and, but, but it's kind of gross, right? You're like, yeah. The

0 (10m 52s):
Water goes in one nostril and out the other Yep. I've been there.

3 (10m 55s):
Yeah. You're like ha hanging your face over, over the sink and, you know, flushing your, your nasal cavity and, and also what innovations have been brought to the Neti pot and, you know, the last thousand years. Yeah. And, and what could we do to, to make it extra special? I love that. So, so we would sometimes on the weekends get modeling clay and come up with all kinds of different designs and, and ways that this might work and all, all the things that we could do to make the nutty pot so much better than it already is. The, the thing that was missing I think for both of us was a real hook that tugged at our heartstrings. Right. That's something that we could, you know, that, that we cared a lot about. And yeah, I I think that that conversation really started back in, you know, in earnest in 2015 when, when we first started talking about this particular idea.

0 (11m 40s):
Alright, so 2015 Aria, where did the idea for, you know, for cultivating meat, where did it, where did it come from?

3 (11m 49s):
I, I had one of these rare vacations that they would give us in residency and went back to my childhood home of Australia and was in the, the, the far north parts in where, where there used to be a lot of rainforest, a lot more than there is right now. And today a lot of it is agricultural land and was just kind of looking around and thinking about everything I had learned about not just stem cells, but what modern agriculture means, particularly when it comes to beef. And, and I just, you know, kind of ask this question of can we still eat meat and not eat animals and thought about like, you know, we must be able to do this.

3 (12m 37s):
And, and, and then I started to think about, well, what would it mean to create the fat and what would it mean to create certain cuts of meat? And didn't really know that that other people were already working on this. Hmm. And one in particular, Dr. Mark Post in the Netherlands was somebody who actually, you know, about 15 years before that, I had worked in the same lab with also doing cardiac research. And he had gone on to create the world's first hamburger in this way. And he organized the first conference about this. And I was just riveted. I I, you know, I'd never been to the Netherlands.

3 (13m 17s):
I didn't know why I was so interested in, in this whole field, but I just went Hmm. And it was incredible because nobody knew how many people were gonna show up what it was gonna be like. And there was, there was a very special energy in, in the room there. And it, it was truly an event that, you know, changed everything for me. Hmm.

0 (13m 39s):
By the way, are, are you vegetarian? Either of you vegetarians?

3 (13m 42s):
When I moved to San Francisco, I slowly reduced my consumption of meat. I think that it's something that even since I was a child, I never really felt comfortable with the fact that, you know, when, when my parents would feed me chicken, that, like, that, that was a chicken

0 (14m 0s):
Ju and Justin or you a vegetarian by any chance?

3 (14m 4s):
I would say I'm a conscientious meat and seafood eater.

0 (14m 8s):
And I say this with, with no judgment. I, I, I eat meat. I'm, I'm a meat eater. But I, I understand this idea of feeling conflicted about it because we know that there are huge environmental consequences to it. And also there's this moral conundrum, you're actually killing an animal. So it sounds to me that you already, both of you had some of those issues in, in, in your mind.

3 (14m 30s):
Yeah, definitely. I, I, I think, you know, for, for me, I, I started learning about our, our food system and really in, in a great deal of depth, going back to some of the time I spent in Afghanistan, which is one of the most food insecure places in the world, and, you know, got back to the US and dug pretty deep and it was clear that at some point eating meat and seafood at the rate we are is not going to work anymore. Right. Yeah. For all the reasons you mentioned, there's environmental reasons, there's sort of humane reasons, there's economic reasons, but yeah, I, I think, you know, for me, I've a couple of small kids and you know, it really, how do you have that conversation, right? Yeah. That this isn't for free and it isn't limitless.

3 (15m 12s):
Right. That's, that's how we do it at our house. But at the same time, I really like to have a hamburger on the 4th of July and on the barbecue once in a while and a steak once in a while and, you know, fish on a fairly regular basis. And so I, I think there's just a lot of people out there that are in this really difficult place where you're trying to juggle your, your values and your instincts. Yeah.

0 (15m 36s):
Alright. Justin aria, stick around for just a moment. We're gonna take a quick break when we come back more about the founding of Wow type stay with us. You're listening to How I Built This Lab.

Canva (15m 50s):
Today's sponsor, Canva for Teams is a design platform that makes it easy for anyone to create stunning visual content, even if you aren't a graphic designer. Our team uses it to create episode artworks social media posts and graphics for our website. Canva has endless templates for things like presentations, business documents, brainstorms, posters, and more turn inspiration into design in no time with canvas wide selection of premium fonts, photos, graphics, videos, audio tracks and animations. Canva also has AI powered magic features to help kickstart your creative process like magic design. Start by uploading an image and watch as a collection of unique templates appear curated specifically for you. Customize them to your liking or simply finish them with a few personal touches. Design and collaborate with Canva for teams. Right now you can get a free 45 day extended trial when you go to Canva dot me slash built. That's c a nva me slash built for a free 45 day extended trial. Canva dot me slash bi built

4 (16m 60s):
Celebrity feuds are high stakes. You never know if you're just gonna end up on page six or DUIs or in court. I'm Matt Bei,

5 (17m 8s):
And I'm Sydnee Battle. And we're the Host of Wonder's new podcast. Dis and Tell where each episode we unpack a different iconic celebrity feud from the buildup, why it happened and the repercussions. What does our obsession with these feuds say about us? The first season is packed with some pretty messy pop culture drama, but none is drawn out I personal as Britney and Jamie Lynn Spears.

4 (17m 30s):
When Britney's fans form the free Britney movement dedicated to freeing her from the infamous conservatorship. Jamie Lynn's lack of public support. It angered some fans, a lot of 'em, it's a story of two young women who had their choices taken away from them by their controlling parents, but took their anger out on each other. And it's about a movement to save a superstar, which set its sights upon anyone who failed to fight for Britney.

5 (17m 53s):
Follow dis intel wherever you get your podcast, you can listen ad free on Amazon Music or the Wondery app.

0 (18m 6s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This lab. I'm Guy Raz and I'm speaking with the founders of Wildtype, a company that grows real salmon, but without the salmon aria. When you, when you started to the gears in your head started to, to turn around sell cultivated meat. At the time there were, and it's not that long ago, it was 20 15, 20 16, there, there weren't that many companies out there growing cells. How did you land on maybe trying this with seafood?

3 (18m 37s):
Yeah, it wasn't actually seafood at first. We Huh. Made we went through a whole exercise, much like the exercise for which companies we'd start about all the different kinds of meats and seafoods that, that we could make. And, and you know, a couple of the axes on which we plotted this were cost and controversy. And if you imagine the kinds of meats that would be in the extreme upward right quadrant for that, things like foie gra would be pre pretty much at, at the top of the list. Yeah. And foie, gra is, is a really interesting meat as well. And, and, and the reason is because it's relatively homogeneous in terms of its texture and it's actually also predominantly one cell type.

3 (19m 22s):
So it's not sort of fat cells and liver cells, it's mostly liver cells that have just been exposed to, to a lot of fat. And, and this was the first thing that, that we wanted to work on.

0 (19m 32s):
So, so I mean that sounds like a great idea because it's so cruel, right? We know to produce gra force feeding ducks and geese. So it sounds like a great idea. You could, if you could build, cultivate it through cells. Right? So, so what happened? Why, why didn't you pursue that?

3 (19m 49s):
So we, we were able to make some fo gras like a, you know, a fairly small amount and people, people tried it. I remember the, the first person that we invited to try it was a, was a friend of ours in San Francisco. and, you know, it was tiny amount it like so small that it was almost difficult to really taste. But we, but we did it and we did it in relatively short order, probably from start to finish in just a handful of months really. But, but even then I think we started having these conversations about, okay, well this is really interesting, but are, are we gonna really have an impact on the Planet by working on something like gra which most Americans have probably never had.

3 (20m 31s):
Yeah. And how many people actually consume these products? And I, I think at that point, you know, we, we started looking a little bit more broadly and a little bit more globally and thinking about, well, what does our species eat? Hmm. And so, you know, it was, it was a very quick transition I think for us after we made that initial proof of concept.

0 (20m 53s):
Alright. So you guys realized that to have an impact you really have to tackle something that lots of people eat. So you, you essentially decide to kind of pivot from foie gra to, to fish. Is that, is that the conversation you started to have Aria?

3 (21m 9s):
Yeah, that's exactly how it happened. We started to realize that what we didn't want to be creating was a company that just made fine food for fancy people. And instead we wanted to stay true to what the mission was, which was to use this method of growing seafood and growing meats to actually have a positive environmental impact. And, and it was around this time that, that our focus did shift in terms of thinking about what could we do with this, this method. And, and it very quickly turned to seafood as Justin described.

0 (21m 45s):
Alright. Help me understand how you, technically you did this. Like, I mean, aria were you, you had access to a lab, so were you kind of just, was it like a little corner there that you were just kind of playing around with, with cells and, and you know, when I know salmon sells, like tell me how you, how you started to do

3 (22m 5s):
It. Yeah. You know, San Francisco was one of the few places in at that time where you could actually rent lab space by the hour. Hmm. And we applied to, to be able to, to be part of one of these areas. And, and it was, you know, it was in San Francisco, it was actually very close to the university and for the first time ever we had our own lab. And, and I should say that at this time we still had our day jobs and in my case, I, I had two, so I was still working as a researcher and I would also work overnights in the hospital, in the intensive care unit.

3 (22m 45s):
Wow. And, and, and this was, this was something that, that Justin and I would do on, on nights and weekends. We would get these eggs and do these dissections and learn in just the, the, the most incredible way what these cells loved in terms of nutrition, how we could get them to thrive, what conditions would be optimal to grow them in. and, you know, when we think about food, it's, it's for the most part muscle and fat. And so we, we started by just growing cells.

0 (23m 18s):
Wow. J I mean Justin, you, I mean you guys were, the challenge, you were, you were, you were trying to solve for was this idea of sustainability. We know that we're running out of, of seafood, we know that we're overfishing and not just that we know that the fish we're consuming today is full of microplastics. That every time we ingest fish and I think even land animals we're consuming plastic.

3 (23m 42s):
Yeah. That's right. There, there are a couple of real challenges with seafood. As, as you pointed out, it's almost impossible to find uncontaminated seafood anywhere in the world. You know, and you mentioned microplastics, the number that I can't get out of my head is five grams or the equivalent of a credit card worth of microplastics that go into our bodies every week. And not just that there's mercury and antibiotics and parasites and the list goes on and on. And with seafood, unlike a lot of the other types of meats that we eat, it's not about eliminating these things, it's about minimizing them. Right. Which is why Yeah.

3 (24m 22s):
FDA has these guidelines for young kids. I remember at my kids' first six month appointment, the doctor asked, Hey, are you giving your kids seafood? I said, yeah, yeah. Why? And she said, well, it's very nutritious for them omega three s for their brain, yada, yada yada. But by the way, don't give them more than two fistfuls of it. Yeah. Right. So you have this paradox where you've got this delicious, nutritious protein that's contaminated by all the stuff that we've dumped into our oceans. And at the same time we have wild fish populations flat or plummeting with just, just basically across the board for almost every type of seafood that we eat. And then we have fish farms.

3 (25m 2s):
You know, there have been issues like in the Puget Sound, for example, where Atlantic salmon was being farmed, you've had some nets break and these invasive species are out competing with the native species. Right. So chinook and sockeye and coho and so on. So there's been a big movement to kind of get away from this open, open net farming. And so the, the confluence of those things means strongly rising demand with pinched supply means some of our healthiest, most nutritious seafoods are only gonna become further and further out of reach of many people.

0 (25m 36s):
Yeah. Alright. So you, you know that there is a challenge, there's still a challenge to be solved here, but you, you guys are in the lab and you are trying to grow a piece of salmon, right? Initially, and, and Aria, what do you, what about that first piece of salmon? How long did it take before you had something that you could actually eat?

3 (25m 57s):
I think it was the better part of a year before we could actually try it. And, and I'll say that once we had grown enough that we could try it for the first time, it was probably one of the most disappointing things I've ever experienced. I mean, it really tasted like nothing. I mean truly, I I couldn't even describe it. And, and, and it's because we realize that that cells on their own, they don't know how to spontaneously organize into, you know, a a piece of sashimi for example. Right. They, they need structures and they, they need to, to follow cues from their environments to organize in, in this way to create all the complexities of, you know, texture and flavor.

3 (26m 42s):
And, and that, you know, that moment we, we realized that we were still very, very far from having anything resembling a viable product.

0 (26m 52s):
Alright. So you, you, you guys finally, after a year, you have your first sample and it sucks, I mean, it just doesn't taste good. It doesn't, I mean, was that disheartening? I mean, or did you feel like okay, cuz that feels like a long time to just, to, to basically wait and then it sucked.

3 (27m 10s):
Totally. Yeah. I mean, it, it's, I mean, along the way we were learning a lot and I, and I think what gave us hope in that fairly dark moment was that, you know, at the end of the year we felt like we really had our arms around how this would scale. And, and I think that was the biggest thing that the two of us were grappling with, right? Is there were these sort of two fundamental questions in the early days. One, can we do this and can we eventually make a product that is really good? And we hadn't answered that question at that point as Ary said. And two, could this, could this ever scale and turn into, you know, a big business that can even begin be a drop in the ocean of the colossal amount of seafood that is consumed globally.

3 (27m 51s):
And I, I think through that process of that first year, both of us became a lot more convicted that we could do this, that this could actually work. And it was for some pretty obvious reasons in retrospect. So for example, half of roughly half of a fish's weight gets thrown away or discarded between the time it's caught and the time it shows up on your plate rights. Things like fins and bones and so on that we, that we don't consume. So out out of the gate we had a sort of a, a 50% advantage over, over conventional seafood. If

0 (28m 24s):
You were growing exactly what would be consumed. That's

3 (28m 27s):
Right. Yeah. No waste.

0 (28m 28s):
Wow. So you, you're, you're trying to get a, a sort of a working prototype going. What change did you make that enabled you to actually grow something that tasted pretty good, that tasted like raw salmon?

3 (28m 44s):
You know, I, I wish I could say it was one particular thing. So there, there are many ways to, to approach something like this. There, there could be a way to think through how can we create the highest density of cells, for example, how can we work through the scaling challenges first and then deal with the flavor and textural complexity afterwards. And a lot of our debate in the early days was, how do we do this? How do we do this to create a product quickly enough in the beginning so that people can see what the promise is, but still give us the, the space to iterate upon that and actually perfect.

3 (29m 28s):
What is such a difficult product to, to, you know, to create in the end. Yeah. And salmon is a great example of a very versatile fish that can be created in many preparations. Sure. That we're very used to seeing as, you know, for example, mince salmon in a salmon roll or locks on a bagel or salmon filet or sashimi. And, and so, you know, having that, that vision for what this could become as, as the product got better, I think was was a big part of, of slowly improving all of the different characteristics that, that, that made the product better.

0 (30m 8s):
Alright. So 2019, June of 2019, you have finally really gotten to a place where, where it's ready to, to debut and, and you, you guys grew salmon sashimi, so raw salmon and, and you were ready to serve it to a group of diners. The cost, I read the cost for one salmon roll was $200. So this is not sustainable, but it was a start. And what did people think at that dinner when you served it? What, what was the response from people

3 (30m 45s):
You know at, at the time? People were, were, were first of all just very impressed that we had managed to do this, that we showed up with a couple pounds of cultivated salmon. And the chefs that were working with the product did really a fantastic job across a number of dishes. I think we had bisque, we had it in sushi rolls, of course we had it in a tartar. And at the very end we, we brought out just a tin, sort of like, like a tin of sardines of just the product so people can try it, you know, undressed up. And so the in in the hands of such capable chefs, any product would be really good. But looking back on those pictures today, I mean, I can't help but cringing cuz it just didn't have the same visual appeal and structure that, that people would expect from, from salmon.

3 (31m 33s):
So I think, yeah, you know, we had a, a reporter from Bloomberg there that we'd never be met before. and you know, when, when he wrote about the product, I, I think, I think it was a very accurate description of where we were at the time. And, and this was after he tried just the unadorned piece of fish, you know, he said it was certainly reminiscent of fish in the ocean, but faint. And, and I, and I think that that was exactly right for, for that moment because the, the structure and the texture of the product wasn't really there yet. And so it was really just the taste really at that point that, that we could offer.

0 (32m 8s):
All right, we're gonna take another quick break, but in a moment more from Justin Kolbeck and Aria Elfenbein co-founders of Wildtype Foods. You're listening to How I Built This Lab. I'm Guy Raz back in the moment. Hey, welcome back to How I Built This lab. I'm Guy Raz, my guests are Justin Kolbeck and Aria Elfenbein, the co-founders of Wildtype. So, alright, you've got this product, it's not quite where you want it to be yet in 2019 and it's gonna take a lot of money to really kind of scale this up right now, let's say, how long, like how long does it take from cell to piece of salmon?

0 (32m 57s):
Like what is the, the timeframe there?

3 (32m 59s):
Yeah, it's about four to six weeks.

0 (33m 2s):
Wow. That's fast. That's a lot faster than a real salmon.

3 (33m 4s):
Definitely.

0 (33m 5s):
And, and it, I guess you can compare it to like a brewery, right? Like you basically have like a what would look like a brewery

3 (33m 11s):
And you know, it, it does look like a brewery. This is something that, that people always comment on when, when they come visit our space in, in San Francisco. It has grown in a similar way with similar principles when when people kind of see how it's made it, it just kind of clicks, it sort of makes sense. It's like, oh, okay, this is, you know, you're growing cells in, in these steel tanks just like the way that we grow beer or brew beer.

0 (33m 36s):
And so how, what does it look like when it comes out of these, these steel drums? Or what does it, does it look like a, a hunk of sashimi? Like you can go to your fish counter at the grocery store and some of them have like, you see these big hunks of salmon?

3 (33m 49s):
No, it, it doesn't look like that at all. Okay. That's really just the first step. And that, and that first step is, is only just a couple of weeks. It's, it's afterwards when we actually have it grow on the structures, which we call the scaffold. I see, okay. And there, there's a whole process there where the cells will, you know, assume different forms and, you know, mature and, and kind of grow together in some cases to, to create these more complex structures and, you know, textures and, and flavors.

0 (34m 24s):
So does it now when you I've seen pictures of, it's amazing. I mean it it's, it's texture and the, the fat distribution, it looks like a piece of raw salmon. Does it smell like salmon? Does it, I mean, how close to the, to to, you know, a fish that you're, how close to it is at this point?

3 (34m 41s):
You know, you know what I'd say is there, there there is a wide range of, of salmon flavors and, and aromas and, and textures that, that we're used to. And I think some of the freshest salmon that maybe is just pulled out of the river in that moment can have a very mild flavor profile. Yeah.

0 (35m 3s):
It doesn't even smell it's like fish at all. Yeah,

3 (35m 4s):
Exactly. It's a, it's a very subtle, you know, flavor and, and a very similar thing ha you know, happened when we started to think about the appearance where there is also a wide variety of, of color hues when we think about salmon. And so, so, so these were the kinds of conversations that, that all of a sudden were, were really interesting from a, from a culinary perspective. And, and it was, it was these questions that we, we started to elicit the help of chefs to, to, to help us answer what feels, you know, most familiar. Is it more of what's called the SKU or you know, or the sort of blocks that are used in sushi counters or should we be creating more of a salmon filet that should be cooked?

3 (35m 51s):
And as you can imagine it is, it can often be a very subjective assessment.

0 (35m 57s):
Yeah. How did you, I mean you're, you're trying to do a very complex thing, right? I mean the, the the sort of the science behind it and the research behind it is highly complex. I mean, this is not a lemonade stand. I mean, we're talking about growing salmon for cells. How, how were you able to move from the lab to running a business because it is a business, this is not just being going in the lab and doing science experiments.

3 (36m 26s):
Yeah. For, I mean, we're fortunate that we have I think a very complimentary skillset. So I, I do have at least a little bit of background in financial modeling and consulting and things like that. Yep. So I guess the best way to think about how we divided it to use a music analogy to, to a large extent I was, and to a large extent still am today, kind of the, the backup singer and the percussionist and Aria and her scientists are the lead singers, the vocalists. Right. And there's a really interesting lesson here about, you know, that entrepreneurship alone, it, it's, it's nice when there are two people not just to sort of divide things up as we have, but to really work through and cope with things when they go badly.

3 (37m 11s):
and you know, we, we haven't talked much about that today, but there have been way more moments when things went sideways and off the rails than when things worked.

0 (37m 19s):
Tell me about that, because you've raised a hundred million dollars in the last four or five years, it sounds like, you know, it's been going pretty well, but what, tell me about a moment where you weren't sure whether it was gonna go well,

3 (37m 34s):
Okay, I'll I'll give you a recent one. So one of the things that we had to do was design a vessel, a cultivator that can grow cells at a, at a pretty large scale. And one of the things that we wanted to do was to not order an off the shelf one that was made for a completely different purpose in the biotherapeutics world, but actually design one more with people who make brewery tanks for example. And so we did it, we actually prototyped it at a very small scale and then made a medium-sized one and just recently received a pretty large one. Unfortunately, the, the person who assembled it made a mistake and we had some sterility issues and if you know anything about cell culture, contamination is your, your enemy.

3 (38m 18s):
And so, you know, that's just one example, but that, you know, that was a three month setback. And I'd say for every success we have at, you know, as, not just as a business, but in the lab too, there are at least 10 failures. And, and I, and I think one of the big things that, that Ary and I have had to, to do is just deal ourselves to that and then help our team kind of cope with overcoming these routine failures that are just a big part of doing science generally.

0 (38m 48s):
What about the pressure of financing and funding? I mean, you, you're, you're, you're far, far away from being a profitable company cuz you can't, you can't sell your products in, we're gonna talk about that. That's just the, the, the reality when you're doing something so massive, so radical, it's gonna take time. Do you feel any of that pressure? I mean, you know, right now you've got a bunch of cash that you raised, but still it's like, you know, you wanna bring a return to those investors. Do you feel that pressure or do you feel kind of, you know, removed from it? Oh yeah.

3 (39m 19s):
Every, every day. I, I don't think there's a day that goes by when we're not thinking about moving from a, an r and d company into a food production one. And it, and it's been a, a longer journey than many other companies have to take. and, you know, and, and part of it is feeling, you know, a a deep sense of gratitude and appreciation to our investors and wanting to return that money to them with a nice return. But part of it is driven by the perils that our oceans are facing. Right. If you are a sucker for every David Attenborough documentary as I am, you know, that, you know, if we don't seriously turn things around by the middle part of the century, we can just say goodbye to the biodiversity that exists in our oceans today and we don't even understand what impact that's gonna have.

3 (40m 3s):
And so, on one hand, you know, the, the pressure of returning money in, in a, in a venture funded business might lead to some unintended consequences. But on the other hand, for Yeah. A mission as profoundly urgent as ours, it it might actually be a, a fairly positive one

0 (40m 19s):
Yeah. Because time is running out. Yeah.

3 (40m 22s):
Literally, you know, I was at a, an event hosted by some First Nations folks up in, just outside of Vancouver a couple of weeks ago, and somebody there who grew up in the, in the countryside would talk about the salmon runs when he was a boy. and, you know, he's probably about my age, so maybe mid forties, you know, he, and he would describe it as a R snake and he said it was like almost so dense you could walk on them. Wow. And, and today hearing him talk about this, it's a trickle, I mean literally a trickle. And, and that's over the span of someone like relatively young's lifespan. And if you play that tape forward, it, it doesn't take us to a good place. And, and I, and I think that's why we are so urgently working to build this third source of seafood that can supplement wild catch and, and farmed fish.

0 (41m 10s):
Yeah. Alright. The marketplace for plant-based meat substitutes is pretty robust, but this market, the salt cultivated market is, is still really new and there's, you have no FDA approval yet to sell your products, right? I mean, you can't, there's no nowhere you can actually sell what you're making at the moment.

3 (41m 33s):
That's right.

0 (41m 34s):
But you do have, you can sample this, right? If you are in San Francisco, you guys, you can go and try

3 (41m 39s):
This Absolutely. The

0 (41m 40s):
Public can, right?

3 (41m 41s):
Yeah. I mean we, we can have tastings and, and that's, that's been one way in which we've been able to get just invaluable feedback about how people perceive this product, what it tastes like, what it, you know, means to them and, and just how we can improve generally. But it, it, it's not something we're able to sell at this point.

0 (42m 7s):
And, and I mean, in theory or maybe in practice you could do this with any other seafood, right? Like, could you make toro, like could you make really, you know, bluefin tuna, like really prized rare fish? Is that theoretically or maybe more than theoretically possible.

3 (42m 22s):
Absolutely. And we've actually already started on some of the things that are, that are hopefully we'll be announced soon and you know, we've been taking a lot of cues from some of our early commercial partners who have expressed, you know, a lot of interest in launching with us as soon as we get that green light from fda. Yeah. And you're right, a lot of the energy and interest is, is on things like bluefin tuna, for example, that are really difficult to farm and are actually on the brink of extinction. and, you know, I think we're, we're really excited to listen to more of this feedback and, and help meet the, the market where, where the demand is.

0 (42m 60s):
So in, in theory, if, if you got FDA approval sometime then within the next two to five years, what do you do next? How I mean? Are you already talking to the whole foods of the world? Are you already talking to the Costcos or is that, is that the next step?

3 (43m 16s):
We are and you know, we'll, we'll start just because we'll be volume constrained. Not unlike impossible in the early days when they were first launching in places like Dave Chang's Momofuku. Sure. So, so we'll be, you know, in probably a small handful of restaurants around the country when once we get that green light, but we, we actually have started conversations with some of these big grocery chains and what's been interesting is that there, there was a lot of interest in actually having new things that would show up that people aren't used to seeing at their local grocery stores. And I, I think that creates a lot of space for innovation and, and partnership with these big conventional food producers who, who have surprised us, I would say, with just how innovative and forward-leaning they are on, on new forms of food production and technologies like ours.

0 (44m 1s):
Ultimately, if, if this scales and succeeds as, as you hope it will. And I think, you know, for the plant's sake, I think we all do. Do you want this to be the only way we consume seafood in the future? Seafood that is essentially cultivated rather than fished or farmed?

3 (44m 22s):
Not at all. You know, I think that people who are stewards of the ocean, who care about the numbers of fish that we pull out of the water every year should be rewarded for the sustainable ways in which they're fishing. I think that, you know, just as we have more humans on the Planet, if we can have not just increasing choice, meaning if people want wild fish, it's there. If people want farmed fish, it's there. And if they want cultivated fish, like, like Wildtype salmon, that's an option as well. Not just in terms of that increasing choice, but that there's just more traceability and transparency in the entire seafood system.

3 (45m 4s):
I think that is a a, a future that, that is, is, you know, the, the brightest we can imagine.

0 (45m 11s):
Aria Elfenbein, Justin Colbeck are the co-founders of Wildtype Foods. Guys, thank you so much for joining us.

3 (45m 19s):
Thank you. Yeah, thank you.

0 (45m 21s):
Hey, thanks so much for listening to How I Built This Lab. Please do follow us on your podcast app so you always have the latest episode downloaded. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at How I Built This and mine is at Guy Raz. And on Instagram, I'm at guy dot Raz if you wanna contact the team, our email address is HIBT at id dot Wondery dot com. This episode was produced by Chris Maccini with editing by John Isabella. Our audio engineer was Maggie Luthar. Our music was composed by Reti Arablouei, our production team at How I Built This includes Alex Chung, Carla Estevez, Casey Herman, JC Howard, Liz Metzger, Sam Paulson, Carrie Thompson, Catherine Cipher, Josh Lash, and Elaine Coates.

0 (46m 6s):
Neeva Grant is our supervising editor. Beth Donovan is our executive producer. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This Hey Prime members You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon music. Download the Amazon music app today. Or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear@oneyshop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Viking Cruises (46m 47s):
Viking committed to exploring the world in comfort journey through the heart of Europe on a Viking long ship with thoughtful service and cultural enrichment on board and onshore. Learn more@viking.com.