3 (0s):
Hey, it's guy here. So by now you might have heard that Jake Burton Carpenter the founder of Burton Snowboards died this past week. Jake was 65 and in his honor. We thought we would re-release this interview. I did with him back in July of 2017. It was actually an incredible experience Jake flew down from Vermont for this interview and he brought me a bottle of Vermont maple syrup, but what he really brought was himself and as you can hear in this interview, he was really vulnerable and really a human and this is a guy who helped to elevate snowboarding and turn it into an international sport. Anyway, all of us who got a chance to meet him feel really lucky that we did and if you haven't heard this interview or even if you have its really worth hearing so take a listen in honor of Jake.

3 (51s):
I

1 (51s):
mean, I was like Willy Loman and I was a traveling salesman and I would load up my car. It was a Volvo Wagon at the time and I remember One's going out with 38 snowboards and I drove around New York State and visited dealers and I went out with 38 and I came home with 4040 snowboard because one guy had given me to pack that he'd bought and said this is a joke.

3 (1m 17s):
From NPR it's how I built this show of that innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They

1 (1m 25s):
don't

3 (1m 31s):
guy Roz and on today's show how Jake Carpenter turned a childhood novelty toy into one of the biggest winter sports in the world from it built Burton Snowboards. So imagine being on an airplane in 1977. You sit down you strike up a conversation with the guy sitting next to you. You ask him what he does and he says something like I make sleds for the snow except you stand on them like a skateboard. You have no idea what he was describing you you couldn't have imagined that within 20 years snowboarding would become a multi-billion dollar industry and if that person next You were Jake Burton Carpenter.

3 (2m 20s):
There's no way you'd have predicted that one day one out of every three snowboards sold worldwide would be a Burton Snowboard and not because he invented the sport he didn't but there's probably no one on earth who did more to popularize it and it didn't happen overnight Ten Years After Jake founded Burton Snowboards fewer than seven percent of ski resorts even allowed snowboarding but today It's hard to find one that doesn't and the thing about burden is it didn't just build snowboards it built a culture around snowboarding. It was a culture that was inspired in part by Family ski trips to Vermont when Jake was a kid

1 (3m 3s):
my dad sort of figured it might be something fun for a family to do when I was around I guess seven or eight and he would take the whole family. I just always had this attachment to snow. I mean, I to me, it was meant no. Cool and still my favorite thing to do in life is go up to my kids rooms and mean those days are behind me, but tell him to get up for school and then after they get up to elements of snow day.

3 (3m 29s):
One winter in 1966. There was a brief craze across parts of America for a novelty toy called the snurfer as in snow plus surf it was basically a stand-up sled that you could ride down a hill and Jay Carpenter was one of the thousands of kids who bought one for 10 bucks.

1 (3m 50s):
It was a four foot long piece of wood that was about six or seven inches wide and it had no edges and you stood on it on these sort of Staples it gave Traction and yet a rope attached to the nose. It was a little bit like you're riding a bucking bronco. Just getting down the hill but it was fun and Brunswick made them they sold 800 thousand or something like that, but it developed as sort of cult in a positive sense of the word that friends and we would do it together and we would modify them for me. It's never was the opportunity to

3 (4m 24s):
serve. It was basically surfing on Snell surfing on

1 (4m 27s):
snow

3 (4m 28s):
now. A lot of ways Jake's childhood was pretty great even idyllic but then when he was about 13 things started to unravel Jake's older brother. George was killed in battle in Vietnam and a few years later. His mother died as well. And for Jake it was a pretty tough time. He even ended up getting expelled from his boarding school. I

1 (4m 52s):
mean I was a wiseass and when I was young and to a fault and when I got kicked out of Brooks was a school and I wanted to see that Master who was a Headmaster one. My father was there and when my brother was there, it was brutal. I mean my dad made me get in the car go five hours. See this guy, you know for a five-minute conversation and then a long drive home and that is when I decided to turn my life around and start applying myself to whatever the hell I did

3 (5m 21s):
and the way he did apply himself was by figuring out how to take what he was good at and make money out of it. So Jake's first Venture was a small landscaping business and then after college he went to work for an investor in Manhattan. But in the back of his mind, he never forgot about the snurfer and about its potential to be something much much bigger. Yeah. I

1 (5m 46s):
really from the very beginning of sniffing for me. I saw it as something that could be developed and I was sure that Brunswick was going to do it or somebody was going to do it and nothing happened. You know in the back of my mind, I always knew it could be a sport and I didn't have a business plan per se but I did the math that if I could make 50 snowboards a day. I can make a hundred thousand dollars a year and that would be

3 (6m 11s):
awesome. You thought I'm going to I can do something in the thing to do is make a much better

1 (6m 17s):
smurfer. Yeah make money on it. So I started the company in

3 (6m 20s):
77 and and what did you do? Did you because you were living in Manhattan at the time,

1 (6m 25s):
right? Yes, and I made my first prototypes in my Man, and the Upper East, you know upon

3 (6m 31s):
86th Street you behave like a shop in your apartment and like table saws and

1 (6m 36s):
stuff. You know, I was just clueless then as you are now, I did not know how to do it. I was a loser in shop class in school. Like my napkin holder was by far the ugliest for the worst. And so there I was with a saber son in my apartment making

3 (6m 51s):
them like out of what you buy a piece of

1 (6m 54s):
wood. Yeah. I'd avoid the very first I was modifying some Surfers there were around. And then I said I got to move to Vermont to start this company. We're not going to start a snowboard company and Manhattan. Yeah, so I left my job in New York City in like early December. I thought well winners here, you know, I started landscaping business when I was spraying and you start raking you on tonight. I had a car station wagon that inherited from the family. I had a box of garbage bags a couple of rakes. That's what I started. My landscape business with manufacturing is a lot tougher than mowing lawns, but I thought okay it's winter now is I'm start the company. I almost missed the next winner. Literally it took so long to develop a product.

3 (7m 35s):
And by the way, how did you finance a where did you get the money?

1 (7m 38s):
Well, my because my mother died at a young age when my grandmother died she had some dough and instead of going to my mother came to me and my two sisters and so I inherited almost $200,000 and I spent a hundred and fifty of it developing burden.

3 (7m 56s):
So your middle name is Burton. Yes, but Last name is Carpenter. So why did you call the snowboards or the company burden?

1 (8m 4s):
I just always had this interest in the guy. I was named after John house Burton and I thought that Burton was a cooler name and I wanted to name. It boards. I mean boards was part of the name. It was Burton boards, and then I drove down to Montpelier Vermont and Incorporated went to the was so cool. Did all the paperwork and everything was a big moment for me and I started as a Burton. Or maybe Burton boards. I sort of did some form of crude trade marker but to have next to it, you know, I didn't ya have anything official

3 (8m 39s):
she you okay. See you move to Vermont and then to start this thing and then what was your next at?

1 (8m 46s):
Yeah, so I went to this company called shushan Bentwood company and they made curved wood for people that made furniture out of Salah - Oh wow. So my first prototype was a piece of solid Ash. That was just putting in this thing to curve the nose and then I just start riding the money else and I literally made a hundred well, but of those under prototypes, they weren't all solid wood. I got onto laminated wood vertically laminated and horizontally laminated like plywood. I went to a friend who lived in California who had a surfboard company and they would let me make boards in their Factory at night and I would take a surfboard blank which is six or seven feet long.

1 (9m 29s):
And maybe three or four inches thick and by the morning, I'd have whittled to think down to a snowboard and they were just these guys were so cool. But they laughed at

3 (9m 37s):
me when you went to these factories. And you said I need you to give me this curved piece of wood or this piece of material and they would say what is it for? What would you tell

1 (9m 45s):
them? I mean, it's turf or there was some awareness of it. It had been around. So I was telling him that I was making a modern rendition of that and I always feared that like the minute ski companies caught wind of this that they would just jump On and I'd be out of business in no time. Nobody cared

3 (10m 1s):
nobody cared and was it just you like with this thing like messing around on

1 (10m 6s):
Hills dude? I was so alone. Yeah.

3 (10m 9s):
Wow. Did you ever come across people? Like what what is that? What are you

1 (10m 12s):
doing? Yes, it was to the point. Literally if I was on a plane somebody would ask me what I did I would make something up because it was just too

3 (10m 20s):
embarrassing explain what it was that I concept of snowboarding wasn't something that it would be like saying today. Yeah, I ride. Like that's my job. I make skateboards for cloud skateboarding. Yeah for sure, right it was so weird. So at what point were you able to say? I got it I've got this is the one I'm going to make

1 (10m 42s):
I have thought about this in a long time, but I remember that specific moment on Mount Washington in June and you can hike up Mount with you know, they ask, you know would have been June of 78 78. Okay, and I'm hiking up there and Hillman's Highway was a trail and I had the board. Or when I was testing the final test and it was horizontally laminated Rock Maple very much like a skateboard but thinner and more flexible and I wrote down, you know, just hiking up a little bit right is like, okay. This is it and then I've decided on the construction now, so I go out and I rent this place that's going to be this little sort of factoring and I hired to relatives and a friend to help me.

1 (11m 29s):
Take these pieces of curved wood and shape them drill them paint them put fins on and put Matt on them. But bindings on them. It was a long process and we as I said, my original plan was to make 50 boards a day. That was always sort of my goal

3 (11m 44s):
because you thought that they were just going to this was going to blow up it was you were going to need to I

1 (11m 48s):
didn't I majored in economics College I classes with Nobel Prize winners, but I don't know if I really understood supply and demand and

3 (11m 59s):
did you ever shop or

1 (12m 0s):
yes in Londonderry Vermont with Burton boards written on the front of it and big letter who are

3 (12m 5s):
the kinds of people who are coming into your shop in Londonderry, Vermont and saying yeah, I'll buy one. Yeah, it

1 (12m 13s):
wasn't people out for a walk and buying a snowboard and we didn't sell any maybe a few t-shirts but most people have found out about us that would come there and people we would advertise in the skateboard magazines and a little bit in the ski magazines spent some money. There I mean I because there are these Pockets around the country in Michigan and Arizona are these places where people had snarf and like me and they'd sort of stuck with it and they got it. They understood it

3 (12m 45s):
that first year. What kind of feedback are you getting from? People who bought them? Did they love it? They were they like this is gonna change the

1 (12m 51s):
world. Yeah. It was um, I mean, I was like Willy Loman and I was a traveling salesman and I would load up my car. It was a Volvo Wagon at the time and I remember once going out with 38 snowboards and I drove around New York State and visited dealers and I went out with 38. I came home with

3 (13m 10s):
4040

1 (13m 11s):
snowboard because one guy had given me to back that he'd bought and said no

3 (13m 15s):
one joke, you would visit ski shops

1 (13m 18s):
basically shops. Yeah, that was my first and then ultimately, you know some surf shops and It was in the beginning skateboard shop surf shop ski shops. Nobody wanted any part of

3 (13m 29s):
it. I mean did you have were you discouraged at all after that first year, did you think maybe this isn't not going to work and maybe I should just cut bait. Yeah. I had some I had a

1 (13m 37s):
few days it was tough getting out of bed. Just motivating myself,

3 (13m 42s):
right? I mean you were getting rejected all the time. all day long and you're all by yourself. Yeah,

1 (13m 50s):
and I am like, I'm an emotional guy, you know having lost people and I always happen. Yeah. So I had to let go of my true relatives of my friend very quickly and it became back to me and you're too because we made enough boards in that first winter. I don't know. What are we made of thousand or fifty we made enough for three years. So they're just sitting here you are. Yeah, they're not shop only fully assembled her boxed. But yeah, they're pretty much done. And so I had one high school kid helping me out part-time and now was

3 (14m 26s):
it and how many boards did you guys sell that first year

1 (14m 29s):
first? It was 300 or 350 second year was 700. I remember one day and that second winner of selling and packing up the 700th board and thinking wow, that's you know, that's over doubling. So

3 (14m 43s):
what happens between that first year in that second year when you go from 300 to 700? Why why did you double the number of boards was it just

1 (14m 51s):
luck Soldier? It was just getting out there word-of-mouth. I mean marketing are you know advertising placing ads and These skis Surfers skateboard mags. I mean, I remember going to check the mailbox because dealers really weren't that interested, you know stores and so we would send out these brochures right from your one we had brochures and we would send them out with a little mail order form in it. And now we go to get the mail every day and I remember looking in the mailbox and would be like either nothing or couple of envelopes or some days are be five or six envelopes and then you'd open up the thing and that is crude little order form and you can get it you'd open up the envelope. Probably, you know do t-shirts or something and then you'd open up an envelope.

1 (15m 34s):
It would be like four snowboards for a family in Connecticut. I mean, I can remember it so

3 (15m 39s):
clearly and where could you actually use them? I'm assuming you couldn't take it to a ski resort and just go down a

1 (15m 46s):
mountain. No, but it was presented. I mean skiing at the time was 20 bucks a day and it was a lot of money. So this was an opportunity to express yourself and have fun out and do with friends and it was a cheap way to have a lot of fun when there's snow on the ground. Yeah, you could not go on a resort and to be honest. I didn't started as a resort thing. You didn't care. No, it wasn't that wasn't the intent was like a low cost alternative to skiing. But then these kids who then I started hiring more kids as maybe your

3 (16m 22s):
three do what to just

1 (16m 23s):
help assemble these boards put them in boxes and get them out the

3 (16m 26s):
door still doing all the assembly in that place in Vermont. Yeah.

1 (16m 30s):
And my hand totally yeah. Okay. Yeah, they were just help me get the boards out the door this one Resort Bromley, you could drive up to this Village that was quarter of the way up the mountain. So we would pile into the car drive up to the Village everybody would if there were four of us one guy would stay in the car the other three would snowboard down the hill and then we'd meet at the bottom and do it again and again and then ultimately snowcat drivers would give us rides and we bribes no cat drivers the six-pack. Of thing and they would drive you up to a point top of the mountain but it was so challenging to ride those boards people now, they have these vintage races and they had on Old snowboards and I for the life of me don't get it.

1 (17m 12s):
I mean it's you know hard but it was just these young rebellious. I mean what snowboarding and Burton did as we revolutionized winner life and this was the beginning of it. She

3 (17m 30s):
do you remember a moment when in those early years when this thing like really started to take off?

1 (17m 35s):
Well, I mean in terms of the sport or my company, I mean it was nothing I think in the now in the context of starting a business people think of internet companies it just explode and they want and there just was not a defining moment in the context of this sport blowing up. I mean, there were big Milestones along the way and I think time was quoted as calling it the worst news.

3 (17m 59s):
When you remember when that was it was in the

1 (18m 1s):
80s. Um, yeah, that would have been early 80s. Yeah and part of that time thing. The worst News sport was they said it was more about raging hormones. And this was these rebellious young men that were making it happen and then some cool girls, very courageous women got into it and started doing it and I realized okay, we're not going to lose any more money. We might not Make money, but I can you know manage manage this financially so it just grew and grew and grew but at a manageable

3 (18m 37s):
Pace why didn't ski resorts allow snowboarders in the

1 (18m 41s):
beginning. Well, it was there was actually a famous case at Stratton which was a resort one of the first Resorts. Let us on where this guy had where Stratton it's in southern Vermont and that this guy broken his leg because of some sign or something skiing and he sued the mountain and I think he tried to get Half million and they got a million dollars. So there was this liability. There's this just feel paranoia about getting sued. Yeah. And so that was their fear but they ultimately would give us a chance and we would lobby with them and their kids sometimes how often we would Lobby Resorts and then if a big Resort likes we got on Stratton then Bromley had to come along and Magic Mountain and it took years but it was there was no stopping it.

1 (19m 28s):
Did you

3 (19m 28s):
hear that? Point also, I guess start to identify people who are really good snowboarders and and sponsor them.

1 (19m 37s):
Yeah. Well for a minute there these kids that are work for me just happened to be the best and then there was a rider Craig Kelly who actually wrote for this company Sims who started making snowboards after we did but they were pretty well known skateboard company and this guy Craig Kelly wrote for them, but we were good friends not always told Greg if you ever had the opportunity. Opportunity we would love for him to ride for us and then Sims ultimately sold his company to bigger skateboard company. And so we got a deal and he rode for me and I paid him 17,000 bucks a year. And this guy was Craig Kelly was a godsend

3 (20m 16s):
always used Burton

1 (20m 17s):
Snowboards and we was burdensome. Perhaps it

3 (20m 20s):
all over his body. Yes. So having him represent Burton that must've been pretty

1 (20m 25s):
transformational. It was beyond transfer

3 (20m 27s):
man because you're on all of a sudden not only give this advertisement but you've got the coolest and the best guy who can do all this cool stuff and you've got kids seeing this and they're like, well, I want to try this and I guess Burton's the way to go because this guy uses Burton.

1 (20m 43s):
Yes, you know what that's pretty much it Craig made the sport cool and the brand cool.

3 (20m 49s):
When did I mean as snowboarding started to get bigger? The ski companies must have thought well, there's money to be made here right like K2 and Rossignol. I didn't they Didn't they start to make snowboards? It's

1 (21m 3s):
just so funny that this key companies were so oblivious to what was going on in front of their eyes. I mean talk about close-minded, you know, they could have crushed you early on right could have destroyed us and we're all these rumors that some ski companies going to start making it a name we went from being, you know fly on the windshield Xena Street to all of a sudden we became a threat

3 (21m 29s):
in just a minute how Jake dealt with the competitors now wanted a piece of the action stay with us. I'm guy rod and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So in the early days for J Carpenter building Burton and at the same time trying to build the whole sport of snowboarding was sometimes lonely, but because he stuck with it and because the sport caught on the big ski companies has you can imagine started to notice and all of a sudden the market for snowboards wasn't so lonely anymore.

3 (22m 16s):
Okay, so when when the big ski company started to make snowboards what happened to you

1 (22m 21s):
guys? Well, by the time they started making them we were maybe on a third of the resorts and they they didn't want the sport to happen. Right? I mean these she companies did not want snowboarding to succeed. So snowboarders didn't like ski companies. I mean people did perceive them as not being a real deal and we didn't keep that a secret. I mean we made it pretty damn clear that we were the Real deal and but they did have manufacturing ability and some of those French and Austrian companies were subsidized by their governments to keep their factories going. So from a cost perspective. They were lower cost producers for a minute there, but it was just they were too late.

1 (23m 2s):
They missed the boat.

3 (23m 4s):
Did you ever have as snowboarding really began to take off in the early 90s. Did you ever face serious threats from competitors either speak or small?

1 (23m 15s):
Well, it was always like in the early days was a rivalry between burden Sims. But we were we've doubled the number of snowboards sold for the first 20 years. I think of the company. So Simms was a threat of one point k 2 was somewhat of a threat. They got more aggressive earlier on but know we've been we've been the number one manufacturer of snowboards since the day, I you

3 (23m 42s):
know at any point did you think about Going public doing an IPO seeking, you know Venture Capital outside investors anything like that.

1 (23m 53s):
Yeah interestingly. There was this one company called ride and they started out and then a guy that worked for us went to work for them. And he was sort of a mid-level manager at least

3 (24m 4s):
was a competing snowboarding

1 (24m 5s):
company competing snowboarding company went to work for them and then they went public and they had a very low price and the stock went up to its split and I went up to 35 bucks. It was up to 70 on a non-slip just valuation was huge was huge. And this kid with was a millionaire all of a sudden and I felt this enormous amount of pressure. Like I'm taking care of my people and yeah I bet and like just am I doing the right thing here? And so I went and I met with a couple of big New York Investment Banking firms, and I just couldn't deal the the vibe but I just was like, this is not us and then all of a sudden Right stock which was at 35 bucks at the time went down to box because they had these expectations that like Wall Street just they take things and they project unrealistic expectations.

1 (24m 58s):
So ultimately people have realized working for a privately held company has many many advantages.

3 (25m 7s):
I guess it was in like 98 that snowboarding became an Olympic sport. That must've been crazy. I mean you I know that you don't like to say this and you deny it but you are widely credited as the guy who really made snowboarding what it is and this is became an Olympic sport. How what did you think when that happened like that must have been a pretty amazing moment.

1 (25m 32s):
It was not a cool moment at all. I was not expecting that answer at all. That was not the answer. I was expecting what happened. Well face, which is a international ski Federation. It's a Swiss, you know, whatever governmental body and they controlled the scene and then they started having snowboard competitions when they just said aside from their ski races and we were wondering what they were up to and then they just arbitrarily decided. Okay, so no one is going to be the Olympics. I mean, they didn't even give me a phone call they never do. This anything I will take credit for pioneering a sport and you would think that you might pick up the phone and tell that person what you're up to or how do you think we should do this?

1 (26m 17s):
None of that? They just arbitrarily it's like the baseball player that finds out he's traded when he reads in the newspaper. And then I go to the Olympics. We've got our team there and I get to the venue and they've got snowboarding misspelled at the venue had to spell it. Well, you spell it with a W snowboarding, but they had es Endo - boarding. This is in Nagano, Japan. If an I was like not a good sign, right so and then they proceeded to have the the raising thing was hard conditions and they decide it was a driving rainstorm and they say okay, we can't have the men's down a we would never have this prestigious key event in a rainstorm. But no the snowboarders they can go they can get risks life and Limb and not be wearing goggles.

1 (27m 1s):
It's raining so hard and so but nonetheless they've gotten Better and they're doing it better and better job in the American armed. It's a form of national associations. They care about the sport and they've got some people to care about the sport and are trying to do better but the last two Olympics the venues for the freestyle stuff, which is what people care about for the halfpipe and slopestyle. The venues have been really sketchy.

3 (27m 28s):
As your company grew describe the culture of the company was it? I mean, I'm looking at you right now and I cannot imagine you ever wearing a suit and tie and and being like boardroom boss. Like for example, like where do you have your meetings with your top team and stuff? Like how do you

1 (27m 48s):
well our meetings? You know, you look at my office. It's three sofas and two chairs and a coffee table and there's no desk and our senior conference room where we have our Meetings itself has throw your feet up and bring your dog to work and then a hundred and thirty-two registered dogs or people, you know, we sort of keep track of the number and it's resembles snowboarding's lifestyle and we're tribe and we are so focused on the sport everybody in that cup, you know damn near everybody in that company snowboards and because that's our source of energy. That's where you recharge your

3 (28m 24s):
batteries and what if somebody was like Jake I'm going Owing to be in late today because I can't

1 (28m 30s):
snowboarding. It's pretty much the dry mean if it snows over two feet. It's an automatic day off for the whole company and last year there were three of those

3 (28m 41s):
days

1 (28m 43s):
which is almost too nice. I mean, I like people to work to I'm not it's but people come in late and work late, you know people work hard there. So that's as long as people are giving us a solid effort. I get it if they want to get up there and catch Few runs on a great day.

3 (29m 1s):
So your your wife Donna. She actually had some point became took over as as the company CEO, right? Yeah, and how did that happen? What's the story there?

1 (29m 12s):
Well, she came and went and then she was even CFO for a while. This is in the early days. And then when we had kids she backed off some she wasn't working as much then and then when the financial crisis hit which was really

3 (29m 27s):
right. How did that? Hit you guys.

1 (29m 29s):
Well, the bank charges us for a million dollars to change one paragraph in our loan agreement, which was called a covenant when you're borrowing money. Your earnings had to represent a certain ratio compared to how much money were borrowing and we slipped on that one because it was a very tough year and we weren't losing money. We were making money, but literally they said oh, well you broke this Covenant, so you're going to pay a four million dollar fee. And that boy, I mean we had to lay people off we weren't making the money that we had

3 (30m 2s):
been and so we had to take snowboards because the recession

1 (30m 5s):
yes exactly. You know, it's always been a youth driven Market its kids. I mean people would buy two or three snowboards a year. Then you look at Italy or Spain to very big markets for us and the unemployment rate amongst people under 20. It was 50% Yeah. It was a very tough tough time. And through this process of this crisis and I think it's not unique to Burton our company culture kind of got destroyed what happened? Well, I think a lot of people would blame other people for things negative things that were happening in there would be finger-pointing and their culture at our company was messed up and at the same time I felt there were no women in our top management and And that just felt wrong to me.

1 (30m 60s):
So I got in there and I and Donna came along with me and at that level we were running the company and I brought her and sort of specifically to help with the culture and get more women in leadership positions at Burton

3 (31m 15s):
when you say the culture. I mean, I'm just trying to get in through the innuendo it was it was it like broish. Was it like male sort of Macho? Was it like, I mean, what was the thing you wanted? Inch

1 (31m 29s):
well, I mean you're not happy when you're being managed by fear or or you instill fear in yourself that you're going to lose your job or it's just you need to make people. People have to understand when and why stuff

3 (31m 48s):
happens. Were you responsible for any of that

1 (31m 51s):
for any of that fear-based up? Well, I think I hired many of the people that were in and around it and I think that we were all responsible to a certain extent. I mean, I don't think that's ever been a tactic that I've used hopefully, but I certainly let it happen under my

3 (32m 10s):
nose. Do you think that that you have a hard time? With criticism and I ask that because you know, it can be really problematic. Right if you're unwilling to listen to somebody that says listen, I know you built this thing, but I'm trying to make it better. Listen to

1 (32m 24s):
me. You know, that's couldn't be more true. But less and less and less every year. I mean I did every job in that company. I mean I made the first board and for a while there, I mean we might have had 50 employees and I was convinced not in a bragging way, but I could do anybody's job better than they could. But that's not the case anymore. You know, we've got Engineers now that I don't even have our time having a conversation with them, but I got better at it and I had this sense to surround myself with people that were better at things than I am that I'm not good at that's been good enough learned to delegate that's not an easy thing to learn how to do especially when you're detail-oriented learn to let go like that.

1 (33m 10s):
You have to trust people Beyond trusting you have to let him And live with it and live through mistakes and if they repeat the mistakes and that's not a good sign Burton's made every mistake in the book, but I don't think we've made too many twice.

3 (33m 27s):
Why didn't I mean I'm sure at certain points you are offered money to buy your company.

1 (33m 32s):
I just didn't take those phone

3 (33m 33s):
calls. Yeah, but I mean you could I mean you could have sold this company, you know been like a philanthropist and I don't know. I'm not seen as a better life, but sounds pretty cool. It's like a pretty great life.

1 (33m 45s):
Well, I for a long time if people would ask me that question, I would say well, I think I've become a couch potato and just be chips and watch SportsCenter, you know, and So, you know and Snowboard plenty, but I mean, it's the best job in the world. Why would I ever walk away from it? That's selfishly admittedly that's always been part of it. And I think that we're doing a great job and we're humming along if we were really struggling and might be more appropriate for me to look at that more. Seriously.

3 (34m 21s):
You had a really tough couple of years and you're just now In the recovery of it you need surgery, I guess in 2015, right? And then and then before that you had you had to have heart

1 (34m 35s):
surgery, right

3 (34m 36s):
and then you battled cancer testicular

1 (34m 38s):
cancer. Yeah, and I dealt with the whole process of chemotherapy, which is Dreadful and in the tail end of that. I was in a plane and I had a pulmonary embolism which really still affects me and then I came down with Miller Fisher that form of Maury

3 (34m 59s):
how does that experience change the way you live your life and you interact with the people you love?

1 (35m 8s):
Well, I sure as hell don't take my family for granted anymore. And I do live life for the moment. I mean much more than ever. I mean, I think it happens through something like that. I don't know why or how but it does or did to me.

3 (35m 25s):
I must put into perspective all your success and wealth in the thing that you built like obviously that stuff matters, but like in the context of your life nothing else really matters.

1 (35m 38s):
Yeah, yeah, that stuff couldn't have been further from my mind. I think it is now though now I'm like prepared to die. Really? Yeah, I am much more so I could die get hit by a bus walking out of your studio and I still think I'm the luckiest guy in the world

3 (35m 54s):
because of the life you had yes, could you ever have imagined when you are in that first year need to fire your employees and that you would have built something this big

1 (36m 8s):
I had no idea that what would happen with no burning. I mean I saw a sport but I did not see Shaun White on the cover of Rolling Stone twice or snowboarding me in the Olympics or the stuff that's happened. And it's been the athletes that have made it happen and we've facilitated it but it's been exceeded. I wouldn't even say dreams because I never dreamt anything on the level that were on Now.

3 (36m 38s):
That's Jake Burton Carpenter founder of Burton Snowboards. I spoke with Jake in July of 2017. He died on November 20th 2019 at the age of 65.