Wyzant (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor wise and a one-to-one tutoring alternative to online classes offering live online, personalized the lessons, and more than 300 subjects head to w Y and Z a N t.com because of wise. And we take learning personally,

1 (19s):
Hey, it's guy here with some really exciting news. We are launching a brand new how I built this Fellowship. Now we've done this in the past few years to help support the next generation of entrepreneurs working to build a better world. And this year we're taking it to the next level. We're going to pick 10 fellows. Each fellow will get matched to an amazing mentor, attend a virtual workshops with some of the entrepreneurs who have been on the show and even have a chance to be interviewed by me in each fellow will then have an opportunity to pitch their business idea. Two, a panel of amazing judges, including some of our favorite, how I built this founder's.

1 (1m 1s):
And guess what? One winner will be selected to receive a $50,000 no strings attached grant $50,000. Amazing. Right? If you are an early stage entrepreneur looking to make the world a little bit better and want to find out how to apply to become an HIBT fellow visit summit dot NPR dot org slash fellows for more details. And remember the deadline is March 31st.

GoDaddy (1m 30s):
The, how I built this fellows program, including an NPR grant to one select fellow is supported by GoDaddy rules apply.

1 (1m 42s):
Did you sit down and say, okay, this is the strategy. We're going to create a travel business and we're going to do it all of these different things or do the things that Eventually happened, kind of just happened in haphazardly, no strategy at all. I never really wanted to look in the book and say, Oh, now you have a COO. Now you have a CFO. I don't even know what that stuff is until it becomes apparent, Oh, we need a Guy to do this. And then they go, yeah, that's called a, a, a CFO kind of going, Oh, that's why they have that.

2 (2m 14s):
<inaudible>

1 (2m 20s):
From, NPR how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements.

2 (2m 28s):
<inaudible>

1 (2m 31s):
I'm Guy Roz and on the show today, how Rick Steves backpack around Europe bread and jam and a few dollars a day and turned his passion for no frills travel into a $100 million brand, Giving your products away for free doesn't sound like a winning business strategy. In fact, it's one reason why most regional in America collapsed

3 (3m 1s):
When media first went digital because at the Dawn of the internet age, most newspapers made their content available online for free in lots of subscribers. Wondered, why am I paying when I could just read it on the internet for nothing. It's an old truism. Once you start to give away your core product, people don't place as much a value on it. Except when that truism is false. Like remember a few years ago, we had an episode about the rapper logic and his manager, Chris Saru logic spent the first several years of his career giving his music away for free, free downloads online.

3 (3m 41s):
But that free music made its way into the hands of a small and loyal following people who would pay to see logic, perform those songs at a venue. And over time that following grew until thousands of people would turn out to see him live. And when logic finally released his first major label album in 2014, after years of giving his music away, the record shot right to the top of the charts. This approach is actually how Rick, Steves created a $100 million travel business. Rick has spent much of his career giving away travel tips, information, videos, and audio tours for free, but his brand is so trusted, considered so authentic by millions of people that his travel guides are among the best selling of all time.

3 (4m 34s):
And before the pandemic hit 30,000 people a year, went on tours, organized by his company called not surprisingly Rick Steves Europe. And Rick has done this by being well. He himself, a super nerdy, super earnest tour guide who visits popular sites around Europe on the cheap. His public television show is so recognizable that Rick's up there with PBS icons, like big bird or Bob Ross or LaVar Burton or Arthur, the aardvark. And what's remarkable about Rick story is he never planned on building a huge business.

3 (5m 16s):
He caught the travel bug as a 14 year old. When he tagged along with his parents on a business trip to Europe, Rick mainly grew up in the town where he still lives, Edmonds, Washington, his kids, he and his sisters spent a lot of time camping with their parents and being active members of the Lutheran church,

4 (5m 37s):
The church, not every Sunday. And I do remember it was kind of embarrassing. We'd go to church. And then after communion, we would, we would go up there and have our, the wine and the wafer. And then we, as a family, we would walk straight out of the church. It's like, thank you. That was tasty. And then we'd walk to the car and we'd go camping. And it was like, that was when I think on it kind of a, not a very polite way to go to church, but you know, my, my parents were juggling a lot of things and they, they want it to have their cake and they had their community in, in vacation too. Yeah. But yeah, we, we grew up, I mean, now I'm, I love the whole Lutheran style of Christianity, but back then, it was just, you know, it's who your parents and your grandparents were.

4 (6m 21s):
So, you know, we, we were Lutherans. Yeah.

3 (6m 24s):
Tell me a little bit about your parents. I know that you're dad was the headliner, a piano repair and import importing store in Edmonds. Tell me, tell me about that.

4 (6m 35s):
Yeah. My dad was a piano tuner. He was a vehicle to guidance Seattle for, for the concert pianists and so on. And an old German guy said a Steves. You should in the finest pianos in the world from Germany. So my dad thought, well, that's interesting. And he went to the piano fair and Frankfurt and made connections with the great panel makers and he decided to import piano's. And I remember when I was a kid, I was just, that was what we were all excited about. I couldn't step into a, a, a home without lifting up the fall board and seeing what the name was on the, above the keyboard for the piano. And, you know, I knew the Beatles paid a boot ner, and each panel has a different personality even to this day.

4 (7m 15s):
You know, I, I can't go into a building in a Europe when I'm traveling. If I see a piano without checking out the name of it, or I squint to see, you know, at the end and the TV special, what a piano, that person playing and for them,

3 (7m 26s):
The middle, you, you played piano, you grew up taking lessons.

4 (7m 30s):
No, no. I had two. I mean, it was that wasn't an option and it's interesting. My dad made me play the piano. My mom wasn't a musical, you know? So that was a big part of my childhood. And I remember one day I came home from school and my dad said, son, we're going to Europe to see the piano of factories. And I thought, dad, that's a silly idea, but it was actually the big, what opened up my world.

3 (7m 52s):
So each 14, your parents take you to Europe for this trip and this, this trip, really, I guess I was like a Raz regulatory. Right? Like what, what do you remember about how that trip made you think about the world? I mean, you're only 14, so you're still a kid. Yeah. My very first

4 (8m 15s):
Moments over there. I remember just stepping out of the hotel on my very first mourning in the Netherlands. And there was a stop sign in front of us, a little town in the Netherlands and a, all the people who had bicycles with the racks in the front of the bicycles. And in every rack, there was a set of wooden shoes in there, all peddling out to the farm where they were going to work on the farm with their wooden shoes for a practical purpose, not for tourism, but because you need to do, wouldn't choose to walk around in the soggy bug.

3 (8m 42s):
Were you, or are you curious and excited about everything you saw, where you were? Were you more like a typical 14 year old kid? Were, you were kind of bored with some of the museums and things like that.

4 (8m 53s):
At first, they didn't want to go. There was a 14 year-old with a attitude and then he got

5 (8m 56s):
Over there and I've always navigated. I navigated childhood with a pragmatic understanding that things go better if you're not fighting your parents, you know? And I just thought, okay, I'm going to make the best of this. And then I was always into stuff. I remember I had no money at all, but I was collecting things. I would collect a bottle caps because in Europe, when you have a bottle cap, it says what city it was a bottled Inn. So I'd have all these exotic bottle caps, beer or soft drinks with where it was bottled. And they collected that. I collected matchbooks, I collected sugar cubes, you know, and I also was a businessman. I would Guy its, its kind of fun to think back on it funny because I found that the most incredible business for a 14 year old, because that was a coin collector coins sold in Seattle in the sixties, foreign coins for 3 cents a piece, you know, in the, in the coin markets was a German coin owner.

5 (9m 49s):
We didn't coin. And so I could buy 50 to grow shin coins for a nickel and bring them home and sell them for 3 cents. Each that is a markup.

3 (9m 57s):
So there is a, a photograph of you, it's you, your mom, your dad. And I think a S a little sister and you are, you've got shaggy long hair and big glasses and it's a photo of your family in Europe. And this was, I guess, 1969 in the summer of 69,

5 (10m 17s):
They were looking out a window. I think that's yeah, it was my mom and my dad and a, a piano salesman who took care of us from Burson door, for in Vienna and an old man we met and it was Sunday. And we went to this little village and a half. We dropped in the church and after the, the mass, everybody, it just felt like it was an old wild West scene. Everybody was wearing black and top hats and long mustaches. And everybody walked across the dusty square, pest the fountain over to the wind garden and they would drink their wine and they would smear lard on rustic bread and, and tell stories. And it was a multi-generational. And to me that was, that was probably one of the eye-opening things that I thought this world is his chest inviting me too, to open up to at and explore.

5 (11m 5s):
And, and I remember this old guy, he looked like a caricature out of some silent movie, a in a big handlebar mustache in a fancy carved pipe. And he was telling stories about how he witnessed the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand. And they teach in 14 that kicked off of world war one and he was old enough to have witnessed it. And I was just wide-eyed. And that was right on the border of the, the communist world right there between Austria and Hungary and, Oh, gee, it was, it was a, it was a, it was a cauldron, it was a Whirlpool of culture in history and had my parents not taken me to Europe, you know, and I just would not have that dimension to my world.

3 (11m 48s):
Yeah. And of course I was just the, the first of all, it would be many more like, like dozens, more trips to Europe.

5 (11m 54s):
Yeah. And I remember on that, the next trip to Europe I was in a, in the train station in Copenhagen, gone between the panel of factory is in Germany and the relatives in Norway. And I saw these backpackers and this was back at a time when literally a 16 year old kid in the United States could be on his mother's passport. My, I didn't have a passport. My mom had a passport with two photographs on it. It was her.

3 (12m 18s):
So I was second to none. This is a second family trip.

5 (12m 20s):
The second trip two years later, and I was 16. So I don't know how that would have been 11th grade or something. And I remember I was in the train station with my parents and I saw these kids. This was a really a Eureka moment for me because I was literally legally chained to my mom to travel with her. And then I saw these kids with backpacks, with the European equivalent of a year rail pass, an inter rail pass. And they were free as the Witt. And they had no parents in sight. And I remember looking at the destination board and that old fashioned Copenhagen, the train station, which to me, which to me is sort of a, sort of almost a Mecca of travelers to go into these two old train stations.

5 (13m 3s):
Yeah.

3 (13m 3s):
Let's see the board at the letters, flipping those letters.

5 (13m 6s):
You got to take it to him to get them, to take it, to get, to get to deal, to get, to get, to give him, and it's going to Berlin or Stockholm or Amsterdam. And I saw those kids and I looked over at my mom and dad, and I thought, I don't need you guys for this world can be my playground. And I vowed right then in the Copenhagen, the train station that I would go back to Europe every year after I graduated from high school. And I have, so that was quite a commitment, quite a of vision. And I didn't have any intention of making a business out of it. This is just what I did in the summer. He was just fun.

3 (13m 35s):
So the day, I guess that like the day after your, you graduated high school, this is 1973. You did, you went on a solo with a friend, I guess, to Europe yeah. You were 18, right. And you were there pretty much all summer traveling around Europe.

5 (13m 50s):
It was a hardcore trip. That was the best trip of my life. And I wanted to go to Europe. I was going to, I was hell bent on going to Europe. And my parents said, well, you got to have a buddy to go with him. And, and they said, you got to send home postcards. So if you disappear, we know where you are and we can come and find you.

3 (14m 5s):
And how did you, how did you pay for it? How, how did you, how did you have the money to do that?

5 (14m 10s):
I, I remember I used to, I had a, I had a jar on the mantle and my parents in, in our home and it said, send a poor boy to Europe and then, and every time a guest would come over, they would, I would try to beg a little money, but I was a piano teacher and I, I was making good money as a piano teacher. I mean, I think I made $6 for a half an hour lesson and there was a really good money. But back then, you can go to your really cheap, you could, you could fly to Europe for a few hundred dollars. You could get a year rail pass, a student Eurail pass for, I think it was $250. And we lived on, on three or four and there was no $5 a day. We lived on $3 a day.

5 (14m 51s):
Wow. Okay. I mean,

3 (14m 52s):
That was, that was a time where that the, one of the most famous guidebooks for Americans, which was Arthur Frommer's, Europe on $5 a day. And you, and were you living, you were living on that or even less than that? Or were they

4 (15m 3s):
Less than that? Yeah. How do you live

3 (15m 6s):
On, I mean, 1973, I get it. It's a D but how do you live on less than $5 a day in Europe even in 1973

4 (15m 12s):
Guy I've got the journals for this. I was a journal writing fiend. I wrote every day, even when I was 14 years old, what the weather was like, how much money I had in my, in my money belt. You know, what food I ate and I can trace every day I was in Europe For every year. And until they got wrapped up in my business much later when I didn't have the energy, the bandwidth to do that. And you know, when I was 18, my buddy Gina and I, we would have a game, would see how many hours we could go without spending any money. I mean, when we were sightseeing, if it we'd go right up to the door and if it costs, we'd find a way to sneak in the back door and we would, we would visit it. We would by a single room in a hotel and I'd sleep on the floor.

4 (15m 54s):
I would once a week, we'd put all of our money on the bed and we'd count up the money and we'd divide how many days we had left and we'd say, Oh, no, we were slipping down below $2 a day. We've got to really tighten up. And then we went home after that trip with no money. And we went from the Frankfurt youth hostel out to the airport on an expired rail pass. It was frightening. I the conduct. We were really good at stowing away on a boat, on, on trains and boats. And, and the conductors were coming from either end of the train. And we knew we were just going to the suburban airport. So, you know, they were, it was like two collapsing walls with those spikes on it, like in Batman and Superman. And they were coming closer and closer on the left end, the right.

4 (16m 36s):
And we were just let's get to the airport. And just in time, we got to the airport, the door opened and we popped out before the conductor expired rail. And it was, and I came home and I was, I was sick. I was with the doctor called chronically undernourished or chronically fatigued

3 (16m 53s):
And eating. While you were

4 (16m 55s):
On this trip, I had no sense of nutrition. I would eat bread and jam. We had a, one of our theme songs. Kodachrome was a big hit that year by Paul Simon. I don't have to remember that. Can I sing you? I was thinking it a little if I can remember it, but

3 (17m 10s):
Take my Kodachrome away.

4 (17m 13s):
Right. So it was like w when I think back on all the crap by eight, and Europe, it's a wonder I am here at all. Although my lack of good nutrition never hurt me. None. I got in the magnets on my stomach, well, bread and jam. You know, we went over there and I often think back, why was that trip so great in that car trip was so great because it was a challenge because every penny mattered because everything was new because we were totally on our own. And, and it was just a beautiful part of growing up.

3 (17m 45s):
I remember that feeling too. When cause I traveled around Europe in, in around 20 years old. And, and that feeling when you, when you do that on your own, and you had to make all these choices and decisions and you do, you, you come back a changed person. It's it's, it really is transformational. Yeah.

4 (18m 1s):
And even as a teenager, I was aware of that. And, you know, I often think if the world was smart, they would establish a fund and give every American kid a little gap year trip. And it seems extravagant, but it'd be a small price to pay, to get American's out of their home and into the rest of the world and realize this world is a beautiful place in it's worth being a part of, you know, if he grew up in the United States, you think the world is a pyramid with the United States is on top and everybody else trying to figure it out and you get over there and you realize, no, they, they liked their style of life. And they've got, they've got different dreams. They, they don't have the American dream. They've got the, the Bulgarian dream. And, and these are, these are revelations I had as a teenager traveler that are still integral to the talks that I give today.

3 (18m 47s):
So you, you take that trip and you come back to, to Edmands and you start college, they go to the university of Washington. And what was your, I mean, at that point, you're still, you know, young 18, 19, 20, but did you, how did you start to think, you know, here's what I'll do with my life? Like what did you, what did you start to think you might do with your life

4 (19m 6s):
At that point? I just, I think I just was very happy to be a piano teacher. I love teaching piano. I had a studio as well as a businessman. I had a studio next to my parent's piano store and paid $200 a month for the rent. We had a recital hall or twice a year, the kids would do their recitals. And I bought a coffee machine where I could actually serve coffee and styrofoam cups to all of the parents. And it was just, for me, it was just like, so happy to do that. And the kids wouldn't practice in the summer. So I'm just going to go to Europe, we'll see in the fall and life was going to be simple and sweet like that. And, and then I thought, well, that's a good set and practical. So I got a business degree also. So I got a history degree for a cause I love that in business school because they thought it would be practical, but I had no, no thought about hurting my, my love of travel into a business I a bit, but then, you know, things unfolded

3 (19m 56s):
So that while you were still in college, there was something called the experimental college, which I think is still around with some universities, have it. And it's basically free classes for people in the community. And you started to, you start to offer a class called travel. Europe on the cheap, which I'm assuming this is free. You was just giving you the lectures for free.

4 (20m 15s):
No, no, not quite, but almost, you know, a couple, but I mean, that was, that was the turning point for me. It was ha I was in the dorm and I just, I love when I look back on it, I just love teaching things. I love, I teach piano and I teach travel and I would spend a lot of time at lunch, helping people plan their trips. And I was the local expert in the dorm. And I remember, you know, I remember I took a class about taking the hippy trail from Katmandu to a no, from his 10 Paul to Katmandu. That was what the ultimate backpacker trip out of class or you to know that no, I took the class in the sky. I was going to do this trip and I there's no good information back then today we have a glut of information, but back then, you know, he just didn't have much information.

4 (20m 60s):
This guy had information. I signed up for his class and there was like 15 of us. They are dreaming about, you know, just, you know, just like wide-eyed, he's done this trip from a standpoint of Katmandu over Khyber pass, you know? And, and we sat there and he was just too cool for school. He just didn't prepare. He didn't care about our trip. He had the information, but he didn't give it to us. And it really, it really frustrated me. And at that moment I realized if somebody has to travel experience and other people need it, it's wrong not to be well-organized and to share it in a, in an artful careful practical way. And I thought, you know, I could do the same thing and I could really help people.

4 (21m 42s):
So I put together this class and it was, I just was sort of a dark, you know, it was just this goofy college where people teach you how to fix your bike or how to build a log cabin, or how to forage and eat snails and all of this kind of stuff. And, and I was teaching a class called European travel cheap. And I remember I'm not going to mince words. This is European travel cheap. That's all it is how we're going to afford to go to Europe. And there was a six Wednesday class or something like that. And I thought, I'd get 20 kids from the dorm signing up. I had a, a hundred of their parents signing up and I just remember, Holy cow, I've, I've struck something here. There's these are not the students. These are the parents.

4 (22m 22s):
And I left the dorm. I was going to be very efficient. I knew it would cost $8 for the class. And I thought, okay, I better. And I don't want to have a backlog because of lack of change. You know? So I went, I remember I actually went to the class with, with like a, a a hundred, $2 bills. And I came home. I came home with a, a, a a hundred times, a at $800 on tens and twenties. And for me as a, as a kid and the dorm $800 paid for my, my flight and my rail pass for next time of his trip. And by the way, Rick what, how, how detailed

3 (22m 59s):
Were you going into it in these classes? Or was it like, Oh, here's how you get to Europe here's where you stay here or, or was it,

4 (23m 7s):
They would sit on a, on a table facing the group in, in this, in the classroom. And I had a slide, so I had a slide projector, and I showed slides. And I remember I could, it was to after a while it got, I mean, I was teaching all the time. I was just a teaching maniac. I would teach all Saturday. I would give the six week course in a one on Saturday session because people from out of, out of, out of town wanted to take it and they couldn't come every Wednesday night. So they would drive in and, and I would teach it from nine til five with an hour break for lunch. And I could keep a, a, a hundred people into a pack to a little hotel ballroom all day long with giving my talk. And, and it was, I got better and better at it. Right.

4 (23m 47s):
And I experimented with the delivery time after time, how I would teach this and how to get the points across. And Eventually my, my mom's sister, my aunt said, you should read a book that's so stupid. And then I, but then I thought, well, wait, I've already written the book by giving this talk over and over and over. And I just sat down and, and gave my lecture to the paper in there. It was the first edition of Europe through the back door.

1 (24m 14s):
So essentially you, you, when you say your game for a lecturer to the paper, or you were just kinda talking out loud and typing it out.

4 (24m 20s):
Yeah. And I think I even hand wrote it or something, but it was just my lecture. I mean, cause I had given that lecture and for me, giving them the giving, the talk is, is, is recreation. It's H how are you going to, how are you going to design these ideas and get it across? And how are you going to illustrate it? And you know, you're going to talk about the, a bed and breakfasts. And how did that relate to youth hostels? And what about sleeping on the train and finding cheap, free three places to sleep in whatever. And after each, at the beginning of each class, I had everybody right on a piece of paper, their fears and apprehensions. And I would survey for a long time. I would serve at the class in the first night. And what are your fears and apprehensions. And I really got good at knowing what people's fears and apprehensions, where are they afraid of their fare to the language barrier.

4 (25m 4s):
They were afraid of not finding a room. They were afraid of, you know, getting diarrhea. They're afraid of pickpockets. They were afraid of how do I, how do I use my Traveler's checks properly? So, you know, and I just wouldn't have all of these issues that I would just Bing, Bing, Bing. So, yeah.

1 (25m 20s):
So you, you took your, you're a lecturer essentially, and you typed it up into, into a book that, that you called Europe through the back door. And did you, did you structure the book in just a clear way? It was a country by country? Is that how you organized it?

4 (25m 35s):
So in the beginning of the book was two halves. It was like two books bound together. The first half was all the skills, packing, hotels, eating, transportation, communication, you name it. And then the last half were individual chapters on my 20 favorite discoveries. These are the backdoors. So I didn't need to write a guidebook to Paris or to Ireland. I just need to share my discoveries. And for a long time, I kind of almost prided myself in not having to bog down on, you know, phone numbers and prices and ours and that kind of stuff. I just wrote creative articles to turn people onto my favorite. Coroner's the South coast of Portugal, Dingle peninsula in Ireland, Aero Island in Denmark, you know, the Moselle river Valley instead of the ride for your castles in Germany.

1 (26m 22s):
And did you, did you get it formally published? Did you, I mean, did you start to distribute to bookstores? Tell me what, what the book looks like and how, how you made that happen?

4 (26m 32s):
Looks so simple that once it was already sold people, when I tried to get publicity that they thought it was a pre publication edition, they would say, when is the book coming out? This is the book. It a very simple thing. I didn't know what a not published by the way. It was a self published. I didn't know what an ESPN was, so it didn't have an ISP. It was stupid, but

3 (26m 52s):
The pages and stapled them together.

4 (26m 55s):
My girlfriend type it for me. My, my roommate was an artist. He, I gave him the photographs and he sketched them really nicely. Andy, and then it was at a time when you type in you, you correct by typing it on another piece of paper with the glue stick, you, then you, you, you glue that strip over to the line that has the mistake. So it was a lovingly put together pile of a, a, a 180 pages. And I took it up to the publisher with an eye, dug up all my money, and it would cost a couple of thousand dollars. Then I got a couple of thousand books, a Quebec, a few weeks later, picked them up in my Oldsmobile station, wagon drove home. And now I had the first self-publishing version of Rick Steves Europe through the back door.

4 (27m 36s):
And then after that, I finally got to a publisher, which was a blessing.

3 (27m 40s):
And how much were you charging for the book in that, in that first

4 (27m 42s):
Year? I think it was for ninety-five.

3 (27m 45s):
And so you were just Hocking on yourself. You were, you were going into bookstores and saying, Hey, I've got these books or you're going to be giving lectures and offering the book for sale.

4 (27m 53s):
Yeah. And then I would have the books in my car and it was literally the book's in the back of my car. And I remember a few occasions. I was giving a talk and no, no, no, you can't sell anything on the premises here. Okay. After the talk, I'd say, if you want to buy the book, I'll be out of my car. And it's just five bucks, you know? And, and then it was just bam, bam, bam. It's selling like hotcakes. And a, and I got to the point where I would get bigger and bigger classes and I would sell the book for the book, got bigger and bigger and bigger, but they kept it at $5 for a long time, just cause I wanted to move those books. And I knew though that my audience was my parents' age. For for many years now I'm older. So I don't have audience that's my parents' age anymore. But in the beginning I was always thinking, I'm talking to my parents and their friends.

3 (28m 37s):
So when you were, you know, leading these lectures and talking about going to Europe, I mean, were you just saying, look, you can do this. I don't speak French, German, Dutch. You can, you can get a little guidebook. You can make your, you know, you can make it work.

4 (28m 50s):
I think that's part of my, how I was successful as part of my appeal is I'm not a scholar. You know, I mispronounced the words. I, I don't know how to say, I don't say Perry. You know, I say, Paris, I speak only English. You know, remember I was interviewing my students. That was a fear and apprehension. I don't speak the language and I tell them, well, neither do I. And I write guidebooks. I make TV shows. I lead tours. And to have a great vacation is going to Portugal.

3 (29m 18s):
So I have to imagine after you publish Europe through the back door self, published that for, I think the first edition came out in 1980. Is that right? Yes, that's right. So I'm assuming that it was clear to you cause you had, you had established a business, right? You called it Europe too the back door at least a few years earlier, but it was like you, you probably found an LLC, but I, it's not clear to me that you thought this was still going to be the way you're

1 (29m 42s):
Going to make a living up until 1980.

4 (29m 45s):
No, no, no. I don't know if I filed anything. I'm kinda laughing at that because that's what I was, I was so I'm klutzy than I was just having fun teaching and selling books out of the back of my car when I had books to sell. But you don't want to think back on it, friends and loved ones and relatives give me these ideas and my gut responses. Oh, that's crazy. And then I think about it and that's actually a great idea and a good friend of my parents, a petty price and said, you should take bus tours around. And I just thought that sounds horrible. And then I thought Guy, there is a huge efficiency in sharing the rental cost of a mini bus. And I'd love to, you know, I love to help organize people's trip plans at the table in the dormitory over lunch. And I'd love to take people around Europe on these mini bus tours.

4 (30m 27s):
And so I, I, you know, I was giving these talks and it was very easy to talk to people who are enamored with me because of my funny stories I could tell you about traveling. They, you know, it was kind of a natural, they would, they'd be interested in traveling with me if I made that possible. And I did. And the many of us are, there was no, there was no promises that the mini bus tours were like, it was like a commune on wheels. It was a, it was not profitable except to cover my cost. So I could stay over there longer. And, you know, everybody had to almost signed a little agreement that says they wouldn't complain about the lousy accommodations. It was so upfront.

1 (31m 5s):
So you, you would basically, would you drive the bus? Yeah.

4 (31m 8s):
Drove the best. It was just a, that was a beautiful for me when people want to get into the travel business and make some money. I say, you know, I think the best thing is just to have a forte, just, you know, you are, you know, you are Mr. Scandinavia or you are Mr. Baja or Ms. Baja, California. And just do that specialty with eight people on a minibus and the economy of a sharing of a vehicle with eight people has wonderful. The fact that you don't have to take care of a, a, a driver and to guide, but the driver can be, the guide is wonderful. And a that's. That was kinda my original formula there. And this worked really well at the time I was, I would actually have a day where I would announce my, my mini bus tour plans for the next year.

4 (31m 53s):
And I would give the talk, I, I would, I would say, okay, I'm going to explain the tours. And then I'll take deposits for the tours on that day. And I'd have, you know, four or five tours that I would do with the minibus. I was always the guide and the driver and that night, all those tourists would be For. They would sell up. They would sell out that one night,

1 (32m 11s):
10 or 12 people per tour, eight people per tour,

4 (32m 15s):
B 22 days back then I only did 22 day tours. I was on a one man crusade to help Americans have a longer vacation. I was just amazed that we put up with such short vacations. And so it was 22 days in Britain, 22 days in Germany, Austria, Switzerland. It's funny. Cause now, you know, 40 years later it's evolved where that's way too long for the American market. And the longest tour is 20 days in our best selling tours or 10 or 12 days.

1 (32m 42s):
So I'm trying to, I'm trying to picture this. I mean, you are like in your late twenties, you're offering these mini bus tours of with eight people and you're driving them in any of us and you're the guide and you only speak English. So I mean, that's a lot to take on, like, you didn't have a local guide with you was just you.

4 (33m 0s):
Oh yeah. And I didn't have the sophistication or the appreciation of a local guide or the, or the money for a local guide. So we were just bumbling around together. You know, I remember we went to the craziest things we'd maybe would go through the, the, there is an Oak forest where Admiral Nelson is to get his master for his ships in Southern Wales. I forget the name of the forest of something very romantic. And we would take turns sitting up on the top of the bus on the, on the luggage rack and a couple of people up on the top of the luggage rack, just so they could look up at the Oak forest, as we rolled through it slowly, you know, every night we'd in the youth house, we'd pull out the map and debate. We would actually debate what we're going to do the next day.

4 (33m 42s):
And this was a formative time for me as a tour organizer, because again, I was learning and what the market wanted. I was learning how many, how many hilltowns can a mortal tour and find worth climbing up? How many in the donnas and children can a mortal tourist be excited about a I don't after a while. And it doesn't matter if its Raphael's greatest there going to stay and the bus to do something else because they they're burned out on Madonnas and children. It's interesting. It's how I remember this is this business kind of philosophy. I think of mine. I would have the handbooks for those tours laying around in my lectures and the handbooks were designed.

4 (34m 22s):
So people could be independent in the context of the tour. That was, there was always this focus on it and he got to a handbook that's right. Yeah. And time and time again. I was so, so impressed by how honest my, my, my students were in these classes I gave, I never checked ID for checks when people were giving me any money for anything. And, and I just didn't need to, they're just great people, but they were stealing this book, these books, and I thought these tour handbooks are driving a decent people to theft or they need to be available for sale. So the next year sort of a radical thing to do, I put everything I knew about doing the tour in the handbook for the tour intending to give people the information necessary so they could do the Rick Steves tour without Rick Steves they could buy the book for five bucks and do it on their own.

4 (35m 9s):
And some people said, Oh, you're giving away all your secrets. No, it was a great thing because it turned people on to the tours and it opened up my teaching, the people that wouldn't take the tours anyway. And then I could stand in front of these groups of people who are taking my class for free and say, I don't care. You can take my tour or you can buy this book and do the tour with that as well, but just do it and do it right.

1 (35m 29s):
When did you start to think of yourself as the real deal? Because I think a lot of people, including myself have an sometimes still have imposter syndrome. We were like, how do people listen to me? When did, when did you start to think, God, I I'm not an expert, but right.

4 (35m 47s):
So it kinda, you kind of grow into it. Yeah. I remember a big breakthrough for me was Arthur Fromer. I mean, he was the granddad of all this. He's the guy that, that, that inspired the, the democratization of, of international travel, you know,

1 (36m 1s):
Europe on $5 a day, right. As classic book. Yeah.

4 (36m 5s):
It was just a kid. And, and I mean, I must of been right after I self published my book and, and he hadn't even know, he knew who I was. He, he had me fly all the way to New York and be on his radio show and wow. He has a TV show. I think maybe he, he put his eye, he, you know, he kind of effectively put his arm around me and he said, ladies and gentlemen, I'd like you to meet the next temple, fielding Eugene four-door and Steven Birnbaum of the traveler publishing world. Those were the big household words in the fifties and sixties, fielding guides. Four-door guides, burdened bomb guides.

1 (36m 39s):
Yeah. And Eventually, I mean, you would do, you would, you know, do your own, like Rick Steves guides cause you'd get a, a, a publisher and start publishing them. But for awhile, I guess you were, you were pretty much Hocking that the first book on your own, right?

4 (36m 52s):
Yeah. And it was a guy that was sort of This, it was like this big business that was just a little kernel and it was just ready to burst out because there was such a market for it, if it was designed. And, and how do you call a scaled up properly?

1 (37m 6s):
What about your personal life for you? Or were you married at, at, at that point in time? In the 1980s?

4 (37m 12s):
Yes, I was married. I forget. I remember it was, my class was Wednesday nights and I got married on a, on a Saturday and a Sunday, of course. So I remember giving a talk When Wednesday and saying, I'm going to get married this weekend. And that whole next week was dedicated to getting married. And then the next ones, and I was back in the university of Washington giving the experimental college class. So I guess that's the little indication that I was a focused on my business quite a lot. I and my wife was very supportive in a beautiful partner for that period of my life. And then I got this, a complexity, you know, of a growing family and kids and also a business that was just taken off.

4 (37m 55s):
And my heart was in two places at the same time.

1 (37m 58s):
And, and sounds like it was still a regional business is still like Pacific Northwest Rick Steves. That is the guy on the Pacific Northwest.

4 (38m 4s):
I remember the day I remember I was walking to the book, the book fair once in a San Francisco in my publisher, put his arm around me and he said, Rick, if you're ever going to get anywhere, you got to have more titles. You know, cause then I just had two or three titles and I thought, Oh, more titles. That sounds like a lot of work. And then I had to branch beyond that, you know, favorite places, the essays and generic travel skills into the specifics. Where are you going to sleep in, in Brussels? Where are you going to eat? And Copenhagen, you know what time is the museum

5 (38m 36s):
Opened in Dublin? And that was a lot of work and there was a big change, but that's what people wanted. And that's what we could offer in a, in a unique Rick Steves kind of way. So then we embarked on all of making all of these guidebooks to different countries in different regions and ultimately different cities. But from 80 on, after I had the guidebook, the tour that the bus tours where we're funding the idealism of the business, I then I started to get people working with me and that was kind of a breakthrough. You know, you got to book, you get an idea and you need to realize it's not a one man.

3 (39m 12s):
So when we come back and just a moment, how Rick went from selling books out of his car to hosting an incredibly popular TV show and how that success and all the work that went with it would wind up taking a big toll on his family life, stay with us. I'm Guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

Upwork (39m 44s):
Hey everyone, just a quick, thanks to our sponsor Upwork, the world's largest remote talent platform, devs designers, writers, strategists, you name it, find, hire, and pay all in one place. Need to find coders outside your area code and SEO specialist for six weeks or a UI designer through December, pro's available short for longterm and they're proven, rated and reviewed. When you need in demand talent on demand. Upwork is How learn more@upwork.com.

ClickUp (40m 20s):
Thanks also to click up. You don't need to exist for hours of sleep to be productive, enter, click on a completely customizable work platform with all the features you ever needed to build your business. All in one place, join a a hundred thousand teams across companies like Airbnb, Google, and Uber who are already using click up to level up their productivity and save one day a week. Guaranteed click up is free forever to get started@clickup.com slash NPR today,

E-Trade (40m 53s):
Support for this podcast and the following message come from E-Trade. You want to invest your money, but there's one problem. You're not sure where to begin. Luckily there's each E-Trade who offers more than just trading E-Trade simplifies investing without the financial jargon and has the people to offer guidance and support to make your money work hard for you. For more information, visit E-Trade dot com slash NPR E-Trade securities, LLC member FINRA civic

3 (41m 23s):
On NPR

5 (41m 24s):
Consider this podcast. We help you make sense of one big story in the news every day, like how to combat this information and conspiracy theories, which pose a real threat to democracy

7 (41m 35s):
And what life looks like after you're vaccinated. The next phase of do's. And don'ts all that in 15 minutes every week day. Listen now to consider this from NPR

3 (41m 47s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Ross. So it's around 1991 and from his home in Edmonds, Washington, Rick, Steves his running a pretty successful travel business, writing guidebooks and doing small tours of Europe for months at a time, and then comes a pretty important turning point. He starts making a TV show called travels in Europe with Rick Steves tell me how that began. I mean, did you, did you produce find a production company and, and have them follow you through Europe did they have, I mean, how did that idea even come about?

4 (42m 26s):
You know, and when he just said that, I'm just thinking I am such a reluctant, I'm sort of in a way I'm eager and I'm just like an Energizer bunny about all this, but in another way, I'm sort of like digging my heels in like a stubborn dog and saying, no, you know, some, some loved one says you should make tours and take people around on a minibus. And then I do that. And then somebody says, you should read a book and they say no. And then somebody actually a whole bunch of people in the late eighties were coming to me and saying, you should make a TV show. Yeah. I thought no way. But then I thought these are smart people. And they've worked with other people and made shows. They've got a track record of success and they see something in this. And I thought, well, I'll give it a whirl.

3 (43m 2s):
Okay. So the idea was a, you'd make a, a TV show where you'd be touring cities in Europe and kind of taking us with you on the journey, but how am and how would you, like, how were you going to finance it?

4 (43m 17s):
Well, that was the trouble. I mean, everything I had done up until now had been no finance necessary. I'm just, I'll give it a free gathered 10 people together. I'm there all day giving you a talk, you know, but this was different because you had to have a funder, a, you had to have a seat it's expensive. And it's a, it's a huge investment of time. And, and for me it was the investment of time. Do I really want to take all that time away from researching my guidebooks and dedicated to making TV, show us where I'm not learning anything? The a C when I'm researching, I'm learning, I'm, I'm, I'm contributing. It's a, it's a huge, a practical investment in my program of who I am as a travel teacher, the TV show, it takes six days to produce a half-hour TV show.

4 (43m 60s):
And you learn nothing during that. I mean, I always thought, Oh, I can learn while I'm there. No, he's just so all consuming. You're just there waiting for the jackhammer to stop trying to remember your lines, waiting for the clouds to go away and then saying it. And then he go to the next place and you do it. And after six days of focus, while you have a show,

3 (44m 16s):
How did you find, I mean, how did you even begin the process? Did you find a production company and then started to pitch the show?

4 (44m 25s):
No, I didn't want to do it. They found me and I did it.

3 (44m 29s):
It was a small production company, a small world, small world productions.

4 (44m 32s):
Yeah. They were, a lot of people had been contacting. There was this flurry of interest in the late eighties and I was skeptical and I felt like, well, I can actually play hard to get, because I don't want to do this. And they were really smart, the good people. And they knew what I did. They had, they had been followers of mine. You know, they knew my program. They drank the Rick Steves Europe through the back door Koolaid, and they wanted to share it on public television. And I said, okay, if you guys think you can do it, I'm with you. And I was basically a hired hand. I was, the eye was the host.

1 (45m 5s):
So they, they owned the car, the whole thing. And you, they hired you as the talent. Let's say

4 (45m 11s):
One of their friends had a, a few thousand dollars that he could be the funder. And we did a pilot and it look at it now and it seemed kind of cocky. But at the time it was, it was good enough to get to show off the ground

1 (45m 24s):
Then. And what you make a pilot and pitch the idea to, to Public TV stations.

4 (45m 29s):
Yeah. And when you, when you make a TV show for public television, you need a station to be your presenting station. And Seattle opted out for some reason. So Oregon took it up and Oregon public broadcasting, OPB all over the country. Now, you know, 30 years later, people think I'm from Portland because my show gets a little OPB jingle and they presented it to the system and a few channels picked it up. And if it works well, there's a buzz and other channels, pick it up the next time, around a bit. What that ended up doing was kicking off the series. And we did five series with a small world. And I remember it was expensive. Every dissolve was, it was a financial decision.

4 (46m 11s):
I remember they had to go to an editing suite and just to have forever, right? Yeah. Yeah. And a camera was hugely expensive. Now anybody can afford the camera, but PAC, then you take out a bank learned to have a camera.

1 (46m 23s):
Yeah. So, so this was really, I mean, this production company, they have this idea that you were the face of it, but it wasn't your

4 (46m 32s):
Listen to mine. Nope. They only pay, I was getting was the exposure I supposed to the public eye and the chance to say, and he writes a guidebook. So at the end of the show, it's a cool book. And you feel like to show you the book you by that, and then a small world would make it a little money.

1 (46m 47s):
No, I mean, that was it. That was kind of risky and a great risk because you, you were essentially giving them the IP. I mean, they were, they owned the intellectual property This and you, you, you, you know, it could have worked entirely in their favor and not in your favor.

4 (47m 1s):
I had no, no option. I mean, they were, they knew how to do it. I didn't, they had, I didn't have any capital. And it was, for me, it was an adventure. It was one of those things that if an opera opportunity comes along, say yes, you know, I had the energy and it turned out to be frustrating because I wanted to be more than what they wanted me to be. You know, what

1 (47m 24s):
Did they want you to be versus what you want

4 (47m 27s):
To do to be, they wanted me to be a, a, an obedient host that wood learn his lines in, stay out of the way. And I had a teaching agenda, a they had a let's stay in business agenda, and I had a teaching agenda. So they want it to produce shows that would be pleasant to watch and popular. And I wanted to produce shows that would teach the Rick Steves style of travel.

1 (47m 53s):
I mean, in 1991, you were not the kind of a typical television host. You're, you know, you're, you've got this, you know, kinda nerdy earnest thing going. And of course today that's, that's why people love you, but then like, you know, people were going for like the deep, basic voice like that, you know, that kind of, so I, I mean, I'm just curious why they thought you were the guy to be the face of travel.

4 (48m 23s):
So if, if there wasn't a public television, I don't think anybody else would've taken look at me, but public television was the domain of the Bob Ross's and, and the Mr. Rogers and the Rick Steves I think, and we were all getting started back. Are we were, we were, we were doing it back then. We were part of the time I look at it and I think, boy, that was a dorky, but it's me, it's honest, it's authentic. And it's, it's driven by a passion for travel. And we all were true blue for public television. It was tough to be viable back then. I mean, the gear was expensive. The post-production was expensive. It was hard to get under writing. And it's just hard to have a, I've got a lot of friends now in that or travel teachers that are trying to break through with a TV show on public television.

4 (49m 7s):
I don't know how you do it. I mean, I'm very lucky that, that I had that the brakes that I had way back then,

1 (49m 13s):
One of the stations got it for free because you guys were handling the underwriting and then you got some publicity to there. And this turned you into a celebrity kind of quickly.

4 (49m 23s):
You know, one thing I've had is a business sort of value is be at other people's cash cow. Everybody is struggling. Everybody is desperate to be viable from a business point of view in the fall, you are, is your own cash cow. Nobody is going to want to talk to you. But if you honestly are other people's cash cow, then you become a key player for all these organizations because you're making them money. And I'm, I'm a cash cow for my publisher. I do a lot of things for my publisher that while other writers just complain that their publishers don't promote them properly, I realize no, I got to do my own song and dance. And my publisher appreciates that. And I paid for it, you know, and I, I, I benefit from it.

4 (50m 4s):
And from a television point of view, I was Mr. Pledge drive, right? So as soon as they say no, and I, I stand for the stations all over the country, I was spending 20 days a year, 20 days on the road doing pledge. And to this day, I mean, I just was talking to the people at public television a week or two ago. And they said nearly 20% of all the money that they in pledge this last quarter was from my show

1 (50m 30s):
For the whole system. When did you first realize? Cause it shows his babies in 1991 and it's super fun to watch cause its so nerdy and I love it. I love it for that reason. It's so, I mean it's really special. When did you start? What did you first realize that people were recognizing you and they were going, Hey, there's a book, there's a guy from TV like w w do you remember that feeling of when that happened?

4 (50m 56s):
Yeah, it was very, it was. I remember the first time I ever saw somebody with my book in Europe. I remember the first time people started recognizing me from the TV show and then the first time people from other, the other hemisphere would know me from the scene, the TV show in a YouTube and other streaming ways. But yeah, over time that became more and more of a deal. I remember coming into a, into a, a youth hostel high in the Alps and I just checking for the guidebook information and dropping in. And, and there was a, the guy who runs the hotel said, Oh, there was a girl scout group and the, in the dining room. And they'd love to see it. Cause there, here with your book and I came in to the, I just interrupted their dinner and they'd just go, Oh, there's the guy we saw on TV.

4 (51m 39s):
We saw shows before we took our trip. And the girl scout leader says to the girls, girls, if its not to your liking and they all go change your liking. And that one of my slogans is in my, in my guidebook, if its not to your liking change, your liking. So they were true blue and doing, you know, honoring my little, little slogans without me even knowing it. And that was, you know, that's pretty fun when you work really hard to, to realize your having an impact in that way.

1 (52m 6s):
The meantime you're you're you're doing these shows, which was super labor intensive. You are also going to Europe For to lead tours. You're also updating your guidebooks. You're traveling around now doing fundraisers for public radio stations and you've got a family at home. And I, I mean, I imagine you are a way you were away from home for, for months on end throughout the year. Yeah.

4 (52m 35s):
Yeah. It was a, when I think back on it, huh? It was tough. I mean I was a, I needed two lives and my, you know, I worked a lot of people work hard and it takes a toll on their families. I worked hard and it was sort of addictive to be writing a business that was rising up and it was my dream and it was also so enjoyable and I, I, I loved parenting. I, I just, I was married to my work as well as to my family. And in that case I was a guy that didn't work well.

1 (53m 11s):
And there were demands on being Rick Steves people needed Rick Steves for a variety of reasons.

4 (53m 17s):
Yes. And that was a big deal. In fact, my relationship with my son was it was difficult for him for several years because he really, he recognized that Mike Public had hijacked by his dad and his other friends had dads that didn't have a quote Public. Yeah. And I've had this attitude that if you've got and not, I was going to say an adoring Public but you know, you got to love your work

2 (53m 45s):
Next, the next. Yeah.

4 (53m 47s):
I mean, I feel like you owe it to your public to take time and talk to them and to, you know, to visit them in person. And so it's a choice you make.

2 (53m 57s):
No, I mean, I can imagine that that caused some, some tension or stress in your marriage with your wife. Yeah. She just was

4 (54m 9s):
Realizing, and I think her friends were helping her figure this out that, you know, you got to stop being in Rick shadow, you know, she'd go to the grocery store and she'd buy the groceries in the industry and signed the check and they go, Oh, that's, you know, that Rick Steves right. And I'm sure that gets a really old because she's stuck with the kids and she's, you know, doing all the responsible things, a parent should do not a mother as a parent, should I do? And she was doing it pretty much alone. And I was doing a family thing a lot. Like my dad did, you know, and my dad was out there being the big personality, conducting the band, you know, being everybody's favorite piano technician and then going with the concert's and my mum was at home, making sure the books worked and the kids were getting their shots and all that kind of thing.

4 (54m 55s):
So, you know, I was, that was just a choice I made and I don't know how else I could of done it, frankly. I, I went to the soccer games in the football games and I was very, I was very frustrated because I wanted to be working and I didn't want to be sitting there with the other parents, watching the kids kick the ball. You know, I, I, it was, it was a, it was a difficult thing. Now my, I mean, my kids as the adults now, their, in their early thirties and we have a beautiful relationship and I'm, I'm, they know I'm, I feel so sad that there wasn't to have me and much of a, those years were the formative years in my business, then it, and we missed a lot of opportunities.

4 (55m 46s):
On the other hand, we, we did a lot of great things to, and I, I wasn't, I just don't want somebody else to dictate what it takes to be a good dad. Yeah. I had a chip on my shoulder about that because I didn't feel like I needed to help the kids moved into the dorm. You know, I mean, moving into the dorm yourself, you know, I'm busy and if that's wrong, well, no, that's not wrong. It's just one person's assessment of what it takes to be a good parent. But I just miss the, the joys, the, the little magic moments, you know, you, can't, I'm pretty practical about the reality that you can't do it all. And those years are fleeting years and you can't, you can't really make it up, make up for it when your kids or in their thirties, when you finally slow down into realize that cat's in the cradle kind of business, you know, you, you either do it or you don't do it when the kids were little.

4 (56m 36s):
And I tell a lot of my, you know, a reminder, a lot of my friends that, you know, I, I had to make some hard choices and be real careful about that.

3 (56m 46s):
So, so you did this first series television series with this production company for, I guess, five seasons. And then, and then a couple years later, you, you relaunched the show is Rick Steves Europe right. And also on public television and this time it was your, it was your show. Right? Right. And this was going to be different. This was going to be the way you want it to do it.

4 (57m 9s):
Yep. I suppose creative people have had that, you know, where they're in a band and they wanna be the composer in the, in the manager create the vision. And they say, what album there going to do next? And I got to the point with a small world where it just, we had different visions and we weren't enjoying the collaboration. And especially when you're making TV, if you're not having fun in the field, you know, it's not going to it's the, the, the, the product is going to suffer and you're going to grow old because of it prematurely. I mean, it's no fun. It's hard work to be making TV in the field. And if you're not having fun doing it, I wouldn't do it. So I wanted to have fun in the field.

4 (57m 49s):
And I, I, and I wanted to be, and to be totally honest, I just wanted to be in complete control. I knew what I wanted to make life is short. I'm spending a third of my time in Europe making TV. They see my time in Europe is divided. It's basically a third involved with the tour program, a third involved in researching the books and a third involved in producing the TV shows. And that's a big commitment.

3 (58m 15s):
What's really remarkable to me is that a lot of people don't realize this is that with all the television out in the world today, a lot of people don't really make that much money from TV. The TV in some ways is, is like a vehicle to promote other things as you do. And my understanding of the way your business works is that television. And then you started at a public radio show, which you have a podcast and radio show and, and all this, he would go to your, your, your webpage. So there's all this free content. And my understanding is that that virtually all of your revenue comes from giving tours in Europe Rick Steves tours that you no longer personally lead, but tours and books, that that is like the vast majority of your revenue.

3 (58m 57s):
It's not the TV shows. It's not the radio stuff. It's not the content on your website.

4 (59m 2s):
Yeah. I think the worst thing I could do is charge for the TV show. Cause then nobody would watch it. People, people, people couldn't afford to run it. You know, I mean, public television doesn't have much money and they have to choose. I mean, my show ran every night in Los Angeles for years, every night in prime time, he says, because Los Angeles public television broke away from PBS because they couldn't afford it. The, the, the, the, the dues KCT, right. KCT. Yeah. And I was there. I was their favorite little guy for, for years.

1 (59m 33s):
It was free content for them that they liked and they just aired it. It

4 (59m 36s):
Was free. And they had, they had to budget reality and they said, well, we can do this and it'll cost us X, or we can do this. And it'll cost us nothing. And everybody likes that and it's free. So let's do it. So as long as my shows are good and popular and free, we can do no wrong. That's why our show, it just has wheels. And, you know, we, we work very hard on it's got legs. I mean, we've, we work really hard to make the show's. So they are evergreen and, you know, and they, they get run a lot. We, we, we try to pack as much content in there so people can watch them several times and still get good stuff out of it. And it's, it works quite well.

1 (1h 0m 13s):
I mean, it's really an interesting model because the content isn't what drives the, the business. I mean, you know, you eventually, as you grew, grew and ruined, you had, I think you were doing what tours for like 30,000 people a year at buy, buy, buy 2019. Yeah.

4 (1h 0m 30s):
In a, in a normal year, we take 30,000 people in 1200 tours.

1 (1h 0m 34s):
It's an unbelievable, so this is, you know, and, and so the content that you offer, because you can go to your website now and, and download apps that are free, right. You can go, you can download free guides to like, like audio guides. That is really just stuff you put out there. And I, and I, I hope this doesn't sound cynical, cause I don't think this is how you think about it, but it really is a brilliant kind of free advertisement for the things you do sell.

4 (1h 1m 2s):
Yeah. I'm honestly, I measure my profit by how many trips do I impact? Like right now during COVID I'm producing I'm profitable. I'm not making any money, but I'm plenty profitable because we've created a program called classroom Europe that lets teachers put together a little clips from our TV shows into their own playlists to teach on a certain theme. And this is free. I could charge for it, but that would complicate things. And it would diminish the amount of people who could use it. And it wouldn't no longer be a celebration. So we spent a lot of money making this program. We spent a lot of money making the TV show. We've got every right to charge for this, but I would much rather have people run it and then say, how can he afford to do this?

4 (1h 1m 43s):
And then it becomes a part of their teaching arsenal. And, and then people like us more and, you know, without even being aggressive and calculated, you know, they're gonna think good about Rick Steves

1 (1h 1m 56s):
When you, when you started to get more visible, because when you started become more visible and, and you know, you're on the TV show and there presumably more people interested in buying your books and then maybe even taking your tours, did you sit down and say, okay, this is the strategy. We're going to create a travel business and we're going to do all these different things or do the things that Eventually happened, kind of just happened. Haphazardly, no strategy at all.

4 (1h 2m 21s):
You got, I always think I kind of liked this idea of in Mexico. There's a volcano that just appears, or just a little mountain grows out of the desert. And then it grows bigger and bigger. And all of a sudden it's a mountain didn't there was not any plan there. And that's kind of the way we grew. We become a bigger and bigger and bigger. And for me, it's, I never really wanted, I got a business degree, but I never really wanted to look in the book and say, Oh, now you have a COO. Now you have a CFO. Now you have a CEO. I don't even know what that stuff is until it becomes apparent, Oh, we need a Guy to do this. And then they go, yeah, that's called a CFO.

4 (1h 3m 2s):
You know? And we're just, we're just kinda going, Oh, that's the way that

1 (1h 3m 6s):
They have that when we come back. And just a moment why Rick didn't want the company to grow too big or too fast. And later what happened when the pandemic brought his entire business to a halt, stay with us. I'm Guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

Netsuite (1h 3m 38s):
Hey, everyone, just a quick, thanks to our sponsor NetSuite. If you're a business owner, you don't need to be told that running a business is tough. Now is the time to ditch the spreadsheet's and upgrade to NetSuite by Oracle, a leading cloud business solution system. That suite gives you visibility and control over your financials, HR inventory e-commerce and more join the over 24,000 companies using NetSuite right now to schedule your free product tour. Now at netsuite.com/built

1 (1h 4m 12s):
support for how I built this and the following message come from NerdWallet, a personal finance website and app that helps people make smarter money moves. The housing market is moving quickly in 2021. And the team of experts at NerdWallet know that when your buying a new home, you need to be able to act quickly when shopping for a mortgage company to make it easier to shop around and feel confident in your decision. NerdWallet has created mortgage calculators that show you an estimate of your monthly payments. Break down the types of loans you can get and even shows how you can pay down your principal over the time period of your loan. And with personalized tools, NerdWallet will suggest some options of mortgage companies that you can compare right there.

1 (1h 4m 58s):
That way, all the information you need is in one place for all your money questions, turn to the nerds@nerdwallet.com. This message comes from NPR sponsor, ADP, helping clients navigate these complex times and compliance challenges. So businesses can pay their people accurately. And on ADP

4 (1h 5m 18s):
Has been guiding businesses in response to evolving news laws and regulations. For more than 70 years, ADP has been helping companies take care of people on a commitment that doesn't change and an ever changing world, ADP, HR, talent, time benefits and payroll informed by data and designed for people.

2 (1h 5m 42s):
Neuroscientists, Kimberly Noble wants to know if the family gets more money, does it directly impact children's cognitive development ideas about the brain

1 (1h 5m 53s):
That's on the Ted radio hour from

2 (1h 5m 55s):
NPR?

1 (1h 5m 59s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Roz. So by the late 1990s and early two thousands Rick Steves books and tours and TV show were doing so well that he and his small team were actually a little worried that they might be growing too fast. In fact,

4 (1h 6m 20s):
So in my office, the biggest issue, and we had our annual meetings and stuff was how do we not let growth brutalize

1 (1h 6m 26s):
Us? Because we are,

4 (1h 6m 29s):
We're a gang of collaborators, of friends and a big family and my business, and a, and we're not, we're not a typical we're, we're a privately held. I would say if we were publicly held would have no choice. We'd have to profit maximize, but we have ideals and it's not just making money and we didn't want to sell our soul. We didn't, you know, we want to maintain who we were and that's, I mean, I remember the, I just remember when I used to take the next to the bank and myself, you know, and I was not a, not a, not a sliver of that, but so now we've got the power to do things. We've got the power to, you know, when I'm, when I want to make a show, a TV show about, about hunger, I dedicate a lot of time and a lot of money to go into Ethiopian Guatemala, and we finish it with, we don't have to worry about what has every dissolve cost.

4 (1h 7m 12s):
We make that show for his class, that whatever it cost, and then it has an impact. So we're just really enjoying the success we've had because of the, the way it lets us do a good job in the tools we use to teach the public.

1 (1h 7m 29s):
I don't think many people dislike you. I think probably nobody does, but the, the rap on you, one of the criticisms of you and you know, this is Rick Steves has ruined these like beautiful quaint places because they are just masses of American tourists coming through them. And, and they are not special anymore. There's nothing hidden, like writing about Europe to the back door in 1982 meant one thing. But today it's like every spot on earth, you go <inaudible> in Italy or, you know, or, or, you know, the coast of Donegal and Ireland, wherever it is, there was some influencer posing, you know, getting posing for photographs in a field, you know, a, a, a, a field of lavender and Provence or whatever it might be like. It's just a, you know, there's, its, its kind of a trope, but there's some truth to it, which is everything specials kind of in a ruined.

1 (1h 8m 15s):
Yeah.

5 (1h 8m 16s):
I remember there was a cartoon when it was these whalers and somebody goes quick, harpoon it before its extinct and a baby that's a little bit like me. My job is to find these undiscovered places and tell everybody about 'em and you know, I've thought long and hard about this. You know, I'm, I'm the hired hand of my readers. I'm not in business to protect places that I discovered. I remember once I went to a, a, a lecture with Arthur Fromer, you know, my mentor, my inspiration and so many ways. And, and somebody said, you know, what's your favorite place in, in Rome? And he said, I've got a favorite place in Rome. I just go there for myself. It's just any described. So beautifully says they don't tell any about it because I just want it to be for me.

5 (1h 8m 57s):
And I thought, Arthur, that's not, what we're supposed to do is travel writers. We work really hard to find these great places in the very, very favorite places need to be more important than anything else shared with the Public. As long as that place can handle the Public, you know, some places don't want the public or they can't handle the public and you would be wrong to promote it in a way that overwhelmed it and made everybody miserable at the locals and the tourists. But you know, I'm not, I used to genuinely look for places off the beaten path, but I've been sort of, I've morphed into finding unique, authentic places that are accessible to the beaten path. That's what people want. And you know, Paris is by no means and discovered, but you can go to Paris in a way that you can enjoy it without it being a tourist trap.

1 (1h 9m 43s):
Michelle wonder Rick I mean, you've probably seen how How influencers on, on social media travel around Europe, around the world and, and oftentimes they're not, they're not really there to see it, but basically to be seen seeing it, right? Like they post pictures of themselves like posing in, in this or in that place in time as a way of getting travel perks. Right. And I mean, you've seen those kinds of posts, right? Yeah.

5 (1h 10m 8s):
Yeah. I mean, just last year I was traveling around Europe and it occurred to me. I went to like four places in a row where there was this Instagram phenomenon. This is a whatever it is. And I was in <inaudible> in Switzerland. People were lining up to stand on a stump in Miran to get a photograph with a famous mountain behind them in the literally lining up to get this photograph. And then they go to the chink Matera in the Italian Riviera and there's five towns. Nobody goes to Monterrey Cola and all of a sudden everybody is going to Motorola and they're on the spit out on the waterfront and Manohla, and that there was a big crowd on the spit and Rola, and I asked my local friend, what is that? And he goes, that's the Instagram spot. Everybody goes there to get their picture.

5 (1h 10m 50s):
And they don't even know the name of the town, you know? And I was just so thankful that I don't, you know, when I go, when I go to the loo, I'm not putting on my shoulder beds and getting a selfie in front of the Mona Lisa, I've got some serious art appreciation to do so that's a different world. And those people are scrambling to make it in that world. And that's fine with me, but it has nothing to do with work as a travel writer

1 (1h 11m 16s):
This past year has been a tough year for the travel industry. And I, and I know that a couple months ago you put out an open letter, basically explaining the situation for each of your business. You have had zero, basically zero revenue over the, since the pandemic shutdown travel and you have had to in order to avoid laughs, I guess you basically everybody on your team working 60%, something like that. Yeah.

5 (1h 11m 43s):
Yeah. We're between 60 and 70%. Everybody still gets their healthcare, but we're, we're having to trim our sales.

1 (1h 11m 48s):
So how are you, how are you paying people? If you have no revenue as well

5 (1h 11m 53s):
Have for 30 years I've had revenue and, and I'm S I'm a privately held. So I am the only stockholder. And you know, if you're a publicly held or when you make money, when you're in the way, if I understand it correctly, that money has gone and you disperse it through your stockholders, but I've just been the only stockholder. So I've, I've collected a lot of money over 30 successful years in a row. I mean, not that we're any in a giant mega corporation because I'm not, you know, I'm not interested in going public and just becoming bigger than we are. I mean, our, when we peaked in 2019, I think we were a gross revenue was a a hundred million dollars without at least a hundred employees. And it's okay. I got two years that are terrible. Well, if you've got 30 good years and then two terrible years, I can take those lumps.

5 (1h 12m 37s):
And I owe it to my staff. I mean, they've been with me through all these successful years. I'm not going to just say, Oh no, I'm not making money. You guys are all gone. I need to spend whatever it takes to keep my team together because we will throttle up, will it be late 20, 21? Or it will be 20, 22. I don't know, but we're going to be here. We're going to be ready. We've weathered many storms over the last 40 years as a travel company. And Rick, Steves, Europe, we'll be here after the pandemic. And I know that the demand for travel, doesn't dissipate, it backs up and you know, the economy may be tough and there may be some changes and how we travel, but you know, there will be travel and Rick, Steves, Europe, we'll be here with guidebooks ed with tours when breaks open.

5 (1h 13m 22s):
And the worst thing for me to do as, as, as an ethical employer would be, sorry, I'm not making any money. You guys are all unemployed now. And from a, just from a smart businessmen point of view, I want to have my team together. Mike, you know, there's something really an I've been thinking about this lately. There's an intangible value of having the team together. It's like a baseball team or something, you know, you need that shortstop, you need that picture in it. You need that cleanup hitter.

1 (1h 13m 52s):
What do you think the future of travel is going to be like? I mean, I, I wonder about this a lot because I, I live in California and the Bay area and, and I have really rediscovered this part of the country. I mean, I, I've a lot of hiking, a lot of just spending time in nature and really discovering places I hadn't been to

3 (1h 14m 12s):
And actually wondering, and my wife and I have talked about this and sort of wondering like, why are we, why don't we travel so much over a year? Maybe, maybe we should travel less. And I wonder what you think the future of travel is going to look like post COVID.

4 (1h 14m 26s):
Yeah. I'm pretty convinced that the essence of travel will come back. You know, Rick, Steves traveled is the opposite of social distancing. You know, I, I go to Paris to be kissed on the cheeks and I go to Rome to pack into those Piazza's and do the passage out to a strolling in the pedestrian boulevards, looking at an ice cream cone and checking out the crowd. I go to the pubs in Ireland to a clink glasses with people who really believe that strangers are just friends who've yet to meet. And I think that will come back. I think it'll be, it'll be incremental, but I think we are on a glide path to normalcy. I also am concerned that, that the little moms and pops that make travel so fun can survive this because the big businesses will survive it.

4 (1h 15m 12s):
But I do not want a future where everything comes to me in a cardboard box on my doorstep and where, where, where every strip mall is just filled with chain restaurants. I don't want that. I don't want that in my regular life. And I don't want that in my travel life. And the challenge will be can the small mom and pops the little entrepreneurial ventures, ah, the little passionate work, you know, a life work of people about their small museums that they run. Will this still be standing after COVID and I hope that it will be

3 (1h 15m 43s):
Rick for a, for a 65 year old Guy you are remarkably self aware of your privilege. And your, have you talked about what it means to be a white man in the world, and you have been pretty open about your progressive politics. He wrote a book called travel is a political act 2009. You've updated it even though I think just a couple of years ago. Do you think, do you think because you have spend so much time overseas seeing other cultures and tagging other people that it actually made you more progressive politically, I love how travel

4 (1h 16m 28s):
Opens you up to the world. And I think it does make you more progressive I I've always been aware that culture shock is a challenge for travelers. And just this last few months, I've been thinking about how a culture shock is a positive thing. It's the growing pains of a broadening perspective and a I'm I'm so aware of the gap between rich and poor. I'm so aware that that my daily latte costs a day's wages for the less privileged 50% of humanity. Half of our planet is trying to live on $5 a day. I think it's so interesting how you learn about your country.

4 (1h 17m 8s):
A lot of times by leaving, edit and leaving it and, and looking at it from a distance. So this is all to me. You know, my travel teaching has morphed. We talked about it in the very beginning. I said, European travel cheap. It was just budget tricks. You know, and since then it has morphed gradually, gradually, gradually over the years. And now it is getting out of your comfort zone and gaining an empathy for people who live differently and see things differently than we do.

3 (1h 17m 38s):
You know, for somebody who really kind of started this as a, a passion project, right. You never, I can't imagine you ever anticipated getting rich off of what you do, but you did. I mean, th th this, this is a business that in 2019 generated a a hundred million dollars a year, a staff of a a hundred people. I mean, you probably have enough money to retire several times over his money and was money ever important to you to what do you know? Is it important to you? Do you, are you uncomfortable when I say, you know, you're a rich guy?

4 (1h 18m 12s):
No. When I was, when I was a kid, I wanted to get A's as a businessman, when you get A's by making money, I pride myself in paying my staff well and taking care of my staff and providing a working environment that helps people feel good about what they're doing and not just, you know, earning a paycheck, but, but, but contributing in a positive way. And I like to make money. When I, when I make money, I can do things that give me power to do stuff that I think is worthwhile. Like what, you know, I like to pay the rent for my local symphony. So my symphony has a tough time financially, like most symphonies. And I just thought, how about if one of your fans just paid the concert hall rental fee all year long every year.

4 (1h 18m 55s):
So I've committed myself to doing that. I, I care about a homelessness here. You know, I try to make sure people can find an affordable hotel when they're traveling in Europe. And I know a lot of people will never see their name on a plane ticket because life is just tough for them. And if we've got money for traveling, we should of money to help people out here in our country. So I bought a 25 unit apartment building that's

3 (1h 19m 16s):
In Edmonds, Washington, right in

4 (1h 19m 19s):
North of Seattle. And I thought a lot of well-off people have money as a nest egg sitting in the bank, making interest. Why not take that capital and buy an apartment complex and then give it to the white WCA or some organization like that. How has people, and you still own it, but your money is doing something good instead of sitting in the bank. And eventually I just gave that building to the white WCA. And now I go to sleep, knowing that my hard work has resulted in the YWC owning in a 25 unit apartment complex. That is housing 25 single moms, a in this case, people who have had problems with hard drug addiction, and they were not able to be with their kids and now they can be with their kids.

3 (1h 19m 59s):
So do you give yourself some luxuries? Like when you travel, do you travel first-class and a flat bed

4 (1h 20m 6s):
I've never paid for anything than economy on an airplane ticket. If I get bumped,

3 (1h 20m 11s):
You just get upgraded because of your, your mile.

4 (1h 20m 13s):
No, I don't do miles. I've never collected miles or anything like that. I've just have a, I don't want to try to defend it because I don't know for sure why I don't like it, but I don't bother with miles that they really don't like miles. And so when you flood a Europe, you fly in economy, class. Yeah. I found a way back there.

3 (1h 20m 28s):
Somebody just sits next to you. And they were like, wait, aren't you Rick Steves

4 (1h 20m 32s):
I just sit there like a Norwegian, Bernie Sanders with my noise reduction, headphones on looking at my laptop for eight hours.

3 (1h 20m 39s):
How do you prevent people from giving you a bunch of free stuff or trying to influence your decision by making you, because you got to be recognized now, everywhere you go, it's not like you're a, a, a, an anonymous critic, you know? Right.

4 (1h 20m 54s):
No, I mean, I take it personally because you got to earn your way into a Rick Steves book. You can't get in there because you gave Rick a nice bottle of wine or that your cousin's already in there. You got to earn it. Guy Oh, I owed that to my readers. So it is a constant battle. And I, I, you know, I get free rooms when I travel and nobody would charge me for a room when I go to their hotel, because they send them a quarter of their business all year long. But I am very tuned into the fact that I can not let that corrupt me. If, if things go South that hotel, even if it's run by friends of mine is out of the book and it breaks my heart, but I have hope to drop hotels, run by friends of mine, because it's no longer what I used to be.

4 (1h 21m 36s):
When I turned a spot in the book.

3 (1h 21m 37s):
Do you, do you think that your audience is getting older or do you think that you are still appealing to like, if you're, if you're a young traveler today, like when I was 20 and I went all over Europe, so why would you use a Rick Steves guide versus a let's go or a rough guide or lonely planet?

4 (1h 21m 59s):
Yeah, my staff is tuned into generational changes and so on. I find it kind of boring. Maybe it's because I'm the old generation, but I want to produce content. I think if content is fundamentally helpful and if it's well-designed and if it's affordable, the format can be devised after the fact to fit the consuming habits of this generation or that generation. So is it an electronic book or a book in print? Is it an app for all that kind of stuff? I don't know. I just want to produce the content. You know, I've been, you know, our, our guidebooks are the best before COVID hit. My publisher was so excited. He showed me the sales target and twenty-five of the top 30 guide books and published in the United States for Europe had Rick Steves on the cover.

4 (1h 22m 46s):
And I think that is more fundamental than what generation is using it to them.

3 (1h 22m 51s):
I mean, what's interesting about your business, right? Is that it's a, it's a travel business, but it's around the name of this person. Rick Steves right. And, and normally you would say, well, you know, once Rick is, is no longer a part of the equation, there's no business, but, but I mean, Rick Steves is like Frommer's or, or a lonely planet. Right. It's it's you, but it's something else to it. It's actually, I mean, it's interesting to me about your business is that it can survive without, without the person Rick Steves. Yeah.

4 (1h 23m 26s):
I've, you know, I've wanted to get to the point where the business could survive without me. And I think we're at the point now, and I'm really happy about that. That we've got a team where the company, as a viable, without me, on the other hand, it's, it's a shame when a company is named after a person, because then you have other people that should have them the potential to be the public face of that company. But its kind of awkward to say, you know, here's a John DOE who is a F speaking for a Rick Steves it would be nicer if the company was just called Europe through the back door and then John DOE would not be not Rick Steves but that's not a problem right now because Rick Steves is still having fun being Rick Steves.

3 (1h 24m 15s):
When you think about the arc of your career and what you've built the top selling business at the top selling travel books or Rick Steves books and a hundred million dollars in revenue at, at, at, at your peak, how much of that success to you? Do you attribute to how hard you worked in, how, how much you put into it and how much do you think had to do with luck?

4 (1h 24m 39s):
Oh, I think a lot of it is how hard I work. I just I've dedic I've basically I've I'm not at all complaining about it, but I've given my life to this business. I I've always worked on Saturday. I work every night till 10 o'clock. So I'm loving my work, but not everybody can love the work the way that I'm, I'm blessed to love the work I've I've I believe in what we're doing and I got my name on the cover and I'd like to be, America's a traveling Guinea pig. I like to make mistakes, take careful notes and to come home and help people learn from my mistakes rather than their own. So they can have a better grip

3 (1h 25m 13s):
Early in the conversation. You were so candid about your family and, and your personal life and, and, and understand why you're here in a new chapter there as well that you and your wife had to have divorced, divorced some time ago. And I guess it was pretty amicable, but you now have a, a, a new partner. I think her name is Shelly, who is actually a Lutheran Bishop. And it sounds like even though, you know, you're not traveling as much as you normally would. I mean, it sounds like you're in a, a, a really good place.

4 (1h 25m 46s):
Yeah. I am so thankful. And she has been able to introduce me to things that I would have never, ever taken seriously before. COVID I've got an apron now I cook, I know how to use the stove. I'm I'm I'm walking dogs. Shelly has got a couple of dogs and you know, I would have thought that'd be

3 (1h 26m 4s):
A deal-breaker for anybody who is going to be my girlfriend, but no, these dogs are very important part of our life. So it's totally new to me. And it reminds me there's more to life than travel. And I'm really thankful for that. That's Rick Steves founder and owner of Rick Steves Europe and by the way, there's one thing you might be kind of surprised to hear about Rick. He's a pretty big advocate for smoking pot. I love marijuana, but I don't. I talked more than I smoke. Let's put it that way. It takes, it takes time to smoke marijuana and many years, my new year's resolution is to smoke more pot.

3 (1h 26m 46s):
You know, as the resolutions go, you failed, but I've spent a lot of time and a lot of money helping legalize marijuana. I love the idea that the nerdiest most earnest Lutheran guy like you is, is also this huge marijuana advocate to, Oh, if Martin Luther was around today, he'd be a pilot. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you are not already a subscriber, please do subscribe to this podcast. Wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us, our email address is HIBT at NPR dot org. And if you want to follow us on Twitter at how I built this or at Guy rise and on Instagram, you can follow me at Guy dot Ross.

3 (1h 27m 32s):
This episode was produced by Rachel Faulkner with music composed by Ron Tina at bluey. Thanks also to Liz Metzger, a fairer Safari, Derek gales, JC Howard, Julia Carney, Neva grant, and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Janet poo, John Lee I'm Guy RAAs. And you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR.

8 (1h 28m 12s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor Epson. Now you can kiss expensive cartridges. Good-bye the Epson EcoTank printer comes with a ridiculous amount of ink and enough to print thousands of pages. So you can just Phil and chill, learn more@epson.com slash NPR.