1 (0s):
Hey just a quick heads up before we start the show. There are couple of swear words in this episode. So you may want to keep that in mind if you're listening with kids. Okay on with the show.

3 (15s):
We start here is like the week before Christmas Pilar contact me and saying it's not working and their video is coming through like an old TV like tuner like it was like all like lines through it and just you couldn't see the picture. So most of our units are now in the field with customers that not only do they not work, but we can't change that software on them. So they're basically

1 (35s):
bricks. You cannot fix the ones that people have yeah,

3 (39s):
you can't rewrite this. I swear on this chip. And so this was like the end of the world like this really was basically the business is

1 (47s):
over.

2 (54s):
Robin PR it's how I built this a show of that innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built I'm guy Roz and on the shoulder. They have Jamie seminar figured out how to answer the door with his iPhone and how that little side project grew into ring a business. He sold for a billion dollars.

1 (1m 24s):
From time to time all of us have to do things. We'd rather avoid like go to a party. We don't want to be at or meet a friend of a friend of a friend who really wants to meet us, but I'm willing to bet that more often than not when you do do those things. The outcome is actually better than you expected. And sometimes it can be life changing as it was for Jamie semenov the founder of ring. The company that makes the famous video doorbell several years ago. Jamie was struggling to get ring off the ground and he wasn't feeling particularly confident to the contrary. He was feeling like a failure and around this time of friend of a friend who wanted to launch a business ask Jamie to lunch.

1 (2m 12s):
The guy needed some advice in Jamie very reluctantly went to that lunch. But if he hadn't there's a pretty good chance we wouldn't be telling his Tori today you'll hear about that lunch a little later in the show, but if you know the back of the envelope account of Jamie semenov, you'll know that he invented the ring doorbell in his garage in LA and then seven years later. He sold his business to Amazon for a billion dollars, but the path to getting there was actually really slow and

2 (2m 46s):
really messy full of bad business ideas and some good ones

1 (2m 50s):
that never got traction and

2 (2m 52s):
Far as the ring doorbell goes Jamie didn't invent it to put it on the market. It was a home improvement project. He invented it to help him hear the doorbell from the

1 (3m 2s):
garage. Anyway for now what you need to know about Jamie is that he grew up in northern New Jersey where he admits he kind of floundered it's cool. But where he thrived was at home tinkering with stuff.

3 (3m 16s):
I would come home and go in the basement, you know, I had RC cars which

2 (3m 20s):
were radio control. Yeah. I had all these like the

3 (3m 23s):
clot Buster and the Frog and The

2 (3m 26s):
Echoes. I got many of the Frog because this is a time where you wouldn't just go to the

1 (3m 31s):
store and get them all made. You have to buy the components for the everybody Control Card like you would go hobby shop or RadioShack and put them together.

3 (3m 38s):
I Chester Hobby and I would go there and it was like a big thing to buy one. I mean these things were expensive. Yeah, and and they would break like the greatest thing about them is that they broke every almost every time you use them. And so I had to Fabricate Parts fabricate tools and I wasn't like, you know a kid saying I'm gonna fabricate a tool. It's just like my Froggers broken and I want to go play with Andrew down the street with his like I need to fix it. And so like I just had to do this stuff and I learned like that's how I learned engineering. I mean, I learned Electronics from it, you know from the speed controllers the servos I learned gears and mechanical. Yeah. It's probably looking back at the RC cars might have been one of the bigger influences in my life.

3 (4m 20s):
Yeah of that.

1 (4m 21s):
Yeah what we're going really we're geeking out we're getting really

2 (4m 24s):
deep and sorry the hobby kind of like servos. You're going to Servo Motors. I remember those things. Oh my

1 (4m 29s):
God. All right people are going to like this is weird.

3 (4m 32s):
But I think I guess the point of though is that it's like how things work like, yeah, the fundamentals of how things work even in like as you know, things get more complicated more Computing like still the fundamentals are the same. And so when you learn the fundamentals, it's incredible how you can sort of go up the stack. Yeah and do more complex things.

1 (4m 49s):
So you were that kind of kid, right because so it does Like you were maybe not like a video game kid necessarily or maybe

3 (4m 56s):
like yeah. All I wanted to do is be in the basement just building stuff and I had this like anchoring. Yeah, like balsa wood like three 3D printers. You could make anything out of balsa wood like you could just shape it.

2 (5m 9s):
Oh man. I made it. I made a

1 (5m 11s):
bridge with balsa wood like with a little exacto knife and cutting it at Angles and then gluing them together or just pushing it,

3 (5m 18s):
right? Yeah and in high school I had this Sure class and in year 3 of it you built the house that you had like argue like first of the architecture you like do the whole plans and then you actually built a model of the house and the model that I built. I remember I wanted it to have cedar shingles and my teachers like you can't do it's going to take too long and I'm like I have cedar shingles and so I cut individually out balsa wood shingles and I'm glued them onto this house and I don't even know how many hours it took me and I don't know how I did this, but I literally I did finish it.

2 (5m 52s):
Just for people with think we have no idea what I'm about if it's sort of

1 (5m 55s):
like taking a thousand garlic cloves and slicing them very very thin. Yes hours and hours. Yeah. So model cars balsa wood your that was your thing. That was what you love to do and I say you are not a great student, but you know, okay student like what B's and

3 (6m 15s):
C's yeah like B's and C's and then what happened Land Rover did like a thing. NG in my town like they brought new cars to it and my dad and I just went was like in the park and this Land Rover Defender 90 was being brought into the u.s. And it was like it was seeing that thing I can still picture myself seeing the like this at this moment like it's in my head right now and I said to my dad I'm like man, I would do anything to have that car. My dad goes get straight A's and I literally did I the first semester I actually got one b and I was devastated and my dad said I'll extend it. And then I got straight As the next semester and it was my junior year which ended up being super critical for College admission.

3 (6m 59s):
And so it was this amazing thing where yes, it was a bribe, but it helped me so much of my life because it's helped me get into probably a better College it like it was a kind of an incredible thing. She's got the car. Yeah with Straight A's.

1 (7m 13s):
Yeah and you go off to college you went to Babson College, which is kind of a not a super well-known school, but it mainly focused on Business and Entrepreneurship. How are Were you as a kid who was a tinkerer? How did you think I wanted like work in a business? Because I don't know where you selling stuff. And I mean did you we kind of already doing businesses on the side before you got there?

3 (7m 34s):
I was I was doing like lots of entrepreneurial things but not realizing they were like entrepreneurial. So I was on the way to school. I was like, you know that we lived in a place where there was horses and so on the way to school I'd like shovel people's four stalls out on the way to school. I can make a couple hundred bucks a week doing that and every parent that was In business or did anything I would talk like it's kind of funny looking back but like my friends would all be you know down on the couch playing games and I'd be like with the dad talking to them about business or time. Like I wanted to learn all this stuff. And the way I got to Babson was I used to drive this kid to school who is like the wealthiest kid in the town or whatever. I remember being in his kitchen one morning, and he was always late and the dad came down who I like really looked up to and always wanted to talk to him and he said to me just kind of off the cuff and he's making his coffee and said I Gotta Wear Your applying for colleges I gave all these colleges that were like liberal arts.

3 (8m 24s):
Like, you know, just sort of General colleges and I said Babson and Babson literally just been thrown into my list and he goes huh Babson he was you know, what because the most interesting and successful people I know went there and then just goes back to doing his coffee whatever a drive to school drop this kid off go straight to the counselor's office and I'm like, I'm going to Babson. How do I get in? What do I got to do? Wow, that was it? I heard that from this guy and I was in all

1 (8m 47s):
right, so you get to college and the 90s and you Had this kind of background and tinkering and electronics background should be of just this basement kind of taking stuff apart. Will you still kind of doing things related to that when you got to college? So

3 (9m 3s):
I was a little bit when I got to college. I mean I was I sold Electronics on the campus. I had a company called Gadget Tronics, you know gadgets and electronics TVs stereos all that kind of stuff. So I was always hustling we how are you get your you were like

1 (9m 19s):
sourcing electronic it's and selling them on campus.

3 (9m 24s):
So I found there was a girl at school and her dad had a electronic store in Houston, Texas. And yeah, I was able to convince him to sell my stuff at a lower price. And so yeah, I was

2 (9m 35s):
basically like I was trying

3 (9m 36s):
to think about business in the way of like I'm going to try to create a career or something like company. I was always just hustling, you know, I was always like doing stuff and thinking about like, where is there a need hustle? Where's her need hustle, buddy, and I in college we put posters up all over the place. For $15 an hour will do anything and so we'd pay kids ten dollars an hour and make the difference. This is Wellesley, Massachusetts really nice town that horrible things people would have you do for $15 an hour. It was pretty unbelievable. But you know, we were we were happy to make, you know, make a little spread and

1 (10m 9s):
so you would like task grab it before taskrabbit. Yeah. Yeah, but doesn't sound like it was like build my Ikea furniture. It sounds like it was it was

3 (10m 19s):
the best one we've ever and I and we would obviously also sometimes want to make the $15 an hour, so we were just do the work ourselves as well. And so one of them was this huge Hillside full of poison ivy and they're like, can you just pull all this poison ivy out of this Hillside and we're like Hells. Yeah. I mean that was like

2 (10m 34s):
for like for three weeks room bucks

1 (10m 36s):
an hour. Yeah the time that

3 (10m 38s):
seemed like a lot. You know Beer Money lies that was like it was very good leverage on the dollar. So wow. All

1 (10m 44s):
right, so you graduate and I'm assuming you like a lot of kids who graduate from Babson you're thinking. All right. What am I gonna do? So what did you do?

3 (10m 54s):
So I got contacted by like a friend of a friend and they were opening up a hot dog chained in Hoboken and wanted a business plan to raise money and they you know kept asking like would you do this and I'm like no, I don't listen to me and they're like well, if you would how much would it be and I'm like, I don't know

1 (11m 12s):
$10,000 to help write them a business plan. Yeah for their hot dog company. Yes.

3 (11m 17s):
Okay. I just said like ten thousand dollars. Like I mean I literally was like, you know like a joke like yeah sure for $1.00 I'll come do this and they said yes, and I'm like, okay done. I am through $10,000 or do anything. I had no idea what I was doing. And so I started doing this business plan, which I guess I think it ended up being because there's okay and then I'd from that. I got other business plan jobs. And so I started a company called Your First Step which was a business plan company. So I kind of started doing this thing and I just every because I like doing it I kept sort of raising my Phrase and people get paying it was it was during the.com boom to so people were a little bit had lost touch with

1 (11m 59s):
reality. Yeah, but who had two people find out about you mean your this is Hoboken, New Jersey you do a business plan for a hot dog guy. And then how do you get your next

3 (12m 8s):
client? So just it's funny just kind of like and again I didn't need to have the world know about me. I just need to have the next job know about me. So it was you know, and I was doing these every couple months, so it wasn't like I was doing hundreds of business plans. I was just doing it for

2 (12m 22s):
you. And by the way, this was the

1 (12m 23s):
this is the era before like a business plan today is got to be five slides and that's it. Like that's what people want to see. This was like kind of pretty slick like

3 (12m 32s):
the clip art era the clip art Market studies. I mean, it really was responding. You got a lot of points for how it looks I ended up figuring out that I could get a book binder which was like a thing that would make it a

2 (12m 42s):
hardcover blow. These were physical business plans. Of course, this was not a little business plan.

3 (12m 49s):
So I realize if you made them into a physical book like Just gave that to someone they were like, wow. This is real. This is good and everything inside of it was just crap. I mean it was how would I know what to do with a business plan? I got you and again looking back if you needed a kid to write your business by means you didn't understand your business like it was just I was bad

1 (13m 8s):
and I think I read that that around this time like this is like the late 90s. Somebody actually asked you two to work on like a random business plan in in Bulgaria.

3 (13m 19s):
Yes, and I went there and it was like January February. February of 2000 and I think like for my type of brain those places were like they were like I empty canvas to an artist going to a place where there's so much that needs to be done. My brain wanted to explode there's a so many businesses so many things you could do because it was things are just kind of coming out and people are you know, they're just everything was needed like it was pretty exciting. So so I go there I do this business plan and then I meet A guy who's doing voice over IP. And so that was like my first transition from all say from being like this service business to actually getting into a real business.

3 (14m 2s):
This

1 (14m 3s):
is the early days of voice over IP. Super super early. Somebody's like hey, I want to do voice over IP and make that the new Telecom of Bulgaria was that the

2 (14m 13s):
idea. So what happened

3 (14m 15s):
was is all there had never been the ability for a individual like a not a sort of either. Er a government entity or a giant Telecom company to send a call from one place to another you needed physical lines and like I mean, it was like you really had a boat like, you know, putting copper through the ocean. I mean it was like Bill and so with voice over IP did is it allowed literally like two guys in an office to deploy these gateways and send a call from the u.s. To Bulgaria. And so what you could do is you could get local phone lines. You would get a little apartment and a you put this box. In there and you'd send the call through the internet and then you dial it out locally and the your cost was the internet cost plus the local charge which usually was basically free.

3 (15m 3s):
So now inaudible Gary instead of being 25 cents was the cost was called a penny and so you would sell a phone card against that and you would and this is what sort of opened up all Telecom globally.

1 (15m 17s):
So you decide to stay in Bulgaria. I'm assuming and like pursue this idea. So when

3 (15m 22s):
when I got into this I ended up basically being a nomad because eat once I got a place to start it and going I didn't really need to be there that much longer and the partner was based in the US and he understood the technology and I was sort of the one who would even say I understood how to do is I was just willing to like I'll just go and I'll make this work. I'll figure this out.

1 (15m 45s):
But as I understand it from from what I read the business kind of goes into the steak roller coaster mode, like initially it did really Well, and you were able to expand to to bunch of countries and then like the guy who you partner with who understood all the technology like he I guess he got in this like some money trouble and took off and things kind of fell apart, correct. So so what happened like, were you able to salvage it?

3 (16m 9s):
Yeah. So basically my partner ends up this he's gone. I have this network, but I didn't understand really how to run it and across the street from my apartment in New York was a Barnes & Noble owls and I went over and I bought this Cisco how to voice over IP book which was like 700 pages and I read the entire book cover to cover to figure out how to program these gateways so that I could turn them back on so that I could run this network because the only way to get out of this thing was to try that sort of make it work. There's people that I owed money to that said, you know, you owe me money and I said listen and this is a good lesson for the rest of my life, which was I want to pay you. I will work hard to pay you. But if you shut me down now, I'll never be able to pay you.

3 (16m 49s):
So like we just have to work this out together. And through doing that two things happen one is I got the business going started up again, which was which was great. The second thing that happened was I actually understood again to that going back to the RC cars. I understood like really how to fix them. At first. I didn't even understand what I was doing and then right. Okay when the business collapsed I literally had to learn the other side. Like I had to like read The Cisco book and understand like I understood why voice over IP now to me before this voice over IP was just a protocol that was doing something that I was making money with now I understood why it was so powerful it how you could saying calls how you could do stuff. And so that really like that, you know, then I became like a voice over IP technician and engineer and architect of networks.

3 (17m 35s):
And so I started building this back up and then another kid who went to Babson had been doing a phone card business that didn't have a network. I was a network without a phone card. He had the customer I had the logistics. So it was like putting together the supplier. In the Distributing putting that whole thing vertically integrating it and so we both saw the benefit of that put it together and you know, it was

1 (17m 58s):
good. How long did you do that?

3 (18m 0s):
How is this 2000 we merge in 2002 and then I think I sold out in 2005. It was like three or four years with him

1 (18m 10s):
that I sold my Stakeout and you were by the way living in New York at the time.

3 (18m 14s):
I was living in this know. I was living in California. Now we moved to San Diego the company in 2002 or three. So that brought me to California which I then met my wife who is in ela and so that kind of kept me

1 (18m 27s):
here and we should say you didn't do too badly on that sale think you walked away with about like a million dollars, right? Yep, by the way, were you were you making money and in all those years were you worried being paid?

3 (18m 41s):
I took like a Founders salary not a I was in drive around like in fancy cars and I think at the time so I think when I got the money from the sale, maybe had like five. I was in the bank or something. I was always sort of just you know, yeah scraping it

1 (18m 55s):
by all right, but now you've got a nice chunk of cash and was your idea

3 (19m 1s):
to

1 (19m 3s):
immediately do the next thing use that cash and start the next business.

3 (19m 7s):
So sick funny when you say idea it sounds like I was planning things out for a long time. I think I was more like a snowball just kind of flying down a hill trying not to crash into something that's gonna blow me up. So I Yeah, it wasn't as purposeful as like oh, I'm now going to do the next company. I had already started playing around with voicemail to text at the time. And so also I just moved my focus there because I didn't have anything else to do. So, I just kind of move the focus to that and kept end and really kind of doubled down on that business.

1 (19m 40s):
So tell me about it. How did that idea even come

3 (19m 43s):
about so it's you know, the Blackberry is out people are you know, clicking and stuff and it's like

2 (19m 49s):
what 2005

3 (19m 50s):
2005? Yeah going into 2016. Yep, and this idea of to

1 (19m 54s):
transcribe voicemails? How did you come up with that idea?

3 (19m 58s):
So I was with like a friend Mentor this guy Bill Wachtel really successful lawyer in New York who is visiting La we were just kind of did we were going to go out to dinner? We were sitting around talking and his son was there and it was like the dad's yelling about a voicemail message or something and he's sitting on his BlackBerry and I could have been thinking about this but it's like I just kind of blurted it out and said what happens if you could read your voicemail and he's like, that'd be great. I'm like, let's do it. He's like let's Do it. And so that was that started the business was like one of those like we'll just do a 50-50 done. Like we're just going to do it and he helped fund it and because I understood voice over IP because I understood sure it Telecom networks now. So again like this is building on I had some fundamental knowledge of how to route a call how to build a voice mail server.

3 (20m 39s):
So I literally built a voice mail server and we built this little system to be able to transcribe voicemail messages and then send them to you as email

1 (20m 47s):
and what was it called?

3 (20m 49s):
It was really called Simon scribe simultaneous transfer.

2 (20m 53s):
You know like God's Tronics you're seeing probably a

3 (20m 55s):
trend here and then we renamed it to phone tag because we realize it's a muskrat was a terrible name and you know wasn't wasn't gonna be the biggest company that world still exists today. It's an interesting service. But yeah, it wasn't, you know,

1 (21m 7s):
and who are your customers? How did you whoo-wee whoo-wee going to get to use the service?

3 (21m 12s):
So the original idea was that we would go direct to Consumer and so we literally would just you know people you could just go to phone tag and you could reroute your voicemail to us and pay us 10 bucks a month or thirty bucks a month. I

1 (21m 22s):
can't remember it was a website that you would visit pre apps.

3 (21m 26s):
Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. This is exactly this is pretty apps mostly blackberry. And then we went to AT&T and Verizon and Sprint and tried to get them to add it as a service that they could add which was a great You Know lesson of if you're a small company trying to do deals with big companies is it's almost guaranteed to be a kiss of death because they just take so much time and so much energy out of you and it's so hard to get something to happen there. So I did it was a real slog. Business, right? All right, so you have this business and

1 (21m 55s):
then from what I understand and I think anyone listening here could to see the foreshadowing coming Google

2 (22m 2s):
voice comes out of with a free service to to transcribe your calls for

1 (22m 8s):
free and I if I'm you I'm thinking we're done we're sunk.

3 (22m 13s):
Yeah, I think yeah, I think I thought even worse than that. But yes, no, it was it was a tough day and it's one of those funny things because I on the outside I had to come out and be like this doesn't Matter we can fight this like we're bigger than this. And yes, I don't like we're so screwed think we are done. Do you remember

2 (22m 28s):
when you found out about Google voice? Oh my God, I

3 (22m 30s):
remember writing this blog post that I wrote that morning. I was I like it's like almost a movie where the person's just smashing the keys. They're just writing so

1 (22m 37s):
fast. What did you write in the blog post? I

3 (22m 39s):
basically wrote that there's no way for you to do this with the way Telecom networks work and that they will just end up having to lose money on this Google. Yeah,

1 (22m 48s):
but it sounds like this is like an angry screed because

2 (22m 52s):
Of

3 (22m 52s):
course is going to crush you. Yeah, it's like the these the writing was on the wall. I mean it was like, you know it is yeah, why would somebody pay you

1 (22m 58s):
$10 a month when Google is offering it for free like free is a better price than $10. It's better by $10

2 (23m 7s):
actually put a

3 (23m 7s):
number on that. So what did you do? I found this small public company called die Tech which they were in the Telecom business selling services the carrier's so we know that we sold it I am. I was able to sell it for to get this sort of investors their money back.

1 (23m 25s):
I read they bought it for 17 million dollars, which to most of us sounds like a ton of money, but it wasn't

3 (23m 30s):
actually tell ya I didn't read between the lines. So like I was got it mean something I've always been sensitive to is like the fiduciary responsibility to investors. And so I did get every dollar back to every investor.

1 (23m 43s):
So no one made money. No one really lost money exactly.

3 (23m 47s):
Like let's put out of the 17 I got basically zero, so I got my the money I had invested I got back which was amazing. Yeah, and so that I came up with my next idea, you know, which is like almost it's like going through it like this. So most like exhausting of like, yeah, and then I yeah on to the next one. Well somebody but it

1 (24m 7s):
sounds like that was kind of the plan. I mean you sell a company but you come up with things and it sounds like your kind of restless which I think many if not all the people who've been on the show are and what's this new

3 (24m 18s):
idea. So this was unsubscribe.com. Yeah. Yeah, which is these spam had been solved but spamming the unlike the emails that are like not legally sent basically. So are those those have been like sort of the filters for those have been really tuned to get all that out? The problem you now had was like it's legal email, but it's filling up fifty percent of your inbox. And so I got this idea of if you could automatically unsubscribe from things you could clean out 50% of your inbox, you could give back time to employees or yourself and To make a service around it is still to this day. I think one of the best products I've ever done and one of the worst businesses I've ever been part of so like the the financial side of the business is as bad as it gets and the product was just awesome.

3 (25m 6s):
So just to clarify

1 (25m 8s):
today on my Gmail, it's awesome. Google will say Hey, you are not reading this thing. Do you want to unsubscribe? I just say,

3 (25m 14s):
yep. Yeah, so is it was that before that so there wasn't that feature on Gmail you basically get the button like you have now and they'll be like a little It would show up with actually insert the button through an extension in your browser. So

1 (25m 27s):
every time you get an email from somebody do my you just hit the unsubscribe button that you had on your browser. I got you. Exactly and what's your business model? You

2 (25m 34s):
try to sell it to companies?

3 (25m 36s):
Yeah. It was like a per week that the idea originally like a per seat fee, you know, if you take 50% of someone's email and clean it out like the amount of time times x number of employees like you can kind of figure out this return and it's just everyone agreed with that. They just didn't want to buy it. And so just ended up being I got a business that no one wanted to buy like everyone loved it. They individually like the idea. They just wouldn't buy it. And so I played out every which way I thought the business could go like we could be this we could do this like and I couldn't figure out how to make the company bigger than like 30 million dollars in Revenue in the next like three to five years. So yeah, I'd raised two million of venture capital and if the best you can do like if just the whole world was behind us was like 30 million.

3 (26m 22s):
Revenue, and that's when I realized like this is this is just not going to end.

1 (26m 25s):
Well, it's not going to be able to make enough money.

3 (26m 28s):
No, so what did you do? So anyway, fortunately through just meeting people and stuff met someone who is in the identity space.

1 (26m 38s):
What's the identity space

3 (26m 40s):
like the LifeLock like that kind of? Oh, yeah identity identity protection space. I get all trusted ID and we had built a lot of tech around this and they thought I'd be a great additional thing to add to their customers. So if they can This is like another feature, you know, we have this this, you know credit card this and and unsubscribe. And so for them. It was like we could just add this is another feature. It's great. And so I was able to in essence, you know dollar-for-dollar again like this is you know, this is if you're following the trend line here, this is not good build business up sell it get investors their exact dollars back like this is not a you

1 (27m 13s):
know, so you got an exit but not this is not like the because a lot of times people think of they'll meet someone and I'll say yeah, I sold my business and a lot of I think man that person is like yes, you know, you're actually most of the time when people said so my business, it doesn't really mean that they walked away with lots of cash.

3 (27m 33s):
Yeah, a lot of times there's people like me who are basically getting the money back to their investors or even, you know, getting half the money back to their investors, you know, it's like fortunate in some ways fortunate as I will get the full money back to investors both times. So

1 (27m 46s):
you are in your late 30s. You don't have a whole lot of money, but I'm assuming You're thinking okay. I gotta figure out the next thing I'm going to do or I gotta get a job or something like that.

3 (27m 57s):
So luckily on this one. I call it my entrepreneurial midlife crisis. I remember having this just like, you know almost like this collapse of I keep doing these things that I invent something I get excited I get into it and I won't look at it as like railroad tracks like once you raise money for something you turn a road into a railroad track and what I mean by that is you can't turn. And so like unsubscribe like I realized pretty quickly. It was bad, but I'd raise too many dogs are like, I'm on a railroad track now, which is going to burn up time see the phone tag, like, you know, I wasn't passionate about voicemail like I yeah, I thought it'd be fun to do and then all of a sudden

2 (28m 36s):
I'm in this thing where I'm like

3 (28m 37s):
slogging every day, and so I kind of sat back and again, this is by far the most important part of my life and I realized that I was an inventor and not an entrepreneur and by that I mean entrepreneurs want to build a business and inventor one. To literally invent a product or service to just get it out there. Yeah, and I decided from that. I'm just going to go to my garage hire a couple kids and we're just going to build ahead all these ideas that I've been writing down in my phone and the notes section and I'm just going to start to play with these and try to not get on a railroad track flavor them long enough to see what actually becomes something that has the ability to become something meaningful before going sort of too deep into

1 (29m 22s):
it. All right. So you say I'm going to go into my garage and hire a couple of kids and like when you say kids

3 (29m 28s):
like like that a college kids like literally I employee number one John modest teen lived in Philadelphia never we always joke never got a west of the Mississippi. I literally flew the kid out here and he I bought him a bicycle and he would ride from his apartment to my garage to work on this stuff. I'm

1 (29m 46s):
just and what was your boy? Did you say to him? You said? Hey, I don't really know what the next thing is. I just Tinker and I just want you to help me do that. Was that what you said?

3 (29m 56s):
Basically? I mean I had I had so at that point I had him working on a thing called Snap Garden which snap Garden was this idea of building modular thin tiles that would go on your patio and that you could grow food or grass on or whatever with a centralized watering system.

1 (30m 14s):
I love that idea. They would be like rubber mats that you could just have sections of a garden on I love that. Yeah. I want that special. now yeah, you

3 (30m 23s):
guys have tomatoes and parsley and like you could you know get I like mint and it all the different things and on your sort of patio in your apartment and my whole back yard was growing tables trying to figure out how to grow on these almost like a Saran Wrap and I mean none of it ever work by the way, but we were trying all this stuff and

1 (30m 43s):
these ideas were just like ideas that would come to the middle of the night and you write them down on a piece of paper like because we all have crazy ideas, but you're like, I've got a bunch of these Is yeah and this is the one where he's at at this has the most promise

3 (30m 55s):
this one and we had like four five. I had I had a conference call idea called poke poke that would call you when your conference call is about to start love that and

2 (31m 4s):
I love Comfort style. It's

3 (31m 5s):
all so poke poke. We had pop the portable power which was a big battery that you could like sit on a table and charge all your phones. So that was it

1 (31m 16s):
was different things you have and you just hired a couple people and I'm just trying to understand was your garage like Full of like

2 (31m 23s):
soldering irons and like

1 (31m 24s):
a horse like where this call the sawhorse our

3 (31m 27s):
Wars and like it was yes, that's exactly what it was. It really met him. I guess like we were just kind of like, I mean there was ideas and then we were like we're going to work on this we're going to try to do this with SNAP Garden. We're going to try to do this with it. I mean it was like looking back again like your kind of exposing. I don't think I'm a great sort of operational manager because yeah, I don't think we really had a plan for

1 (31m 48s):
that. Alright, so you guys can try snap garden and you just cannot get Torque. Yes you and to like recent college student graduates. Yes, and just kind of trying to figure out what to come up with. Yeah. I'm

3 (32m 0s):
not nothing had been working and the one big pain point I had which was a personal pain point was every time a package was delivered or someone's at the front door to visit because now people are coming to my office quote unquote which is, you know, again my garage I called

1 (32m 16s):
it our to car office like

3 (32m 18s):
my phone didn't get signal in the garage. And the doorbells those Wireless ones wouldn't reach to the garage just like through they wouldn't go through all the walls or whatever and might the garage was like a little separate unit like going to a back alley and I couldn't hear it. So I didn't know when someone's at the front door and you know, that was the greatest position to put myself in looking back because that's that's what sort of started at all.

1 (32m 44s):
When we come back in just a moment how a random

2 (32m 47s):
lunch meeting with a friend of a friend

1 (32m 49s):
that Jamie reluctantly takes ends up leading to the luckiest break. He could ever ask for stay with us. I'm guy

2 (32m 57s):
Roz and listening to how I

1 (32m 59s):
built this from NPR.

2 (33m 7s):
Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible. First to DuckDuckGo. Do you want the same internet? But more privacy DuckDuckGo can help they help millions of people like you get privacy online without any trade-offs with one download. You can search and browse privately avoiding trackers DuckDuckGo privacy simplified. Thanks. Also to LinkedIn learning a lot of things are changing in our professional lives. So LinkedIn learning wants to give you a hand with skills that can help you and your career. They have more than 16,000 courses taught by industry experts learn skills, like how to master working from home entrepreneurship foundations, or how to be a resilient leader to name a few.

2 (33m 55s):
So keep learning the skills that you need to rise to any moment and try one month free at LinkedIn learning-dot-com how I built this

1 (34m 7s):
Hey, I'm Sam Sanders host of it's been a minute. There is a lot going on in the

2 (34m 12s):
world. So on my show my guest tonight makes sense of the news and culture through conversation. It feels like we're living in three movies at once. That's a good way to put it because like a Mike Judge movie. It feels like a Spike Lee movie and it feels like a Michael Bay movie like every Tuesday and Friday. Listen And

1 (34m 32s):
subscribe now to it's been a minute from NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's around 2011 and Jamie. Semenov is madly tinkering in the garage trying to come up with a brilliant new idea for a business. And in the meantime, he's trying to solve a problem just for himself,

2 (34m 54s):
which is how can he

1 (34m 55s):
hear his doorbell if he's all the way in the garage and he thinks maybe he can rig up something with Wi-Fi

2 (35m 3s):
as she is pretty as I

3 (35m 4s):
looked for a Wi-Fi doorbell. So I It wasn't a immediate. I'm gonna invent a Wi-Fi doorbell. It's let me buy a Wi-Fi doorbell. So I searched for what the word there were

1 (35m 14s):
chime door Bells, right just a chime a wireless

3 (35m 17s):
chiming if it's to the prom was none of those would reach to my garage so you couldn't hear it you got so that was that was like the greatest thing ever because if one of those reach to my garage, I'd probably be still trying to build gardening things for people's porches. So you wanted

1 (35m 31s):
something that went to hear that made a chime sound on your phone, correct? I

3 (35m 36s):
and then I thought like I mean you have the so now like now, I'm sorry to invent, you know, it's like I have the phone with Wi-Fi cameras were starting to come out. So it's like why not have a camera that you could talk then also that go to your phone. So it's like oh now there's like I'll take the intercom and I'll take the doorbell concept and the fact that I had this phone with me that's on Wi-Fi and I'll put it all together and that was I started building this gigantic thing that I was trying to strap on my front

1 (36m 5s):
door. All right. Here's a question. At that time video door, but like like a video intercom existed they were expensive but it existed you could have installed that right. So Wireless and version did

3 (36m 21s):
not exist. I mean if you're talking like expensive meaning like probably installing a like a video intercom, you know, that was like a states have that and so like it's probably like, you know thousands of dollars and not a consumer product, correct? And so there was nothing For me to have to do this and I just like anything when you're naive which and ieave is such a great thing. Sometimes I just was like I'll just build it and so I just like sat down at the bench and got the soldering iron out started to like break things open and put them together. What were you

1 (36m 54s):
building a camera in a compartment like like plastic casing that you would

3 (36m 59s):
just so we had a 3D printer. We had I took a Wi-Fi camera like an off-the-shelf Wi-Fi camera off the shelf button. I was just like hacking stuff. Up to just try to build this. And again, it's the funniest part is going back to that time. I had raised a little bit of money for it was called Edison jr. Was the lab like my garage lab. I called it

1 (37m 21s):
Edison jr. He raised money and oh the idea was anyone who put Equity into Edison jr. Would get something back Edison jr. Came up with something. Yes, and just just so you could get a Wi-Fi camera at the time and it was relatively not that complicated to get that. Image on my phone and so you kind of created a doorbell with this camera that would send a signal

3 (37m 46s):
to the internet and then back to my phone. Yeah. Okay

1 (37m 49s):
and how long how long does it take you to come up with this? So I started playing

3 (37m 53s):
around that 2011 like, you know, like literally just like hacking around with it and it was basically like 2012. I had like a real working model. I must have real working model. I me so very very rough, but like something that actually you could like see it. Work and kind of get an idea of what this was

1 (38m 9s):
like I want to kind of push back a little bit because I cannot believe that you did not think that this was going to be the product that you guys are working on your telling me that no part of you thought that no, it

3 (38m 24s):
wasn't like I had it wasn't like I hated it and thought it was something stupid. I just I think I was so my aunt because was fixing my problem. And so the funny thing was as I'm building this doorbell because the doorbell For my home, not for Edison Junior in terms of my thinking at this time that I'm fixing a problem for me. I wasn't actually wasn't one of my ideas on a piece of paper. And so I did it on nights and weekends because I didn't want to take time as a fiduciary away from the work. I was supposed to be doing in the garage for Edison jr. So just that's like how little I sort of thought of the idea of time.

1 (39m 1s):
Yeah, and and what's totally crazy to me is that I think around the same time you you came up with like yet another idea, which was I think it was until like launch a crowdsourcing website like that your own version of Kickstarter.

3 (39m 17s):
Yeah. So at the time you have Kickstarter and Indiegogo is just kind of getting going and Kickstarter was the big one on this pre-buy, you know crowdsource kind of thing and kicks are kicked off all the hardware people at this point. This is 2012. They

1 (39m 33s):
wouldn't let you kick start a hardware product. And yeah, he like

3 (39m 37s):
Yeah, they like dude like all these restrictions and so there were some things that you do but basically in a product like this could not have fit into their terms of service, but they we so again as I'm in this inventor lab I said, oh wow, here's an opportunity. We should launch a Kickstarter for hardware and I called it Christie Street, which is so here. We are the labs called Edison Junior that we did Christie street is the street that Edison's lab was on in New Jersey and I thought Christie Street was going to be the big things that you know to platform and it's a Marketplace and this whole thing could be huge and and so I convinced a friend of mine who has he had a conference in Paris called leweb and I convinced him to let me launch Christie Street at leweb, which was like a huge thing for me to be able to get like that kind of an audience for Christie Street.

3 (40m 27s):
This is

1 (40m 27s):
like the TechCrunch of

3 (40m 28s):
Europe. Yes, basically, okay. Yep. Okay and some on the call with him and I'm like we're going to launch this thing and here's some ideas. I have a products to put on we need to obviously

2 (40m 37s):
Like to

3 (40m 37s):
launch a product to launch the platform like this. You need to have a something on it. Like the people can go to and so I we had a bunch of ideas snap Garden all these things. I went through the list with him and like I'd thrown on the list the doorbell, he's French guys, like, you know, he's like absolutely the doorbell is like the that is the thing people will love and I'm like really he's like, yeah, I think you have to do the doorbell and I'm like, okay, I'll do the

1 (40m 59s):
doorbell. Oh, you were gonna launch Christie Street announce it and then say Oh, and by the way, we've got snap garden and we I want your

3 (41m 7s):
Exile but here the saying

1 (41m 10s):
don't the doorbell that's the thing that you want to get funded. Yes. All right. So you're see you're invited to this conference in Paris. And when was the

3 (41m 19s):
conference December of

1 (41m 21s):
2012 and how many people in the audience it

3 (41m 23s):
was like I think it's like over a thousand. It was like a big conference. So you

1 (41m 27s):
stand in front of a thousand people and you present Christie Street, correct?

3 (41m 33s):
And everything was broken the night before on the side and nothing worked and the credit card thing. I mean, it was like any normal thing. Like I was like everything was met a mess in like behind the scenes and then we launched it

1 (41m 44s):
like I think so. She was Christie Street. It was not the doorbell or was it was the doorbell? Well,

3 (41m 48s):
it was Christie Street and oh but like our first the first thing on chrystie street is doorbot this wi-fi doorbell. So we definitely needed something that for people who go to the marketplace. And so that was like the first thing so we threw our own product on is the first

1 (42m 2s):
product that and you decide to call a doorbot.

3 (42m 6s):
Yes, when you're three guys in a garage you call something doorbell and my wife when I was building this thing and putting it on and showing her. She said to me is the best thing you've ever invented. Wow. This

1 (42m 17s):
is Aaron your wife

3 (42m 18s):
Erin. Yeah, my wife Erin and so Aaron said like it's the best thing you've ever invented and it's a time. I really did. I didn't like her saying that because I did I almost felt like it was it put down the other things I was

2 (42m 29s):
doing and you're thinking I'm the guy who invented unsubscribe Aaron Yan voicemail the

1 (42m 34s):
text you're an errand at the time was working in Hollywood, right? She's working in the entertainment industry

3 (42m 39s):
Still Still. Yeah. She's a witch was again, very fortunate. She, you know part of how we Was you know, I was a part of how we lived was on her salary? Yes, so she definitely was she was keeping us going. Yeah, but and she said because it makes me feel safer at home. It makes me feel like we have Gates. So if you've doubt fast forward back to where pre-selling part of why I didn't want to put it out there and didn't think it was that big as I didn't think other people would have the same. I didn't think they'd understand how it would make them feel and so I thought it'd be very hard to Market that to say. Hey is going to make you feel safer in your home. Not just be a guy. Gadget and we started pre-selling it. I remember there was this one woman and she said I bought it because the neighbor's house was robbed and they rang the doorbell and if someone rings the doorbell now, I can answer it and I could act like I'm home and I was like, so if there was an aha moment in this whole thing it was that where I was like, oh my holy shit, the

1 (43m 39s):
customers understand

3 (43m 40s):
why this is important to them. That was when I was like we can this like that that was really the wow they get it will

1 (43m 48s):
come back to this idea of the mission because I have to imagine that most people who saw the door boss concept thought that's so cool I want that like they weren't thinking security or when this is it was just cool the video doorbell and your phone

3 (44m 4s):
yeah so weak I call them Gadget collectors the issue is and I think why a lot of companies have this sort of false positive where they look like they're going to be huge companies early on because their growth is just like astronomical and then all of a sudden they just go to 0 because you can't live on Gadget collectors you need to do something more meaningful than that because long-term the gadget collector Market is just not that big

1 (44m 28s):
but by the way how much money were you trying to raise for doorbot on Christie streets I think

3 (44m 35s):
we put 250,000 or 200,000 it was a pretty like I mean for the time it was like a pretty big

1 (44m 42s):
ask and did you raise nice we did and and was that enough money to hire like as I imagine you and the to the to college guys you hired did not have the technical know-how to actually build this or am I wrong did you know

3 (44m 55s):
it turns out you're right we did not again I looking back I don't understand how we ever got a product out you know we were so underfunded I mean $250,000 at the time sounded like a lot of money I'm going to go that far the reality was yeah it wasn't even like it was like a rounding error is you know oh so

1 (45m 15s):
small right because Hardware we have the same conversation with James park at Fitbit he raised $400,000 thinking that that would make Fitbit only to realize that wasn't even get going to get them like the plastic band for the Fitbit

3 (45m 28s):
and that was the the problem was like it was so easy to get into trying to build this kind of like all of a sudden I was all-in like I didn't I didn't realize that I was doing it but all of a sudden I realized I had all of my money like all of a sudden like everything was In this thing in some way it just kept eating up cash, but it was like little chunks here and there ten thousand ten that you know, just and

1 (45m 51s):
because it's a bunch of problems to solve. It's like, okay, how do we make this? And then how do we Source the materials? And then how do we get this manufactured at scale? And I think the first and most important one is to remain look and make something that works. Right? Yeah and to

3 (46m 6s):
make matters even worse we decided because my house didn't have a working doorbell on it. So we decided that we're going to make a battery. Operated one so it could go on

2 (46m 16s):
any home. So so you want to make a

1 (46m 19s):
wireless wi-fi

2 (46m 22s):
battery-operated doorbell

1 (46m 24s):
with a camera? Yes and working out of your garage still

3 (46m 28s):
working out the garage and but you're hiring Consultants to do something, you know, is it because we had like you said, I mean we really did have like very

2 (46m 36s):
little yeah

3 (46m 37s):
expertise in the things that we would need and you would need

2 (46m 40s):
Consultants who had expertise to come on and I'm sure their hourly rate was high. What was the what was like the biggest challenge that you sort of faced in this first year trying to trying to

3 (46m 50s):
solve would have been amazing if there was one that stuck out, you know, it was like everything was it was you know, if you were skier. It's like everything you looked at was a cliff like there was just no easy part of the Run doing audio. Like this

2 (47m 5s):
was hard. The video is very

3 (47m 7s):
hard we had and I never had been to China to find a manufacturer. I had to go find someone to do that it used. And apps you know, you had to have a big back and video processing system. Like there was

2 (47m 20s):
each one of those in itself was a

3 (47m 21s):
company that would have been hard to do. And so it was we took on a task. That was I'd say as close to impossible as you can get I think did you

1 (47m 31s):
bring in I mean was there a moment where you would bring in a consultant who was a specialist in one area that you needed solved? And you said this is what we need and the consultant said that's impossible. You just it's not possible to do.

3 (47m 43s):
Well, why don't we bring In that was like you talk to someone would say that you just like hang up and then call the next one. Like you just kind of you just kind of kept calling was

1 (47m 50s):
that the standard answer that you get

3 (47m 52s):
pretty much I mean most people were highly to fairly negative about the product ever working and there was people that like stake their reputation on saying like they will never be able to get this thing to work at scale. So

1 (48m 7s):
$250,000. You must have burned through that pretty fast the money you raised from the from the that's what ya like like that.

3 (48m 13s):
Yeah. I mean it was a goner In a Flash that's

1 (48m 15s):
imagine you needed outside investors to help you

3 (48m 18s):
out. So we did so I put I kicked some money in that I had and sort of got again a little over my sort of head in it. And then we raised it. We started raising money in 2013. We raised a million dollars, which was one of the most difficult raises of money I've ever had to do in my life. Why was

2 (48m 38s):
it so difficult what were

3 (48m 39s):
investors music? There's a lot of things we one is it was very hard to see that a Wi-Fi doorbell. Meaningful and anyway, how is this going to do something? That's enough to pay back a venture capitalist Hardware is hard, you know, are you able to build this thing? I couldn't show my working prototype because I don't have one. The deck was fairly stacked against us. I think the only way I raised the money was just by hustle in terms of like I think I just wore people down and and at this point I really didn't have it. I didn't really have the option to not fight because I was so into this that if it ended I was going to be in Psych serious trouble financially myself. So I was really like going and hustling and just doing it and executing on the other side though like at home, you know, when no one was looking like yeah, it was like crying inside.

3 (49m 27s):
Like I really thought I'd like destroyed everything

1 (49m 30s):
for this. All right. So 2013 something else happens at year, which a lot of people listening to may know or may not know but what you got on Shark Tank.

2 (49m 41s):
Yeah, how did that happen?

3 (49m 43s):
So I have a friend of a friend who's trying to start some sort of start up business and said, could you go out to lunch with my buddy? He's trying to start this business and would love to Sir to get some feedback from you and I'll never forget I remember driving to this lunch being like here. I am a guy who's going bankrupt in his

2 (49m 60s):
garage for a doorbell and I'm Give

3 (50m 2s):
him this rich like he's his family's very very well known and I'm going to give him advice. I should be focused and I'm like thinking to myself. This is why Jamie you always lose because you can't focus like this is why it's like I remember I was like

2 (50m 16s):
yelling at myself on the way to this lunch

3 (50m 18s):
and I get to the lunch and the guy super nice and talking the whole time and like all about his business and literally like we're just done and he said like what are you working on? It was doorbell thing and he said you should go on Shark Tank and here I am thinking Dang, it must be nice to be like wealthy because that's how you think like. Oh, you should

2 (50m 37s):
go on Shark Tank. Like I'm like no shit. I should go on Shark Tank. But yeah, how do I get us Arctic? And he said, oh a producer contacted another friend of mine. They're looking for things more like your stuff like a product like something more electronic like a little more

3 (50m 50s):
complex this season. I'll

2 (50m 53s):
send you the email you can email the person that he didn't even know the person I

3 (50m 56s):
blind email

2 (50m 58s):
that person from the table

3 (50m 60s):
saying like hey, here's my get door

2 (51m 2s):
about.com

3 (51m 3s):
would love to go on Shark Tank and I'm driving back

2 (51m 6s):
from the lunge the producer calls me and

3 (51m 8s):
said this is the greatest thing we got to have you on

2 (51m 10s):
Shark Tank was like yeah

3 (51m 12s):
now

2 (51m 13s):
from that call

3 (51m 14s):
though now it's like the fear of I don't want to be someone who becomes a joke like and so I took shark tank as seriously as any execution of any piece of our business I built the set in my

2 (51m 28s):
backyard you have to build a set for like he liked

1 (51m 32s):
wheel out you build out okay a set where you should show okay

3 (51m 36s):
alright the funny thing is they tell you they're like oh we think this is what would look cool and I'm like great you just you know tell me and you can build it kind of thing like your show like and they're like no you build it and okay

1 (51m 46s):
so you had to build out your own display yeah and what did you build this set out of just like plywood

3 (51m 53s):
so we're in Los Angeles luckily how do you build a set well it turns out like you just ask someone because everyone build sets here because that's what they do Los Angeles and so doctor would who is a set builder came over and built a set describe what it looks like. It's just like a it's a fake front of a home to put the the door bell on you just to have it sort of sit there, you know, so they had something in the picture to make it look nice

1 (52m 18s):
and and was that how much that cost you eight thousand dollars because you really wanted to impress him. Yeah, and I really did

3 (52m 24s):
I took Shark Tank seriously like I mean and I mean seriously, I had 300 questions that I thought. That they would do I watched every single Shark Tank Episode multiple times that had been on to that point. I wasn't so

1 (52m 38s):
important to you to go on tracting though. Was it

3 (52m 41s):
because at the time the ratings on Shark Tank were massive. I mean, it's still a big show, but it was a massive show at the time. So look at it as a 12-minute commercial on ABC for your company. How much would what's the value of that for a guy in a garage is infinite? It is it's Priceless. And so I wanted to Be the best Shark Tank person of all time, which I really took it. Seriously. I mean I trained and I have not

1 (53m 9s):
overcame Shark Tank not yes. You must have been so

3 (53m 13s):
nervous. Like nervous doesn't even describe mean I've been and here's the worst part The Producers forced us to do a live demo of the product and I kept being like hey, yeah, we'll do a live demo I'll tape it and then we'll run the tape and they're like no live demo. I'm like, yeah, I'll just in like they wanted to

1 (53m 32s):
It work. They wanted to work live it had to be

3 (53m 34s):
live. This is September of 2013. So we hadn't even shipped them yet. So we had four door Bots, which I think we're the only for that existed in the world of that time. We brought all four and the you have a very quick transition between the last person goes you get on you like 10 minutes to set up and so we're setting up with the producers. I'm talking they're talking to me about all this like here is we want you to do this and set up for this and do all these things and Mark is behind the house is your engineer

1 (54m 1s):
mark Yeah, yeah

3 (54m 3s):
scurrying back and forth and literally you can see his shirt every time he scurries back. He's like more sweat is on it. And so it's like at this point. I was like swimming pool like it jumped into so I go over there. I'm like Mark what's going on? I'm trying I'm trying to be calm because they're all looking at me and he's like it's not working and I'm like, yeah, it's going to work Mark you get it working and he just looks at me like you're gonna get it working. And so it turned out like the first three for whatever reason didn't work the fourth one ends up working and and but but like working just for the

2 (54m 34s):
before we start and you're nervous and I'm dying nervous but you gotta be positive and right uncharismatic yo who's there it's Jamie here to pitch

3 (54m 52s):
come in so I get out there I do my you know like pitch saying and the end of the pitch is the live demo and I

2 (54m 59s):
go over there and I have the phone in my

3 (55m 1s):
hand and and I press the doorbot button and I'm just waiting and it's like the longest you know three seconds or whatever it took to go in my life

2 (55m 11s):
good looking door black guys hey Mark it's your good friend mr. wonder and the thing all of a

3 (55m 18s):
sudden it like comes up and the picture comes up it's probably still the best picture we ever got out of a doorbot in the history of doorbot it looks beautiful and literally I'm just like oh my god it worked it's like words and is a and just you know made it happen now two of the

1 (55m 36s):
Sharks Mark and Lori I think we're like hmm I don't get this thing in all the sharks past except for Kevin O'Leary

2 (55m 44s):
I think the deal that Kevin O'Leary offered you if I'm not mistaken was he would give you a $700,000 loners but they I want to 10% royalty and I get five percent of the company's Equity today that is that is a horrible offer I in that is that is an outrageous offer

3 (56m 5s):
from Kevin O'Leary yeah and I literally was contemplating because we needed the

2 (56m 10s):
money or desperate you needed the cash yeah respectfully mr. wonderful we're going to decline go kick some ass Jamie thank you good like sharks but you did not take the deal no were you like this was a disaster or using you know there's a silver lining here

3 (56m 33s):
so that you don't know when it's a this is now I September 2013 we filmed there's no way to know when it'll air it'll are between now basically between the show starts on TV which is like I think October something and like met I knew we weren't going to make it to met at this

1 (56m 49s):
you knew the business was it going to make it till May yeah not where we were sitting I

3 (56m 53s):
was thinking I just blew a month of focus this thing that now didn't work out and we are in a worse place than we were before

1 (57m 2s):
when did these are

3 (57m 3s):
it are November of 2013 which you know think about like as a consumer electronics products to are right before Christmas when you're just about to start shipping and you're just about to have all these units come in that you haven't figured out how to sell you couldn't write it was a like is like Cinderella Story I mean you can't write the script better than that

1 (57m 22s):
so how many mean you still were about to send the orders to the people who bought it from the crowdsourcing platform yep how many orders did the to the publicity from Shark Tank generate

3 (57m 35s):
it was just I was crazy it was actually didn't come in all at once those funny like the first night we did you know is hundred something thousand whatever it was it was a lot

1 (57m 43s):
thousand orders dollars dollars hundred thousand dollars

3 (57m 46s):
okay yeah it was a lot but it wasn't like crazy yeah so then the next day I'm like oh wow that was good but it wasn't as good as I'd hoped and then the next day was like another couple hundred thousand dollars and the next day was like

2 (57m 56s):
the

3 (57m 56s):
dollars and the next day was like a hundred thousand dollars because people are Tebowing or you know watching on demand and so it ended up being this tale of this thing was just so long and so we got in the end it was millions of dollars of sales from being on Shark Tank and then we ended up starting in December we started shipping them

1 (58m 15s):
out and and by the way these were being made in China

3 (58m 19s):
yes at the time

1 (58m 20s):
how did you find a factory to agree to make this I mean you guys were skating on on thin ice financially I mean there was a good chance you would not be able to pay your your creditors

3 (58m 33s):
so yeah I mean we we found a factory to agree to do it through like you know just friend of a friend calling doing a hook and Crook and just everything you could and we were prepaying for the devices so they would never take a risk on us and it was the other problems I had to order to many devices I'd order my first order was 20 thousand devices which was a lot then because otherwise they wouldn't even do it

1 (59m 2s):
and so when they went out to to customers were people happy with

3 (59m 6s):
them so interesting story so so we we get them in and you know the first ones you know we're doing some stuff with and they're coming they're kind of trickling in this is like November of 13 and where we had this one programmer that we hired and he came up with hey we can make the video better if we change these variables and so he was testing that and so he sent off to the factory a new build of the software to go on the next round of door Bots to make them better and we were so behind on shipping and this is getting into the holidays and you like we were worried people were going to you know ask for refunds so we took this huge shipment so you know thousands and thousands of door Bots and we just turned around just put them in boxes and we just ship them out that day and this is getting ready to Christmas and we start here like the week before Christmas people are contacting me and saying it's not working it was certainly a challenge device that had a lot of like technical issues but not working was like it wasn't not working and so I talked to them and I was looking at it and there video was coming through like like an old TV like tuner like it was like all like lines through it and just you couldn't see the picture

2 (1h 0m 16s):
and so I'm like okay let's look at

3 (1h 0m 18s):
it this is now Christmas Eve so the day before Christmas Eve and we're sitting with the engineer guy person and we realized that when he was testing his software it wasn't actually writing onto the unit so he thought he was changing stuff he actually wasn't so he ended up sending software to the factory that was basically just like garbled so we now had basically the largest like most of our units are now in the field with customers that not only do they not work but we can't change that software on them so they're basically bricks you

1 (1h 0m 54s):
cannot fix the ones that people have

3 (1h 0m 56s):
so it turned out then we learned this on Christmas Eve Eve that you can't rewrite the software on this chip it just doesn't like the chip only takes it once at the factory and then it never allows it to be re-written again he

1 (1h 1m 9s):
cannot update it wirelessly or

3 (1h 1m 10s):
anything Z like that not even physically like so they were literally Rick's like and so this was like the end of the world like this really was and you know so when something real happens I'm almost like a pilot I go through my checklist like I actually go super calm and so I literally like go to the calmest place like probably in my life get everyone together and I'm just going through the checklist like can it do this kind of do this kind of do this and like every answer is no so I go home and I'm like it's amazing because like basically the business is over but I'm calm and I talked to Aaron and I said I said yeah like the the you know like it's it's done and she's like it's not done you know like in Aaron's always been amazing like you know like it will make it through I'm like no it's done like we sent out everything with software that doesn't

2 (1h 1m 56s):
by the way how many did

3 (1h 1m 57s):
you send out I think it was like it was over 5,000

1 (1h 2m 1s):
so the shipping alone just to bring them back would have been

2 (1h 2m 3s):
devastating and by the way we would have really had to

3 (1h 2m 6s):
like the the if you go to the pilot checklist you have to throw them out make another batch of this amount which by the way we couldn't make we didn't have the parts we didn't have the money and send those back out to people or refund them all their money which I didn't have that either

2 (1h 2m 20s):
and so

3 (1h 2m 22s):
I like I'll

2 (1h 2m 24s):
I'll never forget it like my wife

3 (1h 2m 27s):
you're still why don't we just mortgage the house and it was like

2 (1h 2m 31s):
is that because it's fucking it's like you're heading into like the worst storm ever in a boat you know it's like you're going to sink and she's like let's borders houses go into the storm it's like you can't like there's no like we're done When we come back in just a moment how Jamie came up with a desperate last-minute idea to fix those door Bots and how the real work of ring was just beginning stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsor Comcast business powered by the nation's largest gig Speed network tools to do business from anywhere and experts available.

2 (1h 3m 21s):
24/7 Comcast business is prepared for these times. Learn more at Comcast business.com. parents ever wish you had a coach or a fairy godmother for when your kids hit you with those really tough questions well NPR's Life kid has tons of episodes to help you through the hardest parenting moments listen And subscribe to life kit

1 (1h 3m 49s):
and one more thing before we get back into the story just want to mention that in this part of the show you'll hear me talking with Jamie about the possible unintended consequences of ring and Rings mission to make neighborhood safer and just a heads up that we did this interview back in late April so if you're wondering why my questions don't mention anything about the mass demonstrations we've been seeing around the u.s. and the world that's the reason okay back to the show hey welcome back to how I built this from NPR so it's 2013 and Jamie's sent thousands of non-working door Bots to thousands of customers and his company has no money to issue refunds and one more thing it's two days before Christmas

3 (1h 4m 37s):
so yeah like that was that was Christmas Eve eve and so we go out to dinner and it's like it's like as upset as I am I can't like there's nothing to do I can't yelling is not going to help so I'm just kind of like calm and we're at dinner and all of a sudden I'm like you know what we change the back end server a couple weeks ago to a cheaper one because for processing the video in the cloud and it was just cheaper because you only need to do one thing and the other server used to do like a million things and was expensive

2 (1h 5m 6s):
and I'm like I wonder If that other server would actually go to process whatever the hell we're

3 (1h 5m 11s):
sending just because it just has like better sort of capabilities to

2 (1h 5m 16s):
it. This is while you're at dinner

1 (1h 5m 17s):
what your yeah, you can just touch just like racking your brain. Yeah, and

3 (1h 5m 21s):
so I call Mark and I said who is like our engineer and kind of like my main engineering partner in this and I said Mark, what do you think and he's like, hey, let's

2 (1h 5m 29s):
it's worth a try. Yeah,

3 (1h 5m 30s):
and so to do this took a while though, like you couldn't just like, oh I flip the switch. Yeah, it works. And so Mark works all night long and like 6:30 a.m. I got a call on my cell phone. It's ringing its Mark I pick it up and he's like dude, you won't believe this it literally works and it's it is and it's the best picture we've ever had. I'm like, wow wait,

1 (1h 5m 53s):
it was just swapping out a better server.

3 (1h 5m 55s):
Yep. It literally worked and I mean like that was yeah that was and so like, oh my God, I still say it's best Christmas we've ever had as a family. I mean, it's

1 (1h 6m 7s):
it's amazing right I mean what happens the do you do send a blast out to the customer and say okay now retry it

3 (1h 6m 13s):
yeah it was like Hey if you if you might have had an issue we made some updates and you should be fine now like you know like like just if it was just yours that you had an issue on because maybe someone had a problem like try this even though everybody did and it was okay it works it's great like thank you so

2 (1h 6m 28s):
much okay sure you

3 (1h 6m 29s):
know of course it works like why wouldn't it like Merry Christmas oh my God

1 (1h 6m 33s):
but I have to imagine at this point you're like we are never going to put ourselves in the situation where we cannot update the chip ever again

3 (1h 6m 41s):
that yeah no that was definitely a tenant that we realize and again we just didn't realize we had even built it like that because we were so naive and young and trying and hacking this thing together we literally just kind of didn't understand that's what we were

1 (1h 6m 55s):
doing I mean I'm assuming now 2014 you enter 2014 like good to go right you got the life line to get the money and now it sounds like you're in great shape

3 (1h 7m 7s):
so again to the living in fear thing so I mean from a from a definitely we are in better shape than we were before that's for sure like we had orders coming in money coming in but we have this other problem now which is everyone just saw this product and we were like a ragtag group building this thing with a ragtag product and now my fear is I'm going to be a bartender in five years and someone's going to say to me oh if you ever done whatever I say oh I actually was the one who invented the video doorbell they're gonna say no way that's Frank Jones or Jenny whatever and she's a billionaire and I'm going to be like I know I invented it they took the idea and actually did it right and so that was like my that was your fear yes because you had shown the proof

1 (1h 7m 54s):
of concept on Shark Tank and really there was interest and clearly even enterprising company like an alarm system company or somebody saw this somebody in their Development team or whatever product development team was like Hey, look at this thing. We should do something like this.

3 (1h 8m 13s):
Yeah big we're gonna we're gonna copy this we're going to build this we have hundreds of Engineers. We have

2 (1h 8m 18s):
endless resources.

3 (1h 8m 19s):
Yes, they literally really my fear that I really felt that in my bones that I was a person who invented this and didn't actually make it with us and so between Christmas and New Year's I get everyone together and I said we shown what's going to be out there and if we don't worry, Rebuild everything like the name the back end the product if we don't really sort of show what this thing can really do and we don't and it's not us doing that and we don't launch it by next year's holiday. So by the holidays of 2014 someone else is going to take this slot and we're done huh? And I called the effort. I called it F5 which said for effing five star reviews.

3 (1h 9m 4s):
Meaning that like you needed a true. 365 star reviewed products which meant the customer service had to be five star the brand had to be five star the packaging had to be five star the product I'd be like everything about it had to be five

1 (1h 9m 18s):
star and how did you cut by the way how does the name ring come about because your doorbot in 2014

3 (1h 9m 24s):
so I go to one of our investors with this F5 thing who'd already invested in doorbot and I said listen here's what we're thinking here's F5 I just want to like passes by oh I'm gonna need to raise some money so I just want to get an early look just sit with me let me Pitch it so I pitched the whole thing in the last slide was I need a new name and every slide before that I'd said the Ring of security around your home the Ring of this the ring like literally I kept saying ring I didn't kind of realize it but I kept saying it and so literally just blurts out and said just call it ring you keep saying ring I was like maybe and I kept thinking about it and then he emails me that night and he said the domain name is for sale and I had always wanted to have a company for letter domain name I'm not a person who likes vanity but man did I want a four-letter domain company like eBay you know or half.com or like you know nests or like there's so many and so when he said that I'm like I need to buy this domain and change the company their bring

1 (1h 10m 25s):
and and presume and also I should mention by this point you have an office you're out of your garage you're working out you're working as a space in Santa Monica

3 (1h 10m 34s):
yeah and we were like now 40 be Engineers or something so we were like we were going for it

1 (1h 10m 40s):
and so and this is really your year right like that Christmas that the Christmas sales for that year the the fall of 2014 I think this is really when you want to kind of push this out so as you are pivoting from doorbot to ring did you like completely reinvent it at you make it better that your

3 (1h 10m 60s):
everything was from scratch so new Wi-Fi new camera module motion detection we put on it that never had been there before we did infrared night vision to a bi-directional talk so it was more like a phone conversation then push to talk I mean it was just like we literally like everything was redesigned on that everything was redesigned on the brand you know we literally ring so just every piece of the business from like Soup To Nuts was redesigned and rebuilt from scratch between

1 (1h 11m 30s):
January 14 in October and things like like design right like design was going to be important like one of the things that happens when you get a ring and I think and I don't know if you introduced it as early as 2014 was it

2 (1h 11m 46s):
came with a screwdriver a little screwdriver and like a

1 (1h 11m 48s):
leveler yep because a lot of people just you know don't have was

3 (1h 11m 52s):
that but my my thing was always that I don't if someone has to drive to a hardware store when they get something it's just such a bummer it like just bums you out and so I want everything in there in fact the first rings that shipped had a canvas tool kit and And it rolled out and every single thing was in the canvas tool kit and it was like this beautiful like I mean way too expensive and we couldn't keep doing it. But but it was like this beautiful canvas silk is amazing.

1 (1h 12m 18s):
How did you do in 2014 where our

3 (1h 12m 20s):
sales 2014 was I think three million in sales. It was it ended up working out that the tale of Shark Tank sort of credibility and awareness got us through selling the door Bots without having to do much marketing. It allowed us to sort of focus on then getting ring up and running and so my job mid-2014 was to go raise money because that we needed and sort of get us to launch sort of let's call it into

1 (1h 12m 48s):
15. And how was that when you went back to raise money. Was it a little bit easier? No. No,

3 (1h 12m 55s):
I basically went to these venture capitalist and I talked about the mission, you know, we're going to make neighborhood safer. We're going to do this and so like most of them just I mean, they literally him say no they just an even talked. Just like threw us out. Like it wasn't even like I wish it was like a know it was almost like like not even a chance and there was one Venture Capital firm in Silicon Valley that was just like super missionary focus and I didn't really even realize how missionary Focus they were and when I said that it just like kind of sparked the partner there and they were so intrigued by that that they basically invested but I'll never forget like being in that VC meeting when I said, you know, we need you know, 4.7 million in the partner on the other side said, there's no No way you're getting that out with four point.

3 (1h 13m 38s):
Seven million dollars more. You're going to need a lot more. I said you want to bet and he said yeah I said well gate give me four point seven million dollars. I'll show you and get it out. Like I think he was like, okay, you know what for that much. I got to take the BET and so it was we were we were tight. We we launched ring in October of 2014 like, you know, basically October 1st 2014, and we were zero dollars in the bank account the day we launched

1 (1h 13m 59s):
and and how much was the cost of a the ring doorbell at that point? Was it 200 bucks the ring? Yeah that

3 (1h 14m 4s):
plays 200. It was like $1.99. I think so. Yeah.

1 (1h 14m 7s):
and and that and through sales in 2015 I can't imagine you were profitable even a two hundred dollar price point

3 (1h 14m 16s):
so we were not so the Rings were very expensive the first ones that came in most of the ones that we sold we were losing some money on so yeah it was a tough we kind of were I had felt you know this point we like we were all in like I've always said to the team I'd rather be a giant hole in the ground so I look at like Santa Monica's where our offices

2 (1h 14m 37s):
we say like I'd rather there be

3 (1h 14m 38s):
a giant hole in Santa Monica then to kind of whimper our way out of business like so if we're going to go for it let's go

1 (1h 14m 44s):
for it so there's a quote that of yours that I read basically you said there were nights when I would wake up at 3 a.m. and tears bawling how are we going to make it to tomorrow you've got traction you're selling product you've got investors on board it's 2015 there's more visibility the products getting better and you're still panicking about its survival I mean I still Panic today

3 (1h 15m 10s):
I think I just always was worried if there's so many things to worry about in business in What you don't know and so I am always kind of panicked, you know fear drives me and you know, now I'd say it's a digestible fear back then it was really I had everything in this thing and if it went away maybe now at this point, I would not have like gone literally bankrupt, but just a mean such a giant thing that I had built would have been just you know wiped out I have nothing and I could keep seeing how we could go to nothing. Like I just was I was terrified I mean Ders terrified of what I didn't know like what was the person going to build that was going to wipe us out that I couldn't see terrified of ourselves.

3 (1h 15m 55s):
You know, I always say like the thing that I believe puts companies out of business is yourself, you know, it's us not providing to the customer in a way and not building that relationship that's going to you know, so it's you got to keep you know, keep pushing things and I said if we keep going the way we're going I think we're going to get trampled. We need to take this thing to the next level.

1 (1h 16m 14s):
You thought you'd get trampled by. Technology company, you've been traveled before Google trampled your voice transcription service. They unsubscribe. I mean, you knew what it meant to get eaten alive by a bigger better Resource company.

3 (1h 16m 28s):
I certainly knew what trampling felt like and I also had this concept and it actually comes from my mentor who I've never met and who has no idea that I exist James Dyson

2 (1h 16m 41s):
shows amazing story

3 (1h 16m 43s):
he is Always thought you know in the future we're going to keep getting competition because that's the way of life and that's fine. I need it to be that when someone sees ring. They know that it stands for something else that it's it's about neighborhood safety. And we always said we have to be rewarded with the purchase of our neighbor, which is what we call our customers. And so the way that Dyson did that was they put James Dyson and commercials and he talked to you and said how he was an inventor. And so yeah, that's kind of where a lot of our

2 (1h 17m 15s):
Came from is like

3 (1h 17m 17s):
let me just go out there and tell people what we're doing and the message and let's get it out there so that we can build this brand because that's defensible long-term. Like if when you build a Dyson anything they come out with you know is designed better than everyone else has and has been thought through better and like and that's what we had to be for neighborhood security was my feeling and I think we've actually maybe now achieved that.

1 (1h 17m 42s):
I'm wondering how well were alarm companies thinking. Seeing what were they thinking I mean Ring was getting Traction in 2014 2015 2016. Why didn't they what do you think like why don't they just copy this idea and make it

3 (1h 17m 56s):
I mean it was interesting. I went to one of the big security companies and talk to the CEOs and I think they just they were in sort of a different business than we were I think which was I was in a business of trying to invent around this mission of making neighborhoods safer and Innovate around that and they were the business of any trying to capture customers like reduce shrinkage like very like MBA type talk like you need to have like, you know, what's your Roi? What's your this? What like they were running a business and I was running an innovation lab around making neighborhood safer. And so I'll say we got kind of lucky because yeah, I mean if trust me if one of the someone that big and come out with something much earlier, could they have unseated us probably

1 (1h 18m 44s):
So I want to ask you about something that is controversial controversial part of your growth, which has been partnering up with law enforcement agencies and I can understand how a lot of people especially, you know, privacy Advocates get freaked out because when someone passes by your house, right you get filmed if someone Rings your doorbell you get filmed. So let me just want to ask you about if the law enforcement part right when you when you decide to partner with law enforcement agencies did a part of you ever think hey you know this like this could be troubling right like there could be things like racial profiling and and other things that you might not have thought through

3 (1h 19m 29s):
so the term I mean there's been a lot of press around this turned and and so you know we missionary company make neighborhoods safer and so I'm an inventor I go out there and I look at like what what services as what what products can I build to make neighborhoods safer that's my goal and I looked at a current thing that was happening in the world where when something happens in a neighborhood a crime happens in a neighborhood a police officer has to go door-to-door if you know to ask for video ask what's going on it's very time intensive on their part it's also very nerve-wracking to the person who is on the other side of that some of the police officers literally on the other side of your door you open it up and they ask you you know hey do you have this you have this and so that's that's not you know for both sides it's not good and I said I can build a better system for this for the neighbors with better is we have a system where police you know law enforcement or also fire departments now use it can ask for information you know basically goes out as allert and you can respond to that alert and if you respond and obviously they'll get your video that you're you know saying yes I want to give you this at this time time they don't have access after that they don't have access before that and if you say no they don't actually see that you said no so you don't have that if you didn't want to give a police officer video who's standing in front of you and your door that's a very uncomfortable situation we actually made it better so we actually made it more privacy Centric which goes to our privacy security and control or sort of the foundational elements we always say it ring and so I think we've actually invented a system that's way better each person owns their data and that's so important to us so it's the idea that every single person owns their data and then when something happens you can come together you can make that choice to share at that point you have the again security privacy and control are foundational to every literally everything that we do

1 (1h 21m 33s):
access to my video stream at all absolutely not there's no says it must be they must be stored somewhere though

3 (1h 21m 39s):
their story but we for sure on purpose do I'd have access to those because I mean yeah I know it's your your data and we want your security privacy and control to

1 (1h 21m 49s):
be there I guess Jamie the thing that I'm sort of hoping to Crunch on right is the idea of unintended consequences like there's no question that the benefits of ring are huge like the benefits of Airbnb are huge I've been able to stay in place all over the world but it's also like affected property values in place like particularly San go in New York or London were there just empty homes Rings amazing product but there are also things about it that let's be honest our are going to be beyond your control and so I just kind of think that it's important that everyone inventors technology people just just acknowledge that possibility I think I think these are

3 (1h 22m 35s):
important discussions that should be had and constantly had just like I said I always live in fear like I always wake up every morning thinking something could have taken us out like whatever that is like we should always be looking at this always scrutinizing ourselves always taking the scrutiny that comes and looking at it and making sure that you know we build features and products that truly make people's lives better so that's it has been powerful and we've seen the anecdotes of that of even like lost pets and you know a person who goes missing and you know in the neighborhood and we had an elderly person who went missing in their neighborhood you know they were like Alzheimer's or something like that and so we were able to eat these using the neighbors app they were able to sort of people are track down and find this person so I think there's just a lot of great things it's not just about when I say like safer neighbors I don't mean just you know crying safety like there's lots of things I think that's something we should do every day and I agree every person who is in a leadership position government companies whatever that is if you have the ability to do something that's large you need to continually we scrutinize and think and discuss and look at this to make sure that the unintended consequences aren't

1 (1h 23m 50s):
happening all right so in 2016 Amazon makes a Strategic investment and ring and then about a year later I guess somebody sort of like signal to you that maybe they were interested in acquiring you so we're

3 (1h 24m 9s):
working with them or doing all sorts of projects with them all the stuff I you know we just kind of keep the relationship going and and it was good but I wasn't I always laughed at them and said if there's any company I'm going to sell to its you and I meant it in a in a not like trying to like bait them but in a real way of Amazon was the only large company that I saw or felt when they bought companies truly like brought it to the next level like I you know with Audible and IMDb and sure Zappos and I mean you look at which like you look at all the just kept Founders and just and I really felt they did such a great job as I was a joke with them about that and so Nick comoros was one of their head of Corp Dev people said you know hey I'm going to be in La let's have some lunch and make sure it was not that out of line because we had been doing a lot of stuff with them and I go to lunch with him and he says to me you know I think it's time we go to the next level and I'm like was like this weird dating thing where it's like so are you saying you want to go out like it was I didn't want to jump into like yes we're going to say yeah let's do it and so so it'll be like it was kind of an awkward sort of a couple minutes of back-and-forth to like make sure that he was saying yes we want to buy you and so that I could say yes I'd want to sell to you and that was in like september/october of 17

1 (1h 25m 29s):
they offered a billion dollars for ring which I mean that was a huge return for your investors and all those people who put money into Edison Labs a lot of people got rich off that acquisition I have to

3 (1h 25m 43s):
imagine I mean yeah I could be distributed a lot of money

1 (1h 25m 48s):
wow yeah when that deal came through the a lot out of the articles about it were he went on Shark Tank no one invested they were all dummies that was I was basically the story that all these Shark Tank people could have made all his money off of ring I mean streets of those articles did a party you think that too

3 (1h 26m 7s):
I mean date you don't start taking me to church that TV show and I think it's an amazing TV show that does I think great things for kids to inspire them to build and do things but you know it is a TV show it does have to entertain to be fair to the investors they get up to an hour or someone they've never met before you know and they had done so much for us that yeah I didn't have any bad feelings about it I am really proud to have built the largest company ever to appear on Shark Tank I mean that's something you know certainly I really do get a lot of Pride out of that and then I was invited and I went back on for a few shows as a shark and so I was the first person ever to sort of be you know on the show as an entrepreneur and then go as a shark and again that was like really we have a thing in our culture where we don't celebrate at ring it's like one of our culture sort of bullet points you

1 (1h 27m 1s):
don't celebrate victories where wins

3 (1h 27m 3s):
because there's always something next that we have to do just fine because I like the idea that will sort of always just keep progressing and doing better and so to that point like even with Shark Tank like maybe hard not to celebrate the fact to be that happening personally was pretty pretty interesting all

1 (1h 27m 20s):
right so you now are an Amazon pulley basically your it's like Zapdos right you have your own company but you're part of Amazon yo and you have all this support and recently the Amazon resources and their distribution system and it's one of these companies in the world now do you feel like you can kind of take a breath and say alright we're not going to get crushed because we're with Amazon it's like being on the Chicago Bulls in the 90s

3 (1h 27m 49s):
so it's been a really interesting I mean I've always said that money didn't drive me like I always you know have said that but I think until you have money it's hard to be sure that that's the case I am just as passionate and you know sort of angry when something doesn't happen that's right my email still on every box I still respond to them I'm still just as upset when we do something that's not as good as we should so like all of that the same the difference though is now before if ring if something really bad happened to the company I would lose everything and truly like impacts my family's life at this point that's off the table and so it is I do it's amazing every day I'm still almost like it's this I feel the same like I don't even feel like we sold I feel like it's just we're there to keep him you know fighting the fight and doing what you're doing and it's like and I love that

1 (1h 28m 42s):
you are in your early 40s yep 43 your hero James Dyson when he was your age was broke he done the ball Barrow and a bunch of other things and he put all his money into building the Dyson vacuum cleaner and then within two years after he launched it was the best-selling vacuum cleaner Britain and we know the story he's now one of the wealthiest people in the UK and the world do you think that you know your story and the what happened with this the ring and charting everything do you think it has more to do with just your intelligence and your skill or do you think that luck was a bigger factor in everything that's happened to you

3 (1h 29m 18s):
so the thing I always say about lock I think it is it's the lottery and so you get sort of lottery tickets for how you know it's like how good your idea is how good your team is and how hard you work and so you take those like factors and I think how hard you work in your team or probably even bigger factors than the the idea but you still need to have something that actually would work and so you take those three things together and you get for each sort of our of production or work you get a lottery ticket and so just like the lottery if you unless you own every ticket you're not guaranteed to win because I've seen people that have are smarter than me better than me better idea than me fail because of things like luck like things not going their way and I've seen again the opposite of that and so we have been fortunate to have been have lots of Lucky breaks in our Direction but we also continue to work to get more tickets so that we could win the lottery

2 (1h 30m 15s):
that's Jamie seminar founder of ring since

1 (1h 30m 19s):
the pandemic began ring has donated hundreds of its products to hospitals across the u.s. so that health workers can communicate with their patients remotely by the way remember when Jamie said his email address is still on every box he's not joking it is and if you agree with me that snap Garden those floor tiles that grow tomatoes and cucumbers is a product that the world really needs right now send them an email tell him I sent you and thanks so much for listening to the show this week you can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts you can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to tweet at us it's at how I built this or add guy

2 (1h 31m 4s):
Roz this episode was produced by

1 (1h 31m 6s):
JC Howard with music composed by Rome teen Arab Louis thanks also to Kansas limb dareth Dale's Julia Carney the immigrants and Jeff Rogers I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this this is NPR