1 (1s):
Reveal the economic patterns all around us while you swipe right and left, understand money better with the indicator, one of NPR, daily podcasts, more voices, all ears, NPR podcasts.

2 (15s):
When building a business, there are tons of moving parts. One that's often overlooked is having the right network, thankfully with at and T business, you can pick the best wireless plan with the features you need for your small business. For example, your teams can work remotely with phone to laptop, tethering, and up to a hundred gigabytes of hotspot data on the best plan from at and T business, wherever business takes you@tandtbusinesshasthefeaturesyouneedvisitatt.com slash B I Z U Y w. After a hundred gigabytes with our at and T unlimited elite plan. Hotspot speed is slowed to a max of 1 28. Kbps in the ever-changing landscape of work. How can you ensure your people workflows and data stay connected?

2 (57s):
We do it with air table. Air table allows you to create flexible systems that help your team operate as one. It's essentially a Lego kit that gives you the building blocks to create tools that work, how you do. We actually use air table to manage our workflow right here at built a productions. It serves as our database for guest contact information and the place where we schedule episodes and move them through our production pipeline. So our remote team knows exactly where each project stands in real time without it we'd have to use multiple tools, and maybe you can relate to this. We already have enough online tools to juggle as it is. So yes, you could say that in a way you can thank air table for helping us make sure our episodes drop every week.

2 (1m 42s):
Air table brings teams together and helps teams like ours. Run smoothly. Give it a try for free@airtable.com today. That's air table.com to get started for free.

3 (1m 57s):
You know, not only do you have to build an incredibly fun game, which is really hard, by the way, there's a lot of really difficult problems to solve there where it has to work and the system has to scale and it has to able to update. And the balance of the game from a math perspective needs to be incredibly precise. You need the content to be compelling, where people fall in love with the characters in the way that somebody would for, you know, Batman or, you know, any of their favorite superheroes. And so there's so many things that you have to get, right? It, again, it's like Brandon, I'd sort of joke that knowing what you know, now we wouldn't have invested in ourselves back then,

2 (2m 36s):
Robin PR, how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Raz and on the show today, how to avid gamers fended off reluctant investors, nay-saying experts and their own self-doubt to build riot games. And one of the most successful video games ever created league of legends In 2006, a video game company called Bethesda soft works, try it out and experiment at the time.

2 (3m 16s):
But that was the, had a popular video game called oblivion. And that year it decided to offer its users an extra feature horse armor, not real armor virtual armor that you could use in the game. And Bethesda offered it up for $2 50 cents. It was an incredibly controversial decision and most players reacted badly. They didn't like it, but enough gamers decided to try it out and bought the armor. And it proved a theory that company had that you could create an entire revenue stream through what became known as micro-transactions still almost no game developers chose to pursue this business model.

2 (3m 60s):
But that same year two friends, Brandon Beck, and Mark Merrill pitched an idea to investors. They wanted to build free video games, but offer up things like in game currency and weapons and characters and skill points. First small price, Brandon and mark believed that if the game was good enough, players would happily spend a few dollars each week to buy virtual products that might enhance the gaming experience. Not surprisingly most investors turned them down and thought it was a crazy idea. The question mark and Brandon kept getting was who's going to spend money on virtual things, on things that have no value in the real world.

2 (4m 45s):
And these were fair questions. And it's why it was so hard for mark and Brandon to get riot games up and running. But the game they eventually built league of legends became one of the most popular video games of all time. And again, that helped to pioneer the business model. Now known as the free to play model. This year, the global video game industry will hit more than $160 billion in revenue that makes it four times bigger than the global film and TV industry. And three times bigger than all the music sold around the world. In 2020, according to Forbes, video games will earn more than $300 billion by 2025.

2 (5m 31s):
And a growing percentage of that revenue comes from gamers who spend small amounts of money buying skins or costumes for their virtual characters or buying access to locked rooms and imaginary worlds, huge gaming tournaments attract millions of viewers with players, earning millions of dollars a year. It's a massive business and a big part of it has to do with the model that Brandon and Mark's company, right games helped pioneer mark and Brandon both grew up in Southern California. They met as teenagers at a summer leadership camp shortly before college. Here's how mark remembers it.

3 (6m 11s):
I remember meeting Brandon and I'm like, oh, you're from Los Angeles. Awesome. Like, oh my God, you like video games, what's up. And so we just kind of instantly hit it off it. And then as I got to know him, I also just really thought he had an infectious personality. I thought he had really interesting way of looking at the world. That was just, it was sort of complimentary from the values perspective to mine. And he had just this incredibly entrepreneurial and kind of business oriented mind that kind of inspired me where I'm like, wow, like I've never seen, I never encountered a person that's also younger than me. That is, that felt so vibrant and dynamic in this interesting way. And so because of the shared love of games, so they could hop on the modem to play StarCraft or Warcraft two or Diablo

2 (6m 53s):
Or

3 (6m 54s):
Duke Nukem 3d, or, you know, I mean, I could go on and on about the titles that we all knew and connected about.

2 (6m 58s):
Yeah. So you, you meet this like leadership program and then you both go back to LA and, and you, you stay in touch or, or did you kind of lose touch?

4 (7m 7s):
Yeah. I mean, we, we D we stayed in touch and we'd call each other every once in a while. We'd, we'd play some games. I remember one of those phone calls mark told me, I really had to see the matrix. I was like, what is that? And he's like, you'll see, ended up blowing my mind and being my favorite movie of all time.

2 (7m 24s):
And mark you headed to USC to start college. And Brandon did that. I know eventually you would also go to USC was, was the fact that mark was there, did that influence your decision to go there or was it just happened to be the place where you decided to go?

4 (7m 41s):
It was a total coincidence, but it certainly made me more excited about it. I, I even visited mark when he was at school and hung out within, you know, in the dorms where he, he had a bunch of gaming buddies and they would they'd play games together. And I, wasn't a very good student, you know, I had ADHD and, and a variety of learning differences and was in a pretty tough competitive school environment. And, and I, and I just, I was not the kind of student I was sort of supposed to be, but in the meantime, I'm living in this world online. I wanted to spend every minute in my spare time, I would, you know, build scripts that would play my character for me while I had to be at school.

4 (8m 21s):
So I would continue to make progress.

2 (8m 24s):
Wow. That's pretty impressive. But I mean, you did, despite your struggles, I mean, you did end up getting into USC and mark is already there and presumably like you guys, what, like start to hang out and I guess you already have like a, a friend in college when you get there.

4 (8m 43s):
Yeah. Mark would take me under his wing a bit and, you know, introduce me to his friends and show me around. So yeah, it was, it was really great showing up and knowing mark,

2 (8m 54s):
Mark, when you guys were in college, did, did you think, you know what, I'm going to start a business with this guy one day or was it just like fun conversations you would have about, Hey, you know, maybe one day we should do this or that.

3 (9m 4s):
Yeah, no, we, we did, but it was sort of accidental in some ways, you know, we're Brandon and I, because of our shared passion and games, and then also our mutual interest in business, we would strategize or brainstorm or think about opportunities. And, and this is one of the reasons that I was attracted to Brandon is because he was sort of the most entrepreneurial and sort of business-minded friend that I had, like Brandon ran a music station at SC, he'd be thinking about events or stuff like that. And so we were playing games and we both loved online games. And so we loved to watch replays of really competitive players playing online and try to help inform, you know, how we could get better.

3 (9m 45s):
And that started us thinking about, well, maybe we could help create or run some gaming tournaments. Maybe we could do some stuff like that just around campus. And actually, maybe there's a business opportunity. Maybe we should create a league that we were going to call it the UGL, the ultimate gaming league. And so, you know, Brandon, I went down to the basement of Leavey library, like late one night and we started working on this rough business plan. Neither of us really knew how to build a business plan. So we're trying to figure out what that looked like and what to put on paper and all this. And we kind of never really went anywhere with that business. But nonetheless, like I just remember being really energized about the possibilities of the future. And, and again, that's, that's just something that I think Brandon really helped to awaken in me was this ability to look at not the way the world is currently, but the way that it could be and how we could potentially go help change it.

2 (10m 35s):
So I guess after college, both of you kind of went into like quote unquote safe jobs, right? Like mark, you went to work for a bank and Brandon, you went to work in consulting initially, but you guys were roommates, right. You became roommates after college and lived together in an apartment.

4 (10m 50s):
Yeah, that's right.

2 (10m 51s):
So this is like 2002, 2003 ish. Were you guys constantly playing, playing games and in your apartment together?

3 (10m 59s):
Yeah, that's when I was done with banking and I went to work for a company called advanced search communications and, and Brandon worked at Bain and company as a strategy consultant and our lives at the time really consisted of going to work or coming home and playing games. We had back-to-back gaming rigs and anytime we had free time, like that's all we wanted to do. And it was kind of in that context, that, which we started to explore, you know, different ideas about where the game industry was going.

2 (11m 27s):
And Brandon, I, I read that like at some point you'd like cold called a, a game company, a gaming company that was like out west somewhere because you heard they were developing like a cool game that you want to work on. And I guess the CEO would like actually called you back and said, Hey, we could use your help.

4 (11m 45s):
Yeah. Long story short that CEO gave me a call when I was at Bain in, in sort of my second year. And he said, you know, I think we can get to sort of a next phase of, of growth for this company. Are you interested in coming on board and, and helping me out? And I shared it with mark who was involved and we both, you know, kind of went out there and met with them and, you know, w it just rekindled the, Hey, we should be thinking about games. We love games. I think that call really sort of got us working together, thinking about possibilities in games.

3 (12m 24s):
And to me, like this was an example of Brandon magic, where he hears about this company, cold calls, the CEO, the CEO agrees to be like, yeah, come out. And so Brandon flies out to Arizona, meets the CEO and see, it was like, oh my God, you're a kid. You're like, what the hell? You know? But then Brandon convinces them to be like, Hey, like, can I, like, how can I be helpful? Like, there's no downside to like, could I get your materials? What comes back, shares them with me. And then we start brainstorming on just like other ways to plug in or add value and to sort of just finding ways again, to add advice or things like that, or, or connect them with anybody that we know that may be interested in. Things like that.

2 (12m 59s):
So, all right. So you guys are, are started consulting with this company, meantime, you're still doing your own jobs and, and just, just briefly, like what, what was the game that they were trying to build?

4 (13m 9s):
It was kind of like a next generation MMO, which is massively multiplayer online game, you know, just a really ambitious vision for one that was like super exciting if they could pull it off.

2 (13m 23s):
So ahead of the game do

3 (13m 25s):
Ultimately they ended up failing and it's sort of a good lesson. I think for us where we could, we learned sort of got to see up close, that you can have a right idea and be in the right place at the right time. But if you can't execute well, that doesn't matter.

2 (13m 38s):
It crashed. Right. Didn't it didn't, it didn't succeed.

3 (13m 41s):
Yeah. And, and part of the reason is development is incredibly difficult and especially building an MMO at the time because technology like the ability to build an online game is, is of like building a rocket ship where you have to build a game engine and it's a massive tool pipeline assets into the game. You know, you have to be able to build a whole set of server technologies that can scale to support thousands of simultaneous players all running around the world. So just the technology efforts incredibly difficult. And then from a content and gaming perspective, you have to build a world you needed to make it feel incredibly good to walk around the world. You did to have a story arc and character classes and races in cities with political history, that it all makes sense.

3 (14m 22s):
And then the game has to be fun. So you have to be able to understand and build systems where it feels good to move and the sound effects and the visual effects are great. And the combat mechanics, which is the math behind the game, all make sense. And you want to play it for a long time. I mean, it's an incredibly complex thing. And so the company needed to continually raise money and they could never quite get the game design or pitch, or like the problems that they were trying to solve. And it ended up just not resonating when they ended up shipping the game. It's kind of a watered down version of the original idea. And so the company ended up going out of business.

2 (14m 57s):
So just to clarify, this is like 2005, right at the time, if I understand it correctly games, right. Video games were essentially produced like as a form of software and then shipped out and a user would pay 60 bucks or a hundred bucks for that game. And that was it basically, is it, is that more or less, right?

4 (15m 16s):
Yes. So the typical game model at the time was games would essentially ship the big ones typically around, you know, the black Friday sort of Thanksgiving leading up to Christmas holiday season and you spend about $60 and you got a game

2 (15m 34s):
On a CD.

4 (15m 34s):
Exactly. Yeah. You bought a box with a, with a CD or DVD or cartridge.

2 (15m 39s):
Yeah. And then I guess around this time too, you started to get into this game called defense of the ancients. I'm going to be just straight, straight up, honest with everybody listening to this right now. I am like, this is a new, this is new territory for me. So I know a lot of people listening are like major gamers and super into this. And this is going to be a little hard for you to hear because I'm, I'm like sort of grinding through this with my really bad, basic understanding of how this works. So bear with me, everybody. But you started to play there, like essentially around this time, fans of games, like Warcraft were creating their own modifications of those games and making it available to fans of the game to play.

2 (16m 23s):
Is, is that basically correct?

3 (16m 25s):
Yeah. So Warcraft three, which was a commercial product from blizzard entertainment shipped with what's called a map editor. So, which is an ability for players of the game to utilize the in-game assets, meaning like the art and design abilities, things like that to change the rules. And then you could upload the, you know, these maps that'll have these custom rule sets to anybody else in the world that could then go play them. Wow. But everybody that was playing had to purchase a commercial copy of Warcraft three in order to play. And so this is one of the reasons it was a good business model for business.

2 (16m 55s):
And so Brandon, just, just to get a sense of how revolutionary this was, these mods, like in the context of the gaming world in 2004, 2005, when, when user modified game started to come out, was it like, was like a total game changer?

4 (17m 10s):
Yeah. I mean, it, it was, it, it created this possibility space for people with relatively limited knowledge of all the various disciplines required to build a game could really, you know, make something powerful and special out of a lot of the existing assets of the existing game. And so there was a ton of experimentation and yeah, there was magic in there.

3 (17m 36s):
And so it enabled an explosion of game concepts and design because it made it much more widely accessible for people to come up with their own ideas and then ship them to a marketplace for free and then see what would stick and what people wanted to play

2 (17m 50s):
Meantime to get these games right. You had to still spend money and go buy the physical disc, putting your computer, and then the expansion packs and all this stuff like that was something you had to do. But from what I, from what I understand, like you guys started to see the potential for something completely different through, through these modified games. Is that, is that writer or was that not quite happening? Just, just, just yet.

3 (18m 19s):
So, so yes. So in particular, around Dota or defense of the ancients, and so this became, this is a game and there were multiple iterations of Dota. There was sort of the original Dota and then there was Dota all-stars and Dota all-stars in particular was a really, really fun game that started to grow virally. Cause it was, it took the heroes, these, these characters within Warcraft three and just made it incredibly fun to team up with a team of five players and fight against an enemy team of five players and all these characters at different abilities. And there was this community site called Dota officers.com. And as we got deeper into this community, we're like, oh my God, this, this type of thing where the developer is connecting directly with the audience and growing it in concert with them over time, this is what the future of the industry is gonna look like.

3 (19m 10s):
And then we thought, well, maybe, maybe we could make a donut type game. And then we thought, well, maybe the doughnuts have game. It actually proves this whole games as a service thing. Maybe we should go explore games as a service. And it was that questioning, which then led us to start working on the business plan, which then had us reach out to the creators of Dota to start being like, Hey, like, why don't we go explore building a company to commercialize this game and demonstrate that we could make it so much more than if it's just, you know, remains a mod as part of this Warcraft three ecosystem. And so it was really that which led to the, the Genesis of riot.

2 (19m 45s):
So at this point, I mean, clearly the, the wheels are turning in your head, right? You're you're now talking about building a company and I mean, were you guys thinking of quitting your job? So w what, what steps did you start to take?

4 (19m 59s):
You know, every free minute that we had together, we would be playing these games. And, and as we played them, we would have thoughts and ideas, and eventually we'd start to explore these ideas and put the, put them down, you know, on paper and start to imagine, you know, what, if we, it was, it was essentially like the creation of a, of a, of a business plan, almost like a, a presentation that we would, that we would ultimately refine and share with investors to see a, what, what do other, you know, making games is expensive. What are investors going to think? Is this crazy or not? What they back a couple of young, 20 somethings and B, we wanted to simultaneously reach out to experienced game developers and see what they thought.

4 (20m 43s):
So it was this iterative process of, and know, in terms of like quitting our jobs. We were gonna, at least me personally, like, I didn't want to quit my, I liked my job and I didn't want to quit my job until I was really confident that all those other stakeholders, whether it's investors or potential talent that would want to join us would validate that we weren't insane. Yeah.

2 (21m 5s):
So, so you were, you were a Bain, right? You were a consultant.

4 (21m 9s):
Yeah.

2 (21m 10s):
And, and so did you, the two of you start working on the business plan, like on, at nights and on weekends and, and for how long?

4 (21m 18s):
Yeah, we would get together on, on nights and weekends. We spent a lot of time, I think, in, at Mark's office over the weekend where we could just be like undistracted, including like, not distracted by our own gaming rigs. Cause it was so easy for us to just fall into playing a game and we'd spend the whole day there just getting on the whiteboard, thinking about stuff, iterating, you know, building this presentation to sort of simultaneously convince ourselves. And then ultimately, you know, convince investors that like, we would have a serious plan. Like we'd really be able to execute this. It wasn't crazy. And we could make a game.

3 (21m 52s):
And it was interesting because I started dating my girlfriend at the time. He was my now wife and then many of my friends or family they'd be like, Hey, what do you do this weekend? I'm like, well, I'm gonna go over to this guy's house and we're gonna work on a business plan all day. It became this thing where, where people were kind of like, oh, interesting. And what's your company you're working on? I'm like, oh, a video game company. And people would be like, huh, like I, I just remember how people, it just felt abnormal. And so I, it was fascinating to, to just experience the surprise. And I don't know if it was because of me or because of not many other people wanted to go dedicate so much time to something like that. But I just, I remember being really shocked by, by that kind of reaction.

2 (22m 31s):
So standing correctly, like initially your idea was to be like a, almost like a studio, like right. Not to kind of develop games and then to work with bigger companies that would then distribute your games. So it was that the initial kind of vision for what you want it to do.

4 (22m 50s):
Yes. Yeah. That's, that's exactly right. We, we, we felt like biting off developing games was a big enough bite to chew that we wanted to try to be as narrowly focused as we possibly could. So we were going to partner with other companies to, to publish the game and do everything else that was required. We were going to leverage every existing technology that we could get access to off the shelf to not have to build things that took us away from developing the core moment to moment gameplay experience, which is what we had a, a really clear vision for. And we're really excited, but also totally unprepared to make.

2 (23m 28s):
Now, neither of you guys are engineers, right? I mean, so when you were sort of coming up with the plan, the business plan and iterating and using the whiteboard and kind of going back and forth, I'm assuming both of you are like, we need to find engineers to help us build this thing

3 (23m 44s):
That is right there. Brandon and I were 24 and 25 at the time with no professional software development experience. And so, you know, we, part of the diligence process in terms of building the business plan was really focused on answering three questions. And it was know one, you know, if we build this game and this experience that we think would be great, would it would have worked with people actually want to come play this, you know, to, could we attract capital necessary to fund the development tool to launch this game. And then three sort of on a related note is could we attract developers and the right type of talent to be able to work together with us to, to build this thing. And when all signs kind of pointed to yes, you know, we ended up jumping ship from our respective careers and opening the office in September of 2006.

3 (24m 27s):
But, you know, again, given the lack of experience, we really underestimated the scope and complexity, not only of building the game itself, but then subsequently when we were talking to publishers about financing the game, we quickly realized that that wasn't going to work. Because part of the experience that we were thinking about delivering was going to be premised upon having the game be free and needing to go direct to consumer and not having single-player potentially exploring alternative business models like digital goods and things like that. And once we started talking to publishers, you know, whose entire incumbency and multi, you know, massive multi dollar billion dollar businesses were built around selling shiny discs at retail, they told us that this was a horrible idea and it would never work, which of course shook our confidence.

3 (25m 20s):
And we've talked to a lot of talented developers, too. A lot of people we're busy, we're no names, you know, we didn't have a lot of money, so people didn't want to come join us either. You know? So we had all these different challenges to try to figure out how to move forward and the, the scope quickly expanded. And it was hugely intimidating.

2 (25m 35s):
Where did you guys go to get just the initial money that even just have enough money to turn on the lights in the office?

3 (25m 43s):
So when we put together the business plan, it essentially was, you know, like a 15 slide deck. And then we ended up having like almost 200 slides of, of backup, you know, in this really detailed appendix. And we would essentially just tap the network and ask people like, you know, give an example that my then girlfriend's father, who's a dentist. You know, he was friends. Cause one of his patients was as guy named Greg Dollarhide, who was the former CEO of Baja fresh. And so he was like, Hey, you guys should go talk to Greg. He's a great businessman. And so Brandon and I cruised over to Greg's house in Malibu and we give them a pitch and run it through the deck and he's got some good thoughts and he brings a 17 year old son over and he's like, Hey, have you heard of Dodo?

3 (26m 24s):
What do you think about this whole game and what you think the games as a service and all that. He's like, yeah, that sounds really cool. You know? And so then Greg would be like, cool. Yeah. If you get other people that are come in now I'll all invest. Right. And so then he'd actually introduced us to other people and, you know, that's really how we ended up putting together an angel round of, of a lot of angels. Yeah.

4 (26m 39s):
And so it ended up being like 25 to 30 individual investors, just, you know, you start with friends and family. Yeah. Former bosses or colleagues, and then, you know, they, they would know somebody in the next thing, you know, you're, you're doing this. Like we call it like a living room roadshow.

2 (26m 54s):
Right. And you guys, I think you raised about a million and a half dollars through this friends and family round, is that, is that right?

4 (26m 60s):
Yep. That's right.

2 (27m 1s):
And with a million and a half dollars, you can't obviously create a game. Right. Or can you, is that, is that enough or was like, did you guys think you could, you could actually make something with that money.

4 (27m 13s):
S so, so I think one of the, one of the interesting things looking back is we believe that we could, we had created this really detailed model with all the assumptions, from all the conversations and research that we did that would, they basically had us convinced that we could build and complete this game for two, I think it was $2.8 million. So we thought we were halfway there with a little bit of buffer and we were entirely wrong. I mean, I think all said and done, it was closer to $20 million and it, it highlights how, you know, honestly, our, our own naivete was in many ways an asset to us, we were, we were so unprepared to do what we were trying to do.

4 (27m 57s):
And we were so unclear about what we were really up against that we didn't, that we didn't talk ourselves completely out of it.

2 (28m 6s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment, Brendan and mark built an amazing design team, then lost their amazing design team and why most investors were not the slightest bit interested in their free to play business model, stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR, Ready to turn your small e-commerce business into the next big thing. Klaviyo can help. It's the easy to use email and SMS platform that gives you everything you need to build genuine relationships with your customers. And even if you're new to marketing Klaviyo can help you become an email expert with drag and drop design templates, simple insights, and made for e-commerce reports and recommendations.

2 (28m 57s):
Give it a try with a free account at klaviyo.com/built. That's K L a V I Y o.com/built.

6 (29m 7s):
This episode is sponsored by audible 2022 is all about celebrating our newfound self-awareness and making positive change. Audible helps make space for what matters to you. It's a destination for your wellness. Whether you're looking to soul search, be inspired, work towards new goals, unwind or simply be entertained. Audible offers an incredible selection of audio books across every genre from bestsellers to new releases, to celebrity memoirs, mysteries, and thrillers, motivation, wellness business, and more plus new members can try audible free for 30 days. Visit audible.com/one, three pod or text pod to 500, 500 that's audible.com/wondery pot or text Wondery pot to 500, 500.

2 (29m 57s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Raz. So it's the mid two thousands and Brendan and mark have set up an office in an old converted machine shop near the 4 0 5 freeway in Santa Monica. And they decided to call their brand new company riot games.

4 (30m 15s):
We liked riot because it had sort of this double meaning of kind of the fist in the air, you know, on behalf of, of players and gamers. And, and then, you know, at the same time, this lightheartedness double entendre for, you know, it's a riot, it doesn't take itself too seriously. And the cool thing about the name was when we, you know, when we first started going to conferences and meeting people, you know, they say where you're from, you know, we said riot games and be like, oh yeah, I've heard of you guys. And of course they hadn't, but for some reason there was like some, something about it that was familiar to people.

2 (30m 47s):
All right. You guys, your first B coup was, was you guys hired this guy named Steve Feick to be one of the people in your design team. And, and he was, I guess he was like one of the original designers of, of Dota all-stars and I guess he was kind of a big deal in the gaming community. So, so what was your pitch to him? I mean, was it like, Hey, come work for us and we're going to build this big thing. And he was like, sure.

3 (31m 12s):
Well, so yeah, so Steve Feick.