0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor talk desk talk desk offers a better way to do customer experience with talk desks, innovative solution. You can get superior contact centers up and running fast. So if you're customer obsessed visit talk desk.com,

1 (19s):
The way I knew that it wasn't working is I was listening to the customer. You can see there is too much frustration. The most consistent feedback is it was more complex and it took more work on their part, then it would have otherwise. So within about a year, it's a little less than a year. I go to the team and I say, this isn't going to work. What are we going to do

0 (49s):
From NPR? It's how I built this show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built. I'm guy Ross. And I have today's show how Robert Revkin wrote a business plan just to get a job, didn't get the job, but turn the business plan into compass. A real estate company worth around $6 billion. 2020 was supposed to be a disastrous year for real estate in the United States. Instead, the value of the us housing market increased by two and a half trillion dollars last year.

0 (1m 34s):
That is the biggest single year gain since 2005. And despite all the fears about housing collapsed during a pandemic crisis, the overall housing market in the U S is now worth over $36 trillion trillion with a T, which couldn't have come at a better time for the real estate broker compass. The company is one of the fastest growing players in the real estate business in the U S it was founded less than a decade ago, but it's already one of the biggest real estate brokerage firms in America. In the spring of 2021 compass became a publicly traded company turning its co-founders, or are you alone?

0 (2m 15s):
And Robert Revkin into multi-millionaires overnight. Each of them owns about 6% of the company, a company now valued at around $6 billion. And the decision to start compass wasn't inspired by Robert's passion for real estate. In fact, he knew very little about the industry, but as he considered ideas for a business that wasn't dominated by Google or Amazon or apple or Facebook, he realized there were two options, healthcare or real estate. So Robert chose the ladder. And as you will hear, the initial launch of compass was kind of a disaster, a disaster that would push Robert and Ori to make a major pivot.

0 (2m 59s):
But before any of that, when Robert was growing up, he was by his own account, pretty mediocre student. He didn't always feel like he belonged in part because of his background. Robert is both black and Jewish. So he felt a little like an outsider in both communities. But what Robert did have was a skill much more important than the ability to get good grades. He learned to feel comfortable feeling uncomfortable, and that helped him develop incredible people skills. He had meticulously safe business cards. You follow up with people he met and actively seek out mentors. Robert grew up in Berkeley, California.

0 (3m 40s):
His mom, Ruth was born in Israel and immigrated to the U S when she was younger.

1 (3m 46s):
She moved to New York when she was seven and raised by a very strict parents. She was the kind of person whose parents would not let her leave the block. And she went to a very religious school named Ramaz. She ended up going to NYU and marrying a guy named Jean. He was a tremor. He was a drummer in a band. He was a drummer. They both went to NYU together and all he did was play music. My grandfather wanted Jean to be an accountant, but, you know, he didn't do that. And so they ended up moving to Berkeley, California, and on the way to Berkeley, they actually went to Woodstock.

1 (4m 31s):
And at the time they were the real hippies, the kind of people that didn't wear shoes when they were walking on the street. And there's a place in Berkeley called Telegraph, where they would sell beads and necklaces. And so they were really big communes of people and they were just figuring

0 (4m 49s):
Out, so your mom really rebelled against her upbringing. And she went to this super religious Orthodox Jewish school, and parents were really strict. And she sounds like she just kind of rejected it. I think

1 (5m 1s):
It's interesting. My, my mom is very entrepreneurial and believes that she can do whatever she wants and that when people say, no, she can say yes, I could figure it out. I think those qualities of a girl at that time from my grandfather's perspective were bad qualities. He wanted her to be the quiet girl that sits in the corner.

0 (5m 31s):
You actually took your, your last name from gene, from gene Revkin though. He wasn't actually your dad. He was your mom's first husband. And so how long did her marriage to him last

1 (5m 43s):
Their marriage didn't last long and they're friends to this day. Jean Rapkin is my godfather. And I, by the way, I love that. My last name is Revkin and it's neither my mom's maiden name or my father's last name. And it's a reflection that I can create my own future. I can build my own identity.

0 (6m 5s):
So after her, your mom's relationship with, with Jean ended, she met your dad. H w what's the story about how they met? So

1 (6m 13s):
They met at a bar and my father African-American good looking guy, jazz player and construction worker. I'm sure he's in great shape. He sits next to her and they started talking and then he says, Hey, what's your birthday? And she says, yeah, July 26th. And he said, Hey, my birthday is July 26th. And she says, know her year. He says, oh, my birthday is the same year. And of course she doesn't believe me at all. And she says, let me see your license. And they ended up having the exact same birthday. So in a way that was destined, you know, they went and they dated on and off for a few years.

1 (6m 56s):
And I was not born on purpose. I was not intentional, but we had me and yeah.

0 (7m 8s):
Was, was the initial idea to make it work

2 (7m 10s):
For, for your mom to be a of life partner with your dad? Your dad was that her intention? My mom loved my dad and I, I think my dad loved my mom, but he already had two other children. So I have two other half-brothers that I don't know. The other issue was he was a drug addict. There's no other way to say it. And yeah, not just the marijuana kind of drugs, but you know, real drugs like heroin and, and some really difficult things in needles. You write about this in your book a little bit, I guess your mom told her parents that she was pregnant with her grandchild.

2 (7m 52s):
How did, how did they respond? The day I was born, my mom calls her parents and says, I just had a kid. And they just asked one question, what is he? And she said, he is Jewish in black. And they hung up the phone a week

1 (8m 20s):
Later, they sent a letter in the mail that said that she was just own her, you know, to this day, I, I never met my grandparents. I never spoke to them. She never spoke to her dad again, he ended up being very successful. I think he and his family owned real estate in Israel. And when he died, you, he gave $26 million to her sister who is, I guess, more obedient to the way that, you know, he wanted her to be and gave a hundred dollars to her. Just to say, I hate you, your mom to my mom.

1 (9m 0s):
Right. I mean, it's worse than giving nothing.

0 (9m 2s):
So as a child, you had no connection to her family at all. No connection to anybody

1 (9m 9s):
Other than my mom. Yeah. It was just me and my mom against the world. That the interesting thing I think about a times is I think my grandfather would have loved me. Yeah. Obviously we have very different views of the world, but I think the success that I built, I think he would have actually been very proud to have known me. And it's really sad for me. Yeah, sure. It's sad. I didn't get to know them, but I never knew what I didn't know. So I actually didn't, it wasn't as bad as it may seem from the outside, but for them they could have had more of a family and more love. I just don't understand how you could just own your,

0 (9m 50s):
Your kid. So your mom raised you on, on her own. She was estranged from her family. Her relationship with your dad fell apart. And, and by the way, did you have a relationship with him? Were you able to see him growing up?

1 (10m 6s):
I have pictures of my dad when I was younger, but I don't remember it. And so the last memory I have was many years later where I saw him on the street. And how old are you? Like around 10 years old. And my mom know she had started to come a little more successful and she bought this red Volvos who went to Oakland.

0 (10m 31s):
And by the way, she was, she was a real

1 (10m 33s):
Estate agent, right at the time of life insurance agent. Got it. Okay. And so she, she gets the red Volvo and we go to a diner round lake Merritt, Oakland, and we're sitting down and this homeless guy comes walking across the street. She runs out and grabs him. And then they come in together and she said, you know, Robert, this is your dad. Wow. All I remember two things. One, he gives me this huge slobbery kiss on the lips and says a little man.

1 (11m 15s):
And then the second is he ordered two different plates of steak and eggs. And he was so hungry. But the last time I saw him after that, it was about a year later. And it was at his funeral. And my mom always told me that he wasn't around because he didn't want me to be like him. Maybe it was one of the first things early on that taught me that you could, you could change the story and the perspective on anything. They can make anything that's bad. Good. That any disadvantage can be your advantage. It can give you motivation to succeed. Can do more.

0 (11m 55s):
How are you at school as a student? Were you, did you like school?

1 (11m 59s):
I hated school. I just, it never made any sense why I was learning Western civilization. I don't get it calculus, come on. Yeah, who's going to use calculus. And so I couldn't get excited by something that I felt I was just being told to do because other people did it. And so I was never a good student. I was a C student.

0 (12m 25s):
It's interesting. I mean, you grew up in sort of a very, self-consciously progressive part of America, right? Oakland Berkeley, because of who you are and what you looked like, and you know, your different identities, black Jewish, you know, single parent, I mean, all of these things. Did you feel like it was a good environment all the time, or did you feel like, did you feel like an outsider, you know, at school or just in the community?

1 (12m 54s):
I felt that I just didn't have a real community synagogue. I was the only black person around my black friends. I was also, you know, Jewish and, and half white, the private school where I got a scholarship. Hey, I was a scholarship kid and I was commuting two hours to school and two hours back and from the east bay. And I went to high school in San Francisco and I was also a C student in a really good private schools that didn't make me feel like I belonged, but it did give me a skill of feeling comfortable being uncomfortable. I think I was forced to feel that way so much when I was younger, that when I was older and started working, that it didn't drain me.

1 (13m 43s):
I just, it was just part of, of life, of how I felt. And so I just moved on and I was like, I wasn't able, it didn't suck the energy out of me. Yeah. Over time. I just felt very comfortable that I'm different. And I didn't fight it anymore.

0 (13m 60s):
I mean, it sounds like when you think about your childhood externally one could say, wow, what a difficult childhood. I mean, the tragedy of your dad and the tragedy of your mom's relationship with her family and your mom's sort of up and down financial situation. But, but it sounds like you would say, oh, I had a pretty good childhood. Like I was happy.

1 (14m 24s):
I had a lovely childhood and I don't think any kids care about money. I do remember when I was in first grade, my mom didn't give me underwear and the sweat pants had holes in it. So people used to tease me and it was cool because they could see my bottom. But in, in terms of how I, I felt supported, my mom loved me, like in a way, think about what it would have been if I would have this mean grandfather coming around and just telling us that we're not good enough in whatever way he would do. And if my father was around coming in and out of my life, you know, being abusive and seeing them fight physically, like I think about it.

1 (15m 12s):
I didn't have any of that. All he had was me and my mom. He was happy either. The only thing that wasn't happy, you know, one of the hard things about being a mixed kid is that you don't really feel like you belong. Like you have no place, you have no community. And that feels lonely. So I do remember being lonely when I was younger, but those feelings are what instilled in me at such a young age, a drive to succeed, a drive, to build a better life for the family that I was going to create.

0 (15m 51s):
You grew up in the east bay. I mean, you were sort of in high school in the early mid nineties. And that was like a, from a, from a musical standpoint, there's a lot going on. I mean, there was, of course it was MC hammer. There's also green day souls of mischief and east bay hip hop, but also punk. Did you listen to that, to any of that music, first

1 (16m 14s):
Of all, like I respect you to before, but this is even, I mean, the fact that, you know, souls of mischief, 93 till infinity, of course, yeah. I was more into hip hop and rap. I started listening a lot to reggae and this older friend named Bali and he had dreads and he was mixed. He was the first guy who made me proud to be mixed. He owned it. And he's the kind of guy that would break dance along the pier in San Francisco. And he had this radio and he would always play like reggae music.

1 (16m 55s):
You met him at school, I'm in high school JaVale. So Wiki, you know, I didn't have a father figure. So I searched them and ultimately a number of the people that were my friends became father figures in certain ways. And then I had mentors over time that also became like a father figure. But the reason I bring it up reggae in dreads have a special place for black people who don't feel black enough. It was almost like a shield of armor. There's like, if you have dreadlocks, no one can question your, your blackness.

0 (17m 35s):
Did you have dreadlocks? Yeah. And I,

1 (17m 38s):
I started with the Afro as a, as a freshman and I had an Afro for like six months, but it was like big, big. And then I had dreadlocks all the way until college. And it was like his force field that made me feel really confident about who I was

0 (17m 54s):
In high school. I guess you, you started a business, you started by sort of selling like rusty gear, like to classmates. What would you sell?

1 (18m 5s):
I tend to, when I go into something, I go all in and, oh, I didn't just get dreadlocks. I didn't just start listening to reggae. I started buying a bunch of licorice, root, a bunch of Rosta belts and started making mixed tapes and selling them on the buses and subways. And I had this big reggae backpack that I put all my stuff in the truth is not many people bought my stuff, but it was fun. It made me feel like I was controlling my desk, that I was in the driver's seat. And you know, whether it, people bought it or not, it didn't matter.

1 (18m 45s):
It mattered that I was trying.

0 (18m 48s):
And I guess you went from making mixed tapes, actually starting a pretty successful DJ business in, in the east bay. And I read that you called it a rude boy production.

1 (18m 58s):
Yeah. I ended up being one of the most successful DJs in the high school bay area system for years in a row. So it was mostly school dances. Then there are house parties, a couple of bar mitzvahs did one wedding and I had something called the rude boy productions guarantee. And it was basically a gave a list. And it said, you can fill in any song that you want. And I promise you that I'll play it. And if I don't play it, I will give you all your money back. And I noticed at the time that there were all these DJs who were just playing the music that they wanted to hear, they literally weren't listening to the customer and I, I just want it to be successful.

1 (19m 39s):
And I said, I'll tell you whatever you want. And I can not tell you how different, like an all black house party is versus a bar mitzvah of 13 year old kids versus a private school party, a wedding. These are such different communities that listen to completely different types of music. And you gotta give the people what they want.

0 (20m 4s):
I read that you, over the course of your time in high school would earn like more than a hundred thousand dollars TJ, which is insane. I mean, that's an amazing business. Yeah.

1 (20m 16s):
I earned over a hundred thousand dollars as a DJ and better than that, I was able to employ a number of my friends and help them make money as well. And so it was a very empowering feeling and it was fun.

0 (20m 31s):
All right. So you go off to college, you went to Columbia, you describe yourself as a C student, and yet you graduated Columbia in two and a half years. You got your degree in two and a half years. So you had to abandon a good student while you were there to make that happen.

1 (20m 47s):
Yeah. People in question, if I'm a C student a lot, they don't believe it. And I actually think it's of everything that I've accomplished. The thing that I'm almost the most proud of is that I was able to accomplish it all by being a C student. And the reason I decided to graduate in two and a half years is I knew I couldn't be good at school. I knew I could never be Magna cum laude. And so I felt, Hey, I'm paying for school. This costs a lot of money. Let's pay less, get it done faster. Let me hurry up and find the thing that I can be good

0 (21m 22s):
At. You want to, I mean, you had already had experience running a business, the DJ business. And, and so when you, when you got to college and you were clearly in a rush and hurry to get out, what did you envision you would do? Did you think I'm going to go start a business or I'll go to wall street?

1 (21m 39s):
My, my journey to New York is really just the idea of New York. I felt like New York was a city that would accept anybody where everyone can belong. And then I started seeing, you know, what, what do people do after they graduate college? What are the opportunities? And of course, when you're in New York city, it's all about, you know, wall street at that time. And so in the fall, before I graduated, it was November. And I had interviewed at a number of investment banks, anyone that would let me interview, and none of them gave me a job. And so I was getting terrified.

1 (22m 20s):
I was accrued all this student debt and as about a graduate a month later now with a C average, by the way, and no job. And so I got really, really nervous and I had collected hundreds of business cards, actually had a binder of business cards where you, you would slot them into like baseball cards in like a collection. And I'd go through. And I started emailing at people and calling people that I met and asking them if they would interview me.

0 (22m 52s):
Hm. And I guess one of those contexts that, that you had saved was a guy who actually worked for McKinsey. Yep. And then through that connection, you, you were actually able to get your foot in the door for an interview.

1 (23m 4s):
Yeah. So I knew this was like, this was my shot. Like if I didn't get this job, I thought everything would fall apart. And so I take two weeks off of school. I go to the library and in there they had the wet feed press in the volt guide to cases study interviews. And that's how you interview for consulting, case study interviews. And I memorized them. I just, I spent two weeks every morning, every night, just learning how to interview as like a business school student would for McKinsey. And then I go into the interview and I basically aced the case. And that's why they, they had the confidence to give me the offer.

0 (23m 45s):
All right. So you get to McKinsey, admittedly, you were the guy who was like super bored in high school. I, by the way, that was me too. I totally like, what's the point of this. And did you, was it, I mean, was it kind of disorienting working for a big company like McKinsey or D or did you, did you love it? Like

1 (24m 4s):
I was so excited to start at McKinsey and I go in and I just get my butt kicked and I learned, and McKinsey, why should it focus more at school? These kids were smart. Right. I was exhausted every day. Every day, I'd walk home and she'd be like, I'm going to fail. I can succeed. I can't be as good at them. I didn't have the words. I remember being at this lunch. Everyone was talking about the election and the president election. I didn't say I had nothing to say. I wasn't that wasn't my world. I wasn't focused on those things. So for entire lunch, I say not one word I couldn't relate.

1 (24m 46s):
I mean, it's one thing to be a DJ and to like relate to different people. Musically, it's a whole different thing to be able to re relate to people in dialogue about politics or about travel,

0 (24m 58s):
Going to the south of France or yeah.

1 (25m 1s):
And that they need that. And so I, I made it a point for myself over time to be able to make sure that I can always be relevant in a conversation.

0 (25m 12s):
So I ended up staying there for like around two years, is that right

1 (25m 18s):
There for two years? And I was not, they did not let me continue on, they don't call it fired, but they say you're not invited to stay.

0 (25m 29s):
Oh. So it's like a two year sort of trial period. And you just didn't even cut it.

1 (25m 34s):
Yeah. Yeah. I wasn't good enough at writing. I wasn't good enough at synthesizing ideas. I wasn't going to have anything, like if it were a sports, it'd be like, you're in the NFL and you're playing it like a freshman year of college or a senior in high school. I, it was not even close. I had a personality and I worked really hard, but every single night I would go home and say that I'm failing. I mean, every single night I

0 (26m 5s):
Read that around. Like while you were there, cause you get paid pretty well when you're, you know, you're, you're young and that you took all your money and you invested it in the stock market during a boom time, which turned out to be a really unfortunate decision.

1 (26m 24s):
Yeah. It was very unfortunate. I, so I took the over a hundred thousand dollars I had from deejaying and I combined that with some of the earnings from McKinsey. And this was in the middle of the.com boom. Oh yeah. I learned about something called margin and I took all of the money I had and I opened up a couple of different online brokerage accounts. And I took out the maximum amount of margin on them and invested it. And I kept on doing more and more margin and it ended up being a million dollars at the top of the bubble until the crash and in just like less than a few months, it went not only to nothing.

1 (27m 11s):
I owed the bank money. I would run over $10,000 and I had nothing.

0 (27m 19s):
All right. So you're broke and eventually out of a job, but you were young. I mean, you were like 22, 23 years old. And I guess you decided to go to business school back to Columbia to get your degree. And, and did you, I mean, I guess part of that was you're out of a job, but part of that, I'm thinking, you know, you get that degree and it's like a ticket to anything. Right. Is that, was that your thinking? Yeah.

1 (27m 42s):
I remember that when I lost the million dollars I made in the stock market and I was like, how am I going to get it back? The idea was I applied to business school and then worked really hard as the first time I started taking school seriously, because I realized from McKinsey that it actually does matter. And then I ended up applying to a bunch of investment banks. It didn't get into most of them, but I need to get into most of them. I got into two, one of which was Lazard. And I ended up working at Lazard.

0 (28m 17s):
I've read it. There's a quote in your book, you talked about your time kind of working as a banker and right. I was almost always the only black person working on a team. Often. One of the only black people working on an entire floor of a building, there were the small comments that's done the times people confuse me with other black people. The times people assume that I worked in the mailroom, the awkward jokes about the racial comedy skits of Dave Chappelle show. How are you kind of absorbing all of those things?

1 (28m 48s):
I think I grew up with low expectations and I said, this is the way the world is. And I've just got to work twice as hard and, and do the best in the way the world is. And so, yeah, it didn't feel good being the only black person in almost every meeting. But I felt fortunate. I felt lucky. Like how lucky am I to be here? I need to work twice as hard, not just for myself, but to pave the way for others that come after. If I do well, that's the way to honor the people like delayed Vernon Jordan who paved the way for me, because if it wasn't for them, I wouldn't have had that.

1 (29m 30s):
I mean, it was very clear to me if I was born a couple of decades earlier, none of those risks, first of all, I was born 50 years earlier. I wouldn't have been able to even get a scholarship to any of these schools. But the most important thing that happened to me in my career, not just professionally, but psychologically was Vernon Jordan.

0 (29m 53s):
It was a lot of people remember was an advisor to president Clinton and many other presidents.

1 (29m 58s):
He was the only black partner at Lazard when I went there, the only black person and Lazard when I went there in the New York office and he was larger than life, you know, six feet, six, and really amazing human being and more fortune 500 boards than any other person. That's what I had read and seen a black man, dark tall black man walking the halls of Lazard, a multi a hundred plus year institution on wall street just made me feel like being black. Wasn't a barrier to your dreams.

0 (30m 37s):
So he became, I mean, it sounds like he became a pretty important the person in your life.

1 (30m 42s):
Yeah. He had invited me to Thanksgiving at his house and we would have lunch on a regular basis. He told me to apply to be a white house fellow, which I did right after Liz already said, he said, all young professionals in the private sector should get exposure to the public sector, even if, just for one year, because the experiences you gain and the relationships you have will be transferable to any sector you choose.

0 (31m 8s):
And you actually did go to work in the white house as a white house fellow for a year. So I think around like 2005. And then after that, I guess you, you were able to land a job at Goldman Sachs, like a pretty big job, like a VP level.

1 (31m 23s):
It was, it was a really big job. And I thought this was my golden ticket. I thought, like I had made it, I remember talking to my mom and she said, you've networked her entire life to get to this point, to get to Goldman now, stop networking and just work as hard as possible. And that was my approach. I moved in literally one block from Goldman Sachs and the idea was I was never going to be at home. I was always going to be in the office and if I'm not in the office, I'm just gonna be asleep. And so I just want one block back and forth and I gave it everything I possibly could. Unfortunately, I just never was great at it, but I did have the support of a really, really great mentor, Henry Cornell, who was the person who hired me.

1 (32m 14s):
And he also gave me the honest advice that most people don't get what he said. He came in one of my reviews. He, I come in and he says, Robert, he said, stop trying to make your weaknesses a strength, just minimize your weaknesses and maximize your strengths. He said, you're really good at the personal stuff. You could be generating deals. You could be bringing in know CEO's and making transactions happen, focus on your strengths. And that was like really important for me to hear my entire career before I was just banging my head against the wall, trying to make these weaknesses, strengths and depressed every single night, just to press walking back at home to, I'm never going to be good enough.

1 (32m 59s):
I'm never going to be good enough. And then for the first time someone said, Hey, you can be great at what you're great at. And that's okay.

0 (33m 7s):
So, so this is now around, I guess, 2012. And it sounds like you really need to figure out what you're going to do next. Like what, what did you do? So

1 (33m 17s):
I reached out to a guy named Bio-gen lessee and he was the biggest donor to a nonprofit. I started called America needs you.

0 (33m 28s):
This is a nonprofit. You started in New York.

1 (33m 31s):
When I was in Goldman and decided I'm going to start a nonprofit. It was called New York needs you at the time. And we focused on students who were first in their families to go to college and below the poverty line, giving them career development in college support, into summer internships.

0 (33m 48s):
You had called one of your donors up. And you said what? You said, Hey, I'm looking for a job or thinking about going to another bank.

1 (33m 54s):
Yes. I call this donor up his name, his bio. He is the biggest donor to New York deal. And he had a big private equity fund called global infrastructure partners. Right. He said he is willing to meet with me. And as I sat down with them and I told him I really wanted to work for him. And would he be open to interviewing me? So what'd he say? He says, look, if you were my son, I would tell you to go start something. He says, how about this? You go think of a really good business idea, put a lot of effort into it. And I'll use that to evaluate how good you could be in this job and be part of the interview process.

1 (34m 36s):
And so I go out and I had to Everett in this business plan and a friend named Oreo alone who had sold a company to Google and another company to Twitter. And, and we started talking about it. And the idea was what's was an industry that's really, really big that the big companies, Google, Facebook, apple, Amazon, Microsoft, aren't competing within. And it really came down to real estate and healthcare. And my mom's an agent and real estate. So I was like, Hey, let's do that. Why don't

0 (35m 8s):
We come back in just a moment, how Robert's trial business plan morphs into compass and how one year after it's launched the company goes through a major identity crisis, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this.

3 (35m 35s):
This message comes from NPR, sponsor Ford, introducing the Mustang, Mach II global brand director of electric vehicles. Jason Castro Yoda says that it was a daring move for Ford to make this new Mustang in all electric SUV.

4 (35m 50s):
The whole team just rallied behind that and really took on the challenge of how do we get people excited about better electric vehicles. And when you think about Mustang, it's, you know, one of the world's most renowned and iconic sports cars. So to bring our greatest hope forward, unintended, you know, we really wanted to be able to come out with a bang and make a splash and show everybody that Ford was very serious about electrifying all of our great products, you know, because this is really about the future of Ford as it is as much a singular product. And we want to continue to deliver that extra horse in the stable that, you know, Steed for every need. We've got a couple of great puns around it, but we're pretty excited about it to

3 (36m 31s):
Learn more about the creation of forwards all electric Mustang, Mach II, go to ford.com. Good question. That's a really good question. That's a great question. This is free therapy. Thank you for asking

0 (36m 48s):
Me that God, that's such a good question. That's an interesting question. But what fresh air interviews are really about are the interesting answers, listen, and subscribe to fresh air from w H Y Y N NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's around 2012 and Robert is looking to get a job with this big player in private equity and named Bio-gen lessee. And just to kind of see how Robert's mind works. Bio ask Sam to come up with a really good startup idea and write a business plan for it.

0 (37m 29s):
So Robert and his friend Ori come up with an idea for a real estate company.

1 (37m 33s):
And so then I go back to bio and I have like this 10 page plan. I say, Hey, bio, here's the plan? What do you think? It's a good plan. What do you think about me working for you? And he said, well, why don't you go do the plan? I want to create the company. I was like, bio, I only did this. So then I can work for it. You told me that as part of the interview process. And then he says, well, I think it's a good idea. And I told him, look, man, I can't do it. I'm I'm getting married in a couple of months. I'm going to have a kid I can't afford to not have a real income. Is it? How about this? I'll be your first investor.

1 (38m 14s):
I'll give you $500,000. And if you feel in a year, I'll hire you. And I just said, yeah, I guess what I said, I think it's a, wow.

0 (38m 25s):
What was the idea you had? I mean, she wanted sort of do something in real estate. I get it. You were kind of brainstorming and you figured it was going to be real estate or healthcare, but what, what was the problem you were suggesting you could solve with real estate?

1 (38m 38s):
The idea was that we would focus on rentals in New York city. Our big, big dream at the time was we were going to make the process of renting a home. Wonderful for everyone. We're going to make it an amazing customer experience. And the way we would do that is we would hire neighbored specialists, pay them on salary, not commission. And

0 (38m 57s):
Just to clarify the new York's this really weird market. Whereas when you rent a house, unlike almost anywhere else in the United States, you have to pay an agent like a commission, you as the renter pay a commission to an agent. So you can rent an apartment, which is super weird, right? Like New York is this kind of outlier when it comes to that. Right?

1 (39m 18s):
Yeah. So I, we didn't know that it was an outlier at the time. The idea was no one liked any part of the process. It was too hard to find the home. It costs too much. And I sent out an email to everyone in my network and I said, quick question for a tech friend, if there was a problem that technology could solve, what would you want it to solve? And maybe it's just my peer group. But the number one thing was finding an apartment

0 (39m 45s):
In New York. So you, you come up with this idea to instead of a commission based system, you would, you would employ real estate agents, which you called neighborhood neighborhood specialists.

1 (39m 57s):
We call them neighborhood specialists.

0 (39m 59s):
Okay. And they would be like friendly and they'd be on salary. And the renter wouldn't have to pay as much in, in fees. They would pay a smaller fee. Basically. That was the model. Exactly. All right. And this was called you called it compass urban compass, right?

1 (40m 15s):
Urban compass at the time.

0 (40m 17s):
And you had a friend named Ori alone. And I guess he was, he had done a couple of startups. And tell me about him. He, he was the guy that you want to start this with, who who's Ori.

1 (40m 26s):
So I met Ori alone when I was a white house fellow at a conference called academy of achievement. He had just sold his first company to Google and we just sat next to each other. And we really connected. And I sent him holiday cards every year afterwards, and we stayed in touch.

0 (40m 44s):
And why did you, why did you think he was the right partner to start this with, I guess presumably because he had experience right with startups and selling them. So

1 (40m 51s):
I saw this guy who had sold one company in Google, another company to Twitter. And I was like, this guy is a magician. I said, I need to work with him. If I ever do anything, I know work with him. And he gave credibility to everything we're doing on the tech side. I knew I could hire the business people, but he would be able to hire the technology people.

0 (41m 14s):
And when the technology, when you say technology, you thought this would be like an app or a website that kind of made it, took the friction out of renting an apartment. Yeah,

1 (41m 25s):
We wanted to, at the time we didn't know anything very clear

0 (41m 30s):
And including about real estate and

1 (41m 33s):
Knew my was an agent. And I had worked there a little bit when I was younger, but we didn't understand the way real estate worked. We didn't even know how much the commission really was. You know, anything, we were two complete outsiders. And the idea was just, let's make things better. You launched

0 (41m 50s):
This in, in 2013, cause I think you raised, you raised a lot of money before you launched, you ended up raising about $8 million, which I think is credit to your connections at that point. And, and all the experience you had presumably, right? Yeah. We

1 (42m 5s):
Raised $8 million, which was the largest seed financing round that year. And we raised it from three groups of people, venture capital firms, real estate investors and CEOs. And we could see that each group was bringing more credibility to the other. So like the investors like that, the real estate developers were there because they made it feel like we knew what we were doing. The real estate developers like that the technology investors were there because they felt like that meant that we were going to actually be able to build the technology that will transform the industry. The bad thing was we had no clarity of what the single thing we were trying to do was, you know, we're going to hire really talented people and make things better.

1 (42m 50s):
And so Africa was going in different directions, better for some people meant bringing down price better for other people meant creating scheduling software better for other people meant having really, really nice neighbors specialists that are trained on customer service. And we realized people, they're looking to find an apartment that meets all their needs and the people that are best at doing that. I could see where agents who had been doing it for 10 years, not people that we hired, you know, from restaurants or hotels that were really, really nice and trying to train them to like meet someone on a corner and show them property. And

0 (43m 27s):
That was what your idea was that you would hire nice people, not necessarily experienced agents. Exactly.

1 (43m 33s):
I would literally go to restaurants, try to find the nicest waiters and asked them if they would become neighbors specialists. And I'd go to the doorman and door women at hotels and say, Hey, would you want to be a neighborhood specialist?

0 (43m 49s):
So you launch in 2013 having these neighborhood specialists and you rent it and the renter comes in. And how long before you realized that that's not working, that that model is just not going to work.

1 (44m 0s):
So within about it, about a year, just a little less than a year, I go to the team and I say, this isn't going to work. I was an NFL as the same thing from so many times before where you're, you're going home every night. And I'm just saying this isn't going to work. This isn't gonna work. The same feeling I had at Goldman. And the same feeling I had at McKenzie was like, this is all gonna not work. What are we going

0 (44m 26s):
To do? And by the way, how did you know it wasn't working? Cause cause the money wasn't coming in is going to be, we weren't going to be profitable so early, but how did you know that it wasn't going to work? What gave you that, that sense? Was it intuition or was it real hard? Our data,

1 (44m 41s):
We were giving the landlords guarantees and rent to get exclusive listings. And we said as if we can't rent your property within 30 days, we'll pay the rent. Cause we're so confident we're going to be able to rent it. And so we're going above and beyond for the landlords. And then for the renters, we were charging half off and even giving such extraordinary offerings on both the landlord side. And on the renter side, renters were not happy when you really looked at the feedback and you look at the comments and the emails you can see, there is too much frustration.

1 (45m 24s):
The way I knew that it wasn't working as I was listening to the customer and the most consistent feedback is it was more complex and it took more work on their part than it would have otherwise.

0 (45m 39s):
So once you started to come to that realization, how did you, I mean, what did other people in the team Grimmie, you had hired all these people and you had a management team and did they agree with you?

1 (45m 52s):
I tell everyone that this isn't working and they, yeah, they didn't agree with me. They were saying things like, Hey, you know, don't give up on the vision. You know, we could, we could transform the industry. And I was never motivated just to transform the industry. I want to make things better. I didn't want to innovate and disrupt just for disruption sake. And they were very unhappy with me. One morning, Ori was invited to a breakfast by one of the senior members of the team. He goes to breakfast and everyone is there on the senior team except me. And they basically tell him that they want to fire me and Ori, you know, later on he takes me on a walk and he tells me what happens when he said, Hey, let's think about this throughout the day.

1 (46m 41s):
Let's have dinner tonight. I go home to my wife. I tell her, I think it's all over. They don't want me at the company anymore. And we talked for about an hour and end of that, she just tells me like, bounce back, tell Henri why you have conviction in this new strategy. The new strategy was building for regular agents that are experienced and know what they're doing. And so we have dinner that night and I make the case. He says, were always going to be able to hire really talented people from outside the industry and great business people, great engineers. And we were able to raise, raise a good amount of money. If we can just use those resources to help agents be more successful.

1 (47m 24s):
Won't we be successful? I said, yeah, absolutely. If we can just make Aiden's more money, we'll make more money. And yeah, ever since we just hired a bunch of traditional agents and asked them what they wanted to help them grow their business, realized their entrepreneurial potential. And that, that allowed us to be more successful by making them more successful. All

0 (47m 48s):
Right. So you like your idea was this original vision isn't working. We've got to go to the traditional model of a real estate brokerage. So basically where the agents, we would be paid a commission.

1 (48m 1s):
Exactly. I came to the conclusion that real estate agents are central to the transaction and that real estate is, are not going away. There are 2 million of them in the country and that there's no great company that's working for them to help them realize more success. And it was a really large industry with a hundred billion dollars of revenue that agents produce every year where the incumbents, the brokerage firms, aren't investing in research and development to get better. And so they just felt like they're the customer, the eAgent is the most underserved customer out there.

1 (48m 43s):
I kind of just saw the lane and the opportunity to build for this huge customer base. Then no one else was building

0 (48m 50s):
For it. But how did the, how did the neighborhood specialists that you'd hired? How did they respond? Were they like, okay, I'm happy to pivot or did you have like a mass Exodus of people leaving?

1 (49m 2s):
Yeah. Over a third of the team left, it was really hard and people wanting to change the world and I was telling them, let's not reinvent the wheel. Let's just make the wheel better. And that, yeah, that didn't align with a lot of people's dreams.

0 (49m 18s):
Was that personally hurtful?

1 (49m 20s):
I don't take anything personally like that. No.

0 (49m 26s):
I mean, I would be devastated by that. I don't know. I think a lot of people would no people,

1 (49m 31s):
They had a vision, I think for me and a lot of empathy for their position now. I, yeah. And I, and these were friends. I love some of these people to this day. I don't take any of that personally.

0 (49m 45s):
So at this point, when you, this isn't in 2014, were you still focused on the rental market or did you start to, were you also saying, well, let's focus on selling homes. Let's have these agents also represent sellers and buyers.

1 (49m 60s):
So we started by trying to hire rental agents and I said, we have all these engineers, we can build any technology that you want, come here and let's build this, we'll build the future real estate together. And they basically told me in their nose what they wanted. And so whenever someone rejected us, they would tell us why. And then that why was what we know. And I knew we had to do in order get to a yes, next time. So what were people saying? The biggest, no at the time was there's no top agents there and you need to have a top agent or else your firm will never have credibility.

1 (50m 41s):
And then asked all the agents that I had told me, no, give me three names of the top agents that you respect the most. And there was only one person that every agent said that they are one of the top three most respected agents. You know, it was a guy named Leonard Steinberg. You know, Leonard was the number one agent in New York, the prior year having sold or put in contract $500 million in listings. And I knew that he was, if he came to campus, then other agents would come

0 (51m 15s):
By the way, was he working for himself or was he working for another brokerage?

1 (51m 20s):
He was working for another brokerage. And I just literally called him out of the blue because every agent's phone numbers on the internet. And I said, Hey, you know, Leonard, my name is Robert Rapkin. Would you be open to meeting with us and talking about coming on as a, as a leader in the company we're building, he said he was willing to meet, but then when he met, he said, absolutely not. Because, you know, we had no experience in real estate. Yeah.

0 (51m 52s):
I mean, and if he was, if he was listing $500 million in real, I mean, just on commissions alone, he was minting money. I mean, he was making a lot of money. Like why would he take a risk on this? Like how would, how would you even convince him? Presumably you had to say, look, we can, you can make more money with us.

1 (52m 11s):
We convinced them not with money. I mean, money is always part of it. But we convince him with vision, a vision of the impact that he could have on his industry. And that he would allow us to build a better company for agents that are coming after him. And so we knew that if he came then other people would come, that would give them the credibility with their clients. And he did say yes, and he's really transformed the company since, but

0 (52m 42s):
Hold on. How long did it take you to convince him? Did he, was he convinced right away? I mean, it was it several meetings. I mean, because look, it's not enough to just say, Hey, here's our vision. I mean, lots of, there are lots of people with a great vision and this guy is the best real estate agent in New York. Everybody says, so presumably he's going to become a partner in this endeavor. Right. He's going to become an owner as well.

1 (53m 8s):
Yeah. He came on as our, as our president at the time. And you know, we started off with, you know, one meeting. It was like a 15 minute meeting. And then we call him back and he brings for our second meeting as partner on his team. But the reason why I believe we were able to get him to come, is he really wanting to create a better industry? And the best people in the world don't move just from money. They move out of passion. He felt that real estate agents don't get the respect that they deserve and they don't get the investment that they deserve from their companies.

1 (53m 48s):
That the culture of a lot of the brokerage firms is there the same thing year after year after year, that they're not getting

0 (53m 55s):
Better. It sounds like what you're saying you were offering was better tools for the agents, right? It wasn't the experience for the client wouldn't necessarily be different or, or would it be at first

1 (54m 8s):
When we pivoted, we were doing a little for the client and a little bit for the agent. And, but we, we realize at a certain point you have to choose a customer. You can't work for everyone and who's your customer. Your customer is the person that pays you and buyers and sellers don't pay brokerage firms. They pay agents and agents are the ones that pay brokerage firms. They split a percentage of what they make with you, right? And so that clarity, which took us years to get, but that clarity helped us be very focused on creating value for the person that's paying us for agents.

1 (54m 49s):
And just asking them, tell us what you need to make you more successful. Whether it's marketing, whether it's technology, what are the things that will help you either grow your business or have more time. Those are the two things that, that agents care the most about more money or more time. What

0 (55m 7s):
Were, I mean, this is 2014. And by this point, you know, Zillow and Redfin are already kind of disrupting the market because at this point, everybody can look up homes for sale, you know, from the computers that can even look at the Zillow value of their home, whether it was accurate or not, but they could look it up. So this has already, I mean, there's already a lot of disruption happening. What did the agents say they wanted or needed that they weren't able to get?

1 (55m 33s):
So it was clear to us that there, there was a real misunderstanding of real estate and what the business of an agent was. Everyone thought that real estate was like searching listings with aggregators do, right. That's probably less than 5% of what an agent's businesses, the agent business. We started to realize when you ask agents what you want, you know, none of them come back and say, I want a better consumer search. You'll hit. Their say is I want better marketing tools to market my listings. I want better marketing tools to market myself.

1 (56m 14s):
I want a CRM so I can stay top of mind with my sphere of influence so that everyone that I know whenever they're thinking about buying or selling a home, they think of me. I want transaction management. So I can have all the transaction documents and closing documents in one place. And so there, there are so many things and that's just a small portion of what real estate agents do that people, people are all focused on the wrong thing. They're all focused on this consumer search where remember all those consumer searches. They just go back to the agent because you click the button and the agent gets it. And no one was focused on the person that's actually doing the work.

0 (56m 55s):
I'm curious. So, I mean, you were talking about a customer relationship management, right platform, but I mean, I mean, there's HubSpot and there are Salesforce. And presumably there are agents who use those, those CRMs. There was nothing out there that was designed specifically for realtors.

1 (57m 14s):
That is the point. Instead of just being as broad, basic software for everyone, we have a CRM that we built for real estate marketing tools for real estate. Let me give you a simple example. Let's say you want to do a digital newsletter. And there are a lot of these email newsletters that you can get third party sites. Sure. But then you have to upload the photos from your listing. You have to upload the description. You have to upload the price because it's not connected to a listing system and they need to do the same thing again for your postcard.

1 (57m 54s):
Same thing again, upload again for your social media, but by connecting everything in one place, integration creates the, the innovation where you only upload things. Once you only log in once, think about it. Without that integration, you can't get on a mobile app because a mobile app can't connect to 13 different third-party tools, which is how many tools the average agent uses. Yeah. We're building the one thing that they can use. They don't have to log on to 13 companies. They don't have to use 13 countries that don't speak to each other. We're putting all together in one place.

0 (58m 31s):
I imagine like in order to attract the best agents, you had to focus on marketing and branding, right? Because if you are an independent operator as an agent, and you've got to give a percentage of your sales to Coldwell banker or Sotheby's or whoever you're affiliated with you are affiliated with them because they have a brand and people see that name and they say, oh, there's Sotheby's. Yeah. I think that's a good brand. Or their encompass was brand new was that also the strategy to just very quickly kind of get your branding and your signs and your logo in as many places as quickly as possible to build that momentum. Oh,

1 (59m 8s):
Oh yeah. And we, we would, we would market the compass brand outside of the offices of our competing firms. And so there like a phone booth or a billboard or a bus stop outside of our campaign firms, that's where we would put the brand so that Eden's other companies would say, oh, compass people know it. It's names out there on the street. And so we did a lot to try to make our brand bigger so that it would give more credibility to the agents we were trying to have.

0 (59m 44s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment, how compass started attracting more and more agents and more and more criticism stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, American express business. American express business offers a line of cards, packed with features and benefits like membership rewards points, flexible payment options, employee cards, and much more to help take your business further because with needs like yours, you need a card designed for business built for business by American express.

0 (1h 0m 32s):
Don't do business without it terms apply. Learn more@americanexpress.com slash business cards. This message comes from NPR sponsor com committed to helping you kickstart your mental wellbeing initiatives, empower your employees to stress less rest better, and build resilience year round with calm for business companies can partner with the mental fitness app to provide support and tools for their employees. Right now, calm is offering a free wellbeing ebook for HR and benefit leaders. And one month free after you attend a free demo. When you go to calm.com/built, Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross.

0 (1h 1m 18s):
So after compass pivots in 2014, things really begin to take off new agents are joining revenue is growing, more investors are investing and the company starts to expand to other cities. I mean, Robert, I can remember like all of a sudden I started seeing compass signs in, in Washington, DC, where I lived at the time. And, and that was the first city you expanded to. And w why, like, why did you go there first? Was, it was just cause it was close to New York or was there a particular strategic reason?

1 (1h 1m 51s):
Yeah. We asked our agents, you know, what would be the market that would give the most credibility to you is very consistent with how we approach most of what we do at compass. Just ask the agent and you know, they'll tell you where to go. ESO DC was again, nation's capital big brand. Then it was Florida in Miami because new Yorkers moved to Florida and Miami, then it was Boston and Los Angeles. And so we've really followed our agents in where they think we should go next based off of where their clients are moving from into

0 (1h 2m 28s):
How does it, I mean, I'm curious because there's some agents who are super agents, right. And they have a team. Would you go in and kind of same way that you would acquire a company? Like, would you go into a market and like make an acquisition offer for that team and say, all right, we're going to, you know, we're going to give you a big check to join us. And then now you're part of us. Is that something that happens? So

1 (1h 2m 49s):
In the early years I personally launched all the markets. So I've launched dozens of markets, myself. I go out to the market, I would call the top agents and I'd say, Hey, I'm Robert Rapkin, I'm the CEO of compass. Then they would say, you know, compass who like combust the bank right in no market where we launched, did anyone know who we were in the early years? And so the hardest thing was just getting the meeting and I'd try to talk about my background and what we're doing and the money raised and investors and say, Hey, look, if you can meet a there's no downside. The worst thing that can happen is you'll, I'll, I'll share with you all the ways that we're helping agents grow their business.

1 (1h 3m 29s):
And if you don't want to come, you can take those ideas back to your own business. And so that's how I would get the meeting. And I'd have two different conference rooms in a hotel, and it'd be like, back-to-back meetings from one to another and I'd have someone else on my team be in the meeting when I wasn't there. So you'd be back to back from early in the morning, to late at night and explained to them we're going to have the marketing, the technology, the culture, and the support to help them grow their business.

0 (1h 3m 59s):
Hmm. Yeah. You know, I mean, some skeptics have said, all these guys do all compass does, is they'll go in, they've got their, they've raised over a billion and a half dollars from investors and banks and they can just buy out the best agents. And it's kind of, you know, it's, it's using money to buy market share. Is that a fair critique in, in your view or a fair assessment?

1 (1h 4m 25s):
One of the best things that com has has is the cynicism of our competition. When our competition says, oh, compass, they're only successful because of a, B, C, D, whatever, whatever that thing is, it makes them feel okay about not doing anything about not asking their agents. You know, what can we do to make it so you don't want to go to compass. The concept that agents has moved from money is really offensive to the agent, and it doesn't make any sense. They're not going to move their entire business to accompany. They don't believe in for some economic incentive.

1 (1h 5m 6s):
That's a small percentage of their annual income. Yeah. When I moved from my Blackberry to my iPhone, yes, I got like $300 off the first phone, but that's not why I moved. But the, you know, you are, you are right there. The competitors say a lot of really bad things to try to scare people from wanting to move, but they had their chance. And this has been a model for over a hundred years where brokerage firms had taken the profits from the agents, split it between the manager, the manager's manager and the owner, and on balance that owner put in their pocket. And then they went on vacation. But what they didn't do is what apple did, but Microsoft did what Google did.

1 (1h 5m 49s):
They didn't invest it back in research and development to create a better company for their customer, the agent. And that's what we're doing

0 (1h 5m 58s):
Curious. Cause this is, it has to be kind of a cutthroat element to this, right? Like, so we're like a talent agency, right? You represent a talent. Let's say that star can at any point, choose to go work for another talent agency, if they make a more attractive offer. And presumably that can also happen with agents. Like you, you have to, I have to assume stay one step ahead of other brokerage firms to make sure they don't go after the agents that are aligned with compass because those agents can leave. Right? They're not bound to compass. I mean, they're, they're indigent and operators.

1 (1h 6m 35s):
The average agent that comes to compass grown their business 19% in their, their first year. And because of that, we have above average industry retention. You know, that's the, that's one of the things that I look at the most is, you know, if, if they're staying, that's a good thing. It was someone leaves a really bad thing. And we have to make sure that we're building the tools and the offerings and services that help them grow their business. So they would never want to leave.

0 (1h 7m 8s):
I guess, in 2018, you were, you had this idea to like, I guess, to license your, your software, the CRM and things to other agents who were not working for compass and it kind of imploded what, what happened?

1 (1h 7m 24s):
Yeah. I had this idea of let's license, our technology to a competing brokerage. We announce it in less than a month. And there was a complete backlash of our agents and they didn't want us to give any competing company, the technology, because they didn't want an agent at another company to say, Hey, work with me. I had the same technology as that agent from compass. And so he shut it down and yeah, there was a lot of press at the time saying, you know how we failed? And it was a failed launch. I never understood that because to me, we just tried. Yeah, we tried something. It didn't work and you try something else.

1 (1h 8m 5s):
And the next month we tried something called compass concierge. We'd launch it really quickly in less than a a month. And it turned out to be one of the best things that we've ever done, where we front load the cost of home improvement services, like staging and deep cleaning and painting to prepare homes and make them move in ready. And you know, that's a been a big success, but you can't be the company that can do that without being the company. That also has a, that launches. Something that isn't successful rubber.

0 (1h 8m 34s):
I loved your book. I love your story, but it wouldn't be doing my job if I didn't make you uncomfortable. So I'm going to end, but I'm going to read something mean that somebody has said about you and it's not just random person. It's, it's a, a broker named David Goldsmith. He wrote this last year on a forum called urban days. He said he compared a compass to WIWORK. He said, it's like, we work. It's backed by billions and VC money claims to be a tech company that rather than a real estate firm, but also like we work there doesn't really seem to be any revolutionary tech involved. They just seem to be throwing tons of money at acquiring market share. Did you hear that and say, that's just flat out wrong. There's no fidelity to that. Or, or is there anything in there where you think, okay, you know, I can, I can see that.

0 (1h 9m 16s):
Look, I

1 (1h 9m 16s):
Think that 20 years from now, if you're not a technology company, it's unlikely you're going to exist. These agents are going to be here, right? Just to be very clear. People use agents more now, today than they did 10 years ago, who's going to be the company that helps agents use technology to realize their entrepreneurial potential. Over the last 30 years, every profession has been able to use technology to get better. And that's actually what has made it so difficult for brokerage firms 30 years ago, all of the workflow that Eden went through the brokerage firm, the MLS book was on the desk.

1 (1h 9m 59s):
The client wouldn't be in the office. They would look at the off-market listings on the wall. But over last 30 years, the workflow that Aiden has come outside of the brokerage firm. So now it's like half outside and half inside. We're building the modern platform. It's not either, or it's not just, you know, is Amazon a bookstore or a technology company? Is Uber a tax limousine commissioner or a technology company? I think these are false economies over the next 10 and 20 years, you have to be both and you have to use software to make everything better. And we have an overall that 850 person technology team. And so we're, we're investing more in technology than the traditional brokerage firm.

0 (1h 10m 45s):
I mean, 2020 right. Was supposed to be a catastrophic year for the real estate industry. And it started out that way, you know, shut down, you couldn't see homes. It turned out that 2020 transformed the industry. It all of a sudden, completely opened up for virtual tours. And people were looking at homes across the country virtually and buying them. And there was a real estate craze for home prices, just skyrocketed. Was that unexpected? Were you surprised what happened in 2020?

1 (1h 11m 15s):
And when COVID hit in early 2020, we had closed our offices in early March. And over the following weeks, I really thought, Hey, this could all be over. And I told my wife, you know, we are legally not allowed to show property in almost every market we're in and there's no end in sight. And so we couldn't make any money and no business has a business. We cannot get any money. You can go out of business because we still handle those costs. You know, we had to go through the really hard work of, you know, just trying to survive. Like the goal was, we just need to survive. And you're talking just two months later, activity started picking up and market by market, by market, not in New York city because you, they will not let you show property in the buildings, but in the suburbs, people started buying at a faster and faster and faster rate.

1 (1h 12m 12s):
And then over the summer, it became the busiest summer in the history of real estate because everyone wanted more space.

0 (1h 12m 21s):
Is it going to change real estate forever? I mean, do you think that it kind of supercharged certain innovations? Yeah.

1 (1h 12m 28s):
We S we launched during, COVID a number of virtual tools like live stream, open houses, tours, where you as a buyer could stay in your home and the agent would go from property to property, into a live stream tour. So a lot of tools to allow agents to work virtually. And we believe that will continue on the real estate side. I think that we have a permanent shift in the demand curve where people will continue to want more space and more multiple home ownership, the hybrid work environment, which will continue in, makes space literally more valuable because you're going to be using it more, whether it's a private office in your home, or whether it's a second home where you can work two months out of the year and give your family a better quality of life.

2 (1h 13m 22s):
Your mom, who, who became a real estate agent is an agent for compass right now. She, she works for, she works for, for you. Yeah. I like

1 (1h 13m 32s):
To call my mom the chief feedback officer know, she's the, she's always been the kind of parent that tells me what I should be doing differently. And she's been an agent for over 20 years. Yeah. One of the things that makes me happiest is that at this point in her career,

2 (1h 13m 52s):
She's able to work

1 (1h 13m 54s):
At compass. I mean, it just, it's such a wonderful thing. And, and this is one of the few careers where people in their sixties and their seventies are pushed to grow and to get better. Now, while you know, a lot of the traditional companies are pushing people out, you know, much earlier in age. And so it's, it's a wonderful thing to be able to, to spend so much time with her both of course, personally, but also with compass,

2 (1h 14m 19s):
Do you think a part of you was motivated by a desire to prove all the people who kind of let your mom down, let you down to kind of prove them wrong in a sense, or to kind of, I dunno, despite that, despite all the people who let her down, let you down, that you were, you were going to make it,

1 (1h 14m 41s):
I've always been motivated by a mixture of positivity, like big, big dreams and anger. So, you know, you talk about the competitors and contests. When they say things that are less positive about me or the company gives me energy. And there, there was a woman that came to compass when they're early top agents. And she told me, Hey, Robert, I can come the head of my former brokers from the, she came from, she told me that you were anti Semitic anti-gay and anti-woman right. And I'm like, what, what are you talking about?

1 (1h 15m 22s):
I tell her, first of all, I'm Jewish and a bar mitzvah. So w w where then second of all, this is not true. Things like that happen in a weird way. Maybe this real estate industry is so full of people that are negative in mean, in a competitive sense, like the brokerage firms, that's actually given me an extraordinary amount of energy to work harder. I mean, there is a, at a big real estate conference. One of the top brokerage firms says, oh yeah, this was like 2018. I think compass is going to go out of business in five years. And then the head of the fourth largest brokerage firm in the country says, oh, I think that's generous.

1 (1h 16m 4s):
It's not going to last five years. I mean, that's kind of what this industry has been about. And so when someone, when I, when I see that kind of stuff out there, whether it's against me, my company, yeah. I, it makes me want to work harder.

0 (1h 16m 17s):
When you think about with the arc of your life and career so far, cause you're still young. I mean, you're in early forties. Do you think that when you were a kid, like when you were a high school student and you had that business, right. And it was a really successful TJ business, do you feel like you knew intuitively in your head that despite, you know, the kind of personal challenges you faced as in your mom faced, did you just kind of intuitively feel like you were going to succeed?

1 (1h 16m 51s):
I've been afraid of failing and the majority of my life, right. Just indefinitely all of my life then. And that was the driving force. I wanted to create a better life for this family that I had, that I would build, but I couldn't ever see it. There's the line. You can't be what you can see, but I never saw anyone like me know, I didn't, I didn't see like these successful black people when I was in the nineties in like high school and middle school. And so the answer is I never thought that I was going to be successful.

0 (1h 17m 34s):
You never thought you were going to be successful.

1 (1h 17m 36s):
I thought that I was going to get fired the majority of days that I've been working. Wow. I worked really, really, really hard. And I would do, you know, put in any amount of effort that it would take. But the reason I worked so hard is because I didn't think I was going to be successful. It's almost like if I did think I was going to be successful, maybe I wouldn't have been because I want to work as hard.

0 (1h 18m 5s):
I mean, I think anyone listening to this knows that part of your success just comes from working really hard, but does any part of you believe in luck?

1 (1h 18m 14s):
Of course, if there wasn't lucky enough to be born to my mom, I wouldn't be where I am not. Would I not only just be, won't even be, but I wouldn't have been raised to be an entrepreneur. I wouldn't have been raised to bounce back every single time something goes wrong. I would have been raised to be the kind of person that sees positive in negative and knows that whenever something bad happens, there must be something good. So how can you find it? And I also, I had a lot of fun knowing that luck is just around the corner and I'm going to find it.

0 (1h 18m 52s):
That's Robert <inaudible> CEO and co-founder of compass. And by the way, remember the nonprofit Robert started in New York while working at Goldman Sachs, well to raise money, to get it going, Robert actually trained for and ran 50 marathons one in each us state. He was running a marathon every month to reach the goal. So I

1 (1h 19m 16s):
Ran probably on average four hours until the last one, the last one I did everything I possibly could to break three hours. Yeah. And I crossed the finish line at two hours, 59 minutes, 31 seconds. Wow. By the way, the faster you run, the less pain you're going to deal with. Right. Because there's less, less time

0 (1h 19m 40s):
Out there. My experience, by the way, the slower I ride, the less I have, that is my experience, but it's different. Okay. Thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you're not yet a subscriber, please do subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us, our email address is H I t@npr.org. And if you want to follow us on Twitter at guy Roz or at how I built this, you can also find us on Instagram. That's how I built this NPR or my personal account at guide dot Ross. This episode was produced by Casey Herman with music composed by REM team, or Louie was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Liz Metzker production staff includes JC Howard, Rachel Faulkner James DeLuise, Julia Carney, Farah safari, Liz Metzger, Janet Lou, John Lee, and Annalee sober.

0 (1h 20m 33s):
Our intern is Harrison BJ Choi. And Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Roz. And you've been listening to how I built this.

3 (1h 20m 46s):
This is NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor. HP HP has always known that good ideas come from bringing different people together. Diverse viewpoints, help uncover blind spots and challenge assumptions. Find out how you can join HPS group of diverse thinkers at hp.com/jobs.