1 (0s):
Hey

2 (0s):
really quick before we start this brand-new episode of How I built this. I want to remind you about a new video series that we've just launched. It's sort of a how I built this online live conversation with me and a different founder to talk about how they're handling the crisis how it's affecting their business and also how they're working to build resiliency and think creatively about ways to navigate through it this Wednesday April 8th at 12 noon Eastern. I'll be talking with David Neelam in the founder of JetBlue and Azul are weighs about his industry and his ideas on how to move forward and then on Friday April 10th at 12 noon Eastern all have Tristan Walker on he's the founder of Walker & Company its company that makes personal care products like the bevel razor.

2 (43s):
So we're going to catch up with him. You can join us live and please bring your questions those conversations all happen at facebook.com slash how I built this you do not need a Facebook account to watch it. So just go to facebook.com slash how I built this again. That's this. Wednesday April 8th with David Neil Diamond at 12 noon Eastern and then Friday April 10th with Tristan Walker also at 12 noon Eastern find those conversations live at facebook.com slash how I built this bring your questions and I hope to see you there. You went to a trade show and you literally saw table with knockoffs of your bottles.

2 (1m 26s):
There is is

1 (1m 27s):
that right? Yeah. So not only were there swell bottles at this trade show, but the swell bottles had one in a Ward and had a ribbon on a display case at the trade.

2 (1m 38s):
Show. Was it the same logo with s

1 (1m 40s):
' well, yeah, it was the same logo and it had the trademark symbol on the side of it. It was what was your first reaction like I almost passed out.

2 (1m 55s):
Robin PR it's how I built this a show about innovators

1 (1m 59s):
entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built

2 (2m 7s):
I'm guy rosin on the show today how Sarah cows turn the humble thermos into a Sleek accessory called swell and watched her business grow by the tens of millions of dollars. So what are the common threads you might have noticed on the show is the element of design design matters a lot and not just design of your product. But the design of your business the logo the colors you use the customer interface all of these things differentiate successful Brands, especially when they're trying to break out of the pack.

2 (2m 47s):
So for example, think of Spindrift sparkling water that is a crowded space, but Spindrift stands out not only for the quality of its product but for the Simple and Clean design of it or SoulCycle the founders of that company spent months coming up with the colors gray black yellow and the simple geometric logo a bike wheel with spokes so design matters and that is in part the story of swell. It's a water bottle. Yes a very good water bottle, but when Sarah cows launched it back in In 2010, there were already lots of good bottles out there thermos bottles that kept her drinks hot and cold CamelBak bottles with those foldable straws squeezy plastic cycling bottles, but almost no bottle that looks sleek and beautiful a bottle you'd want to put on your Instagram feed and that was Sarah cows has great Insight.

2 (3m 47s):
That is how she broke through the pack and as you will hear she didn't have No wealth and lots of her friends wondered why she was

1 (3m 56s):
throwing away a perfectly safe career in

2 (3m 58s):
accounting to pursue water bottles. But Sarah had a hunch that lots of people would want a better bottle people who didn't want to buy and throw away single-use plastic

1 (4m 10s):
people who wanted a functional

2 (4m 12s):
and nice-looking bottle at the same time and

1 (4m 15s):
she was right in 2016 just six years after it

2 (4m 19s):
launched swell reportedly did about a hundred million. Dollars in revenue

1 (4m 23s):
and by the way, Sarah managed to scale

2 (4m 26s):
the company without ever taking a dime of outside money. She did it by building swell methodically and strategically anyway, right now the company is dealing with the same economic anxiety that everyone else is facing and I'll ask her about that and because of the current situation I couldn't interview her in a studio. So Sarah join me from her home in Florida, which is where she grew up

1 (4m 52s):
I I'm sitting in my bedroom in Jupiter Florida. The reason I'm sitting in my bedroom and not my home office is my son who's just under two likes to come and knock on the office door and say mama mama. So this was the quietest place in my house that I can hide. So it's a beautiful sunny day in Jupiter. I'm watching the boats on the Loxahatchee River go by it's a bit bizarre that it's so pretty out given what's going on in the world

2 (5m 19s):
and and that River you're looking at you actually grew up like By that very same river,

1 (5m 23s):
right? Yes life was simple life is easy, you know, you could ride your bike outside and have all kinds of Adventures. You know, there was always some kind of something to be discovered, you know something to be built. It's a beautiful place to have grown

2 (5m 41s):
up. Yeah and tell me about what your dad did for a living

1 (5m 46s):
he ran and owned a car wash he built and ran that business for 40 years, you know. If six days a week working at the car wash which also had a gas station a little shop and a few tenants including an ice cream store that my mom ran and plant nursery that he rented out. So he was a small business owner in Florida. We

2 (6m 7s):
all of this was at the gas station that was an ice cream shop and a nursery and a gas station and a car wash

1 (6m 13s):
is genius. So you it was you dropped your car off on one side and you had to walk through the retail establishments to pay for your car wash. And of course you had add to wait 15 to 20 minutes until your car was done. So why not buy a plants and ice cream cone and maybe some greeting cards while you're waiting. So it was it was sort of One-Stop shopping.

2 (6m 33s):
Yeah. So your mom and dad basically work together every day and your dad was kind of running the facility. Your mom was running the ice cream shop, but it sounds like they made it work.

1 (6m 43s):
They made it work. Yeah. They're they're still really very close and I think that, you know building a business building a family, you know going through all that together. It's a Unique opportunity to sort of talk about your day and talk about your lives together, but they certainly made it

2 (6m 57s):
work. What kind of kid were you in high school? What do you remember about you as a high school

1 (7m 1s):
student. Oh, I was as awkward as they come in high school. I terrible hairstyle. I wish somebody had told me at the time that those big bangs were going to come back and haunt me and later years. I was certainly a not a popular girl. I you know, I was a bit of a nerd I was co-president of the save the manatee club with my best friend. Of it. Yeah, I was I was at a club called deck. I was a business club and I went to State and national conventions working on business problems. Why senior year I was voted most likely to succeed in business. You were already into business

2 (7m 38s):
in high school like you were I remember those kids in high school. They would be mocked. You know, there's that kid in there the business club and some of them were carry briefcases, but you were kind of like that.

1 (7m 50s):
I was definitely like that. I actually I think because I grew up with entrepreneurs that were always running a business. I think that I knew that I would go into business in some form or fashion from a pretty young age. Yeah.

2 (8m 3s):
So you went off to the University of Colorado and you studied accounting which is a very practical thing to study and I guess you your first job out of college was with Ernst & Young as a trainee or a junior

1 (8m 18s):
CPA, correct? Yeah. So I took the CPA exam right out of college. And I went to work at Ernst & Young. I think the weekend after I graduated and I was in Denver for two years working as an auditor and then I moved to Los Angeles and I was still at ey and I worked in the tax division for two years.

2 (8m 37s):
And basically that means that you were your first two years you were sent to a client and you would just go through all their books and just make someone's life miserable by asking them. What's this? What's this? What's that? Right? I mean, is that sort of what? Yeah,

1 (8m 50s):
that's that's basically right I mean I didn't say we were there to make everyone's lives miserable but I can't say there was a single client that was ever happy to see us coming. You know, they would give you this audit room somewhere in the basement without heat or air conditioning window and say oh, how long are you staying? Can you leave tomorrow? No

2 (9m 6s):
one was like woo here come the Auditors. Welcome. All right. So you do that and then you do tax auditing to after your first two

1 (9m 14s):
years. Yeah after my first two years in Denver, I was getting a little bit itchy to try to do something different and this was 2000. We're all the.com companies were really quite exciting and I kept reading about the clients that you I had had in California and they were all the.com companies. There are mostly New Media companies and really the first DTC companies that I went to go work with and it was really a bit of the Wild West because a lot of these internet companies are transacting, you know, potentially for the first time and we were helping them think about and solve questions and problems that were absolutely brand-new so is Don glamorous as a tax roll sounds it was actually pretty interesting work just because of the types of individuals our clients were

2 (10m 1s):
it's amazing because this really does speak to how you were really kind of whether consciously or not laying the groundwork for what you would eventually do because all of those skills would be crucial when you started your business eventually mean just having that knowledge and the ability to think about financial issues from the beginning gave you a huge

1 (10m 21s):
Advantage. I REI absolutely, you know in hindsight almost everything that I did helped lay the groundwork for where we are today, but it didn't feel like that at the time I was such a Restless Soul right? It was I just couldn't wait to do the next thing and find myself and figure out what the universe had in store for me that I didn't realize that all of that was, you know, potentially very valuable and necessary steps to get to where we are now.

2 (10m 48s):
Yeah. All right, so you do your thing at Ernst & Young? You decide to go to business school to Harvard Business School. And and did you make that decision because you thought all right. I've done this now. I need to build a network of people or I need some new ideas about the next thing to do or was that the thinking it was

1 (11m 8s):
after a few years of really working with these clients. I just wanted to become one of my clients and one of the common themes that my clients had were a lot of them had gone to business school. And so it was more just the gift of time. Of a couple of years to try to come up with some idea or some kind of what's next for me because I realized that is why I didn't aspire to be my boss or my boss's boss, but you know, I met so many amazing and fantastic people in business school that I wasn't really networking with to help me with my business. They were just my knuckle had friends that were helping me get through this experience of school that now happened to be the movers and shakers of business.

1 (11m 51s):
So I don't know that I needed to go. School to learn Finance or marketing or operations, but I think for me it was the combination of the confidence plus the network of friends that kind of help support me through the times that I need it now you were

2 (12m 5s):
there from from 2001 to 2003 and I should mention right that you were there to time where I don't think entrepreneurship was really being emphasized right? Like most students were really kind of going there and they would end up at McKinsey or at a big Finance firm. On the partnership track, is that is that right? Like entrepreneurship wasn't really a thing quite

1 (12m 27s):
yet. That's right. It really wasn't too thing when I was in business school. I think I took 1/2 class on entrepreneurship, but it was more how to finance a business and how to start and grow a business. You know. Now of course, there's hole centers devoted to it and there's a lot of resources that I wish that I had had but no, it really wasn't a thing back when I was in school. Do you

2 (12m 46s):
think that going there in the back of your mind you had this idea of maybe I'll graduate and become an entrepreneur what? That you're thinking or not quite

1 (12m 54s):
yet, you know it was I mean even my essay before I went into business school, I wrote about how I wanted to start some company at some point and do something. I just really was looking for that big idea when I was in school and unfortunately, I didn't find the idea while I was in school. I was still searching for it when I finished school. I was actually at HBS during the time of September 11th. So the economy took a real change from the time when I started in 2001 through The time when I left in

2 (13m 23s):
2003, yeah, so you you finish in 2003 and what did you do when you

1 (13m 29s):
graduated? Oh, I had a really hard time finding a job when I graduated so myself and just a couple of my friends. We actually wound up staying at Harvard Business School and the school created jobs for some of us. So you're working in a position that you know quite honestly always making less after business school and I did before you've got a massive amount of student loans and you also just don't know when the To me it's going to get better and it was it was a really strange and difficult time for myself and a couple of my friends that wound up basically kind of sticking around and not finding our next step.

2 (14m 3s):
All right, so you get a job at working at HBS for a while and then and then I guess eventually got a job with a real estate development firm.

1 (14m 12s):
I did so my my previous roommate from before business school when I worked in California, she said, well, there's an interesting job at my Company, I know you have no real estate experience, but they're looking for someone and I was able to talk my way into International real estate development role for a number of years helping to build big private Partnerships for mostly laboratory buildings for scientists. Huh?

2 (14m 40s):
Tell me about your kind of your state of mind then were you happy with your life interesting were you thinking? All right. I'm on the right track. Now, you know, I was

1 (14m 50s):
really unsettled at the time. I liked my job. I liked the people but professionally I found myself sort of really wondering was this all that there is no I certainly was finally, you know, making a pretty good normal decent salary, you know being a VP at a public company. I had some stock options that you know invest over time and you know was obviously helping me with my savings account, but you know helping me pay off my loans. I just I sort of started to get a little bit itchy almost the same way that you know when I was at ey I I knew that I didn't want to become my boss's boss, you know, it was certainly a really interesting challenge to see if I could figure it out but it wasn't necessarily the thing that was making me feel really excited about my career

2 (15m 35s):
and you were living in New York at the time. By the way.

1 (15m 37s):
I was I my company had put me up in a month the month rented apartment because I was doing a real estate project there. So I was really living a nomadic life, but they put me up in a studio apartment there.

2 (15m 49s):
So did you have time to think about Or did you make time to think about what else you could do? Did you talk to people about it? Or did you kind of keep it inside?

1 (15m 59s):
I kept it inside. You know, I would say that from the outside everyone thought that oh things were going pretty well. I think I was at the point in my life that I didn't want to whine and moan about they seem to be high class problems about oh, you know, I'm not feeling fulfilled, but I was working so much and I wasn't really making the time to think about what came next I Almost had to go on a vacation with my mom and really step away from the day-to-day of my busy life to even have any type of you know reflection time. I literally had to get outside of my own life, you know in a place that required you to put your blackberry at the time away and not be so focused on you know, the next ping that you're going to get on your email because I wasn't really making the time to think about my own personal situation of what came

2 (16m 48s):
next. All right, this is this is an important moment because As I think it's around 2009 you and your mom going on vacation hiking trip to Arizona. I guess your mom had been cancer-free and was celebrating.

1 (17m 2s):
Yes. It was a really big exciting moment. My mom had breast cancer and was so brave and so strong and really got through to the other side and was done taking all of the horrible medicine and we said, you know, if you can just get to the other side of this we're going to go away and have a you know a fancy Spa Vacations so went off to to see Jean Arizona, and it was one of those moments that because we were celebrating her health and really having those deep conversations and those those thoughts about you know life you get one and you know, what are you going to do with it? And how do you want to spend your time? And what's really important and my mom started it and she said, you know, if I had to do it all over again, I would have been a painter.

1 (17m 47s):
Wow. She said she loved to paint and she taught painting classes in high school, but She wanted to have a career and raise her family and she studied something else and she did something else and she said, you know now that I got through this cancer thing. I'm going to take painting lessons and she said to me she said what is it that that you've always wanted to do and don't wait for a health scare. Don't don't wait for you know until you get my age to go do it. You know, what is it that you wanted to do? And I don't just it all came out of me justjust in that

2 (18m 18s):
conversation. All right, so you're on this hike your this. Is intense man? I'm like your mom survived likes Chase telling me all these things and you're like, oh my God must have been you must have been crying a lot and laughing like you must yeah super intense because this is really the beginning of what would be the rest of your professional life. What

1 (18m 39s):
what happened on that Hike It was one of those things guy that it was everything everything just came together. I just, you know, I was walking with my reusable water bottle. So I for many many years have gave up single-use plastic I think part of it. As you know Boulder being part of me going to see you and you know being a very environmental school and you know, I grew up recycling. So there was I always use a reusable bottle but it was as hot in Arizona and we're hiking for a long time. And so I'm you know walking with this metal bottle on a hot day and drinking hot water. So the first thing that occurred to me is would it be great if somebody invented a water bottle that actually kept things cold and then I had just recently been at my is a school reunions at Harvard.

1 (19m 22s):
And they had a professor that made a presentation about climate change and talked about how those that are affected by the Water Crisis were only going to become worse in the future. And so I had this idea on the hike that if there was a company that was creating a better water bottle and you try to tie it to a social Mission by by working on Plastics and climate change and educating people about the Water Crisis. It could be really You're staying to do something good while doing something good.

2 (19m 57s):
Wow, so you're thinking all right. Maybe there's something to do with water water bottle a better water bottle finisher hike your trip to Arizona and you say goodbye to your mom and you go back to New York and you go back to your job, but does this idea like like when you are on the flight back to New York when you get back to your apartment like is this idea now planted in your

1 (20m 21s):
head? It was I started writing a little bit of a business plan. It's embarrassing to call it that now but it was more of an outline a Manifesto of what I thought this company could

2 (20m 31s):
be and what did you write?

1 (20m 34s):
Oh, I wrote that. We were going to be the the water bottle partner to Fashion Week and and the Ted conference and sold and Bloomingdale's and changing the world and you know, I sat down and just started writing like if if a product could do all this, you know, how how would it work? You know, of course there weren't any practical bits in there. There wasn't anything in there about the financial statements or you know how to do processes or procedures or manufacturing. It was it was more of just a thought piece about what could happen if this really

2 (21m 6s):
worked so what was your first what do you remember your first step being? I mean here you are you are working for a real estate development company, no background in manufacturing or supply chain or or design even what was the First thing that you remember doing after writing down your Manifesto. Well,

1 (21m 26s):
I remember going to the sporting goods store Paragon Sports and Union Square and I purchased one of every water bottle on the market and started using the myself and passing them out to my friends and asking them to use them as well. Just to try to get some feedback on how it could work better how it could look better how be packaged better really just trying to educate myself on what was out there and what I wanted to build

2 (21m 52s):
And what did you find out?

1 (21m 54s):
Well, I mean I found out that there were a lot of bottles out there right this this was a very crowded Marketplace. But what I discovered was there wasn't anything that really looked great. I mean everything was appropriate for the gym. Everything was fine for hiking right, but there wasn't anything that I thought could catch like wildfire like a fashion accessory a thing. And so I thought it really needed to catch your eye when I designed this. It really needed to be Offal for lack of a better word and there were some bottles that were functional but they were marketed for extreme camping and Hiking then that wasn't the market I was going to try to go after and so I just thought if I could convert the non converted, so if I can convert people to use a water bottle then haven't because it actually works right?

1 (22m 44s):
It's like the thermostat keeps things hot and cold but in a way that it's the thing to do instead of the you know, Every ounce and the fiji's and the smart waters, you know, if I could try to go after sort of that set that was using what they were drinking as more of a statements the bottle needed to really be a statement piece.

2 (23m 6s):
Yeah, when you started to talk to friends and other people about this, I'm assuming people were like Sarah their millions of bottles out there like, You know, are you sure you want to get into this to anybody say that

1 (23m 22s):
now that's that's exactly what they said everyone everybody. You know closest friends included thought this was a foolhardy idea. I actually went to a business school a classmate's wedding and I was explaining. Oh, I you know, I just quit my job and I'm just getting ready to launch this company and I what do you think about the idea and one of my good friends jumped into the conversation and felt the need to defend me? She said but she used to have a really good job and she felt so uncomfortable for me that I was explaining myself to a pure Perfect Stranger at this wedding that she almost wanted to defend my honor by saying well, I used to have a business card that made sense to people.

1 (24m 4s):
What

2 (24m 4s):
did it take for you to quit your job. I'm assuming when you quit that job you figured well if this doesn't work I can get another job like it

1 (24m 12s):
again is that we were thinking oh, that's right. I think my downside risk protection. It was you know, I still had my CPA at the time so I thought okay, if this really doesn't work out, I guess I could always go back to you know, helping people with their taxes, which I really didn't want to do. So I was super motivated. But yeah, so I always thought there would at least be something for me to do if this went

2 (24m 35s):
sideways and how much money did you have to live off? Like, what was your Runway?

1 (24m 41s):
So I had $30,000 in the bank would saved up from your job,

2 (24m 46s):
correct? And that was going to last. To you know could last you awhile. But you also need that money to I guess to start the company

1 (24m 53s):
right start the company to buy the first initial inventory build the first website. It seemed like a lot to me at the time but when I really started getting into, you know beginning to build the business, it actually wasn't going to take me very far.

2 (25m 8s):
So let's start with how you began to build a business. First of all, you have an idea for a water bottle that's going to be a beautiful bottle that's going to do everything that I really good thermos does. But it's going to look cooler. Who do you call like? Where did you

1 (25m 21s):
go? I started designing the product actually in PowerPoint. Of course. Now we have you know, 3D printers and Engineers on the the T. We do things properly but at you know back then I started with a line drawing that I had made myself and thought okay, how do I take this drawing and turned it into an actual product and I just wound up taking my business school friends out for coffees and say this is what I'm struggling with. This is what I really need your help. You know, how do I find a How do I do this and I wound up finding a friend of mine in school whose dad and made some products and could put me in touch with the right people and kind of send me on my way.

2 (25m 58s):
Wow. So eventually you land on a somebody who can help you design the bottle, correct? And how did you land on that design of the bottle that most people listening that will

1 (26m 9s):
recognize, you know, I wanted it to be really classic and really simple, you know, I wanted it to be something beautiful and iconic enough that could be sold in the MoMA store, but it didn't want it to be like the ones in the sporting good store with, you know, the carabiners on the top and the neoprene on the side and the neon colors with the reflective tape, and I just wanted it, you know, the whole idea was just to try to encourage people to drink tap water and not to use so much plastic. And so I wanted it to be as sleek and elegant as possible. And so I really just tried to make it functional more than anything.

2 (26m 48s):
All right. So you've got a prototype and then where do you get it made is it again like the father of that friend from business school kind of connected you to possible like factories in China that can make a

1 (26m 60s):
prototype. Yeah, so I actually originally really wanted to make the bottle in the US and spent a fair amount of time reaching out to factories in the US and I couldn't find anyone that was interested in working with me. We just didn't have the scale. We know I couldn't say that I wanted to make you know thousands or millions of pieces day one until I had the demand and so I wound up finding that the factories that had been connected with and China were willing to take a risk on small entrepreneurs and do a small run until we were really up and running. So so what was your initial run how many bottles so I made three thousand pieces and they were all blue. They were all the same size and they were all exactly the same and I had them shipped to my apartment.

2 (27m 45s):
How much did that cost

1 (27m 46s):
you? Oh, it was the majority of my savings the time that I actually convinced the factory to let me do a 50 percent down payment and a fifty percent payment 30 days later so that helped a little bit but I had a bit of a fire under me to

2 (28m 5s):
sell and and the name swell was on the side the logo and everything was Art was printed on it. Yes. How did you come up with it?

1 (28m 14s):
Oh, I wish I could say that I came up with the name myself. Unfortunately, I'm an accountant at heart. So I actually originally named the company can't live without it because I thought you can't live without water. Yeah, I thought I was a genius. I actually spent $1,000 on the URL can't live without a.com and which is available if anyone's interested. Yeah. No it turned out that was a terrible name for a water bottle company because I so I actually hired a team to help me build the first website and I had them sign. An NDA and tell them my big top secret, you know idea for starting this water bottle company that's going to change the world and they said okay, what are you going to call it?

1 (28m 55s):
And I I told them can't live without it and they just started laughing just like you did just now guy and they said, you know, we like you and we're going to tell you this no one's going to buy this product. If you call it can't live without it. And so even though I hired them to create the website on the side, they helped me come up with some other names and they actually came up with the name swell and as soon as I heard it. I knew that that was the right

2 (29m 18s):
name, but I'm imagining that swell existed like swell.com or there was their companies like well, it's

1 (29m 27s):
it's well existed. So swole actually turned out to be really difficult to register, but it was actually a business school friend of mine that said to me, you know, how are things going with swell and I said, oh you don't get we can't use the name. We have to go back to the drawing board. She just she was a banker. I don't know how she came up with this idea. But she said well, why don't you put an apostrophe in the Word swell huh? And then it's a logo and not a word and of course, I called my attorney and said hey, could we do this and he said sure yeah, that's no problem. Of course, this is after he had build me for a lots of time and hours and expenses and didn't come up with the idea and self but it was it was the way that we were able to register. It's crazy because you look at it. You think it just works perfectly.

1 (30m 9s):
Yeah. I think the word swell. I mean it's works perfectly because it's so positive, you know, it's so old-fashioned of a word and the idea Idea of swell is so old-fashioned. She knows trying to harken back to the time that people weren't walking around with plastic water bottles and they were drinking water out of the tap or their filter at home. And the fact that we build Wells for people, you know, we bring clean drinking water to people in need, you know, so the fact that we're separating the S with the word well sort of leans into the mission of what we're doing. It's everything that I was looking to do sort of wrapped up into a word which it turned out quite lucky for us.

2 (30m 44s):
All right, so it's 2010. You are in New York living in New York still correct? These 3,000 bottles arrived from China. And then what like, how do you start to think about getting people's attention and getting creating awareness around it? What did you do?

1 (31m 1s):
I I literally just packed up and went into stores and I asked to speak to the buyer or speak to the owner and the case of smaller stores and and just explained said I'm this is me. I'm Sarah. This is my product. This is what I'm trying to do. How many can I put you down for?

2 (31m 17s):
Were you nervous doing

1 (31m 18s):
that? I was really nervous. I have to say I am not a natural-born salesperson, but I had to sell the inventory because you have to pay off the other payment. We're their days

2 (31m 30s):
where you would like walk around store to store and walk in and just feel like there was no no interest or

1 (31m 37s):
there were days and weeks actually that I would I would sort of pound the pavement and try to find people to buy the product and I would only get knows it was a bit depressing. In the beginning, you know, I wrote that Manifesto that that small business plan and said, you know, we're going to be sold in Bloomingdales and the buyer said no way we don't sell water bottles, you know in those early days. I got a lot of NOS before I got a few people to start saying yes,

2 (32m 5s):
when we come back in just a moment how Sarah got those buyers on board and house well began to get a lot of attention including from people. You don't want to get a lot of attention from Copycats and counterfeiters stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to one of our sponsors who helps make this podcast possible

1 (32m 38s):
Squarespace Squarespace. The

2 (32m 40s):
easy-to-use website builder designed by world class designers

1 (32m 44s):
Squarespace has everything you

2 (32m 46s):
need to launch a sleek and modern website and with 24-hour

1 (32m 50s):
seven-day-a-week customer support. Your

2 (32m 53s):
customers will always have a streamlined experience visit squarespace.com NPR for a free 14-day trial. When you're ready to launch use the offer code NPR to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a j WS dot org. Thanks. Also to better help online counseling by licensed professional counselors specializing in isolation depression. Stress and Anxiety visit better help.com built to learn more and get 10% off your first month.

2 (33m 43s):
Right now every household in the country is being asked to fill out the US Census is the form that helps us determine how voting districts are redrawn where to build public schools and hospitals how to spend Federal money. So why are some people are afraid to fill it out? We're getting into all that this week on NPR's code-switch podcast. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2010. Sarah cows has 3,000 brand new swell bottles in her apartment and she starts pitching them store by store in New York City and when she can't get any traction with stores.

1 (34m 22s):
Yeah, I'd say, you know what? I really think if you use the product, I really think if you tried it you would understand how great this is and lo and behold often times. I would get a call back and say, you know, I tried this I put ice. You said last night or I'm 80 before I went to bed and it's still hot. It's still colds come back and tell me a little bit more about this product. So, you know, I had to take a little bit of a risk and give away some product in some cases to try to get people to really understand it worked. Like I said it was going to

2 (34m 51s):
so did you eventually sell all three thousand of those bottles?

1 (34m 56s):
I did I did so it took a number of months, but I eventually sold all of those bottles some on the website on swell.com. Calm and who knew

2 (35m 6s):
about the website how would people even find out about it

1 (35m 8s):
II put it on my Facebook page. I told my friends and family members and I asked if they would repost it as well and created a swell Facebook page and I just ask people to start liking it. I also started to reach out to the Press at that time as well

2 (35m 21s):
myself. How did you do that?

1 (35m 23s):
So I went to Barnes and Noble and I didn't buy the magazines but I wrote down the address of almost every editor mostly women's fashion magazines and started writing letters. And every day I tried to send out a couple of boxes to different editors with a letter and saying, you know, this is my product. This is what I'm trying to do. And here's the sample I would love it if you could try it and if you like it, could you write about it and how

2 (35m 48s):
would you know that it was the right editor? I mean because you know person could be a features editor, but the person who writes about products could be an assistant editor and you would never

1 (35m 57s):
know I would not know but I would hopefully guess that if this what I thought was a beautiful product would show up on their desk and they weren't the right person. And that potentially they would pass it along. I also had a hunch that even if they weren't the right person and a product arrived that they might just use it. Anyway, yeah and that, you know, maybe that's one way that I could win people over, you know having a swell bottle sit on the desk in someone's office as they're trying to think of story ideas, you know, potentially they'll think

2 (36m 26s):
about us and when you initially reached out to the editors, did you write a letter saying hey, I'm sorry cows. This is me. I started this business. Yes, I'm making it. Did you tell a little bit about yourself?

1 (36m 38s):
I did I told him about myself, you know, I told him about what I was trying to do. I talked about how much plastic was in the ocean. I talked about how many people women and girls primarily are affected by the Water Crisis and how we're trying to give back to UNICEF in make a difference in the world. And I talked about the product. You know, I said this is this is a hydration fashion accessory. This is not a water bottle. You've never seen anything like it before and this is why it's important to your

2 (37m 2s):
reader. Were you thinking initially that That this should be something that women would want to use out and about particularly women.

1 (37m 11s):
Yes. I actually might Target in the beginning was women because I was really making something for myself and you know friends like me and I thought, you know women also do a lot of the shopping for the household. So if you really want to get in with a group if you target someone why not try to make this fashion accessory and appeal to not just women but to their spouses and their families their kids It's so you know, it really did start with women as the Target now. We're actually pretty balanced in our customers being women and men but that's really where the idea started in the beginning

2 (37m 45s):
meantime. Did you order more bottles from China or did you still did you cut a hold off until you sold all

1 (37m 51s):
3,000? Well at this time I was still working through my first three thousand and I got a call back from Oprah's Magazine from the O magazine. Oh, I'd sent one of my samples to oh wow. Ow, because

2 (38m 5s):
you can imagine. Oh magazine. They get a thousand

1 (38m 9s):
samples a week or a day right or day. What happened was the editor called and said I got your bottle. Wow. I took it on my family vacation to Peru and it worked. I use it every day, except my water cold. We really want to run this product and we want to run it on the old list, which is the must-have list for summer, but the catch was she said you need to send me one of every color you have color looks good. On a page and you only had them in blue. I only had blue and of course, I still remember what I said. I said, well I'm standing in the warehouse right

2 (38m 42s):
now, which was what your apartment.

1 (38m 45s):
Yeah, like my kitchen living area. Okay, you said I'm

2 (38m 48s):
saying the warehouse. Okay.

1 (38m 49s):
See you as many as you want, but they only come in blue and it was just heartbreaking moment because she said we'll call me back when you have more colors because we really need colors to go on the page. And so you said I said, I will and I literally hung. Up the phone. I walked out the door. I went to Barnes & Noble. I purchased a Pantone color book. I picked out six additional colors and I call the factory and I said listen, I need you to make me two bottles each and these six colors and FedEx them here. I need one for Oprah's magazine and one for myself to take pictures to put on the website so we can we can show the result in these products and that's how we went from one color to 7 and we were Featured then in the summer of 2011 in Oprah's magazine, which was a really big milestone for the business.

1 (39m 42s):
Yeah,

2 (39m 42s):
we talked to Sara Blakely three years ago on that show. And you know, there was the Oprah effect for Spanx what happened to swelled. I have to imagine like people all of

1 (39m 53s):
a sudden your web traffic went up so much that we and I say we I was still the only employee I had to really work on the backend of the website because if we crashed immediately, so there was absolutely a no-brainer. Oprah fact but I would say more than anything it was sort of this stamp of confidence in the business that that either gave me more confidence as I went into retailers or gave retailers more confidence to try the product and put it on the Shelf. I made a little sign that said, you know as featured in Oprah's magazine and that certainly helps, you know opening up retail doors.

2 (40m 26s):
How are you fulfilling web orders? I mean, there must have been a lag time between the time somebody ordered it because now when you order something expect to get it in two days or three days But I imagine you didn't have the you weren't able to fulfill all of these orders over coming in through the website quickly.

1 (40m 41s):
Well at the point that I had ordered the additional inventory. I realized I was going to need a fulfillment center. So at that point I wasn't actually sending the order as myself from the post office. So I had set up a fulfillment center luckily and you know worked with a company that basically works with direct to Consumer companies. So surprisingly even though we were pretty small company orders were going out in a day or two.

2 (41m 4s):
To wow. All right. So you start to fill orders and you're now getting more interest from smaller boutiques, but you also had a pretty big turning point in addition to the O magazine in 2011. When you landed a deal with Crate & Barrel, they ordered a few thousand bottles. He had that happen. Did they approach you to they hear about you through, you know just media attention,

1 (41m 26s):
you know, I think cratenbarrel did hear about us your media attention, but the way that I actually met them was through a trade show, so I had been going to some of the gift trade show. Person standing in a little booth almost like a science fair Booth, you know where you stand there next to your poster board. And you say oh hi. This is my product. And I remember being very excited to meet the buyer from Crate and Barrel and you know, they said they were going to put us in all of their stores but also their catalogs that we go to so many homes in America. So that was a really big exciting turning point

2 (41m 54s):
that first full year, which was 2011. Do you remember how many trade shows you went to

1 (42m 0s):
I went to 17 trade shows that year and it was Testing well on Friends couches and start doing customer service for the e-commerce site or building credit cards, you know being the only employee and doing all of the jobs, you know, and of course my friends would want to talk. You hadn't seen him in years you'd said. Oh can I crash at your place in Atlanta the last thing you want to do? I'm talking about a water bottle all day. Yeah to anybody. So those those were trying times that's for sure, but that

2 (42m 30s):
must have been really I mean go into all those traitors must have been absolutely crucial because That's where you've got the critical mass where you meet those retailers and Distributors, correct? So cratenbarrel, was that a huge deal for you mean? He'd already had all the O magazine thing but was the cratenbarrel and even bigger thing you

1 (42m 47s):
create marrow was a bigger thing because it gave us a bigger stance it gave us, you know, national attention and in some cases from a process perspective. They really want a retailer to tell their readers to go to and so we started to sort of get a little bit more pressed because we had better retail placement. It was also the first time we figured out how to make a bar code sticker cratenbarrel is our first National Council was the first time we had to read a vendor guide. Oh, yeah. He's requirements said you have to actually have a SKU number in a bar code sticker. So I Googled how to do it and I printed out the barcode stickers on my home printer invited my girlfriends over and we had pizza and wine and stuck all the stickers on I actually ship the bottles from my warehouse to the house to put the Is on because I the stuff that was in our warehouse wasn't compliant with their vendor guide and so it was a real learning opportunity to say Hey, listen, if you're going to start working with some of these really big partners are going to have to get smarter on how to service them

2 (43m 48s):
meantime, it's just you you are the company you are swell. It was just me. Wow. Whoo. Do you remember what your sales were? And your first year? I think my

1 (43m 60s):
sales in the first year. We're just under

2 (44m 2s):
$100,000. All right, so By the way, did you ever think okay now I got to go out and raise some money if I want to scale this

1 (44m 11s):
thing I considered it but then quickly discounted it because I thought you know what this is going to be a big waste of time and I'm not really sure if it's going to work and so why don't I just wait until we're bigger and more successful because we have a better pitch in a better story to tell to investors if that's the path we want to go

2 (44m 27s):
down. So your idea was let me get some traction and then I'll find the money to scale it exactly, right? Okay. And so you continue to kind of get attention and your in Crate and Barrel and by 2012 you did like two million dollars in Revenue. Did you I'm assuming by that point you had to hire people to help you

1 (44m 50s):
a Jedi. I hired my first employee that year. Her name is Katie and it was her first job out of college and she showed up to come work with me. She was very brave.

2 (45m 1s):
I remember the first time I saw a really obscure served notice as well. Bottle was at the Ted conference in 2013. Was that a deliberate strategy in your mind? Like let me put these in these in the Ted bags because you have to because right it's a barter system like you Ted is not really buying them from you your

1 (45m 17s):
intentions not if I had it's right donation. It's a donation expensive very, you know to 3,000 people that go every year and so you know it but it was it was very deliberate because as you can imagine being a scrappy as I was starting swell, I didn't have a marketing budget and so I thought How do I get my bottle in the hands of influencers of people that are sort of on The Cutting Edge of ideas you Ted being one of those real obvious places and I had sent a bottle to Ted and said, you know again, this is my bottle in this is my story and you know surprisingly they called me back and even though that's really what I wanted.

1 (45m 58s):
It was a huge decision to pull the trigger and make the donation because it was expensive. And it was product that I had to basically give away and not sell with the hopes of you know, something coming out of it. How did you

2 (46m 12s):
know that donating? All these bottles into the Ted gift bag? How are you able to track whether that was gonna be you know, whether there was going to be a return on that

1 (46m 21s):
investment, you know, it is hard to track but we can try to see where orders come from, you know on the website. We have a little how did you hear about us line? So we try to see your people talking about Ted there, but we have a pretty big. Business where we actually work with big companies and we put their logos on bottles and some of the first bigger corporate orders that we received were CEOs and founders of companies that had had attended tet. They actually wrote to us from the Ted conference and we wanted the same thing. Yeah, exactly. And so in a couple years ago a Shonda Rhimes was one of the the Ted speakers and she wrote Into You Know info as well bottle herself and said, oh hi, I'm Shonda and I just got a swell bottle at the Ted conference and she purchased Wells for all six of her shows at the time.

1 (47m 7s):
Wow, and the cool thing about that was then you had the likes of, you know, Kerry Washington and all of those amazing stars that she has access to because of her shows all walking around with the swell bottle. So it's really hard to really quantify. But when you pull back and you think you know, how did I meet Shonda? How do we meet LinkedIn? You know, how did how to be get a bottle to Kyra's it was a big, you know calculated expense, but at the same time it certainly has paid off for us now, I read that like,

2 (47m 34s):
Year after you started swell you went to China to go visit the factory that was making the the bottles for you. And then you went to a trade show in Hong Kong and you literally saw table with knockoffs of your bottles. There

1 (47m 48s):
is is that right that is a true story whatwhat hap so I had gone to so many trade shows, you know over the first year and here I am in Hong Kong and I saw a big, you know promotion for a trade show and I thought great. I spend all my free time at trade shows now. Why don't I go check out the show. Oh, it's see what it's like and not only were there swell bottles at this trade show. But the swell bottles had one in a Ward and had a ribbon on a display case at the trade show. What? Yes, was it the same logo

2 (48m 19s):
with s ' well,

1 (48m 22s):
yeah, it was the same logo and I had the trademark symbol on the side of my God and it and it was all of our colors. It was everything it was it was absolutely I got ourselves. Yeah my

2 (48m 32s):
God, what was your first reaction like what's going on?

1 (48m 34s):
I also just passed out. I'm sure leave it and I was there with my boyfriend at the time who is now my husband and luckily he kept his wits about him and went over and started talking to someone standing by this, you know display case what he says. Hey, what are you doing? Yeah. He said oh hi tell me about this and the the gentleman that was working in the booth was super smiley and happy and he pulled out his business card and gave it to us and said, oh hi. I'm from swell and his business card also had swell on it. Of course. I had never seen this man before so what'd you do? We contacted the officials that were running the show and showed them my business card and showed them the swell website and the US and said listen, this is a counterfeit company.

1 (49m 17s):
This is not swell. We are not showing at the show. We found someone that had the keys to the display case and we took all of the samples out stuff that all into our bags and we went back to our hotel. I mean, we couldn't believe he had

2 (49m 31s):
just seen I can't imagine you had a budget. Lawyers at that time.

1 (49m 36s):
No, I mean I had done, you know, the initial registration of the patents and design patents and intellectual property, but certainly didn't have a lawyer on staff or really the budget, you know, unfortunately, we did have to hire some attorneys and we really did have to try to get to the bottom of it to make sure that this was stopped immediately.

2 (49m 55s):
You did eventually win a lawsuit you received 19 million dollars in Damages against defendants that were accused of trademark infringement. Ain't these were similarly. These are just knockoffs. These were counterfeiters who are making bottles and calling them swell,

1 (50m 11s):
correct? So we've added a number of lawsuits that one included of individuals and companies that are there making products that directly a friendship on our intellectual property rights.

2 (50m 22s):
I mean we talked about this a little bit with Randy hetrick of TRX because TRX straps massively counterfeited, he spent years and years and years and litigation eventually won. I mean it can eat Up a huge part of a company's budget and take away from marketing and other things and just time and like mental space. Right? I mean just dealing with all that is a

1 (50m 46s):
lot either it is a limey absolutely affects the bottom line. I think it's hard to quantify. But I think you're right. I think more than that. It's the brain space. It's the the opportunity cost of time when you have your time and attention or your team or the fact that you're spending money on legal and not on product development or marketing. Eating it really creates a lot of stress and strain on the organization. It also creates a fair amount of confusion for customers in the marketplace. We hear from customers the customer service that they bought us. Well what they think is as well and it's not working. It's not keeping things hot and cold or it dense or the paint is coming off and we ask the customer.

1 (51m 26s):
Hey send us a picture of it and it's not real. I think that's the thing that I have the hardest time with is it's not just That they didn't buy the product from us. It's just that customers are having an inferior experience and it could really be turning customers off from our brand because they're not getting the real thing and I think that's where it really gets my blood boiling.

2 (51m 49s):
So as you were growing 2012, you do 2 million in revenue 2013 Starbucks approaches you they want to put your bottles in some of its stores into cities Atlanta and Austin they did great they sold out but you You wanted them and all the Starbucks. How did you get them into all the

1 (52m 8s):
Starbucks? So I actually was at Starbucks headquarters for a meeting with our buyers talking about the program that we were doing and in Austin and Atlanta and it was very fortunate because at the time this was in December 2014, they were opening this new store in Seattle called the Roasterie and it was sort of this Willy Wonka Chocolate Factory coffee experience. I've been there see the beans roasted. It's amazing. It's the yes. So my buyer said hey, there's our opening tonight of a new store. Why don't you come to the opening? And so I go to the Roasterie opening and who's standing at the coffee bar waiting for his espresso but Howard Schultz.

1 (52m 48s):
Yeah. And so yeah, I just had this moment where I realized that this was my time to try a much bigger pitch for swell at Starbucks. So I asked my buyer I said, hey, do you want to come with me? I think that's that's your boss over there. And she said oh God. No, she said I'd be way. Too nervous to speak with the CEO. And so I said, okay. Well here hold my bag. And so I give her my purse like grabbed my swell bottle and I be line over to Howard before anyone else can get to him and I just told him my story and said Hey, listen, we're both CEOs here. I'm running a much smaller company, you're running a much bigger one, but we could be doing so much more business with you. If you could just give us the opportunity to sell and more stores. Wow, and he listened he said, okay.

1 (53m 29s):
Well, here's my card. And why don't you contact me and after the holidays we'll sit down and have a Aang and he was true to his word. He had me in for an hour and a half the following February. Yeah, and we hatched a plan. We it was it was one of those incredible moments where I really would have kicked myself if I hadn't done it, but I still can't believe I actually

2 (53m 50s):
did it and that meeting led to Starbucks putting swell bottles in like I think 14,000 of its locations around the world.

1 (53m 60s):
That's right. So I think 10,000 stores in the US and Canada. Five countries in Europe all over Asia Russia South Africa. I beat it was incredible.

2 (54m 12s):
And if you hadn't done that, if you hadn't, you know have the courage to go up to him had you been to nervous that may never have

1 (54m 19s):
happened. Absolutely. I had a moment before I went to go talk to him and I was grabbing my swell and thinking about what I wanted to say and I just thought how am I going to get on the plane tomorrow back from Seattle and live with myself if I don't Go do it. I mean the worst that can happen is he says no, thank you. Leave me alone. And the best is that something comes to this. And so I thought well I've got absolutely nothing to lose and it worked out, you know from that, you know, we sold a lot of product but more than that, you know, we became more of a household name. Yeah, we had a sign in all the Starbucks that said, you know Starbucks favorite hydration fashion accessory is swell with our logo bigger than the Starbucks logo.

1 (55m 3s):
I mean, wow that's better than sale.

2 (55m 4s):
That's brand Rex incredible. I think by 2015 that your sales hit 50 million dollars. You would not raised any money. You had not gone to investors. Did you at that point kind of gave up on that idea and say I don't need to do this anymore.

1 (55m 19s):
We were actually having some investors come to us. I'm sure and we had some really interesting conversations. But at that point we were just so busy and trying to scale this company or like painting the plane after we took off we didn't really have time to think about it. Investor pitch or really? What that would look like so luckily we were self-funding pretty well at that point. We really didn't need the outside Capital.

2 (55m 42s):
It's amazing. I mean did did any investors kind of not maybe say this directly but sort of suggests that like, hey look if you don't take our money and you don't, you know, scale up even faster you're going to get crushed because some other big brands are just going to make a similar bottle and Crush you I think I

1 (55m 59s):
definitely heard that from a few people, but I honestly was so Focused on what I was trying to do that I wasn't really that concerned about what others were doing and had a lot of confidence and swell and in myself and what I was doing and you know, I have met some really nice investors. I just didn't meet anyone that I thought was really going to be that helpful to what I was trying to

2 (56m 25s):
do. I'm curious about this idea of confidence right? Because some people just have it they're born with it. And but I think most of us aren't most Of us we grow into our confidence and confidence can come and go right depends depending on your circumstances in life and where you are, but as you built this business and as you saw more and more people buying it, I'm assuming that your confidence grew more and more as

1 (56m 52s):
well. I would say, yes, although I think with every phase of the business there was always something that sort of put me on the back foot and so I didn't have I'm to have too much Swagger or overconfidence because there was always something that I could have done better. I should have known or you know a person or a process or a system that needed to be upgraded. And so, you know, I think we're I really have come full circle on the confidence piece is being able to admit that sometimes things aren't working perfectly and to be able to be honest about that imperfection and ask other entrepreneurs or even just you know.

1 (57m 34s):
Our employees for advice or help because I think that if I had been overconfident at any step of the journey that it might have blindsided me or the company for sort of that next big step forward on the growth perspective.

2 (57m 51s):
So as you got to a point where your sales are huge, I mean and you are you know, you kind of grow the company and you got to build it out and you got to get a space and and how did you hire and what did you do? How did you manage all that chaos happening while still you know with all that

1 (58m 10s):
growth. It was chaos for sure. You know, it was drinking out of the fire hose or you know, any one of those analogies but it was it was a really interesting fun time, you know, it was trying to figure out you know, how do you get six months ahead of yourself instead of always being three months behind but it was a lot of fun. I mean I had I had a really energized, you know team there was something that was a bit magical to our scrappiness that that we seem to be able to get through a lot of that chaos and make I don't know. Thrive on it. Really? Yeah,

2 (58m 45s):
it's amazing that even in the lesson swell jumped onto the scene and over the past 10 years pretty much every airport has a water Filling Station. It's a common thing Parts public parks have water Filling Station not water fountains, but stations where you put your bottle under and there's a you know, there's a sensor and and I have to imagine that's well as part of that right? I don't you think.

1 (59m 7s):
Yeah. I like to think that we really did create part of this movement of people. Carrying a reusable water bottle, you know part of why I started swell was I was trying to get people to stop drinking so much single use plastic. And so it makes me very happy to see so many of you know water filling stations pop-up and so many people carrying a reusable bottle. You

2 (59m 29s):
mentioned earlier your ex-boyfriend because he's your husband Jeff who joined the company, I guess in 2016 as the CEO of oh as hasn't been to work with your partner.

1 (59m 42s):
It's been great. Honestly, I the poor guy, you know, he never applied for a job. He he basically got kidnapped one day. It was one of those situations where I would come home from work after you know, something had happened, you know, the website being down for example and being my partner. I really just needed to vent about it. I would say oh this happened today and I just needed to get off my chest but he would spring into problem-solving mode and he would stay up until 2:00 in the morning fixing the thing fixing the website fixing the think Coming up with a new system for it. And so he said listen Sarah. Why don't I come in for a half day every Tuesday and help you get in front of these things instead of you coming home after the fact and it was it was one of the classic cases of escalation of commitment, you know that half day on Tuesday basically just escalated to you know him working full-time for the company and you know, it's not what I would have expected having met him, you know after swell was started.

1 (1h 0m 40s):
I never would have thought. Oh, I'm going to Make this guy Comin work for me and fix all of my problems, but it's been so incredibly valuable for the company to have him there by my side. I really couldn't do it without him. There's no way that that's well would be the company that we are today, you know, if he wasn't willing to sort of put his ego aside and say listen, I'm going to drop what I'm doing to support you and your dream and your company. So all of this will work. Yeah.

2 (1h 1m 12s):
Your business. I mean, I know you don't release financial information anymore. I think in part because of all the counterfeiters. Is that

1 (1h 1m 20s):
right? That's correct. I found that the more that I talked about our Revenue numbers the more that we seem to have a bit of a Target on our back. Yeah, but I mean

2 (1h 1m 30s):
you still own a hundred percent of the company

1 (1h 1m 33s):
I do I do. Wow.

2 (1h 1m 35s):
It's pretty insane. I mean, it's pretty crazy. Right? I mean you they're very very few businesses that have been Show where the entrepreneur who founded it still is Sara Blakely is a good example of this work. They still own the entire company unless they were independently wealthy at the beginning and just had you know, unless supplies the cash Sarah. I think just in the recent weeks from the time that we're recording this conversation you step down as CEO, you're still the executive chair woman and you hired a CEO to take over as of this recording. We're not sitting in the same room. You are at your home. Home. I'm in my home studio and we're living in a really crazy moment where all businesses are just they don't know what's happening.

2 (1h 2m 22s):
Right? There's a lot of uncertainty. So first tell me about that. I mean are you I know you're not running the company day to day but what's going on right now with with the business in this situation.

1 (1h 2m 35s):
I'm incredibly happy that I did bring in a CEO. It was absolutely the right. Decision Force well before this Global pandemic, but especially now and I'm following the leadership of the CEO who started, you know, just six weeks ago. So it's it's not the transition. I was hoping for for him. But you know in trying times that's that's when leader step up and he's doing an incredible

2 (1h 2m 59s):
job. Well, this really is a moment that's going to test every single business in America small and large and there's so much Unknown about what's ahead but how are you thinking about About your business and about kind of staying resilient as best as possible. I think it's probably fair to assume you are like every other business you're going to take a hit people are probably not going to be buying your products for a while. It's possible. It's very likely. So what are some early kind of creative ideas that that you guys are coming up with to build some resiliency into your business?

1 (1h 3m 36s):
Well, I have to say these are these are really uncertain times. You know, no one knows where this is going to end up myself included. You know, I do think that there's going to be you know, more pain and more disruptions before we get out on the other side of this unfortunately, but you know what? I hope that we find on the other side of this is sort of a, you know, a changed business environment sort of a new sense of community and relationships that businesses have with their customers, you know, one of the things that I'm working on and I'm optimistic about is just really the into the mission of swell and I think one of the things that will be left with on the other side of this is really how you know, covid-19 or otherwise, you know, we're all intertwined and we're interconnected and that my actions and your actions matter for our communities our key messaging is really like, how can swell be your companion at home right now, you know, we're trying to have a sense of humor about it, you know the video conferencing and and trying to do your at-home workout while you're homeschooling your kids and you know Trying to be the cook and you know, we're trying to say we've got products to help you.

1 (1h 4m 41s):
But at the same time I can we be this place to kind of keep you healthy and happy while you're staying home and staying positive, but we know that all of our retailers aren't going to make it through this time. We're just trying to be supportive and you know, if there's ways for us to weather the storm and get out on the other side what I'm really hopeful for is that we have sort of a renewed sense of community and why companies That have a mission really

2 (1h 5m 7s):
matter. When you think about success that you've had with this brand do tribute that to to skill to hard work or more to luck or a combination. What do you

1 (1h 5m 25s):
think? You know, I think I'd has to be both, you know, I would say that it absolutely has been hard work. It's been a lot of hustle, you know, no one's ever going to outwork me and I live for swell and this is this is really been my life's work these last 10 years, but I have to say luck is played, you know such. Incredible role in our success. I was lucky to be born to parents who are entrepreneurs, you know who taught me the power of hard work and positive thinking and doing the right thing. I was born in a country and a society that values education for girls and I went to Great Schools and I have a network of friends who supported me on this journey and the power of timing was so lucky, you know, I started swell because I had a personal mission to eliminate single-use plastic bottles, but at the same time, I'm that I started the company there were so many people around the world waking up to the issue of climate change and global warming and and how they potentially had the need to take personal action.

1 (1h 6m 24s):
And so yes, it's been a lot of work, but all of the stars aligned in a really lucky way for that work to have turned into something

2 (1h 6m 32s):
that Sarah cows founder of swell swell recently became an official be core, which means the company is A legally required to consider the impact of all its decisions on its customers workers the community and the environment and by the way, remember the original name Sarah had Force well can't live without it. Well, the domain name can't live without a.com is still a presumably owned by Sarah but should you be interested you can still register can't live without a Dutch shop can't live without it dot Biz can't live without it dot life and many other variations.

2 (1h 7m 12s):
ins Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org. And if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or add guy Roz our show is produced this week by JC Howard with music composed by routine Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Juliet Carney Canada slim Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is rainy told I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how how I built this this is NPR.