0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor bank of America, and they were original podcast that made all the difference. What if finding your voice helped heal a nation Smithsonian, secretary, Lonnie, bunch discusses telling the story of all Americans, find it where you get your podcasts.

1 (20s):
No, this wine store. I have this wine show. I'm a wine guy. When I started putting out a little business content in 2009, and every comment said, stay in your lane wine guy. What do you know about business? That's when I was like, wait a minute, these people don't realize you can be a wine guy and a businessman. I couldn't wrap my head around it. I was like, why are they telling me to stay in my lane? I was a business guy before I was this wine guy. They know of course I can talk about business. I'm a businessman

2 (58s):
From NPR. It's how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Ross. And on the show today, how Gary Vaynerchuk started as a wine salesman, grew into a master marketer and built a massive one. Man brand that's inspired tons of people to start their own companies. There are lots of people who don't take Gary Vaynerchuk seriously, who think he personifies the worst elements of a hustle culture who write snarky things about him because he violates their sense of what it means to be cool because he's earnest exuberant.

2 (1m 44s):
And sometimes so over the top that it can be a little hard to take, but Gary Vaynerchuk doesn't much care about what his critics think and he doesn't pay all that much attention to the praise he receives either. Gary is about as pure an entrepreneur as anyone who's been on this show, it's in his blood and soul in a visceral way. That is almost incomparable. You can hear it. You will hear it in his voice, in his expressions, in the frenetic speed and cadence of his sentences at age 45, he's already started more than a dozen businesses and sold a few as well.

2 (2m 27s):
Gary is one of the pioneers of social media marketing, and one of its most influential practitioners. He produces a seemingly endless amount of daily content videos, tweets, blogs, Instagram posts, Facebook chats, a podcast. And yet for the most part, he's not trying to sell you anything on his website. There's no shop, no pitch to take a course or sign up for a seminar, no products for sale at all. Partly because Gary has already a lot of money from the two businesses he sold from his bestselling books, but also from his branding and marketing studio and other ventures that fall under his company, Vayner X, what he offers is advice on marketing, on working on branding on entrepreneurship, even on how to deal with critics, skeptics, and haters.

2 (3m 23s):
And I should mention he does all of this with a lot of F-bombs, which fair warning he will hear in this interview. Gary has had a remarkable ability to see around corners back in the late 1990s, he convinced his dad to let him set up an e-commerce website for the family's liquor store, which Gary turned into a powerhouse direct to consumer wine business. He was one of the earliest YouTube vloggers and amassed an enormous audience talking about wine. He saw the early promise of Twitter and figured out how to use it to help massive brands reach younger consumers. He co-founded one of the early online reservation sites called Rezi that he would go on to sell to American express, but his biggest secret it's not a secret at all.

2 (4m 13s):
Gary Vaynerchuk works really, really hard work is the fuel that allows Gary V to be Gary V. And he explains the source of that work ethic and his status as an immigrant, Gary was born in the Soviet union. And what is now a part of Belarus? His parents were Soviet Jews in a society that often discriminated against Jews. So in 1978, when Gary was around three years old, his parents managed to immigrate to the United States. They settled in a tiny apartment in Queens, New York. They had no money, no language skills and no professional qualifications that were recognized in the U S but they did have a few relatives in the area.

1 (4m 57s):
I remember random things like my grandpa, my great grandfather. I actually remember him quite a bit. I remember a lot of one-on-one time with him. He would walk me to the park. I remember riding a beat up big wheels that we found in the trash. I remember that he occasionally would buy me vanilla ice cream. And that blew my mind because even at that young of an age, I kind of knew that we didn't spend money on most things besides food and clothes. So we were a poor ass family.

2 (5m 24s):
Yeah. What is your, what is your dad at which parents do for living in those early years? Do you remember worse?

1 (5m 32s):
Yeah. I mean, this is the beauty of being only 20 years younger than your parents. You remember a lot of stuff. Yeah. First the family was very big on picking garbage and selling it at flea markets and things of that nature, real rugged stuff. It was really hard. The U S was not flourishing. We were, it was, it was seventies in New York. Yeah. It was 1978 New York. My parents were like, wait a minute. We heard propaganda of streets of gold. Grandma just got mugged. Like, you know, like it was like, it was hard. And so my dad was fortunate. He had a great uncle who was extremely well off. And so he was going to kind of take care of us. But when we were in Italy, waiting for our visa as he died.

1 (6m 12s):
And so we came to the U S thinking, we had a little bit of this kind of like, you know, Jeanie gonna take care of us. Now he's passed the credit of, of his children, Bob Siegelman, Arlene Newman. They did do a nice job on my dad. And one of the nice things they did was they gave him a job as a stock boy in a liquor store in Clark, New Jersey.

2 (6m 31s):
And they were, they'd just be clear. They were like your sponsors.

1 (6m 33s):
They were like, our sponsors. That's exactly right. This was the liquor store. They owned this crystal where they owned. And my dad gets a job there, which was very nice. And there was this mass Exodus at one point at the liquor store. And my dad had basically got propelled to manager. Literally my dad's first American words were things like Budweiser and Carlo Rossi, and Boone's farm. Like literally later in my career, when I met some of the salesmen that called on my dad, when he was just a stock boy, not the owner. They would tell me stories about my dad. Like literally literally did not speak English. And so, you know, my dad became, the manager got paid more and we moved to Edison, New Jersey where really this story of my life starts to truly.

2 (7m 18s):
All right. So your family, moose Edison, and your dad is managing this liquor store with an eye to eventually opening his own liquor store. Yes, because

1 (7m 28s):
My dad's boss was his great uncle. He didn't know his second cousin removed. Yeah. So my dad obviously giving me a lot of this DNA was an entrepreneur was a hard worker. And so this gentlemen recognized that, and at some point in the mid eighties, this gentleman allowed my father to buy half the business, you know, going from zero, not having a language to four or 5, 6, 7 years later to own a piece of a business. It's an incredible accomplishment. And I admire my father so much for that. And so he became half owner of that store. And then only 10 years after he came to this country, he opened up very small store in Springfield, New Jersey,

2 (8m 9s):
Which is called shoppers discount liquors.

1 (8m 12s):
Thank you for doing the homework shoppers discount liquors. I'm sitting in my office in New York right now. His second store was not much bigger than my office. It was literally a tiny home, but it was his. And that was huge.

2 (8m 24s):
And liquor is a pretty good business because it doesn't go bad,

1 (8m 28s):
Good business that it doesn't go bad. It's better than food. That way. It was a good business that people drink when things are good. And when things are bad, it's not a good business in the part that my dad's store was called shoppers. And let me hit it now. Discount liquors product. Everybody bought for the same price because that's the regulation of the liquor industry. He was selling everything low and running ads. That's how he maintained growth top line, but it wasn't a lot of profit and that we kept as expenses low. Cause my dad surely he didn't love the idea of paying employees too, too much. So he kept his overhead down. Very good operator. That way knew how to like, not lose money, but it wasn't a profitable business.

1 (9m 10s):
And what I realized was right, my dad ran a business where he valued the business more than the money he took out of it. He cared so much about the business. He didn't care that it wasn't profit. He just wanted to keep being the best store in town and keep his position. Yeah.

2 (9m 24s):
What kind of kid were you? I mean, were you, first of all at school was school. I mean, did it come easy for you or was it

1 (9m 32s):
Harder? School was incredibly easy to me until third grade. I got straight A's and then I don't think I got another, a, except for Jim for the rest of my life. As a matter of fact, my interest level and my capacity to sit and be bored zero.

2 (9m 47s):
Yeah. You could not focus on the teacher. You couldn't focus on the lesson plan. Your, your, your mind was wandering.

1 (9m 52s):
I have incredible focus guys. Like I'm outrageously focused. I wasn't willing to compromise my interests to appease what seemed to be required. And that is why I'm still to this day. Now I didn't understand that at the time I got F's in science, but I got BS in history because I was very interested and I was, it was very easy to focus. I think I am a true byproduct of the vulnerability of a rigid system, because if you would have taught me why new Coke failed in high school? I would've got an a plus plus cause I would have been fascinating.

2 (10m 29s):
Yeah. And did your parents care that you didn't Excel at school? My mother,

1 (10m 34s):
My father had no idea what was going on. He spent 150% of his time on the business and you know, I didn't see my dad until I started working in the store at 14. My mother,

3 (10m 44s):
God,

1 (10m 45s):
She's so smart. She grounded me every single report card for two weeks, no TV, no video games, no friends. It was when I tell you the anxiety, I still have to this day

2 (10m 57s):
About bringing the report card home,

1 (10m 59s):
Not bring the report card home. You'll love this still to this day. Like on November 6th, the breeze of the fall winter thing hits me and I can feel sixth grade me saying, oh, it's time for me to check the mailbox for the report card. Because if I can get it before my mom gets it, I'm going to flush it down the toilet, which will buy me two weeks before she grounds me. Like that was my life. It was cat and mouse between me and my report card. But my mom knew who I was and, and she

2 (11m 26s):
Saw it. And I mean, clearly you were focused on things outside of school, like, right. Like I think you, you started to work at your dad's liquor store pretty much every weekend when you were around 14, right? Yes.

1 (11m 41s):
My dad's store was in Springfield, New Jersey on the slightly, slightly wrong side of the tracks of a very affluent area because it literally, my dad's parking. Lot of his liquor store was at Millburn and Milburn was attached to short Hills and summit and living staff and money. And, and by the way, I didn't like my dad's liquor store. At first, I was selling baseball cards, making a lot of money as a kid. And now I was in this liquor store making two, three bucks an hour. And I didn't like beer and liquor, but I realized that people collected wine. And that was the trigger.

2 (12m 14s):
That that's interesting. I mean, were you, I mean, were you expected to work in the liquor store? Was that was an expectation. Yes.

1 (12m 20s):
I remember at 12 or 13, my mom saying to me, well, you're not going to Harvard, so you better mentally get prepared because you're going to be working at the store every day of your life. Soon. There was no conversation. Yeah. I was the son of a merchant of a first-generation family. I was the only child born in the old country. I was the oldest. This was my destiny. Now. I don't think, I don't think there was, I didn't feel pressure that I had to take it over one day. Yeah. What did

2 (12m 47s):
You think about the liquor store? Did you think that it was like, I don't know. Did you have an impression of what it was, did you think it was sort of low class? What

1 (12m 55s):
I thought was this thinks like, why am I here? Like I could be at the mall or the JCC or the fire station right now in Hillsborough, New Jersey selling my Eric Davis rookie cards that I bought this week in school. And he's hot. He had three home runs last night and they're up to six bucks a piece right now. He bought them for two, but I can't do anything about it because my parents are making me be here. And by the way, there was no doubt that I was going to work every weekend and every holiday and every summer vacation in high school. And that was non debatable.

2 (13m 31s):
I, I wonder whether you, how, I mean, you were a baseball card collector and a lot of, I love collecting baseball cards and you know, selling them now. And again, remember Jose Conseco, how much that rookie card is worth. It's crazy now, but it seems like your interest in baseball cards and the collecting of baseball cards, you started to kind of connect that with wine. I mean, you were working in a liquor store, but it seems to me that the baseball card collecting kind of side of you got you thinking about wine. Do you think that's fair?

1 (14m 2s):
Not only do I think that's fair. That's exactly what happened. I learned a lot from the ages of nine to the ages of 15 in, in doing baseball card shows, I was a child setting up tables with grown men and doing business. And by the time I got to my dad's store, I was a little seasoned for a 15 year old, 14 year old. And then I got to listen. I educated myself in class, took advantage of every minute, started to really know wine, understood human behavior, understood, collecting and took everything.

1 (14m 42s):
That would be the word. I would use everything from them, by the way, let me give you one. When you're setting up a table at a baseball card show, you start realizing by if you're talented, like I, and you had the gifts that I was given, that the way you set up your table will be a huge variable of how much money you make, where you put cards, what signage you use, where is your table? And by the time I got to my dad's store, the first thing I did for my dad was merchandise. The store. I would make signs and I would move around cases. I would say, dad, you want to sell this wine? Right? And he was like, yeah. I was like, why is it here? I'm like, look help. And this is a 15 year old dad. Look how people walk in the store. And they walk that way first, because of the way you've set up the store.

1 (15m 25s):
That's opposite of this thing. You've got the thing we don't want to sell there, but this is the profit. And so I started merchant. I was a merchandiser first and he was listening to you. He was listening to me, which I, you know, this gets me emotional. My dad really gave me a lot of freedom. Now. I know, for fact it was earned. I know my pops. He would be quick to shut everything down. He very quickly realized probably he tells me and I believe him. Cause he doesn't bullshit. He basically knew right away first weekend because I was a 14 year old, supposed to be downstairs, finagling myself upstairs, trying to sell people stuff. It was just in me. Right. And he knew that he knew what that was.

2 (16m 6s):
And by the way, what were your parents just expecting you to stay on in the business after high school? I mean, did, did they want you to go to college? Did you want to go to college?

1 (16m 16s):
No. I planned on not going to college. My parents didn't know anything. My mom was very insular. She didn't go to my parent teacher conferences. She had no idea. My mom had no, this is a true story. My mom asks me February of my senior year of high school. So what are we doing about college? I laugh. I go, what do you mean it's over? I'm going to go right into the business. She rolls up on me, stares me down and scares the shit out of me, points her finger directly in my face to my, and my mom's an angel by the way, and goes, you're going to college, figure it out. Turns around, turns back around and says, and don't make it a community college.

2 (16m 55s):
And, and so you actually wound up going to a four-year colleges come Mount Ida college, which is a sort of a small school in, in Massachusetts, right?

1 (17m 4s):
Yes. In Mount Ida college. First semester, I hear the internet for the first time and I decide, oh my God, I'm not going to launch 800 toys or recessive wines, which is what my plan was at that time. I'm going to launch a website, even though I did not own a computer, even though I wasn't techie. And a year later I launched wine library.com. One of the first e-commerce wine businesses.

2 (17m 26s):
Discipline is like 96, 97. I mean, no one's doing, I mean, people are going on like prodigy and AOL and you know, you've got mail like nobody's, but you're thinking this is the way to sell wine. Or this is the way to market wine. How are you thinking of it? Sell, sell. Okay.

1 (17m 42s):
I want to say this publicly. The greatest thing that was ever done for me in my life professionally was my father making an bet on spending the $15,000 to build wine library.com, which was like a good drilling in dollars.

2 (17m 58s):
So, so the idea was to build a website and you wanted to call it wine library.com.

1 (18m 3s):
That's right. My dad went to Napa on a trip cause now he was like getting deeper into the wine world to wine because the business was turning. Everybody kept calling their wine, cellars, their wine library. This is our library. And so my dad actually came up with the name wine library. I just knew he liked the name. He wanted to use it as a catalog or like a thing. I was the one who says, this is what we'll call our.com. But that's how the name wine library was come up with.

2 (18m 33s):
The business was called shoppers discount liquors. Correct. So you said let's not do shoppers discount, liquors.com. Let's call it. Let's just call the website wine library.com.

1 (18m 42s):
Your dad was part of a co-op. So there was 40 stores named shoppers discount liquors in New Jersey. They were all independently owned, but they all wanted to run a full-page ad in the star ledger. It was like ACE hardware. Correct? I want it to not be part of that because I wanted to build the biggest wine company in the world. So I strategically bought wine library.com because I already had bet the farm that the internet was going to be the future. And I knew that if I did this, because my dad was not looking to give up the shoppers name, it, he came up with it. Yeah, he wasn't. That was his baby. And he was not listening. That was a place he was fighting me on. I wanted to change the store name. He was petrified of that, but I knew that if I changed the.com to that, that eventually it would tip.

1 (19m 28s):
And that's exactly what happened

2 (19m 30s):
By the way. How did you learn line? Okay, so you were just 21, 22 at that time,

1 (19m 34s):
I've learned winds through books, through books and really Robert Parker's wine spectator. And there was a bulletin board on prodigy called mark Squires wine bulletin board. And so I lived on that community board.

2 (19m 46s):
And did you have, I mean, some, some people like, like Janice Robinson are known to have like just super power pallet. Right. But did you have, were you one of those people with a natural palette?

1 (19m 57s):
Yes. I knew everything on paper, but the first year of me tasting wine heavily in the store, it all just tasted like wine. Yeah. And I was starting to worry about this imposter syndrome of shoot. What are these people talking about? I don't taste boys and Barry, the hell is lead sheet fruit. Like, like I would literally have to work after working a 12 hour day, go to the king supermarket and buy all these weird fruits and vegetables and spices and go home at 11:00 PM. This is, this is how obsessed I was. I'm a 22 year old boy on a Friday night at 11:00 PM. Instead of going out, sitting and biting cinnamon sticks so that I could really capture the nuance of cinnamon to see if I would pick up on Barolos like I got what I was obsessed.

2 (20m 52s):
So after you graduate college, you come back to New Jersey and you work in the shop and you've got the wine library.com site. And how are you getting people to find out about it? I worked the floor, the floor of the, of the shop.

1 (21m 5s):
That's right. I am in the store 12 hours a day. So you come in the store, I see

2 (21m 9s):
You. Gotcha. Gary Vaynerchuk comes up to me and he says, what are you looking for? We

4 (21m 13s):
Got shot. Even the way. Even

1 (21m 15s):
The way you just said that you nailed the Gary Vaynerchuk, you see on the internet was that boy. Yeah. How are you? What can I help you? Like just pure, pure enthusiasm. And I will not let you leave my store. I will make you a hostage unless you give me your email address. Now this is 19 96, 7, 8. It was really 97, right before I graduated. And then 98 full-time a lot of people didn't even know they had an email, just got it from work. My favorite stories. Cause I can see them in my brain are people say things like, oh yeah, I got one it's aol@yahoo.com. I'm like, no, no, no, no, no, no. You probably have an AOL and Yahoo. And, and so what I did was I built a very powerful 10,000 then 20,000 and $30,000, 10,000

2 (22m 2s):
Email addresses. No, not from people just coming into the store over the

1 (22m 5s):
Course of the first year. Yeah. I would say the first year we probably had about 13,000. We did a little direct mail, but I would argue, I mean, you know, it's funny, I'm such an extreme character that I think when people hear my stories, they don't believe them. They're like, there's the level of embellishment there. He's trying to make a point. And I'm like, no, no, no, no. I'm telling you right now. Every human being that walked into the liquor store for an entire year, I would not let them leave to the best of my ability, which is very high without giving me their email address. But

2 (22m 35s):
I don't know why somebody wouldn't believe that. I think,

1 (22m 38s):
I think, I think, you know, the store was a big enough store that we had enough customers to that 10,000. Like it was easy to get to that base. What ended up happening was that worked so well, driving people to the website and buying on email that it gave us our first level of profit. You know, the first year I ran the business, we went from a 4 million to a $10 million business. Yes.

2 (22m 57s):
So this was, I mean, this was an email list that you would send out to people with the wine deals and they could directly click on that email and order wine. Cause this is still like the late nineties, early two thousands. It was that possible to do it was.

1 (23m 12s):
But to your point, 90% of the people didn't know what the hell you were saying, right? Nobody trusts putting a credit card in the computer. Nobody really even knows how to buy an, a website. Most people don't even know how to look at an email newsletter yet and look how well my dad's business is going. This is it like waiting to, to, and this is where I was wrong. Wait to the year, 2000. When everybody in America buys everything on the internet in my youth, I did not understand yet because I didn't have the pattern recognition or experience to know the things that I saw would take a decade to happen. Not a year. This was still before

2 (23m 46s):
Many states now allow, you know, direct wine sales. And, but even so there's still some challenges with some states as you know, but at that time, were you only selling pretty much to people in New Jersey? Yes.

1 (23m 57s):
Comma in 2000, we opened it up a little more as FedEx and ups became more progressive. So yes, 98 99 was very New Jersey. And then we built a big reputation because wall street, a lot of people live in the Jersey suburbs, right? And wall street was very, is very viral at that time because people now have email for the first time. So I'm thinking about it. This is gonna make so much sense to everybody. I'm sending an email for Opus, one at the lowest price in the country. What was the price at the time? Opus one was a $90 wine and I'm selling it for 60 to 99.

2 (24m 30s):
And that was the hottest one. Bobby is the hottest one,

1 (24m 34s):
Super hottest wine at the time. So I send it to wall street. Now think about the psyche of a wall street guy. Let's

2 (24m 41s):
Call it what it is. You send a Thompson

1 (24m 45s):
Comes in from short Hills buys, six bottles of Duckhorn, Sauvignon Blanc. For me, I get him on the email newsletter. He now gets an email while he's on the floor for Opus at 62 99, he yells guys Opus at 62 99 from long. Island's like, get the fuck outta here. I'm paying 95 bucks in long island. I'll take six, I'll take six. And they start. And then I'm getting emails saying, can you add my friend Burke to the list? Can you move? And so we are now in a viral loop and the world doesn't know it. Sherry Lehman's doesn't know it. KNL doesn't know it. Morels doesn't know it Zakys doesn't know it. Sam's in Chicago.

1 (25m 25s):
Doesn't know it. Specks doesn't know it. Crossroads doesn't know it, but I do. I'm now spending six years mapping all the stores that I just mentioned to you reading every single Wednesday, the dining section of the New York times. And I'm memorizing the ads that all the stores are pricing, what their mix is. Are they Bordeaux heavy? Are they Napa happy? And I'm mapping in my little brain. And so now I can see where I want to play in between and how I can attack them on pricing and selection. And if it just was that

2 (25m 57s):
All right, so you're building this, this email list and you are starting to reach people, especially wall street. People who know a deal when they see it and you start to see revenue grow pretty quickly, by the way, as a store still the physical store is still called shoppers discount liquors. The physical

1 (26m 14s):
Store became wine library in 1999. Okay.

2 (26m 17s):
Yeah. So your dad agreed to change the name. Yep. Better name, much better name. I think so. And did it increasingly become more wine and less liquor? Yes, but

1 (26m 26s):
That was not only because of how I was running the business. It was because that's what was happening in America. Yeah. The co the, the average 49 year old woman that lives in a high net worth neighborhood in 1977 has a cocktail at night, right? The cliche 49 year old woman in a high net worth neighborhood in 1999 and 2002 has a bottle of wine. So

2 (26m 51s):
You're seeing this happen in real time. And you guys are riding this wave and, and I mean, how fast cause you were, your dad was doing 4 million in revenue a year in gross revenue. His net profit was low, relatively low. What kind of change were you? Were you starting to see when you start to sell people via the internet?

1 (27m 11s):
We went to, we went to 10,000,099 and 17.5 and 2020 8.3. You know, I mean, it was, we went from four to 65 and 60 to 65 in a blink, you know, that was the first culture shock of my life because everything changes once, something like that happen.

2 (27m 33s):
Yeah. And your dad was making serious money, big money. Yeah.

1 (27m 37s):
But to my dad's credit, he was making big money. But you know what he decided to do, he decided to buy the burger king next door, which just went out of business, which is unheard of. And then he decided to build a 40,000 square foot store as if he was building the Taj Mahal made out of mahogany and stone. So my dad had the opportunity to make a lot of money and take it off the table. What he chose to do was to pour it back into the business. Something that is still to this day, one of the great life lessons for me, I think the reason I have such a big business is I was born in an ecosystem that says, don't take the money out and buy a boat, put the money back in to build a bigger business.

2 (28m 19s):
Yep. What were you, I mean, I'm trying to, if you ask me the question, what was I chasing in my twenties? I don't quite know. It may have been a combination of, of recognition or, or proving something. Probably there was some insecurity that I was chasing to prove that I could do these things. What, what do you think you were chasing in your twenties when you were working so hard? Was it, was it money? Was it, was it a number? Was it, what was it? What I was

1 (28m 45s):
Chasing? You know, it's really funny. The numbers thing made me laugh that we just talked about earlier. It was definitely not a number numbers are just like a very quick way to tell a story. Yeah. I CA I never had a goal. I, to this day, I've never had a goal of like, we're going to do this. I don't even think that way. In my twenties, I was chasing one feeling, God, you gave me the best parents in the world. You also gave me this talent. I have this incredible relationship with time I'm patient. I am going to give everything I've got for this next decade to my parents who brought me to this country who loved me, who gave me self-esteem, who gave me work ethic and accountability. I was so emotionally intelligently charged that I knew it.

1 (29m 30s):
And I said, you know what I'm gonna do. I'm gonna give my prime youth years fully to my parents. And then I'm going to go and do my own thing.

2 (29m 38s):
So in your twenties, because in your twenties and you were grinding away, you are totally what, seven days, a week, 12 hours a day working at the store. Yes,

1 (29m 49s):
I worked, you know, it was a retail store. Saturday was the biggest day by a country mile. So Saturday was seven to 11 because I had to get there early seven to 11. Those are insane hours. I

2 (29m 59s):
Do have friends. Did you hang out with people or not really?

1 (30m 2s):
I, my friends became my employees, by the way, that's my life. Now my friend group always circles around what I'm doing. Cause I'm enjoy it too much.

2 (30m 13s):
In, in 2006, you launched a YouTube show. Why wine library, TV, New York times wrote a review of this show like two years in and just want to read what they wrote because it's so funny. It's actually very positive review of the show. But the opening line is when the refined British wine writer, Janice Robinson joined the frenetic, Gary Vaynerchuk last fall on his video blog, wine library, TV. It was as if Helen Mirren had shown up on an episode of dog, the bounty hunter. I love that so much. It's such a great lead. And it's true. I mean, here you are. You're this young guy shouting about wine and you know, Janice Robinson and you know these, and she's probably the greatest wine critic on the planet, but you know, some, and, and initially I have to imagine people in the wine world just thought, who is this person?

4 (31m 5s):
Hello, everybody, welcome to one levy TV. I am your host, Gary bay, nerd, Chuck. And this, my friends is the thunder show. AKA the Internet's most passionate wine.

1 (31m 17s):
I feel like I do wrestling promo videos in perpetuity, but I had the ambition to make it possible for people that were more casual to be influential voices in the wine world, because I thought it would be good for the wine world. Right? Very elegant,

4 (31m 35s):
Very structured, almost like a hot dog flavor in the mid palate. I know stick with me. I'm sorry, but a little hot doggy little gain.

1 (31m 42s):
And all the people that thought I was downgrading wine, not holding it up to the standard that it deserved. They didn't realize that I was creating wine drinkers and interest at scale. And what first initially shook the wine world was not only the fact that I was out of control and talking about wrestling and football and all the things, the wine world would never want to be done especially 15 years ago. But what was happening was I was also showing that I actually knew what I was talking about, which really confused a lot of people. And then most of all, the one that completely was the big one. I was panning wines that we sold.

2 (32m 17s):
You were panning them. You were saying, they're terrible.

1 (32m 19s):
I was saying things like how in the world does this winery believe that they can pass this wine on us for $55, went on a blind tasting. It's a $13 wine and they're hosing us because they have the word Napa in their wine. Wow. And there was three reasons why that blew people away. Hey, everybody in my company from dad down in the first year or two thought, I'd lost my mind,

2 (32m 44s):
Right? These are people you're buying wine from. Well,

1 (32m 46s):
That's the next part? The insular industry had a real problem because my friends would call me and they're like, what are you doing? You know, you've been buying wine for me for 15 years. We're friends. You stayed at my couch in that book. I'm like, John, I love you. I can't lie. It's over. If I do. I remember that being the first two years, just the sheer, why are you doing this? And I remember thinking, how do people not understand why I'm doing this? If I'm chilling up here or not telling my truth, I'm one moment away from being finished. I always thought that if somebody showed up to a dinner or an event gave me a glass of wine, without me knowing what was in it, tell me what I thought.

1 (33m 28s):
And if I didn't say good or bad, you know, you know, if I said, oh, this is delicious. And they're like, ha ha. You said it was garbage. Like, so I was so scared of that, that I just always said what I said.

2 (33m 40s):
So is this interesting? Cause as you're, I mean, this is like, you know, this is a time when, when news, the news media would, would sort of scour the internet for interesting things and say, oh, there's this thing called YouTube. And a, and here's this guy. And he, he does a wine show on this thing called YouTube. And so you started to get invited onto like the news and you got invited to the Conan O'Brien show. And, and I have to assume that you were sort of seen as this curiosity, here's this, this wine guy, who's got a video show on, on the internet

1 (34m 9s):
A hundred percent. And I also was using Twitter and Facebook and my space to promote the show, which started the process of me understanding this new medium.

2 (34m 20s):
What's so interesting to me is that you are building up a profile, a brand around yourself as a wine guy. So, so most people in this is like 2006, 7, 8, 9, 10. They're thinking there's Gary Vaynerchuk. If they knew who you are, he's the wine guy. He's the guy who talks about wine. That is absolutely correct. And normally that is who people stay for the rest of their careers. Did you think at the time that's who I'm going to be? I

1 (34m 51s):
Thought that I am a wine guy. You know, this wine store. I have this wine show. I'm a wine guy. When I started putting out a little business content in 2009, and every comment said, stay in your lane, wine guy. What do you know about business? That's when I was like, wait a minute, these people don't realize you can be a wine guy and a businessman. It was the first time I realized, oh, America is obsessed with narrow and or not wide. And both, yes. I couldn't wrap my head around it. I was like, why are they telling me to stay in my lane? I was a business guy before I was this wine guy.

1 (35m 33s):
They know I was very confused. I was like, no, no. I built this business, this big business with not a lot of money. We didn't get cash infusion and raise capital for wine library. I exploded it from the dirt, with my skills and work ethic and women. They think I'm a wine cartoon character. Like of course I can talk about business. I'm a businessman.

2 (35m 55s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment. Have Gary throws an impromptu party for 500 people in Austin, Texas, and how that party helps him evolve from a wine guy into a marketing guy, stay with us guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this support for this podcast and the following message come from. Klayvio the email and text marketing platform that puts creators in control. If you're the creator of an e-commerce brand, you need a platform that hustles as hard as you do.

2 (36m 38s):
Klayvio unlocks the power of your e-commerce data. So you can personalize and automate messages that keep customers coming back. Creators communicate with Klayvio get started for free@klaviyo.com slash NPR support for this NPR podcast. And the following message come from bubble.io, a no-code platform that enables you to build launch and scale real ideas and products without investing thousands of dollars on engineers or wasting time trying to code it yourself, join over 1 million builders and use bubbles drag and drop tool to develop and launch custom interactive multi-user web apps in hours go to bubble.io/npr.

2 (37m 23s):
And the first 500 listeners will get their first month free on any of bubbles paid plans.

0 (37m 30s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, click up. Did you know that people can spend 40% of their time on non-work-related tasks while at work, as we've shifted to work from home, we can lose our productivity to distraction, disorganization and work app fatigue, click up delivers a flexible platform that brings your tasks, docs, goals, chat, and more in one place used by 200,000 plus teams from companies like Uber, Google, and Webflow. Try click up for free today@clickup.com slash NPR.

5 (38m 6s):
We live in a world, a country, and a moment in time where there's so much important news and it is constantly changing. That's why up first is here for you. It's NPR daily morning news podcast. In about 10 minutes, you can start your day informed, listen to up first on the NPR one app or wherever you get your podcasts.

2 (38m 34s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built I'm guy Roz. So it's 2006 and Gary has launched wine library, TV on YouTube, what he calls the first ever video wine blog. And when he's not doing that, he's finding out everything he can about this new media ecosystem that he's immersed in.

1 (38m 54s):
I started really getting into Silicon valley startup web 2.0 because I was using it to build wine library, TV, and then YouTube sold to Google for $1.7 billion, which at the time was, would raise it. I mean, that would be like waking up tomorrow and hearing that Tik TOK sold to Amazon for $1 trillion, but the kind of number that would stop you were in billions now. So it was one of those moments. And so I read everything that I could on the internet and time and time again, the article said, angel investor, Ron Conway is set to make this on this. And I said, you know, now I'm 32. And I'm like, you know, I've always thought it was a businessman.

1 (39m 34s):
Yeah. But I have something, this.com like I was right about email. I was right about Google ad words. I was right about YouTube. I was maybe, maybe I should be in a,

2 (39m 45s):
And when you, when you start to hear about people like Ron Kahn, when he said, I want to be like that, I mean, where did you go? Who did you see? Yeah, I don't know

1 (39m 52s):
Through the pattern of, I want to be like that. I go into like angel investor enter Google. What the hell is an angel investor? What is investing? What's 20%. Wait a minute. You borrow money from other humans. Like I'm, you know, I was in a cocoon. I surely knew how you know, champagne was made, but I no idea of investing. I didn't take economics class. I didn't even pay attention to wall street. So I said to Eric Kastner, who is my lead developer and no question, one of the most influential people in my career, because he was the developer that showed me web 2.0. And he

2 (40m 26s):
Was working with you on one library. Yeah. He was my

1 (40m 28s):
Lead developer for wine library.com. But our office was half the size, a third of the size of the office I'm sitting in now, which is not very big. So I sat with him and I would look at his screen and be like, what's that? He's the guy that made me stop searching stuff on Yahoo to go to Google. So what ends up happening is Twitter comes out and I really am intuitive to it. Like it just really blew my mind and I got very aggressive on it. I did a very good job. I'm good with people. I figured out how to translate that to the internet. And I'm like, this is it. This is it. This is, I got to do more of this. And now I find my first passion since wine, which is the internet, which is this new internet web 2.0.

1 (41m 12s):
So anyway, nonetheless, now I know I want to know web two. Oh, so I want to go to a conference. So me and Eric Kastner go to London to something called the future of web apps follows

2 (41m 23s):
In 2000, this in 2007, 2006,

1 (41m 25s):
Seven. I want to give you the right answer. But then we sit in the crowd and I'm listening and I'm blown away by these people. And they were nice. And they were like hippie techie, a tiny bit business, but I was like, this is it. And then I went to south by Southwest and I threw a wine party. I remember at south by, cause I just sent wine down there just in case like would need

2 (41m 51s):
It. And you, what you got, you, you had like a hotel suite and you just advertised

1 (41m 54s):
It or something. I wasn't in that place in my life. So instead of throwing this wine party in the suite, I charmed the person at the front desk of the Hilton in Austin and said, could I just use this room over here? And she was like, sure. And then I tweeted out, by the way, I had 5,514 is what I remember followers on Twitter at the time. And everybody at south by they thought I was the Kardashians, right? Like they couldn't believe how many followers I had. This is how early it is. And so like 500 people showed up to this Hilton and like

2 (42m 27s):
500 people came to a conference room at the Hilton to have free wine.

1 (42m 30s):
It was actually like the closed restaurant. So there was enough room, oh God, it was a scene. Actually, I'm going to Google after this interview, the photo cause the photo exists. And that was kind of my coming out party. And it really was.

2 (42m 44s):
I mean, in the sense that it kind of catapulted you into the tech world, right? I mean, Twitter and Facebook were pretty young at the time. And I, and I guess after that party, you were, you were kind of able to walk into those places and meet people. Yeah.

1 (42m 58s):
A month later I flew to San Francisco and met Chris Messina for a coffee

2 (43m 5s):
And Christmas season. Just to be clear, he is the guy who invented the hashtag. That is correct.

1 (43m 9s):
He was absolutely the guy who tweeted, let's all use a hashtag to give context to our tweet. He was a connected guy in the game. As a developer, the hashtag has been around. He kind of commercialized it as a proxy. I'm sure that the hashtag was being used in nerd ICQ and other things. But anyway, while I was having coffee with him, he's like, do you want to go to the Twitter office? It's right down here. I'm like, of course we go there, there are nine people there. There's Jack there's EV and I get to talk into Blaine, cook the original CTL a year later. Blaine's at south by 2008. Now maybe he's leaving Twitter. He tells me not only is he leaving, but he has to sell all his shares.

1 (43m 52s):
Cause that's how religious he is about his passions and ideological points of view. The next thing I know, I am negotiating to buy a portion of Blaine Cooke, the original CTOs founder shares of Twitter. And now I'm in the game

2 (44m 8s):
And this is based on the money that you cause you, I mean you, in your thirties, you start to make some money because of the wine business

1 (44m 15s):
Here. The hugest part, I never made more than $80,000 a year. Even though I built this huge business, cause it's a family business and we don't take salaries and I don't own the business. And I know, I don't know,

2 (44m 26s):
Two $60 million. You're making 80,000 a year. That's right. Okay. Because

1 (44m 30s):
My dad was too, because that's like, and again, this is where true first-generation immigrant family businesses will understand that I'm dead serious about this, like an immigrant business that is built by a certain type of immigrant that picks business over luxury. Right? My dad's, my dad drove a truck that had a hole in the bottom of it. Right? Like he's the anti show off,

2 (44m 52s):
But how did you have money to buy into Twitter? I put

1 (44m 54s):
$34,000 into Twitter. Okay. The reason I had that and then I also put money into Facebook and then put money into Tumblr, those my first three investments. So

2 (45m 4s):
Simply because you went out there and you had met,

1 (45m 7s):
Yes. Because God, you have to understand this is 2000 6, 7, 8. It was early. People didn't know what Facebook and Twitter war.

2 (45m 13s):
So you, it wasn't, it wasn't huge amounts. It was, well, these are still big, but this wasn't like millions of dollars you had to spend. These were in the tens of thousands of dollars. Correct. And that's all you had. That's right. And then I guess people start to get to know you as like a social media presence or like a person with opinions about, about social media. And there was a video that you posted at one point, I think on YouTube. Was it, is that right?

1 (45m 38s):
Actually it was on Fiddler. V I D D L E r.com platform that was competing with YouTube at the time. Right. It was a single video I made titled Facebook should worry about this thing called Twitter. And it was me laying on a couch in my house with my, remember the flip cam. Oh yeah. Yeah. So I take the camera to my face and say, Facebook should be worried about this thing, Twitter, I've been on Twitter, this new thing, you got to check it out. And I got to tell you, I know my brother and all the college kids are on this thing, Facebook, but there's something here with Twitter. And a couple of weeks later, I get an email from Dave Morin who was a top executive there at Facebook at Facebook.

1 (46m 25s):
And he says, you don't happen to be in California on this. I was like, yeah, ironically, I'm coming up. Of course I was going to come and talk to Facebook. Right. So I go and there's 200 people there, 150. I mean, the company was tiny. And by the way, when you,

2 (46m 40s):
When you went to Facebook and you, and they asked you to just speak, did you like write a speech or did you just kind of come with notes? Like, did you like sit down and start preparing something

1 (46m 50s):
Pure improv, no notes, no decks. And so after that moment, I just started making business videos in the first 50 business videos of random ideas I had about social media. We called it web 2.0, back then we're met with 90% comments, stay in your lane line, boy, stay in your lane.

2 (47m 8s):
And you were putting us up on YouTube and Viddler

1 (47m 10s):
Because it had tagging and you could click to the part of it. And I was filming myself with the flip cam for the business stuff, Eric Castro and Chris Mott, they would just, you know, click the button on the camera. I would do my thing, no editing, no lighting, no microphone. And they would go upload it and post it

2 (47m 29s):
And is all happening, I guess, around like 2009. And I guess right around this time, you decided to start a digital ad agency, like a, like a branding agency, which would become Vayner media. But you were still doing the wine business at the same time. Is that, is that right?

1 (47m 46s):
Yes. From 2009 to 2011, I moonlighted in both businesses because wine library wasn't ready for me to leave and VaynerMedia wasn't big enough for me to be forced to. And so I was, you know, doing both

2 (47m 60s):
And the idea with VaynerMedia was, look, I know this space and, and I like, I'm a native in this space. I can help brands figure this out.

1 (48m 7s):
Yeah. Yeah. The idea in 2009 was how does Pepsi and Campbell's and the NHL still not have a Twitter and Facebook account? It's 2009. Right? I already knew that I wanted to work with my brother. Who's 11 years younger than me at a J maybe I should start a company ages graduating. Now I don't have a great idea. You know, we might want to do this fantasy sports thing that would have been good. We might want to do this deal of the day, Groupon living social thing. That probably would have been good. Like the ideas were good, but Vayner media was practical, Gillette pita $60,000 for a project that we thought that was a trillion dollars. Yeah, I'm sure. And so we got to work and what we knew was we wanted to be in this space.

1 (48m 49s):
We want it to be able to pay our rent and we wanted to be able to learn and that nobody loves a good halftime adjustment more than me, that whatever we were doing, helping brands do social, it didn't matter to me to overthink what 13 years from now is going to look like, because I would figure it out along the way. And that's why it was so easy to start. I think people are so rigid. So in need of predicting the future, that it cripples them from actually doing, I agree.

2 (49m 19s):
So, so you, your brother started VaynerMedia and you start to get some accounts and you basically were, were, were using the playbook that you had developed with the, yes,

1 (49m 28s):
The playbook was put out content that people actually want. Don't do television mentality where you're forcing things down, listen to the comments, engage in the comments, follow people, back, use context of culture. So, Hey, Pepsi, you know, it'd be really cool is if you follow Friday normal people that would be stunning to people. And that's what they did. Victor Lee, who was at Hasbro, Hey Victor, I know you're launching this new Furby, the reboot of Furby, which was big a decade earlier. Why don't we do it on a Facebook fan page instead of television. And we post a Furby comment that says, spell your name backwards by writing the word, spell your name backwards in backwards.

1 (50m 9s):
So it was that, that kind of work that was working. It was internet native. And at the time every brand was completely dismissing social media or trying to do print radio or television, like content on social media. Yeah.

2 (50m 26s):
This is the time like 2000 9, 10 11, where companies started to hire quote unquote social media gurus. Was, was that who you guys were thought of or, or is that like, it feels like, oh, we'll go to those, these social media gurus.

1 (50m 41s):
Yes. But what was different was even though I was the guru of the guru, cause of gift of gab had the most Twitter followers. My book was the New York times bestseller. I knew then that I didn't want to be Gary Vaynerchuk, the guru. I wanted to build a business. So you would be hiring Vayner media, not Gary Vaynerchuk. Of course I would come to the meeting. Of course I would put my strategies. Of course I would talk to you. But I believe a lot of people in ad world thought that this was like the Gary V show when it never was. And, and it never will be.

2 (51m 12s):
Let me go back to, you mentioned your book and I want to, I want to talk about that for a sec because I mean, you were, you, you got a book contract, I think like a 10 book deal to write books about, I guess, about entrepreneurship. Your first book was called crush it, why now is the time to cash in on your passion? And I mean, how did you start to get attention that enabled you to attract the book deal? There

1 (51m 33s):
Was a web 2.0 conference at the Javits center in New York. And I give this talk and the talk was basically crushed it, which is, does everybody understand what's happening here in 2007? Like, this is it. We can do stuff. You could do a blog about Smurfs and make a hundred thousand dollars. Like, that's literally what I said. I said, Smurf it up. I said, do something about Alf. I was like, I'm doing it about wine. If you read crush it today, I basically laid out 14 years ago, influencer marketing and it landed. And by the time I got to the green room where I had my phone, cause I didn't even bring them with me on stage those days, I had three emails from penguin Putnam from Wiley, from like publishers saying, I'm in the crowd right now.

1 (52m 16s):
Can you turn what you just said into a book. Wow.

2 (52m 20s):
This is around the time when Tim Ferriss also released. Yes.

1 (52m 23s):
Yes. That was about a year earlier, maybe two years earlier. I'm not sure exact timing. And hence here comes crush it, which is, you know, the economy's crap, but you can do it. You can be on the internet, you can start a blog or a YouTube show.

2 (52m 38s):
You were in 2008. You were not a rich guy. No, you were making a living, but you were making a living from the wine business, but it was your passion. Yes. But

1 (52m 46s):
Book writing was my most lucrative part of my life in 2009, 10, 11, 12. That's where I made most of my money. Yeah. Because I was making nothing at VaynerMedia. I was still making 80 and maybe, you know, to be fair, I might've gotten to a hundred by then at wine library, just because at 30, I got a little testy with my dad. I'm like, yo, I need some more money.

2 (53m 8s):
It it's a hundred thousand dollars. Yeah. So you and your brother are building VaynerMedia and it's growing. And then in 2014, you're still running VaynerMedia. You helped co-found resi the reservation platform. And, but did you guys raise money for that? By the

1 (53m 21s):
Way, did through mug the fund that I started Vayner RSE. And so we incubated Rezi in that fund at some. Right.

2 (53m 30s):
So you didn't have to answer to investors who were like, well, how are you going to do that?

1 (53m 33s):
I was the investor in that scenario. Yeah.

2 (53m 36s):
As you, I mean, as you kind of a growing Vayner media and, and building it out in different extensions and then started other things. What about your personal life? Did you get married? Did you like married two kids? How kids today, by the way, 11

1 (53m 52s):
And eight. And so, you know, like people think, because I talk about work ethic as a important variable that I'm trying to burn myself out and die at Fort. Like, people are very literal, but you know, I come from the old school. Right. Like my family life is like, that's like mine, that's important to me. I come from real family dynamics and it's very easy for me to have that prioritize that value that. So, yeah. I mean, like I live like a real life. I'm not a reality TV star.

2 (54m 30s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment. Gary talks about his latest, all consuming passion and NFT project called V friends. Oh, and did I mention he wants to buy the New York jets? We'll talk a little bit about that too. Stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this. This message comes from NPR sponsor, the hopeful neighborhood project. What if we all used our unique gifts and talents to pursue the common good of our own neighborhoods? The hopeful neighborhood project is building a collaborative network, committed to improving neighborhood wellbeing.

2 (55m 14s):
Their team and free resources can support you as you imagine the possibilities for a more hopeful neighborhood, right where you live, visit hopeful neighborhood.org to connect with a neighborhood project coach and learn more support for this podcast. And the following message come from ZipRecruiter. According to Forbes, Jim's mom and pop stores, and more are set to go on a hiring spree to meet the pent-up demand. As businesses reopened, millions of jobs will need to be filled to fill these roles fast, turn to ZipRecruiter. Their matching technology allows you to find qualified candidates and invite your top choices. To apply four out of five employers, find a quality candidate within the first day.

2 (55m 56s):
Try ZipRecruiter for free at ziprecruiter.com/built. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So we're already up to the present day. And on the day we did this interview in early may. Gary was gearing up to launch his latest project. It's called V friends. And it's a community for buying Gary's own brand of NFTs fungible tokens, which are basically unique pieces of digital property. And to build the friends Gary's team created about 10,000 electronic trading cards that can be redeemed for real things in the real world, like say a fishing trip with Gary.

2 (56m 41s):
And he believes that if they do it right, the friends could be a model for how other people could get into NFTs.

1 (56m 50s):
And I believe that it will be the project that every celebrity influencer author podcaster expert personality human will look at as a blueprint of how to do an NFT project properly. For me, if this thing does $30 million in Ethereum or a dollar, if it becomes the blueprint that I just said, I hope it is. Or doesn't, it's completely irrelevant since January 7th. It is the only thing I care about to try. I have to try to launch this thing I put in hours and hours of thinking and work, but also gleaned off of twenty-five years of experience off of the back of a decade plus now a building a community and knowing how to do better for them than me and in a world right now, where everyone's putting out an NFT project as a gold rush for a quick dollar, I'm building something that's going to benefit my community.

1 (57m 41s):
That's not anything other than deep curiosity, if I can pull it off,

2 (57m 47s):
Right? I mean, if you can pull it off because there are, you know, there are skeptics, right? There are people who think that the NFT concept is super risky. Like maybe not a good investment of time or money.

1 (57m 59s):
Yeah. I mean, I think 99% of the projects that are being launched right now are gold rushes. And they're going to be projects that fail and people are going to buy tokens from celebrities, leagues, different things, and the price is going to go down and they'll probably even be an NFT winter, call it a tipping point next year. This, I don't know when that I don't know, but what I know is supply and demand. And what I know is human psychology. And what I know is pattern recognition, and then what's going to happen guys, internet 1999, the stocks declined because those companies were built on gold rush greed, but the technology changed our lives forever. And if T technology is going to change our lives forever, this 12 to 24 months will create incredibly bad projects that don't bring back value to the person that supported it.

1 (58m 46s):
But I plan on making my project, for example, the Amazon and eBay of that era, Amazon and eBay were during that March, April crash of 2000 stock. And if you were smart enough to see the bigger picture and bought those stocks for dollars, very nice things happened. Yeah. And that's, what's going to happen again,

2 (59m 8s):
Gary, it kind of makes my head spin, hearing, hearing all of this because this NFT project is like one of many businesses you have going on. Right? I mean, I mean, you've launched many companies and sold at least two. I mean, I think a resume, you sold to Amex empathy, wine direct to consumer wine business, and then sold that. But you've got faint RX and you've got digital content production studios, and you've got a talent agency, a sports agency. And I wonder whether you have to do all of these things that it's like stimuli that you can't, you, you have to keep moving, creating, like, as some people would say, how do you do all that stuff? How do you focus on all those things?

2 (59m 49s):
It's impossible. But I wonder whether you actually have to do it to, to feel alive

1 (59m 54s):
A hundred. You you're absolutely right. To me when people are like, how do you do all those things? I'm like, how would I ever focus on one thing now? I love focusing on one thing. It is a game for me. I don't mind losing. Nobody talks about Vayner live right or Vayner experiences. That was a division failed, Vayner sampling. I still want to do it. Hip hop at lunch, dead, the first version of the publishing company dead. So I lose a lot. I just don't care.

2 (1h 0m 27s):
I remember interviewing Richard Branson Peterson on the show and you know, talking about Virgin Cola and some of the other Virgin vodka, just, you know, failures that, but, but he tried them yet and he must be somebody who, because

1 (1h 0m 38s):
It's more, it's more fun.

2 (1h 0m 40s):
Yeah. All right. I want to ask you about the jets. You're lifelong fan of the jets. You've been very open about wanting to buy them one. This, what does the Johnson family think about this? Have they ever, have you talked to them about it?

1 (1h 0m 51s):
I've never had a conversation with Chris or Woody Johnson about this, mainly because I don't like audacity.

2 (1h 0m 57s):
You don't like audacity. Stick with me here. You've been publicly on the record saying you want to buy the jets. Sharing.

1 (1h 1m 4s):
My public dream feels natural to me. Okay. Me rolling into a meeting with the Johnson's, where I'm nowhere close to being able to purchase the New York jets feels audacious. And so my greatest joy is the hunt to buy the New York jets. Would I like it to happen? Sure. It has absolutely been a fun goal of mine. It sucks because I know I'm patient and I know how I'm going about doing it, which makes me feel that I'm going to get it done in 25 to 27 years. The part that bothers me is like how deep I want my parents to be there. You know, can I, can I, that's tough.

1 (1h 1m 45s):
Cause I know I won't deviate from my process. Otherwise there's no chance that I get it, but I have this ticker that I'm not in control of. And obviously I'm not in control of a trillion things, but I'm pretty sure if I pull that off somewhere in 25 years, that 40 years of this energy yelling about it. And then it actually happening is probably good for a Disney movie. And why not?

2 (1h 2m 11s):
Here's something I'm interested in, which is, and, and I've talked about this before, which is I don't engage in social media too much. I do it. And I've got, you know, I don't have masses of followers like, like you, but I don't, it doesn't feel good when people are cruel or mean, then, you know, you see this as some celebrities they'll, they'll drop off Twitter after a while. Cause it just can't take it anymore. You get a lot of hate on social media because you've got millions of followers across your channels.

1 (1h 2m 42s):
I'm a human being, right. You know, somebody decided to take time out of their day to spit venom at me. And, and I would never in the world think that that was a use of time. That would be interesting to me, even if I disagreed with somebody who didn't like someone. So first I think where is that person? And that doesn't mean, I think that person sucks or should be deleted. I don't block people there. It's just very interesting curiosity, intrigue of man, that sucks. Like, Hey, let me look at what I posted. Did I do something there that would so engage someone to do that B there's a very big part of how I handle this.

1 (1h 3m 27s):
I believe that a lot of my friends who aren't able to handle it, which has many enjoy the accolades too much. I believe one of the reasons I can deal with this is I can't hear them cheering for me, which allows me to deal with the booing. If I disappeared tomorrow, God forbid I'll get nine nice hours on social media of people sharing clips. If I even affected them. And then everybody will move on their daily life except for a very small group of people. When you realize you mean nothing, but you aspire to meet as much as humanly possible, you create a very interesting perspective framework that makes a lot of things easy.

2 (1h 4m 13s):
I once asked Jimmy Fallon in an interview, how does he deal with the, just being on all the time when he's in public? Like, you know, cause he walks to work right from his apartment and he's walking down the street and people are high-fiving him. And, and he said, goes to a restaurant and people are kind of always around him. And I was at an event with him and he was just getting mobbed and he loves it. He loves it all the time. It's just so natural. He loves talking to people and it's part of what makes him so approachable, but I am an introvert. So when I see that I'm like, oh my God, I am, I need to just go into a room for a while by myself. Do you ever want to just jump off the hamster wheel for a couple of weeks and just not be around people?

1 (1h 4m 55s):
My answer is the same as balance. I love it. The airport, the cab, the high five, the jets games. I love it. You know why? I can't believe it. I'm so grateful. And by the way, I'm not a comedian. I'm not a supermodel. I'm not an athlete. People like me because of things I'm saying that I'm hoping will help them or, or giving out information that did help them. I figured out tick-tock, I'm telling my people, I figure out and FTS, I'm telling my people like I'm getting it. Not from fame. I'm getting it from someone, admiring it or being grateful. It's an incredible energy. On the flip side, I actually completely understand why people in first glance in an Instagram feed of a 32nd clip at my height of, at a feeling and conviction will be like, fuck this guy.

1 (1h 5m 48s):
But I also know there are people that walk around the world that are adored that know as people get closer to them, they hate them more. I have

2 (1h 5m 56s):
The reverse. I mean, it sounds like the people that are your detractors, your, your view is like, come on, come meet me, come talk to me. You're not mad at them. You're not like definitely

1 (1h 6m 5s):
Not mad at them. I understand them. I'm a lot when the lights are on, oh, you've never seen me. And you're, and, and you see a 32nd video on Instagram where I dropped seven F bombs and nine seconds. And you have no context for me. And, and to your point, like even your reaction on my audacity, like I'm not confused, what audacity and conviction and even disgusting word ego and all these things that people might think. But, but I just know the truth. Like I think of myself as an athlete, when I'm on the field, I will do what it takes to win the game in the rules. But when the game is over guy, I'm going right up to my competitor, who I tried to rip his fucking eyeballs out and saying, Hey, how's Karen.

1 (1h 6m 50s):
And can I give you a donation to your charity? So when I see athletes at the end of the game, hugging each other, after they were bashing each other and I'm pissed because I'm like, don't hug them. They just need us. I'm fucking angry as a fan. But I understand them brother, because even though I know I'm competing with people day to day or this and that, I'm on the field. When people see me on social media, I'm on the field, you are

2 (1h 7m 13s):
Obviously super passionate about the new project that you're building around NFTs and there will be other things. And, and you have this reputation of somebody who'd never stops working, right? Never, ever stops, constantly working constantly on the go. First of all, do you think that's true because it seems to be true.

1 (1h 7m 33s):
No, I don't. I don't think it's true. I try to communicate. Here's the problem, right? No matter how many times I make a video, I can easily say with the same conviction, as I've said, everything else, guys sleep eight, nine hours a day. Yet, even though hundreds of thousand people will hear that somebody will come out and be like, Hey, he sleeps four hours a day. It's not like people see what they're looking for. Right. You know, I am high energy cause I'm a passionate and excited and optimistic and enjoy it. And that comes through. I really like work and I am very addicted. No question to the notion of legacy. I want to leave a mark.

1 (1h 8m 14s):
It's nice. Why not? Why not? Why not try to give the world more than it gave me.

2 (1h 8m 19s):
There's a renewed or a new kind of view on, and I, I hesitate to use this term because I think it's a lazy term. But for shorthand purposes, I'll use it hustle culture. There's a kind of a, a new or a different perspective on it now. And there's a lot of criticism about, and now we get about our show too, even though I don't believe that's what we do. You get a lot of criticism for promoting hustle, culture, this idea that anybody can succeed and make a living off their passion. I know that's oversimplifying. It's not what you said.

1 (1h 8m 55s):
No, no, it's not what I say. Not only, it's not what I say, right? It's not what you say. Well, I mean, everybody gets right. I say in 2008, when Krusha came out, the economy's crap, everyone lost their jobs. Yeah. You have the ability to use the internet to build a business around things you like. That was factual in hindsight. Yeah. It doesn't mean that I'm a guy. I'm not the secret. If you just work, it will come. Like it's just not true. And nor have I ever said that people are so incredibly selective. I don't even use the word hustle anymore. A word that I loved my whole life because I believed in grit. And I believe in tenacity.

1 (1h 9m 36s):
And I believe that work ethic is one of the variables of success, but nobody read the parts of the book where I say make $60,000 a year and be happy. Let there be no confusion. I'm not driven by people making money, buying BMWs, having, you know, private planes. But I think there's a certain group of people on earth that love building businesses. The way people love, golfing, love being a mother, love, being a Dr. Love. And that I'm one of those people. Yeah. Do

2 (1h 10m 8s):
You, when, when you think about your, your journey from, you know, childhood and in Queens and, and your dad opening that liquor store and the work you did and, and where you kind of came to now, how much of that do you attribute to, to you, your values, your hard work and how much, oh, a lot. Do you attribute to luck? Well, it's

1 (1h 10m 34s):
Tough. I worry that people use the word luck to eliminate accountability on their own efforts and they give up and cease mental control and don't realize how much control one has in their lives. So I, I play very carefully with the word luck because I think people love to use it as an excuse engine. However, I think it's an incredibly powerful reality. I mean, you know, to me, the luck starts and stops with Tamara Vaynerchuk to be the first born son of that woman is the greatest, lucky thing that ever happened to me, the way she molded me and navigated me nothing in the outside world had any chance of competing with that.

1 (1h 11m 19s):
Yup. Yup. You know, I've never said that before that way I was in a cocoon of love and accountability. You're punished, you got F's. But she made me feel like I could do anything. And so if you ask me what drives you right now, and I've only realized this in the last five years, which is why I'm like, oh, that's right. That's what I was doing in my twenties. I'm so damn curious about how good I am at this. Hmm.

2 (1h 11m 46s):
But it's, it's interesting because when you say that and articulate that, right. If somebody read a transcript of you saying that without hearing the tone in your voice and the cadence, they might think God, that guy's full of himself. But when you say it and you hear it, it's clear that that's not how you're trying to express it. You are, it sounds like you're almost amazed that you just had that just came to you. You just

1 (1h 12m 6s):
Gratitude the way you just articulated at if this was read your douche. But if you listen to this with all the nuances of context, it feels right. And honestly, I like that. And by the way, could you imagine a better life? Could you imagine a better life? That's

2 (1h 12m 24s):
Gary Vaynerchuk, CEO of Vayner media, author of crush. It co-founder of Rezi launcher of many, many other projects, too numerous to name. And one day possibly the proud owner of the New York jets. By the way, I had a great conversation with Gary and our virtual, how I built this summit back in may. He had all sorts of incredible insights about marketing and time management and lots more. So be on the lookout for that. It will be in your podcast feed on Thursday, August 5th. And thanks so much for listening to the show this week, this episode was produced by Liz Metzker with music composed by REM teen era bluey.

2 (1h 13m 5s):
It was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Derek gales. Our production staff includes Casey Herman, JC Howard, Rachel Faulkner James DeLuise, Julia Carney, Farrah safari, and Annalise Ober. Our intern is Harrison VJ Choi, and Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Roz. And you've been listening to how I built this.

0 (1h 13m 33s):
This is NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor. HP HP has always known that good ideas come from bringing different people together, diverse viewpoints, help uncover blind spots and see possibilities. Find out how you can join HPS group of diverse thinkers at hp.com/jobs.