0 (0s):
So before we start the show, I want to tell you about a few, how I built this a live shows you can attend on the east coast. This fall supported by American express. First, I'll be heading to New York on September 10th, where I'll be talking with Christina Tosi of milk bar at town hall. And then I'll head to Washington DC on September 12th with Tristan Walker of Walker and company at Lincoln theater, you can get your tickets and find out more about our live events, including a third east coast show that we'll be announcing very soon@nprpresents.org. And I hope to see you there. I also want to let you know that tickets are almost entirely sold out for NPRs. How I built this summit happening this October in San Francisco, it's also supported by American express.

0 (46s):
There will be a bunch of incredible founders there from companies like Spanx, Instagram, slack, JetBlue, and many, many others. You can find out more information and get your tickets before they're gone@summitdotnpr.org. And one of the other founders that will be there is Marsia Kilgore. You know, some of us are lucky enough to have one really good idea. That's worth building into a business, but Marsia Gilgore she had five, five ideas, all different, all of which turned into incredibly successful companies. This is an unbelievable story. And I can't wait to talk to her more about it at the summit in San Francisco. We first ran this episode in January of last year.

0 (1m 28s):
If you haven't heard it is so crazy. If you have heard it, it is totally worth rehearing it one more time. Here it is.

2 (1m 39s):
I treated myself to a facial after an economics exam, and I had saved 40 or $50 to go to this place that was supposed to be the, be all and end all of facials. And I remember walking into that place and the esthetician looked through the lamp at my skin and she actually went, oh, what a pity? And I thought to myself, this is not a treat. And I left feeling so horrendous. And I remember just seeing my reflection and my face was kind of raw and blotchy and thinking if I ever had a place like that, I would never make my customers feel bad about themselves,

0 (2m 22s):
Ron and PR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Raz and on today's show how an 18 year old named Marcy a Kilgore moved from a small town in Canada to New York with just 300 bucks and turned herself into a serial entrepreneur, the founder of five companies, including bliss, cosmetics fit flops. According to the small business administration, there's a 50% chance that your business will fail within the first five years.

0 (3m 4s):
So there's some things that entrepreneurs do to maximize the chances that their businesses will succeed, like plan and research the marketplace, the way Arthur blank and his partner, Bernie Marcus did for nearly two years before they launched the home Depot or the way Jenn Hyman from rent. The runway did tons of market research and proof of concept testing. Long before she went to investors. All of this raised the odds that these companies would make it past five years, which brings us to today's show because this is truly a story about someone who never had a bigger plan. Marcia Kilgore didn't set out to become an insanely successful serial entrepreneur.

0 (3m 47s):
She never sat down and said, Hey, I'm going to start a day spa and a line of skincare products called bliss. And then go on to start four more companies. She was a personal trainer who had a side hustle giving facials. And what happened to her happened organically. It just evolved into something bigger and bigger. Marsia actually grew up in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada, go ahead. Find it on the map. It is a very cold place even by Canadian standards. Anyway, a pretty middle-class home. Dad was a real estate agent. Mom took care of the house until age 11 when Marcy, his dad died after battling cancer.

0 (4m 27s):
So her mom went back to work and Marsia well, she started working too, which is how she became an aerobics instructor and then got really into fitness. So into it that at age 15, she decided to become a bodybuilder.

2 (4m 43s):
Yeah, I mean, I could probably bench press 185 pounds. I could probably squat 300. It was, it was actually a skill and a hobby that parlayed itself into, you know, what I could do later. So it w it was helpful.

0 (4m 59s):
How did you even get into that?

2 (5m 0s):
Well, okay. So I think I've always loved a big challenge. And when I was living in Saskatoon, which was a small city and there wasn't really much to do my sister, my middle sister started dating a guy whose brother owned a gym. And he said, Hey, you should come down to the gym and workout. I used to run a lot. And I thought, okay, well, you know, let me go down to the gym and check it out. It's something to do because really, you know, Saskatoon, 10 months of the year, it's pretty cold. And there are only two television channels back then. So it was, it was pretty dry. So I went down to the gym and I remember them hooking me up with this female bodybuilder.

2 (5m 43s):
Her name was Sherry something, and she was missing Canada bodybuilding at the time. And they gave me a couple of sessions with her that learned how to do all sorts of, you know, different weightlifting moves and routines. And she worked me so hard. It was a basement gym, and I could not walk up the stairs to get out of the gym. And I just thought, well, you know, this is an interesting hobby. I've got this free membership. Let me do it.

0 (6m 8s):
I, I don't know if this is a myth or not, but apparently you became like a, a weight class bodybuilding champion in Kansas.

2 (6m 18s):
It's not a myth I won. Let's see, miss Southern Saskatchewan middleweight. I think I also want, now don't laugh out loud. Ms. Moose jaw Moose jaw. I said, don't laugh out loud, but you know, it was great because I could also, I mean, I taught aerobics when I was a teenager as well, just to earn extra money. I waitressed, you know, it sort of lent itself to many different things that, that were useful

0 (6m 46s):
And, and was, was, was the idea. I mean, did you, did you have jobs and did you earn money in part because you, I don't know, felt like there was some financial insecurity at home and that you, I don't know if it was a way for you to kind of have some control over your own financial situation.

2 (7m 4s):
I think that I knew my mother was under a lot of stress, you know, just, just from being a single mother and trying to make ends meet. And I didn't want to be a drain. And if I could pay my own way in terms of at least not asking her for any money, then that was something that made me feel, you know, that it was, it was relieving stress from her. Certainly I never made enough to pay the rent, but I didn't have to ask her for anything.

0 (7m 31s):
Okay. So you're in high school and doing a bunch of jobs. You're a bodybuilder, you're teaching a robotics. So you're already like a, like a fitness type person as a teen. And then what, what was your plan after high school? Did you, did you go off to college?

2 (7m 43s):
Well, when I was 17, my sister who was living in New York at the time, so this was my oldest sister, Jodi. She told me that if I could get accepted to Columbia university and get, you know, pass all the different entrance exams, then she would pay my tuition.

0 (8m 1s):
Wow. How, how was she able to do that?

2 (8m 4s):
She was a model. She was living in New York city and making decent cash, decent cash. So I came to New York, I had $300 in my pocket and I was supposed to go to Columbia and fat year. Unfortunately, my sister's financial situation was not as strong as she thought it was going to be. And so as I hadn't applied for a student loan for a foreign student early enough, it was too late for me to get alone. So I kind of was in New York with my 300 bucks and no school to go to. And I had to figure it out.

0 (8m 38s):
And this was like 19 87, 19 87. Wow. So you, you don't have money for school. Got no work. So what'd you do

2 (8m 50s):
You know, this is the interesting thing. So I started, you know, when I first arrived in New York, I got myself a gym membership with the little money that I did have, because of course, once working out is part of your life. You really have to go and you have to go pretty much every day for an hour or else you start to kind of lose that endorphin dependency. And so there was a really great gym called better bodies. And I met a film director there named Douglas Kieve. We chatted while we were working out. And at one point he said, Hey, do you think you could be my personal trainer? Because I want to look more like you, he was very tall and kind of lean. And I was probably a little bit more muscular, but not bulky.

2 (9m 30s):
And so he wanted to have a physique like mine. And so he was my very first personal training client and then other people through him, he introduced me to, and I started to train them. And my sister then realized that I was a personal trainer and started to refer models and actresses and actors and stuntmen and, you know, all kinds of people to me. So I ended up having, you know, quite a collection of interesting personalities as personal training clients and started to build up the money that I needed to go to some part-time classes at NYU.

0 (10m 4s):
So, I mean, and did you have a plan? Like, did you think, all right, I'll do this, I'll take some classes at NYU. I'll be a personal trainer. And then, but like, long-term, I'm going to do this or that. Did you, was that even like part of the equation, you know,

2 (10m 18s):
Guy, I had no plan. I think I was in survival mode. I knew that doing personal training, getting up at 5:00 AM and sometimes having your last client at nine 30 at night, and then sleeping maybe five and a half hours and starting all over again and maybe going to a class somewhere during the day that was unsustainable. And I used to fall asleep in my economics classes because I was so tired. And then I started to develop quite a bad case of acne. And it was probably because New York can be so humid. I was running around all day and you want it to look decent. So you'd put makeup on and then go do a, you know, a personal training session with someone where you're sweating and then you would put more makeup on because you didn't have time to go home and wash your face in between that client, the next client.

2 (11m 4s):
So my skin got really bad. And one summer I treated myself to a facial after an economics exam that I took at NYU. And I had actually walked up town. I had saved 40 or $50 to go to this place that was supposed to be the be-all and end-all of facials. And I remember going in there and I, I had been under so much stress trying to write this exam, studying really hard, working all the time, you know, paying for everything, myself and I, this was supposed to be a real treat. And I remember walking into that place, laying down on the table and the esthetician looked through the lab at my skin and

4 (11m 40s):
She actually went,

2 (11m 42s):
And then she said, what a pity? And I thought to myself, okay, okay, this is not a treat. She actually then proceeded to go into the common area of that spot and bring in this bar manager, who was a gentleman who came in and they both looked through the lamp at my skin and sort of test and oh, know what a disaster and I left feeling so horrendous. And I remember taking the subway home and as the subway pulled up in front of me, you know, they have the stainless steel side. So you get your reflection. And I remember just seeing my reflection and my face was kind of raw and blotchy and thinking if I

0 (12m 22s):
Ever

2 (12m 23s):
Had a place like that, I would never make my customers feel bad about themselves. And I remember I decided to take a crash course in skincare, and I took this, I think it was probably three or four weeks crash course in skincare, you know, basic skincare and how to do facials. And I started to convince my personal training clients after I would take them jogging or give them a yoga class or whatever it was to let me practice facials on them.

0 (12m 55s):
And, and, and like, and you would have all the, you know, I don't, I mean, I haven't had a facial done ever. I'm just going to shot, put that out there. W were you just like showing up in people's apartments with, with like all the supplies you'd need to give a, like a facial, like I'm trying to picture this, you where you lugging around like potions and lotions and things like that.

2 (13m 18s):
Oh yeah. I mean, this was a huge bag of stuff. First of all, I carried a steamer, which is a very outdated piece of equipment. I would never steam somebody's face. Now back then it was what everybody did. And that was kind of the method that we learned. And we thought that was good for the skin. And, you know, since then we've learned, but it's not so good for the skin. So carry the steamer, which was probably like a small coffee machine. And then I would have probably 20 tubes and jars and cotton pads and towels. And, you know, it was sort of like a giant backpack, right? If you were going to go hike the, you know, the trail, the Pacific coast trail, if you were going to go hike that I was probably carrying around that much stuff, because that would then also bring my personal training equipment, which probably, you know, 30 kilos.

0 (14m 7s):
Wow. So you, so you had this, like this sort of side thing going while you were also a personal trainer and I mean, at what point did you sort of start asking people to pay you for facials?

2 (14m 22s):
Well, I don't think that any of my personal training clients, I don't think I ever charged them for a facial. And then at one point, and it was kind of one of those beautiful organic things where I was doing a lot of young models. I was their personal trainer and there was an agency that used to send me all of the young models who were a little bit out of shape to get them in shape. And that agency had a couple of girls who were the bookers, and one of them had quite bad skin and started to come for facials. And then she started to send me all of the young models who had bad skin. And I started to really gain a reputation for being able to clear up that skin.

2 (15m 4s):
At which point I got other people coming in who were not necessarily just, you know, young, new models, but in fact, more well-known individuals who happen to live downtown, hear about me through the grapevine and, you know, started coming in and paying for that service.

0 (15m 22s):
And, and, and where, where are you doing this? At this point?

2 (15m 25s):
It started out my apartment and then I rented a tiny little space, probably I'm going to say 300 square feet. And it was just a one room studio. I had little closet where people could change and a chair where they could wait. And that was what I had and people would come in for their facials there.

0 (15m 43s):
So you were probably, you were, we were constantly working, but it sounds like you were, I mean, you were doing pretty well. I mean, you had money as a personal coming in from your personal training. You had money coming in from the facials. Like that's, I mean, you had expenses, but you were, sounds like you were covering them.

2 (15m 58s):
Oh yeah. I was covering my expenses. I was a very low maintenance person though. So I lived in, in the east village, in my studio where it was like, sort of a, you could kind of call it a one bedroom. And I had a futon for a sofa. I had a tiny TV that one of my personal training clients had given me because they didn't want it anymore. It sat on a crate. I had a vacuum cleaner and, you know, a lamp and a radio. That was it. So, you know, I was, I was a minimalist let's say.

0 (16m 29s):
And, and we're clients, don't mostly models at that point.

2 (16m 32s):
Yeah. It was quite funny because I only had one door. Right. It was a door and people just stand outside the door and knock, and then I would open the door. And I remember from time to time opening the door and the person standing there was so outstandingly, beautiful male or female that I wouldn't be able to speak, but I would open the door and just kind of gasp and lose my breath. And then I have to kind of, you know, get my composure back and welcome them in and show them where to change. And then you give them a facial, but that was when it really exploded. And everybody started to come in from Luma Thurman. I did Nicole Kidman, Demi Moore, Annie Liebowitz came in with,

0 (17m 11s):
How did you get all these super famous clients? Like, what was it, what was your, what was your technique?

2 (17m 18s):
If I tell you I have to kill you, I'm just really thorough. I think it's really important to be thorough and do, you know, just do the best job you could now listen, most facials would take an hour, right? So facial is generally an hour. I might be in there for two hours with somebody if they really needed it for me time, you know, if I had the time and I could, could have somebody have their treatment for longer, I would do it. And I think you get results when you put time in.

0 (17m 48s):
So at what point did you think, you know, this really could be a business. Like I need to think about turning this into just something beyond this 300 square foot, you know, a little sort of walk-in closet to something bigger.

2 (18m 4s):
I think I've realized that it could be a viable, I guess, career when my appointment book started to be full for five to six weeks in advance, people would call and I couldn't necessarily get them in at the time that they request it. And I was working six days a week and still, still trying to hang on to some of my earlier personal training clients and realizing that it was just so hard to be able to do both that I might have to S you know, someday give that up. Also realized that I could train other people to do the same thing. And that wasn't something that ever entered my mind before, because obviously, you know, when you think that your early path is you're going to go to university and you're going to have a profession you're going to work as that profession.

2 (18m 47s):
I'd never, again, no one in my family had ever had their own business or given me that example, that you can run a business, that you can employ people that you can grow an idea. So I think probably after two years in that, that tiny little 300 square foot space, I hired someone who came in and started to learn how I was doing treatments. And then I found a bigger space that I could rent, which was just two blocks away and started to build out what was then called let's face it.

0 (19m 20s):
So, so when, how did you become blessed? How did that, how did that name become the name of your company

2 (19m 27s):
At let's face? It, it started to become so busy that we were booked and there were, at that point, probably five estheticians esthetician being a person that gives facials. And we worked on different shifts. So some were part-time, but we tried to make the most of the 12 to 14 hours that we could be open in our building during, during each day. And we were also open on Saturdays. And at one point, probably after about two years, we were so busy that when people would call, they wouldn't be able to get an appointment for anywhere between 14 and 16 months. And so, wow.

0 (20m 1s):
Yeah,

2 (20m 1s):
Well, it w you know, it was so amazing because people would come in, they would have their treatment, they would leave. They would be so happy and they would book for that same time slot for the next 12 or 18 months. I remember actually great story where you remember the huge snowstorm of must've been 19 90, 4, 95 in New York, where, where there was snow piled up for 12 feet on the side of the roads and okay. Every, everything around us was closing crate and barrel closed. Dina de Luca closed. Everybody closed our phone. That day was a ringing off the hook with people saying, has anyone canceled?

2 (20m 43s):
Can we get him? Because they were hoping that a point would become available and that somebody else would have canceled their port and nobody canceled their appointments. Somehow, despite the weather everybody's still made it down there, because God forbid they going to cancel their appointment. So, yeah, it was, it was amazing.

0 (20m 60s):
So I guess it was like, like 1996, when, when you open an even larger storefront. Right. And this is when you called it lists, right? Yep.

2 (21m 10s):
And it was a much bigger area floor plate than we'd had at let's face it. We had 10 treatment rooms and we had a nap room and we opened in the beginning of July of 1996.

0 (21m 27s):
How did you have the money to do this? I mean, there must must've. You must have, I mean, you had to rent a space, you had to probably take a three-year lease. You had to put lots of money down. You had to convert the space. I mean, did you bring in outside investment

2 (21m 42s):
At the time? It was pretty scary. And I, again, you know, having not had the experience of anyone or, you know, really any business school experience, I didn't really consider. I didn't even think about outside investment. What I knew was that if I gave facials myself all day long every day, and I could probably take Sunday off and charged, you know, maybe it was 80 for a facial, then that I could still pay that rent by myself. And that was a calculation that I made in terms of, of the build-out of the spa. I took a little bit of a flyer on that one, because at that time, of course, we were booked for 18 months in advance.

2 (22m 23s):
And I kind of did the calculation in terms of what, you know, what we made when we were full all day long every day. Now we were really lucky. The timing was great on this about two months before we opened, bless. And while we were still in the construction phases, American folk did a beautiful piece with a beautiful Irving Penn portrait of a girl having milk poured over her head and talked about three creams. And one of them was a, I think one of them was crumble America, which, you know, Estee Lauder went on to buy and turned it into a big thing. And one of them was a Swiss oxygen cream that we saw.

2 (23m 5s):
And when this article dropped, thousands of people started to call to buy this Swiss oxygen cream. And it lasted probably for four or five months of know this article, having such an incredible effect on the sales of products out of our little facial place, that a lot of the construction costs were almost covered by that one article.

0 (23m 33s):
Yeah. It's incredible. So, I mean, you, you think about like renting a space in New York city today in Manhattan today, and it's insane. Like you have to be a multi-millionaire, you have to put down tons of money and fill out tons of applications. And, and, and you did this in 1996, which, which, I mean, was it a time where you could still kind of do that and not be a millionaire?

2 (23m 56s):
I think so. I think it was probably one of the last periods of time that you could do that, not be a millionaire. There seemed to be a little bit more trust in terms of here's, you know, here's this kid, I remember the landlord just kind of looking at me thinking, well, here's this kid and she's obviously responsible and she's got this decent business already and, you know, let's give it a shot. I've certainly I flinched. And it was terrifying filling out the paperwork. And it was, you know, looking at it and thinking of the responsibility of that overhead, but for me, cause I'd never had anything to lose. Everything was not a big deal.

0 (24m 33s):
So here here's what I'm trying to figure out. There were, there were spots and there's, they're still there in New York, but, but you come in and you have this, this face pallettes call it that, that somehow was just exploded in it. I mean, there was just articles and people were lining up and making appointments. What was it about bliss? What were you offering that was different from those other places?

2 (24m 58s):
I've always, and since then, all the businesses that I've started have been places that I want to go. So I wanted to go to get a facial or get a body treatment or get a pedicure in a non-judgemental place where people were having fun, where the music was not about whales singing or, you know, I hated that kind of music. I loved, you know, jazz and really good soulful music. So he used to mix the music myself. I wanted it to be different. I want it to be a place that I would like to go, that I would feel comfortable where people would be accepting of me, you know? And so that's what we did for everybody else. And I think it was fantastic because it was very egalitarian.

2 (25m 42s):
You would have those superstars in there. So Madonna and whoever, but then you would also have secretaries. You've had kids from NYU who had terrible problems with their skin and just wanted relief from it. And they were going to school up the block. So it was easy for them to come to us yet. Really everybody. And it was, it was wonderful because everyone was treated exactly the same way.

0 (26m 5s):
Yeah. I think I'd be nervous. I'm getting Madonna facial.

2 (26m 8s):
She was very curious. She's one of those people who had tons of tons of questions, you know, what are you doing now? What is this, what does that supposed to do? But, you know, strangely, I wasn't really nervous giving anybody a facial. It was so much fun. There was so many characters from the people who worked at the front desk to the clients, you know, New York is so full of amazing characters. It is like watching a television show, right. It didn't seem like work at all.

0 (26m 38s):
And just a moment how Marsia sold bliss and then turned around and founded a new company and then another, then another, and then another stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Raz. So it's 1996. Let's face, it becomes bliss. And it opens as a day spa in New York Soho neighborhood. And almost instantly the phones are ringing off the hook.

0 (27m 20s):
So in a very short period of time, Marsia decides to expand to double the size of bliss. She also gets married around this time to her boyfriend teary and he joins the business. And the two of them decide to try new things like make a line of skincare products under the name bliss. And soon they start talking about expanding to other cities. But just as things start to take off, this was three years into the business. A huge multinational brand comes knocking LVMH, the conglomerate that owns Louis Vuitton. And they want a piece of bliss, 70% and they're offering Marsia a lot of money. So the amount of money that's been reported, it was anywhere from 30 to $50 million for that, that 70% stake, which is a lot.

0 (28m 10s):
But you guys were just hitting your stride. So why did you sell at that point?

6 (28m 15s):
Well, you know, for about a year

2 (28m 18s):
Prior to 1999, we actually had a lot, it was a, it was a hot time for beauty companies. So retrospectively there were a lot of cool new companies starting and a lot of interest in those companies from the big beauty conglomerates, they were starting to buy up smaller players rather than trying to build their own. And of course, bliss had such a reputation that we, we had more than one large large company come and try and get us. And I think the most exciting thing for me at that time was the idea of not having all of the financial responsibility for that business on, on my head, we actually were, we had expanded and along comes a large company, starts looking at our books, which was, was also very funny because they had an accountant, I think based in Chicago, who couldn't believe that we were making this money without doing something illegal.

2 (29m 13s):
So they came in and they did a report and there were all these things in the report, like, you know, bliss, purports to have celebrity clients, bliss, purports to be doing facials in the dark. I was like, what do you think we're doing in here? It was really, it was quite funny to read, I guess they just never seen anything like it before, but it just, it seemed like after so many years of being kind of flat broke or, you know, I'm an edge that would be nice just to have a little bit of money in the bank. Yeah.

0 (29m 46s):
Because again, I mean, obviously bliss was doing really well, but you guys were, I guess, still living pretty modestly.

2 (29m 53s):
Yeah. Okay. So for anybody who's lived their entire life worrying about money or, you know, just kind of, you know, living very minimally. You do wonder if that's your motivation and if your motivation and all of those skills that you've developed will somehow profoundly change when suddenly there are some zeros in your bank account. So that was a bit of a crisis thinking, will I be different if I'm not starving, but it was just too good an offer to refuse. They had flown me to Paris on the Concord. I had gone to the Christian Dewar boutique. They took me to early on with our factory was where they were, you know, manufacturing, mascara.

2 (30m 33s):
And, and then when you come back to New York, actually I have to say, I came back to New York. I flew back on the Concord and I'm on the subway and this Coca-Cola spilled all over the seats and garbage strewn everywhere. And I remember hanging on that subway car thinking, God, I wonder if I was the only person on the Concorde this morning, that's in the subway. And it was just, it was, it was funny cause I could happily do both. But you did realize that maybe after having worked my tail off for 14 to 16 hours a day for the last, however many years at that point, I guess it would have been 11 years. Maybe it didn't have to be that hard anymore.

0 (31m 12s):
So, I mean, did it change you like, like suddenly coming into all this money,

2 (31m 18s):
You know, I think you get a few, a few dollars in your bank account and I did have a laugh and we used to joke when it got wired, you know, we said the Eagle has landed and you know, we laughed. And then we went and got groceries in our regular shop in Brooklyn. You don't see money. Do you? It just goes into it's numbers on a, on a piece of paper and it lands. And then yeah, maybe you might fly business class and maybe you might go and buy a few more clothes than you normally would maybe once. And then you realize, you know, what you love is what you love. And I think it takes quite a long time to start living differently when, when you've lived for so long with the same attitude.

0 (32m 2s):
Okay. So you guys, in 1999, you sold about 70% of the company to, to LVMH. And then a couple of years later, like 2004, I think you sold the rest of your shares to another company. And then you walked entirely away from bliss. What was, what was going on in your life at that point? Why did you decide to do that?

2 (32m 23s):
So LVMH after 2001, they started to divest of most of their beauty businesses. And we were one of the first ones to get snapped up by another business. So Starwood hotels and resorts bought us because they wanted to have bliss boss and they wanted to put those into w hotels and other hotels. And so, you know, that was also very flattering. So first I had, you know, one of the largest luxury groups in the world by my business. And then I had the largest hotel group in the world by my business. So, you know, two, two good hits there, but they put somebody in charge of the business who was a young guy, probably the prodigy of the, the man who owns Starwood at the time who really didn't understand customer service the way I understood it.

2 (33m 6s):
And I felt like I was spending most of my day trying to teach him, but he was reticent. And for me, you know, to, to spend my time on that when the person is not necessarily open to the ideas, just felt like banging my head against the wall and it was very draining. So I decided to take a break from it and I didn't really know what I was going to do, but I just didn't want to do that anymore.

0 (33m 38s):
So when, when you left Starwood, what did you do? Did you, I know that you moved to London for, for awhile. Did you just kinda hang out and enjoy not working for awhile?

2 (33m 52s):
I probably had about three months off. And as soon as I, I had had a little bit of energy back, I started to come up with a few new ideas for, you know, new brands and new things that I, as, as a woman again, saw a hole in the marketplace for.

0 (34m 12s):
So I guess the, we should, we should, we should point out here that it didn't take very long for you to decide to start a new business, which, which was soap and glory. And this was going to be like affordable personal hygiene products.

2 (34m 26s):
Yeah. Okay. So I remember just, you know, scanning newspapers and scanning these journals every Sunday and seeing the zeitgeists really being one about collaborations and, you know, high street prices or, you know, really affordable pricing for designer stuff. And H and M was leading the way with this and also about waste. There was starting to be a lot of, a lot of interest in environmental concerns. There was a story about David Beckham only wearing his underwear once and throwing it out and how wasteful it was, you know, all of this. And so I, I started to think, you know, people are really worried about the environment and people want more for their money.

2 (35m 9s):
And so how can I roll that all up and do a fun little brand that I can sell and soaking glory, it was designer affordable cosmetics. And then of course we also did very simple packaging that wouldn't be, you know, too hard on the environment. And this sort of took all of those site Geist ideas and bundled them up. And so we launched it, Harvey, Nichols, really fun department store, and then boots, knocking and boosts is

0 (35m 39s):
The big, the big drugstore.

2 (35m 40s):
Yeah, the big drugstore. And they've got probably 1800 stores throughout Britain. And so we rolled out into boots and it was, it was actually very small for the first couple of years. We didn't do that much business, but within, I'd say seven, six or seven years, we were probably be telling about a hundred million dollars.

0 (36m 0s):
Wow. And you didn't, and you did not take any outside investment for this company.

2 (36m 5s):
No,

0 (36m 6s):
Because you didn't need to, you had, you could use the money that you had from the sale of blessed to launch this next company.

2 (36m 13s):
Yes. And it was very organic growth. I mean, you people think about these overnight successes and very rarely are they an overnight success, right. Things do take years and they grow, but then once they grow big enough, they start to snowball. And so it started to snowball. And at one point I remember us doing these like crazy Christmas bags where there were these Christmas bags, just stuffed full of products. And there were literally hundreds of thousands of them produced every Christmas. And you know, the, the week before Christmas, there would be this special offer where you could go in and get this soap and glory Christmas bag. And if you walked around London, every third person was carrying three or four of these on their arms.

2 (36m 53s):
It was such a big deal. Yeah.

0 (36m 55s):
So in the midst of, of lunching soap and glory, like a year later, you launched another company. In addition to that, you launched a, a company that makes like flip-flop shoes called, called the fit flop. So how did that happen? Why would you launch a second company whilst trying to launch a first company or a second company? Why would you launch a third company while trying to get your second company off the ground?

2 (37m 23s):
Do you know? This is a very interesting question. Why launch two kind of simultaneously, however, I have just read this book called originals. And there's one chapter in that book where it says true entrepreneurs always hedge their bets, right? You don't give up your day job because you think that your, you know, side hustle or whatever it is, is going to actually pay off, you always do two things at the same time. Cause one of them may not work and you want to make sure that you've got another one and it's kind of like personal training while I was doing facials. Right. And I guess I did that again, where with soap and glory, when I started it, you know, it was only a year later that I also launched fit flop. And it was really based on the idea for one shoe, which was ergonomically, correct, which would align your body while you watch.

2 (38m 8s):
And because of my personal training days and trying to use my time more efficiently and having started this, this new business soap and glory thinking that I'd have work-life balance and then finding that I had no time at all actually, or very little time to exercise, I was thinking to myself, what can I invent to make more out of this time that I, that I have when I am walking, you know, how can I make walking really work for me in an optimal way? So I then spent a lot of time on different trains in the UK, going to different universities, trying to find somebody who would be able to help me realize this idea. And in fact, eventually I found Dr. Dave cook at the university of south bank in London, which was probably a mile away as the Crow flew.

2 (38m 53s):
So I eventually met with Dr. Cook and I went in, I said, here's the idea, blah, blah, blah. And he said, well, I know how you can do that. So they told me they could make a prototype because they had a shoe design chorus going on within the university. When I waited and waited and waited about three months later, I come in to see this prototype. And it literally, it looked like a lump of coal with some ropes on it. I was like, we can't sell this. This is so ugly. No one will wear this outside, no matter what it does for them, but we tested it. Right? So we, we put it on some different university students feet and we put electrodes on them and we looked at their forces and you can see whether or not the technology is helping to align the force that goes through your heel, which is your heel strike when you walk.

2 (39m 42s):
And it, it worked right. So this, this lump of coal with the ropes, it, it worked. So I then thought, okay, what do I do now? I've got the shoe. It does what I want it to do. I don't know how to make a shoe or where to go, to get shoes made. And then I thought, well, I could go to Nike or Puma or whatever. And I thought, no, I can't. Cause they're going to steal my idea. Yeah. And then in the recesses of my mind, right? I remembered that I knew somebody who did footwear at the time. They were called Peter Black. They've since been bought by a Chinese conglomerate, but we call Peter Black footwear. And we met with somebody who did sourcing for them. And then we had a mold made, which again, you know, it was one of these things, you got to take a flyer.

2 (40m 24s):
It was probably $40,000 to have the mold made. So you have to really hope this is going to go because 40, $40,000 is not nothing. But at the time I thought, you know what? I buy this shoe if the shoe was available. So I'm sure other people will buy this shoe. And so we drew one up, we made a prototype, it was incredibly comfortable, like incredible. And I remember sitting down, so of course I went to retailers that I knew from my American days first. And then, and then also to boots in the UK who was selling soap and glory. But about a year before that I hadn't met with bath and body works. And I explained the idea and the buyer from bath and body works, looked at me and said, I'll take somewhere between 300,000 and 500,000 pairs of those a year.

0 (41m 10s):
Wow.

2 (41m 11s):
I was shocked. I remember walking away cause they wanted to meet at Claridges. So we went to Claridges, you know, and had tea and talked about it. And I remember walking out of Claridges just thinking, wow, this is like, this is a whole new level. I mean, I couldn't give 300,000 facials a year.

0 (41m 29s):
I mean, it's, it's incredible. I mean, if you, if you think about it, right? So you, you sell, bless you walk away from bliss in 2004, you then launch soap and glory in 2006, run that business simultaneously launch the ergonomic shoe line. Flip-flop in 2007, you sold soap and glory to boots, I guess in 2014. And then last year you launched a brand new business, a, a subscription service for high-end cosmetics that, that are actually sold for very little money called beauty pie. W w how do you do that? How do you, how do you pregame so many, how do you stay on top of so many different ideas and companies,

2 (42m 14s):
You know, guy today? I don't feel like I'm quite so on top of it, but beauty pie, the whole idea behind it was knowing, you know, in the cosmetics industry, how fun it is to go to some of these third-party labs and that you walk out of there with, you know, bags full of free cosmetics. And, you know, you're, you're walking through a cosmetic store with a bag that you just got from the third-party lab. That's probably got a $2,000 street value and they were all free and thinking, wow, you know what, if I could bring every woman into the, into the luxury cosmetic factory with me, and we could rate it together, how fun would that be?

2 (42m 56s):
Like what a thrill it's like being a kid in a candy store. And so that was the idea behind beauty by how do I, how do I give women the same feeling that I have? Because the funnest part of being able to work in cosmetics is one of these free boxes of stuff from the lab show up. And beauty pie is a little bit different. You buy stuff at the factory costs, but it's practically free compared to what you would pay for it at retail.

0 (43m 22s):
W what what's interesting is that you don't seem to be sort of a sentimentally attached to your companies. You, you launch them, you create them, you turn them into these incredibly successful companies and, and you've sold at least two of them. And you may sell others. Do you, is there a certain point where you just say, yeah, I don't, you know, I would just want to move on and, and, and start something new. Like, is it, is it almost like, like when a business becomes too big or, or, or you just kind of get bored, you, you want to start something new?

2 (43m 56s):
You know, I've thought about this one a lot, because I do get asked, you know, why, why do you keep doing this? And, and I think about the thrill that is beauty pie right now, which is really like, I'm rubbing the sticks together. And I think it's what really drives me and what I really love, you know, have you ever heard the expression, your first marriage is for life? The second one is for money and the third one's for companionship. I think some famous divorcee say probably set that one, but the companionship that, that I get out of having a business where I can really interface with women and I'm making them happy. And some men, of course, we have, we have 4% men at the moment, but being able to make people feel that happy and, and have them communicate that to me is what gives me the biggest buzz.

0 (44m 46s):
Yeah. I mean, it's, it's why do you think that, that your, your brain works that way, that, that you just are generating all these ideas all the time and ideas that, that don't just kind of float up in, in, in the space, that ideas that you actually stop, sit down and start to really, th they almost seem to obsess you, they, they seem to just overtake everything and in your world, like, why, why do you think that happens to you?

2 (45m 15s):
How did I end up like this?

0 (45m 18s):
So was sort of, yeah.

2 (45m 21s):
I, you know, I have thought a lot about that. Cause you have to psychoanalyze yourself and I, I also tell, want to be entrepreneurs, right? I always tell them that one of the tools that they should have is an understanding of how the human brain works. Right? Because if you can understand how your brain is fooling you, when you might be reacting to something, rather than making a sound decision, or when you might be feeling insecure, when you really shouldn't be, or when you're jumping to a judgment that that necessarily doesn't have enough information to back it up. Now, when you try to then go psychoanalyze yourself, I would say, well, I must be extremely competitive because I will come up with these ideas and think, oh, I can't do that.

2 (46m 3s):
And then I'll think, well, come on, I have to do that. And then I'll think God, if I don't do that fast, somebody else is going to do it. And I don't know why I care. I mean, why do I care if somebody else goes and does it, there must be some competitive aspect to it. And so I'm much more comfortable where I feel like I'm building something and it it's got to be genetic. Right. Cause there's nothing else that would really explain this.

0 (46m 28s):
How much of, of your success do you think is because of your intelligence and hard work and how much, how much do you think is because of luck?

2 (46m 38s):
Okay. Let's see. Okay. I'd say I'm certainly above average in intelligence. I'm not a genius. I know a lot of people who are, you know, much more intellectual than I am an actually much more strategic and people will always say that I'm very strategic, but I don't think of myself as such a strategic person. I just tend to think of things in very simple terms. Luck. I've certainly had some, I mean, moving to New York and having a sister who was really good-looking and in a field where she could give people who could afford my services, you know, the, an introduction to me so that I could have clientele.

2 (47m 23s):
And then more of those people would refer more of those people. That certainly lucky. However, if I wasn't good at what I was doing, I don't think I would have any of them. And if I didn't show up on time and if I wasn't friendly and you know, reliable, I suppose you get a bit of luck and then you have to make something out of it. And I find when I see, and I'm sure you see this as well, you see people who are so talented or, you know, really genius at what they do, but they're not ever really successful. They're always struggling. And I always wonder, you know, is it just a choice that you make, where at one point you say, you know what I am, I am worthy.

2 (48m 3s):
I deserve this. Why not me? Because you know, why not you? And if you're willing to work that hard, why shouldn't you then take the success that comes with it? And I think that's a very complex thing for many people. And somehow I've managed to overcome that.

0 (48m 22s):
Yeah. I mean, it is amazing how many, many of these companies that you've created and all the things you've done by the way. Have you, have you ever come up with an idea that, that you thought was just going to do a amazingly well, that you just didn't pursue? Because it wasn't actually quite right.

2 (48m 39s):
I have one right now, but I, it's not that I'm not pursuing it because it's not right, but I can't say what it is because we're patenting.

0 (48m 47s):
Oh man idea. Right now you are going to launch something new on top of all these other things that you do incredible. Like how do you, doesn't your brain want to explode

2 (48m 57s):
Only if I've had too many expresses

0 (49m 1s):
Marsia Kilgore. She's the founder of bliss, spas, soap, and glory, skincare products, hip flops, arrogant, omic shoes, beauty pie, makeup, and also a fifth brand. We just ran out of time to talk about it. It's a line of environmentally friendly bath products called the super duper. Marcy has built so many companies that on the last episode of the Oprah Winfrey show, Oprah named her one of her personal inspirations. Hey, thanks for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that. And we're updating a story today that ran about a year ago. It starts in 2015 in Los Angeles with a guy named miles pepper.

7 (49m 44s):
I went to my local coffee shop to grab an ice latte before heading off to work. And as I was leaving the shop, I put a plastic straw in my drink as normal habit.

0 (49m 53s):
But as it happens just the night before miles had seen a program about plastics that are polluting the ocean

7 (49m 60s):
Just seen the video of the sea turtle with a straw, stuck up its nose. And I was thinking to myself that I already have a reusable water bottle. I already have a reusable coffee cup. Why don't I have a reasonable straw?

0 (50m 14s):
Yeah. A reusable straw not made out of plastic, but maybe metal, a straw that could fold and collapse like a tentpole

7 (50m 22s):
And a way to guarantee that it would always be on me, would be if it was the size of the car key. So I wanted a collapsible straw that was small enough to fit in a case the size of a car key,

0 (50m 34s):
But unfortunately miles didn't know the first thing about how to make a collapsible straw.

7 (50m 40s):
So I started talking with friends. I started talking with these designers that I had been working with and this mutual friend said, Hey, you should call Emma. Do you remember Emma?

0 (50m 49s):
And in fact miles did remember Emma. She was an acquaintance who also hated plastic straws. She'd even done a TEDx talk about it.

8 (50m 58s):
We've become accustomed to living disposable lifestyles based on convenience.

7 (51m 4s):
And then I then jumped on the phone, the

8 (51m 6s):
Phone rings October, 2017 and he says, Hey, I've got this idea for a collapsible straw. And I just remember, he first sounded really excited on the phone and it got me really excited.

0 (51m 22s):
So anyway, miles found an industrial designer in LA to help him develop a collapsible stainless steel straw.

8 (51m 29s):
And while they were working on the design, I was working on creating a social media presence. I have a love of memes. And one of my favorite ones was filling a pack of cigarettes with straws. And at the bottom, it says break the habit.

0 (51m 45s):
After about a month and a half am on miles, had a prototype of a straw that folds into fourths and fits into a little plastic case that you could carry on a key chain. And next I Kickstarter campaign.

8 (51m 57s):
And the big goal was 5,000 straws, which would have been about $70,000, but we sold about 60,000 straws and closed a month later with 1.8, $9 million in the bank.

0 (52m 10s):
Sounds amazing, right? Except Emma and miles discovered a really big problem.

8 (52m 15s):
There's companies out there that are patrolling Kickstarter and looking to see when people throw a successful campaign. And as soon as they see that overnight success, then they jump on it and they use the measurements that are provided on the Kickstarter to create an exact replica of that item.

0 (52m 33s):
And that is exactly what happened to Emma and miles. These random sharks basically hijack their idea, made some quick cheap knockoffs and started fulfilling orders before Emma and miles could even get their straws out into the world.

8 (52m 48s):
I mean, it's shocking.

0 (52m 50s):
And Emma says the hardest part for her

8 (52m 52s):
Is the fact that most of these knockoffs are complete junk. And so they're just ending up in the trash can. And the entire purpose of our company was to reduce waste. And so I feel weirdly responsible and you know, no matter how many people tell me that it's not my fault, like it still feels like it is

0 (53m 12s):
Emma started filling Kickstarter orders in November of 2018. And she says this past year has been like business school, hunts speed.

8 (53m 21s):
I don't know. It's like going down a river in a tube. Like you just don't know what to expect. And every moment is either like very serene and calm or you're maybe going to die. And I love it.

0 (53m 34s):
That's Emma Cohen, the co-founder of final straw. And by the way, since we last spoke with them, final straw has been issued a patent and has sold about $5 million worth of collapsible metal straws. Emma is now working on their next reusable product. Final fork. If you want to find out more about final straw, head to our podcast page, how I built this.npr.org. And of course, if you want to tell us your story, go to build.npr.org. And thanks so much for listening to the show this week, you can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts, and while you're there, please do give us a review. You can also write to us@htatnpr.org. And if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this, or at guy Roz, our show was produced this week by Rachel Faulkner with music composed by Ramtin Arab Louis.

0 (54m 23s):
Thanks also to Julia Carney, Neva grant Sanaz Meshkinpour and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is David jock. I'm guy Ross, and you've been listening to how I built this.