0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Adyen. Adyen is the payments platform that adapts with your business. So you can accept all kinds of payments with one single integration, Adyen, business, not boundaries. Visit a D Y E n.com/ NPR. Hey, it's Guy here. And really quick, before we start this episode, there are a few bad words that you will hear that we did not bleep out. So if you're listening with kids, just be mindful.

1 (33s):
We were working with a tissue paper manufacturer out in Wisconsin than made all the paper products. Yep. They thought we were crazy by the way, because you know, we were selling unbleached a a a hundred percent recycled fiber bathroom tissue, which was the scratchy stuff that you found in a gas station. And we insisted that it said made with 100% recycled paper and had always been made with 100% recycled, but they hit that in all the promoted, all the materials, because consumers didn't want that. No. Why would a toilet paper made a recycled paper? They thought we were absolutely out of our mind.

2 (1m 15s):
NPR how I built this show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they go and Guy Roz. And on the show today, how two men probably had no business going into business together. We went into business together and build Seventh. Generation a pioneer in eco friendly cleaning products.

0 (1m 47s):
Back in September of 2020, we received an e-mail from a listener named Kiarra. She suggested we consider interviewing her father Jeffrey Hollender. My dad, she wrote started Seventh Generation in 1988. He is kind intelligent. And it was as interested in doing good as ever. He would never write an email like this himself, but I think his story and the story of Seventh Generation is important to where we are in the world. Right now it's filled with hope and pain as all the best stories are. Well, we were intrigued in part because Seventh Generation is one of the iconic brands in the eco-friendly cleaning category.

0 (2m 32s):
And in part, because Kiarra said the story is filled with hope and pain. So we started digging and what we found surprised us for starters, we discovered that there was another founder. His name is Alan Newman. And back in 1992, just a few years after the company was launched, Alan and Jeffrey had a bidder falling out. Allen was ousted. And since then the two men have barely spoken. So we called them up and asked if they'd be willing to appear on the show together to tell their story. They thought about it. And to our surprise, they agreed and even seem to enjoy themselves during most of the interview coming onto the show in this episode is the first time they've come together to talk about the founding of Seventh Generation and their very difficult breakup as business partners.

0 (3m 29s):
So perhaps more than any other conversation I've ever had with co-founders, this one has an incredible amount of insight into what it takes for two people to build something bigger than themselves and how the relationship between partners is actually more important than the skills each one brings to the table. Seventh Generation started out as a mail order catalog. We had sold a curated collection of eco-friendly household goods, but eventually it became one of the first companies to mass produce detergents, paper towels, and other products that are meant to be better for the planet by the mid two thousands.

0 (4m 10s):
The company's products could be found on the shelves of virtually every supermarket and America. And in 2016, Seventh Generation was acquired by the multinational Unilever for between six and $700 million, the small little hippie business, Alan, and Jeffrey co-founded. It is now a part of a giant company that owns everything from Lipton tea to Axe, body spray. And even though Alan and Jeffrey were and are very different personalities, one thing they did share was a restless and even rebellious past neither follow the conventional path from college into a steady job.

0 (4m 51s):
Alan Newman grew up on long Island in the fifties and sixties, and he didn't care all that much about school. Jeffrey Hollender grew up in Manhattan. His dad was a powerful advertising executive and like Allen Jeffrey also remembers struggling in school. And at home, his family life was hardly a happy one.

3 (5m 14s):
It was, you know, my dad was obsessed with working. He was a tense tightly wound, a guy who wasn't a lot of fun to be around. My mother was an artist and my parents didn't get along. They didn't really like each other very much. I also felt fundamentally uncomfortable in the very affluent environment that I grew up in. I mean, I, I remembered, like I grew up on park Avenue, which is a very fancy street in Manhattan. Sure. And I felt that that sort of elite part of society was not something that I wanted to be associated with.

3 (5m 57s):
And I guess

4 (5m 58s):
You, when he went to college, he went to Hampshire college. But I guess you didn't really last, very long there you dropped out, I think after a year or so. And sometimes after that, you ended up living in Toronto with your girlfriend at the time. And so tell me the story, like, what did you do there?

3 (6m 15s):
Well, I, I was trying to figure out what I wanted to do. And I read an amazing book by Ivan Illich. Who's an educational philosopher called D schooling society. And Ivan Elix philosophy was that formal education in universities constrain the flow of knowledge more than facilitated those who are affluent, who can afford it and get access to it. Those who aren't don't. And so he said, you know, what we really need to do is we just need to find bright people and let them teach other people in their homes and their offices. And so I started the skills exchange of Toronto, totally modeled on a chapter of the book that I had read, never having had any business experience or never having studied business.

3 (7m 7s):
I was, you know, 19, 20 years old, we basically printed up this little catalog with all these short courses. They lasted a night to four weeks and I loved finding the teachers and I love riding up the course descriptions and the thing that was incredibly successful. And we had a little newspaper that we put in, what was sort of similar to the village voice in New York, we stuck tens of thousands of these little course catalogs in this newspaper. And lo and behold, people sent in checks and registered for courses. I think the second year we had 30,000 people register for these courses.

3 (7m 48s):
So it was wildly successful.

4 (7m 50s):
And what kind of classes is like photography or whatever, anything,

3 (7m 54s):
It was sort of anything, it was photography, it was cooking, but it was introduction to Marxism. It was alternative health care therapies. And they were very affordable. The classes were, you know, 15, 25 bucks. They were cheap. You know, there were no tests. There were no quizzes. Yeah. It was people engaged in the pure joy of learning because they had a passion to do so.

4 (8m 23s):
So you were running this program in Canada and it was a non-profit right. It was, it was started as a nonprofit. And I guess something happens, which kind of shuts it down. What happened? I mean,

3 (8m 35s):
Yeah. Well, I, I made a big mistake. I failed to get working papers in Canada, in Canada. And I had a pretty high profile because of this successful startup. And one day the Royal Mounties showed up in the office, handcuffed me and through me in jail because I was an illegal alien. I was working in Canada without working papers.

5 (9m 1s):
So this is like, I guess, late 78, early 79 ish. You end up going back to New York in 1979 to kind of regroup and figure it out. And, and you decided to reconstitute this idea, but in the U S E couldn't do it in Canada. But from what I understand, you decided to do it as a for-profit this time around, not as a nonprofit.

3 (9m 22s):
Yeah. My dad thought it was really stupid to start a nonprofit. You can't really make much money. So he said, start a for-profit. And I took that to heart in more ways than one. And instead of teaching and introduction to Marxism, we were teaching how to marry money. And we were teaching the art of flirting, how to get invited to the right parties,

5 (9m 47s):
By the way, where did you, where did you distribute these catalogs? It would just drop them off in like shops and stores, or would you mail them to people?

3 (9m 54s):
New York, Sunday times they were S inserted in the certain zip codes of the New York Sunday times. And it was like magic. I mean, we would put hundreds of thousands of these in the Sunday times and the next week the checks would just roll it. And it was pretty amazing.

5 (10m 10s):
Yes. At one point you even got onto the Phil Donahue show, which at that time it was a huge deal because you had a, you had a course called had to marry money, which just sounds horrible. I mean, but you, one of the Phil Donahue show with the person who lectured to talk to that class, how to marry money, by the way, what was the, what was, what was the suggestion? How do you do that?

3 (10m 31s):
This was a taut by a woman named Joanna Steichen, who was Edward Steichen's wife. The famous photographer, her claim to fame was that she had married money because he was a pretty wealthy photographer. And she would give you all kinds of tips. And I mean, literally

1 (10m 50s):
We had auditoriums of four to 500 people taking this class every other week. And we did go on the Phil Donahue show together. And we had a horrible, horrible reception from the crowd. The crowd thought that this was a terrible, immoral thing to do. We were teaching people, terrible values. And I was, I was really heartbroken after the show. I felt that, Oh my God, what have I, or what have I done with my life? I've gone from being a sort of principled, politically responsive, concerned adult to someone who's teaching values that are pretty important.

1 (11m 34s):
Hmm Jeffrey I want to just pause for a moment and, and turned to Alan, by the way, I was so sad. I'm not a camera because I'm Alan. I love your beard. Your beard is amazing. It's the pandemic. It's incredible. It's, it's better than a civil war. Reenactor it's, it's starting to take on a life of its own. It's really cool. I

4 (11m 54s):
Love it. Thank you. Okay. So you, you graduated from South Hampton college on long Island around, I guess, the late sixties or early seventies. And then from what I understand, you were married when you graduated from college. Right. But you got married pretty young. I did. But just to be clear, you're no longer married to this person, right? Correct. Did you meet at college? Yeah. Yeah.

6 (12m 17s):
It was at the same school that I was. And when I graduated college, we were kind of fed up at the United States, frankly. You know, I was one of those people with long hair and a beard, and we decided we were going to go see what Canada was like, because that was a natural path for a lot of people we knew. So we ended up, probably spent a month, you know, camping our way through Canada, but there was nothing that spoke to us and said, we're going to stay here. So we came back to long Island, did our laundry change clothes and decided to go to Vermont, really on a whim. So most things in my life have not been planned. One of my favorite phrases is, is everybody has everybody's greatest.

6 (12m 57s):
Strength is also the greatest weakness. One of mine is I tend to say yes, if somebody calls This, Hey, you know, can you talk to me about this? I say, yes. It's somebody says, Hey, you know, were you interested in this? I go, well, sure. I'll listen. I find that saying yes, opens doors. And so we just decided to come for a month, we found people were friendly. They didn't care that I had a beer. They didn't care that I have long hair and we kind of settled in.

4 (13m 23s):
And so, all right. You, you started living in Vermont and eventually, I guess you settle in, in Burlington. Yeah. And you got involved in it like a garden supply store. You helped, co-found it like, how did that come about? Was it like, Hey, you know, let's, let's do a garden supply store as well.

6 (13m 40s):
Well, no, I'm first of all, and it may be a more sensitive to the term founder. I don't consider myself to be a co-founder of garden supply. There was a guy named will wrap. I went along with will and I was the number two. I was kind of the finance and ops guy, which is quite humorous to me these days.

4 (14m 1s):
And by the way, this wasn't like so much of a brick and mortar business, but more of a mail order. Right? So, so it was a business where people would order a garden supplies, correct

6 (14m 9s):
Through a catalog. And the business. My description is the business didn't grow fast enough for both will. And I to be in the same business and, you know, will was the one who really taught me. They taught me a lot, actually learned a lot at gardener supply about creating culture and a business, but we'll wanted to do things his way. I wanted to do things my way. And we started clashing and we came to an agreement that since I had really built the fulfillment system, the computer system, I was going to start a business using the computer system, using the fulfillment system to sell time to a non-profits

7 (14m 52s):
Who had small mail, all the divisions that I.

4 (14m 55s):
So, so just to understand you were going to use the systems that you developed to basically to work for other mailer companies. Yeah.

7 (15m 3s):
Yeah. So I had a bunch of clients of which one of them was at a nonprofit called renew America. They had the most God awful catalog you've ever seen. What did they sell? They sold energy conservation and renewable energy products, like light bulbs. They probably had solar panels. They probably have a weather stripping. They probably have a low flow shower heads. But to say that they sold it, I think is a misnomer. They really didn't know business. The catalog was indecipherable. It was just the worst catalog I had ever seen. So after the first year I sent them a note, if you really wanna do some business here in my suggestions.

7 (15m 47s):
And I, and I outlined what I would do,

4 (15m 50s):
What were your suggestions like, just make it clearer, offer a better products. Like what do you remember telling them to do? I

7 (15m 55s):
Think I was, I, you know, my memory on this stuff, I'm going to make it up. Guy But I probably told them, you know, you need to focus on a lifestyle. You need to educate the customer because you got to remember back in the mid, mid to late eighties, nobody knew what environmental ism was about. Nobody really cared. And so I said, you got to educate your customers. You got to make the pictures bigger. Cause nobody had these tiny little pictures and they talked in technical terms. They said, you got to tell why is it a benefit to the customer? And so I made these suggestions and, and they came back and said, boy, those are great suggestions. So why don't you buy us? And yeah, they said, okay.

4 (16m 37s):
And what do you remember? What they offered? How much they, they asked for. I

7 (16m 41s):
Don't think we got to that,

4 (16m 43s):
But you were just like, this is not for me.

7 (16m 45s):
Yeah. I didn't have any money. And I knew it was going to cost money to grow and I didn't believe anybody cared. Yeah. I truly, I didn't see the market for it at all. And so finally I got a call from him one day and they said, we're done. So either we're going to ship everything to you and it's your business to do whatever you want or we're going to throw it all in the garbage can.

4 (17m 8s):
So wait, they said, we're just done with this thing. You can have it for free. Do you want it? Is that essentially? With what they were saying to you.

7 (17m 17s):
Yeah, pretty much. No, not pretty much. Exactly.

4 (17m 19s):
Exactly. And there. And, and they were going to give you the brand renew America and all the way,

7 (17m 24s):
The copy, whatever it was, part of that catalog. We'll get a, pack it up. We're going to send it to you.

4 (17m 30s):
But, but like he just said, you didn't think this could ever be a viable business. So w w why would you even want it for free?

7 (17m 39s):
I really, honestly, and truly I did not the line that I've used in a million times, which was a a hundred percent true. Is my brain is saying, no, no, no, no, no. In and out of my comes,

6 (17m 50s):
I'll take it. I'll take it. And to This to this day, I say, God spoke through me. I don't know where that came from. I had no interest. I didn't believe there was a future. I didn't have the money to do it. And yet I said, yes.

4 (18m 4s):
All right. So you get the catalog business from them. Yep. And you got to make it work. So what do you do? It was your first step.

6 (18m 16s):
Well, in the catalog world, you've got to have your catalog in the mail in August to start competing for the holiday business. Right. So I had six weeks. I had a month to six weeks to get a catalog together. I couldn't take any new photography. So the catalog was originally eight and a half by 11. Since I couldn't increase the picture size, I cut the catalogue in half. So we went to what's called digest sides. And that made the pictures look bigger. I changed the name to Seventh Generation what does that come from? Well, it comes from the, the Iroquois quote that whatever we do, we should be thinking about how it will affect the next seven generations in that that was consistent with, you know, what we were thinking at the time is that This, we really need to change the way we're thinking from a media to a longer term.

4 (19m 9s):
How do you have the money to do this, by the way?

6 (19m 11s):
Well, you know, Burlington is a small town. And so I had relationships. There was a printing company that we use. So I went to them and said, Hey, how would you like to take a gamble? And how about your print, my catalog. And I'll give you a percentage of revenue or whatever deal I struck. And so they printed the catalog for me, and I just had to get the catalog out.

4 (19m 34s):
And how did it improve the catalog? Like what did you do?

6 (19m 38s):
I focused on education. I always knew that people didn't understand why they should use a water saving shower head. So we ran these columns down the side, you know, talking about why you should do that. And it was really that, that early catalogs was really, I wrote pretty much every word of them. And they were written from passion and from enthusiasm, more than from any kind of research. And if I remember correctly, I focus more on the economic gain. You would save the money, you save your money, you'd save money. You're going to get a shower that is perfectly comfortable. It will compare with most shower heads, but you're going to save money.

6 (20m 18s):
And this is really where I personally learned that you really needed to sell from benefit, not feature, you know, the feature that you're saving the environment. Yeah. That was nice. But it was only good after you pass the what's in it for me.

4 (20m 34s):
And did you get the catalog out by August? Yes. It did. It a lot of people. Did you get a lot of orders? Yeah, really? Yeah. Like a significant number of orders blue. It blew me away. It blew away. Yeah. It blew me away. Wow. All right. So Alan, just, just pause for a second. I want to Jeffrey I want to bring you back into the story. Cause we left off with UW running this business and New York. That was, I guess, but it was making you kind of feel soulless and you've been doing these in-person classes. And then I read that around this time you started to put some of those classes on tape, on cassettes and then sell them in stores.

4 (21m 15s):
Yeah. That kind of got you into the books on tape business. And that actually started to do pretty well, right?

3 (21m 22s):
Yes, exactly. And we started buying rights to New York times bestsellers and putting them on tape. Wow. And finally, we were, we were out looking to make a distribution deal and we were meeting with Warner publishing and they basically said, gee, we loved this business. We think it's fantastic, but we don't want to distribute the products. We wanna buy the business and a lot.

4 (21m 47s):
So you thought you were going to meet with them for distribution deal, but actually they want to buy it outright.

3 (21m 53s):
And they did. They offered us a price. That was a, we couldn't refuse. They basically looked at the rights that we owned and controlled and valued the business on our rights portfolio and came up with a number of that just totally blew my mind and millions of dollars. And we decided to sell the business. And I remember my dad got a big check. I dunno, maybe a million dollars or so

4 (22m 23s):
As a, as an investor has returned as an

3 (22m 25s):
Investor. Yeah. He was an investor in the business and it was the first time in my life where he, where I felt like I had finally met with his approval, having dropped out of college, he was very upset about he, he, he often would say to me, you're going to be so embarrassed when you go to a job interview and they ask you where you went to college and you're going to have to say, I never graduated. And of course my response was I don't ever plan on going on a job interview and I never did, but he was really proud of that. And, but I didn't last long as a, as an employee of Warner communications.

4 (23m 4s):
So you, from what I understand, you decide, you're going to write a book and write a book about it because you want to kind of make amends for how to marry money. In those kinds of lectures. You just had to write a book called how to make the world a better place, which is great. How did you come to that realization that you wanted to do this?

3 (23m 24s):
Well, as you said, I needed to redeem myself somehow, but it was, it was just as much of an exploration have all the ways in which you could do good stuff in the world. And I remember I, I wrote the entire book on these long yellow, legal pads at the New York public library on 42nd. And I would sit in that library day after day, doing research and really exploring, looking at the world of socially responsible investing, looking what was happening in the world of human rights, looking at what was happening from an environmental perspective. And the book was really a compendium of all the good things one could do on a full-time or a part-time basis to help make the world a better place.

4 (24m 13s):
Okay. So Alan has a catalog now and he's named But Seventh Generation meantime Jeffrey you are researching your book, how to make the world a better place. And I guess you, you end up in Burlington. How did you come across Allen?

3 (24m 31s):
My memory is that I perhaps, unlike Allen loved the idea of the renew America catalog. I thought the idea of selling people, energy efficient, environmental products was a great idea.

4 (24m 48s):
You had found out about RenewAmerica in your research for the book, had to make the world a better place.

3 (24m 53s):
Exactly, exactly. And somehow I tracked Alan down and I basically said I'm sort of heartbroken that RenewAmerica has walked away from this. I'd love to help in some way, if you're going to continue and I could raise some money, I have some connections. I think I could be helpful. And my recollection is, Alan said, gee, I'm in the middle of getting this first catalog out. Let's talk in the new year, in, in January.

4 (25m 23s):
What did you think it was so interesting about Odom was doing the thing that really caught your eye? I mean, I mean, were you looking at the possibility of maybe a business thing here?

3 (25m 33s):
Absolutely. I mean, I, I love the idea of a business that instead of teaching people how to marry money was helping them solve environmental challenges we were facing. So it was a good business as an opportunity to do, to use business, to have a positive effect on the world. And the way the relationship started was I offered to write a business plan or help write a business plan for the business to raise money. And that evolved into us becoming partners in the business. And that happened, I believe in January of 1989,

4 (26m 15s):
Just curious, Ellen, what was it that convinced you to work with Jeffrey? I mean, did you see in Jeffrey somebody who may be had those skills that you needed to help With no,

3 (26m 27s):
No. It was much simpler

6 (26m 29s):
On that. I had had enough experience in the catalog business to know that I had a, a financial Hill to climb and I knew that running the business day to day and raising money, which was never my strength, by the way, that would never get me over the hurdle. If I was going to continue in this business, I needed capital and they needed a lot of it. And since I did not have the ability, Jeffrey was my best option.

4 (26m 60s):
And you need the capital because the demand was increasing, which means that you needed correct more inventory. And also you need to expand to grow the business in the moment growing a business. Yep.

3 (27m 11s):
I mean, my recollection was we spent way more money acquiring customers than they generated in revenue. So every time we acquired a new customer, we lost money. And the hope was that over time, over years, they would repeat their purchases and they would become profitable, but they weren't profitable at first.

4 (27m 33s):
Right. And so how would you acquire customers? I'm assuming you just mail them a catalog and hope that people ordered is that right.

3 (27m 40s):
But 99 out of a a hundred people didn't buy. So you had the cost of printing and mailing the catalog, and it's the lifetime value of those customers that you hope will turn the business around at some point. But at that point was very, very, very far in the future.

4 (27m 59s):
All right. So, so the two of you start to work together on the Seventh Generation thing and, and you had to raise money and Jeffrey was going to be the key to raising that money. So Jeffrey what, where did you start

3 (28m 13s):
The key to raising money for Seventh Generation was the people who had invested with me in my prior business, made it a lot of money for every dollar they put into the company, they got $10 back. They were happy

4 (28m 27s):
That way. So they're like, Jeffrey, what's the next thing you're doing because we're on this were wanting to join that ride. Right?

3 (28m 33s):
The vast majority of the investors were those investors from the prior business and they put up $850,000 in 1989 as the first of an endless series of fundraising cycles.

6 (28m 48s):
I was always amazed at Jeffrey's ability to raise the money. I understood that he had previous relationships, but we would go to meetings and do pitches and we'd walk out and Jeffrey, With turned to me. And he would either say that we're not getting anything, or he'd put a number out and said, this is the number we're going to get. Cause I never had a clue. I we'd walk out and I don't have a clue whether they were going to invest in that. And he would hit the number right on the nose every time.

4 (29m 19s):
And, and let me ask you this Jeffrey, try to go back to that place in 1989. I have to imagine that having Alan by your side, to this guy with a kind of scraggly beard or whatever it, wherever it look like, but this clearly this guy from Vermont who was sort of a hippie, but running an environmentally friendly catalog gave to you even more authenticity. Absolutely. I mean, not

1 (29m 42s):
Only authenticity, but Alan actually knew what he was doing. He knew the catalog business. He understood how it worked. He understood the marketing and the operations of it. And I couldn't have done it on my own. There was just no way that was going to happen.

4 (29m 57s):
All right. So you've raised the money and Jeffrey you become the CEO and chairman, but you stayed in New York. You did not move to Vermont. Initially the idea was you're going to commute back and forth and Alan, you were kind of running the operation in, in Vermont, right? Correct. Yup. Okay. So from what I understand, you've moved into a new space, into a place called Colchester in Vermont. And it was like, from what I understand, it was like this really kind of, it was described as a hippie Dan, I was like a ping pong table. There's free Ben and Jerry's that were chalkboards and the bathroom, like people can write things on a chalkboard a about the company that they didn't feel comfortable saying in public I'm in the main conference room, there was no table or chairs, just pillows a Allen, is that right?

4 (30m 43s):
Am I describing this correctly?

1 (30m 45s):
Do you lift out the nap room? Are there

4 (30m 46s):
Was a nap room? Okay. Yeah. Right. There is a nap room. And so this was kind of a, this was an, and was this your vision of what you, you wanted a work environment to be like, but to win by the sounds of awesome. I would totally work.

1 (30m 59s):
So again, what I learned at gardener supply, you know, we were on a fairly rapid growth path there also. And what I learned was that the greatest obstacle to success was fear, fear of people that they didn't know what they were doing and somebody was going to find out. And so what I discovered was that if I could get people to share their fears and realize that we're all in this together and that it's better to ask for help, that that created a much more productive and successful business.

4 (31m 35s):
Yeah. And, and by the way, were you still, were you still focused on selling the same stuff? Jeffrey what do you remember about the catalog? Well, what are the products you were selling?

1 (31m 45s):
Well, I think part of the breakthrough was, you know, if you sell someone a low flow shower head, they only need one of them. And I think the breakthrough was getting into the household product category with paper products and cleaning products, because those were multiple frequent purchases. People were going to buy those over and over and over again. And, you know, we got to the point where about 25% of our sales were made up of these household products, like bathroom tissue, paper towels, and a laundry detergent.

4 (32m 22s):
Are you manufacturing them yourselves or were you working with the, what you were white labeling them and putting Seventh Generation on it.

1 (32m 29s):
Yeah. We were working with a co-packer who would help us design the product and do all the manufacturing. So we had one co-packer that made all the cleaning down in New Jersey

3 (32m 41s):
And a, a tissue paper manufacturer out in Wisconsin that made all the paper products. And it was all labeled Seventh Generation yes. And they thought we were crazy by the way, because, you know, we were selling unbleached a a hundred percent recycled fiber bathroom tissue, which was the scratchy stuff that you found in a gas station. It was rough.

4 (33m 5s):
It was a, it was like a prison toilet paper.

3 (33m 7s):
Yes. But people couldn't get enough of it. They loved it.

4 (33m 12s):
So you had these like a co-packing plants, just kind of laughing. Oh, that was crazy weirdos in Burlington. Vermont want this like Brown rough toilet paper we'll make as much as they want. The first one

6 (33m 23s):
Slowed. We had a guarantee, a, a, a, a full trailer load. Cause they, we insisted that it said made with 100% recycled paper. They, it had always been made with 100% recycled, but they hid that in all the promoted, all the materials

4 (33m 37s):
As consumers didn't want that to know

6 (33m 40s):
Why consumers want toilet paper made a recycled paper. I had to convince them to use our labeling on it. It said a hundred percent recycled paper. And they thought we were absolutely out of our mind.

3 (33m 53s):
Although I think the best product we had in those days was the string shopping bag.

4 (33m 60s):
But like just a, a, like a net, like, yeah, it was, it was like a big in, in, in France. Right? Exactly. That's where they came up with a French farmer's market bag. Okay.

3 (34m 9s):
I had so many orders for this string bag. People were waiting and then this is no joke. They were waiting over a year to get their string bag. And I remember Alan and I took a wonderful trip to France to visit the factory. The, try to figure out how to get them to make more of these things. And they, they couldn't believe we were selling them. Why is that? Well, in those days it was sort of elderly, French ladies who used them to go shopping With they were not in Vogue. They weren't cool, but we sold so many of them. It was just a sec.

6 (34m 46s):
Let me define this a little bit. Cause I, I lived the nightmare at Berlin that I, this one, the software we use, it was back in the day of cobalt. Coldwell was a very rigid programming system. And when they designed the, the back order file for a mail order company, they just assumed that you would never need more than five digits. That would mean you would have 99,999 items on back order. And they said, well, no company in their right mind would ever do this. So we don't have to add another digit. Right? Well, we broke through that and took the entire system down. When we went over a hundred thousand backwards and every time the little French company tells us there going to deliver it and they don't deliver it, we have to send notices to, and this was back in mail.

6 (35m 33s):
This is not email messages. This is 21 cents on an envelope mail. We have to send everybody that has been further delayed. And then the punchline was finally, they got a big shipment ready to ship us and they did something on the label and it got held up at customs. Oh yeah. And we've got a bill in the mail for, I don't remember that as something like a, a, a $120,000 for penalties. And it was, it was a nightmare. The whole thing was a nightmare, but we finally got it straightened out. And that's how many we sold though. We sold over a hundred thousand of these stupid things.

4 (36m 12s):
That's the meantime. Jeffrey you are working out of an office in New York. You guys a couple people there. Yeah. The main headquarters is in, is in Vermont. Correct. And I guess eventually you did move there. And from what I understand for a time, like you, you and Alan live together or live next door to each other, or what do you remember? Boy,

3 (36m 35s):
We lived together. At least we did I my mind,

6 (36m 40s):
But we, we, we were, we were joined at the hip, right.

4 (36m 43s):
You guys hung out in similar separable. Yeah,

3 (36m 45s):
We were. I mean, I considered Allen as close as a friend, as I had to,

6 (36m 50s):
You know, what I've learned over the years is that if you bond over common goals, you develop friendships. And we had this tiger. We were holding onto the tale of this tiger and everyday were on the phone trying to figure out how to solve different problems. And, and to some degree we brought different skillsets to the partnership. You know, I agree with Jeffrey. I mean, you know, I consider Jefferey one of my good friends at the time, and we didn't make a decision without talking to each other.

4 (37m 22s):
Jeffrey how did you feel about that? The culture at the office, that kind of hippie culture and the beanbags and the pillows and stuff. Did you think that actually that's a kind of a good look for a, a company like Seventh Generation did you, were you okay with it?

3 (37m 36s):
I had a multiplicity of feelings. I mean, in, in, in some respects, I loved what Allen was doing. And I learned a tremendous amount from him about how to build a culture that was aligned with the values of the business. And that was really cool. And yet at the same time, I took a lot of shit for the nap room from investor's. It was like, you really need a nap room. Is that a good use of our capital? But I, you know, Allen was a great teacher and I came to really appreciate the culture he was talking before about what people don't know. I mean, one of my fondest memories is that in our staff meetings, we would actually give a prize out to the person who made the biggest mistake that week.

3 (38m 23s):
And they would get a coupon to go out to dinner with their friend or their wife.

4 (38m 27s):
You had This tell me that you still have this thing where the person who made the biggest mistake that week actually got rewarded. Yep.

3 (38m 33s):
Absolutely. Because we a culture where we didn't want people to feel like they couldn't be open and share the mistakes they made. And if they made a mistake in covered it up, the only thing that happened is someone else would make that same mistake. Right? So that was part of the genius of the culture that Alan began to build at the company.

6 (38m 53s):
It was all about the speed that we were growing. People had to make decisions every day. They couldn't keep coming to a boss to make a decision cause something new was happening. They had to be empowered to make decisions. And they had to be empowered when they made a bad decision to bring it up and not hide it in the back of their desk. And it's something that I learned at the garden supply and I've done it in every business.

0 (39m 19s):
What's that mean? I would say amazing, because now this is commonly practiced in big companies like Google celebrates failure, you know, and, and it's become almost a fetish.

3 (39m 26s):
We were way ahead of our time in more ways than one.

0 (39m 30s):
Yeah. It's amazing. I've read that. It was an article that came out in 1989 in the New York times and mentioned Seventh Generation, which was a huge publicity coup for you at the time. And I think your catalog sales in 1989, I read were a million dollars in 1990 $7 million. You went from a million to 7 million in a year with that,

3 (39m 54s):
The help of the 20th anniversary of earth day. The amazing thing was that the media wanted to find stories about the environment. And we were a great story. We got a huge amount of publicity. We had, maybe it was a year or two later, but I remember we had a four-page story and people magazine that was unheard of for this tiny little Vermont company.

0 (40m 19s):
So, so you're looking at this explosive growth and you're thinking, all right, 1989, bam, 1990 7 million, 1991. And then there's a recession. The recession hits

3 (40m 31s):
Well, we planned my, my recollection is that for 91, we expected about 20 to 21 million in sales boy, were we wrong?

0 (40m 42s):
And that was because of the recession.

3 (40m 45s):
Well, I think it was the combination of the recession and the fact that the excitement that people had about the environment during the 20th anniversary of earth day did not carry through so many, many people who bought something and we expected that they would buy something else didn't,

6 (41m 4s):
But also the war cause in the world of catalog marketing, anything that distracts people works against catalog sales, because so much of it is impulse. The other things you're talking about are all true, by the way, I'm not negating any of that. But when the Gulf war started, everybody turned on their television and it was glued to the television. And our, we went from, I seem to remember 12 to 1500 orders a day down to less than a a hundred. And there was a disaster. There's no other word for it.

3 (41m 37s):
It was like jumping out a window and not knowing how far you're going to fall because every week we missed our numbers and every week we missed our numbers again and it was incredibly scary and disconcerting.

4 (41m 50s):
Wow. I mean, at the end of 1990, you're doing 7 million by the middle of 1991. And you start to, you have to lay people off.

3 (41m 59s):
Oh, it was, we, my recollection is we had about 120 people and we had to lay off half of them, almost 60 people, 50%. Wow.

6 (42m 8s):
My worst recollection, I had a good buddy who was running the warehouse, who was a, a, a great chef. And he was having a party on a Saturday night and Geoffrey and I had just made the decision on who we were going to cut. And we decided let's not tell them on Friday. Let's let him have the weekend. We'll tell him on Monday. And so I had to go to this party Saturday night, knowing that on Monday I was going to be firing 60% of the people who are at that party. It was probably one of the most difficult things I ever had to do.

4 (42m 42s):
So you, this is clearly going to take its toll on both of you emotionally, because you're, it sucks to have to do that. Allen, at this point, I guess the toll of have just watching this thing kind of crater and it, it affected you when you decided that you needed some time off. Is that D is that your recollection?

6 (43m 7s):
I would phrase it a little bit differently. By this time I had gone through the buildup at Gardner's supply company where I was working, you know, 80, 90 hours a week then started niche marketing services where I had been working, you know, I was down to 65, 70 hours a week. And then the startup of Seventh Generation was a 120 hours a week. I may be exaggerating, but you got the

4 (43m 35s):
Idea. And

6 (43m 38s):
I remember I was tired when I saw the numbers. I was aware that we needed to really rethink what we were doing. This was not a, a, a temporary setback that we really needed to figure out how to generate some business. And I remember having talked to Jeffrey before it tanked, you know, talking about I'd love to get a sabbatical before we have to go, you know, balls to the wall on the new holiday catalog, which was always our biggest catalog. And give me a couple of months to get my head together and come back with what can we do here to help, you know, regrow this business. And so when I left, that was my thinking Jeffrey

4 (44m 19s):
But you remember this differently. What do you remember about Alan's decision to take a sabbatical? How did you respond to it?

6 (44m 26s):
Yeah, I mean, you know, it's hard to separate what I felt at the, with my

3 (44m 32s):
Memory of what I felt. I mean, I felt abandoned. I felt angry. I felt like I was on a ship that was sinking in my partner whose supposed to be steering the ship with me, just stepped off and left me alone with the boat. That was really sick. I mean, I didn't know whether they would survive. So, and you know, when things don't work out, both parties have some responsibilities. So there's no question that I probably didn't behave the way I should have. I might have felt like, you know, if you leave now, don't come back, but I might not have said that.

4 (45m 9s):
Yeah. Are you, are you that kind of do tend to be conflict averse?

3 (45m 13s):
No, but I tend to hold a grudge. So I did feel sort of abandoned with a mess that I was not thrilled about having to sort out.

4 (45m 25s):
And, and Alan, do you, I mean, January of 1992 U take a six month sabbatical, do you remember? Jeffrey saying, Hey, what the hell are you doing? Why are you leaving? Or do you, do you remember it? It made him just sort of saying, okay, fine. See you later. Yep.

6 (45m 39s):
I had really no clue how, how annoyed Jeffrey was. I had no idea how angry he was and I didn't know until I sent an email or a letter or however we communicate in those days say, okay, getting ready to come back. Why don't we get together? And let me talk about some of the ideas that I have put together that I'd love to start implementing. And I got the dear John letter,

4 (46m 3s):
You got to, you got a letter that basically said your time at the company. Silver. Correct.

3 (46m 10s):
It's so hard because we didn't talk during his sabbatical. At least I don't think we were talking during your sabbatical and for two people who were so close to all of a sudden be that separate, you know, left a lot of room for each one of us to be having our own thoughts in totally different directions.

4 (46m 30s):
When you look back at the way it was handled, do you think that you have had no choice that you had no other way of handling it or do you think you might've done it differently?

3 (46m 42s):
You know, when I reflect on this, you know, any time you have a close relationship that falls apart at any time you hurt someone, there's nothing to feel good about it. I mean, that's a bad situation and that's a personal failing on my part. But my, my reflection is that one of the things we could have done that we didn't do is put things in writing when Allen left. So a written document that says Allen's taking six months off and he will return at the end of six months and fulfill the position that he had before. I mean, that wasn't written down anywhere.

3 (47m 22s):
So we were left with very different experiences in different points of view about what the outcome of the sabbatical would be.

0 (47m 32s):
Jeffrey. It sounds like you wrote that letter thinking Alan would not be surprised.

3 (47m 37s):
I know he was sort of out of the picture and you know, it was kind of, no, I'm not sure that I thought he wouldn't be surprised. And I was probably relatively certain that he would be angry and hurt for me. I think it would be crazy for me to expect anything else. Alan had it. How did you feel when you got it when you got that letter?

7 (47m 58s):
Well, I was totally shocked when I got the dear John note, you know, you got to remember that I really felt that we were friends, but I felt that we were in this together. In my mind, at least I was doing the best thing that I could do for the business. And I felt this was really my baby, you know, and, and Jeff was clearly a valuable participant and partner in it, but I really still felt it was my baby. And the fact that my friend threw me out and stole my baby without even a fucking discussion, you know, I was ripped shit.

0 (48m 39s):
When we come back in just a moment, How Alan's departure, left a big hole at the company and have Jeffrey filled it with some very risky decisions, decisions that will turn Seventh Generation into a completely different company to stay with us. I'm Guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

0 (49m 20s):
Hey, everyone, just a quick, thanks to our sponsor. Squarespace, the website builder dedicated to providing customers with the easy to use professionally designed templates joined the millions of graphic designers, architects, lawyers, and other professionals using Squarespace to establish their online presence, go to squarespace.com/ NPR for a free trial. And when you're ready to launch use the offer code NPR to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. Thanks also to NerdWallet a personal finance website and app that helps people make smarter money moves, have new money goals this year, whether you want to use credit card points to plan a family vacation abroad, once it's safe or take advantage of low mortgage rates to refinance and save for your child's education.

0 (50m 11s):
NerdWallet is the best place to shop financial products that help make your 2021 money goals happen, discover and compare the smartest credit cards, mortgage, lenders, andMoore@nerdwallet.com.

5 (50m 29s):
We are still in the middle of this pandemic. And right now having science news, you can trust from variants to vaccines is essential. NPR shortwave has your back about 10 minutes, every weekday, listen and subscribe to shortwave the daily science podcast from NPR.

0 (50m 53s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm Guy rise. So it's the early 1990s and Alan Newman has just been forced out of the company. He started Seventh Generation he still owns a bout 20% of it, but nothing else, not even a seat on the board. You know, I licked my wounds for a while and then I started coming out of it. And one of the things for me was how I got paid out of seven Generation and the impact that, that had on me when,

6 (51m 27s):
When I finally got paid for my stock, it wasn't,

0 (51m 30s):
I didn't get a lot, but it essentially gave me enough to start up another business. Right.

5 (51m 36s):
And, and I, I guess you got paid out in 1993, which was a bit after you were forced out of the company had that happen.

6 (51m 45s):
Well, I got a phone call Seventh Generation is going public. They need you to lock up your shares. And what is a lockout mean? It means, I agree not to sell my shares for 18 months after they go public. And I said, why would I do that? And they said, because it will allow Seventh Generation to go public. And I said, why would I care? You've never cared about my financial situation. Why should I care about yours? If you really want to solve this problem, you need to buy me out. And that's when that's, when I got paid out

5 (52m 17s):
The soldier twenty-three percent of Seventh Generation I think I'm the, you got like 200,000 bucks from selling it,

6 (52m 24s):
Something like that. Yep. And when that happened, a lot of my animosity subsided.

5 (52m 30s):
Hmm. And Jeffrey around that time, period. I mean, you were still living in, in Burlington, which is not a big place. I mean, did you ever run into Alan? Did you ever see him?

6 (52m 43s):
We actually did see each other several times. We in I, I don't know who instigated this, me or Allen, but we went to see a third party to try to reconcile our differences. And we had a series of meetings with a sort of a marriage counselor type person to see if we could mend the relationship, which I don't think happened very successful.

5 (53m 6s):
You'd tried to do this just for, just for the sake of mending the RI the friendship, or to see if he could come back to the business.

6 (53m 14s):
I think it was just a men, the relationship

5 (53m 16s):
And, and Alan, what do you remember about those? The sessions?

6 (53m 19s):
Honestly, I don't remember a lot. I, I, the only thing I really remember is there grossly unsuccessful.

7 (53m 27s):
You know, we were both kind of dug into our point of view and neither one of us, my recollection at that time was willing to, to accept that the other one had some valid issues that were worth discussing.

4 (53m 42s):
And do you remember feeling uncomfortable when you would see Jeffrey? Would you get like butterflies in your stomach? Like,

7 (53m 47s):
No. My recollection is Jeffrey. He was so uncomfortable whenever he was around me that I loved it my all time favorite. I was sitting on a plane in Burlington, getting ready to take off, and they're getting ready to close the door and, and there's a seat next to me. That's open and I look up and there's, Jeffrey getting onto the plane and I immediately know what CD is going to do. And it's just a little tiny puddle jumper that, you know, we were literally locked together. And so, you know, we say, hi cordially, and Jeffrey sits down literally, as he sits down, the pilot gets on the, on the thing that says we have a little weight balancing problem to do with anybody up front. Who's willing to move out back.

7 (54m 28s):
And Jeff got out of that seat really quick. Do you remember that one? I don't, but I'm sure that was exactly what happened.

4 (54m 39s):
All right, Ellen, I'm going to ask you that to hang on for a while. I want to turn to Jeffrey now and talk about what happened after you left Seventh Generation and Jeffrey went on to, to lead the company. Yep. You got it. Okay. Now Jeffrey so Alan is, is no longer part of the business. It's now a shadow of, of, of what it was a year earlier, but you still believed in the business, you still believed it had potential.

3 (55m 6s):
I did. And at a certain point, my perception was that potential was in a very different direction than the one we had been proceeding that rather than having a catalog business, I had developed the vision for a wholesale business where we would sell our products to retailers and attract consumers in retail stores to buy the brand. Right. You know, that was a way that was a business that I had my own experience with 'cause of the books on tape business. Sure. And I just didn't understand and know the catalog business the way Alan did Alan had done it for years and knew it.

3 (55m 46s):
Well, I didn't.

4 (55m 49s):
And so I guess like around this time, it's, it's clear you need to raise some cash. And as we heard Allen say earlier, you wind up taking the company public, and that does bring in several million dollars. So with that money, what were you now able to do at Seventh Generation?

3 (56m 10s):
So we sort of did three things. We built up our line of branded Seventh Generation products. We were selling in the catalog, a lot of other people's products. If we were selling sheets and towels, and t-shirts, those were not ours with our name on them. So we expanded the assortment of our branded products. So that was number one. Number two, was we redesigned and relaunched the mail order catalog, hoping to get better results than we had been getting. And number three, we started experimenting actually having my brother, Peter, Hollender go to the natural food stores in New York city and put our products on the shelf to see if they actually sold her.

3 (57m 0s):
And we've got a pretty quick feel of what was moving. And there was no question that three products dominated the assortment bathroom, tissue, paper towels, and laundry detergent.

5 (57m 12s):
So from what I understand, I mean, this strategy started to, to work. I mean, you, you had a terrible a couple of years, right. Firm sort of 1991, but by 1994, from what I understand, revenues backup, you exceed $8 million. So your biggest year, since I think 1990 at that point and catalog sales, I guess at this point account for like 80% of what you're doing. So the strategy seems to be at this point, but yeah,

3 (57m 40s):
The strategy was working in the challenge we faced was we had raised about $5 million of additional capital and the board. And I came to the conclusion that we had two very different businesses and they both demanded lots of money. And we decided that we should do something that appeared highly risky and bed on the wholesale retail business, rather than the mail order catalog business. 'cause that was my intuition about were the biggest upside was in the future.

5 (58m 18s):
I guess the thinking was, look, we're really going to make money by being in stores and lots of storage, rather than trying to just sell to individual people.

3 (58m 26s):
I have a mail order catalogs and the mail order catalogs had a problem. I mean, it was a very wasteful business, whether you got one, two or three customers for every hundred catalogs, you mailed, you were creating tons of garbage and tons of waste for all the people that recycled those catalogs without even opening them. And postage costs were rising. Paper costs were rising. So we decided to place our bet on the natural product industry and work on getting more and more retailers like whole foods and bread and circus. And Mrs. Gucci was on board with the brand.

5 (59m 7s):
So this is 1995. You decide to sell the catalog business. As you say, I mean, this is 80% of your revenue, but it sounds like you, it was risky, but that you, you kind of had to dump this aside. So you could really focus on growth. It was sort of like taking a half a step back to take five steps forward. Exactly. All right. So you are now fully focused on being in retail stores. So, and I guess you guys enter whole food. Seventh, Generation enter whole foods in 1998. And was that like a major turning point for you? Was that a year or a time where you can point to and say, that was the moment Seventh, Generation just turned to a major corner.

3 (59m 53s):
Yes, it was huge. And it basically unleashed growth that would propel us from, you know, 10, $12 million to five years later, almost $50 million. Whole foods had so much credibility with the consumer that, that trust rubbed off on us as well. So, you know, we, we had sort of the whole foods stamp of approval by just being present in the store.

5 (1h 0m 23s):
And, and you're still trying to convince other retailers around this time to, to carry your products. I have to imagine that you come across people who are like, listen, I used it. Lysol is better. Or Mr. Clean is better. Just kicks this in the butt. And what would you say when people say that to you?

3 (1h 0m 39s):
Well, every product we sold, we sent to an independent lab and tested our performance against Lysol tide or bounty. And we had a pretty good test results. We were 90 or 95% as effective. We weren't a a hundred percent as effective or more effective, but we felt that we got the job done for most consumers. And that was what would be good,

5 (1h 1m 5s):
The nuts. And, and that's the day that you would show too to retailers?

3 (1h 1m 9s):
Well, we would show that data, but we would also show a lot of sales analysis. And basically what we said was not only are these products healthier and safer, but you will make more money per square foot by selling them than you will selling traditional products. You'll have bigger margins, you'll sell more with less space. And honestly, that financial argument was often what was a winning argument because these retailers or in the real estate business, and they look at how much revenue they can generate per square foot of shelf space. And if you can create more profit per square foot, they're happy.

5 (1h 1m 51s):
But, you know, we had the founders of methadone a couple of years ago. And one of the early insights they had was that you don't, they didn't have a whole lot of success telling their customers at their products were, you know, organic and plant-based et cetera. So they didn't even really advertise that. They just advertised it as a great product that was effective. Did you find that appeals to consumers, like I don't know, a better angels worked or, or did you just try to kind of sell the cleaning products is a good cleaning products in a good paper towel?

3 (1h 2m 25s):
No, I mean, the truth was we sold health and safety first environment second. And as an end, these products really work as well as traditional products. We believed that in order to really set ourselves apart and particularly to appeal to these new moms who were having kids for the first time, that health and safety was critical, as well as the environmental benefits. And yes, the products had to work, but that wasn't our niche, our niche. Wasn't. We're cool. And we'll look nice on your bathroom shelf. We appeal to a quite different market.

5 (1h 3m 5s):
Mm. What about kind of figuring out how to expand your product line? I mean, were there any, did you ever have to come up with products that just like were total dogs? It just, you really wanted them to work and they just didn't know.

3 (1h 3m 21s):
Oh, sure. We created this product made a zeal light that you would put in your refrigerator. And, and basically what it did was take the humidity out of your refrigerator to allow your vegetables to last longer and your refrigerator to run more efficiently. So it was an amazing product it's used in many professional institutional, a refrigerators. I loved it. I loved the idea, but it was far too complicated. A story to tell on a retail shelf that was a total failure right away. No one bought it, unlike our diaper business. I mean, when we got into the diaper business, I, I was traveling in Europe and I saw these Brown diapers.

3 (1h 4m 4s):
I said, wow, unbleached diapers made from a non chlorine bleach pulp. And I said, I gotta have these, we've got to sell these. And they were a success from day one. And that added, you know, about a third to our sales. That was a huge, huge driver of our growth and expansion.

5 (1h 4m 27s):
And who was your first big kind of mainstream retailer that you were able to convince to carry this stuff?

3 (1h 4m 35s):
Well, beyond the focus on the natural food industry in whole foods, our first traditional grocery store was a grocery store called Albertson's in Southern California. Sure.

5 (1h 4m 48s):
I grew up in, in LA. I know the Albertsons. Yeah.

3 (1h 4m 50s):
And we had a very unusual experience with Albertsons about two weeks after we got on the shelf and we were celebrating and excited because it was the first traditional grocery store. There was a labor strike at Albertson's because they were trying to reduce the healthcare benefits that their employees had. We were so idealistic that we felt that those we're not the values that we wanted to be associated with. And we had a contingent of our employees pushing to take the product's off the shelves. And we debated and we debated, and the whole company sat down in a meeting together and some brilliant young man whose name, I can't remember, came up with this idea that we should take all the profits we generated from selling it at Albertson's and donated to the worker's strike fund to help the workers extend the strike and hopefully win back their healthcare benefits.

3 (1h 5m 49s):
And that's in fact, what we did,

5 (1h 5m 51s):
That was amazing. I mean, this is 1995 when let's be honest, consumers didn't care about that kind of stuff as much like today, if you did that, you know, you have a bunch of people that were like, yep. But in 1995, I don't think consumers really care. They probably thought you were, if they even knew that you were doing it, maybe that you were a little kooky,

3 (1h 6m 10s):
It was cookie. And it was unusual and it was the exploration of a new way to embed values into business.

5 (1h 6m 19s):
Alright. So the company is starting to do pretty well. And I guess around this, around like the end of the nineties, 99, you actually decided to raise some money and buy back all the shares and, and take the company private again. So what did that mean?

3 (1h 6m 37s):
Basically meant we had a small group of much more powerful, influential investors who were relatively traditional in their investment strategy. They liked the mission, but they loved the business performance and sales growth. And some of the things that they considered to be silly or extraneous, they were willing to put up with. As long as the sales kept growing at a fast pace,

5 (1h 7m 8s):
I want to go down a little bit of a rabbit hole here. It's that Seventh Generation and companies like it create great products with a great mission, but that also allow consumers to consume, but not feel as bad about it, or feel like they're actually not doing any harm. I mean, for example, if you buy Seventh Generation diapers, the recycled they're Brown, but you're still missing a lot of waste, right? It's still going to sit in a landfill for a a hundred years, no matter what anybody says, if you buy Seventh Generation spray you're, you're still buying it in a bottle that is pretty much impossible to recycle.

5 (1h 7m 54s):
And I don't know. I just wonder about that. I mean, I, I'm not trying to criticize you or, or anybody who does this, but still, I just, I can't get around this idea that it, in some ways gives people this feeling like they're doing good when in fact they are still, you know, they're still throwing stuff away.

3 (1h 8m 12s):
Well, first of all, I totally agree with you. It's a fundamental challenge that the whole green responsible products industry faces to be quite honest, it's often about being less bad rather than good. And I think we've gotten the two things confused. I think that when you're buying a Seventh Generation diaper, you're causing landfills to fill up you're causing increased climate change, your causing water pollution, your having a bunch of negative impacts. They're just not as bad as they would be if you purchased another brand, but being less bad is not being good.

3 (1h 8m 55s):
And I think we really need sort of a sustainability 2.0, that's focused on good products. That's focused on cloth wipes rather than paper towels. That's focused on reusable diapers rather than disposable diapers. And that's why Seventh, Generation just this year came out with cleaning products that had no water and no plastic packaging. Now that's still not good, but it's better than having the plastic waste that we have with our traditional cleaning products.

0 (1h 9m 33s):
But over time, Jeffrey you start to, to make it a name for yourself, not, not only as the CEO of Seventh Generation But, but also as a, as a kind of a leader in, in sustainable green eco-friendly business as a whole, which I gather lead to some tension between you and the board of directors. At what point did you start to reassess the role you were playing in? It sounds like in your head, you started to feel like maybe this wasn't really the, the, the way to, to save the planet. I don't know, am I, am I kind of projecting here?

3 (1h 10m 16s):
Well, in 2007, I began to reflect on my own personal goals and the impact I wanted to have, and it wasn't that I didn't want to be working at Seventh Generation. It was that I wanted to be doing different things than I was doing. I didn't want to be completely focused on the monthly profit and loss statement. I didn't want to be obsessed about product development. What I really wanted to do was help build this responsible business movement. And I wanted to write more. I wanted to speak more. I loved being the public face of the company, but I didn't love doing all the things that a traditional CEO does.

0 (1h 11m 1s):
And did that start to affect your performance as a CEO? Is that let's say the performance that was expected of a CEO?

3 (1h 11m 10s):
I don't think so. I mean, you know, 2010 was the best year financially that the company ever had with about a 50% growth rate. But, you know, there were a series of factors that had created an increasingly tense situation with the board. One was we were in the middle of going to raise about $30 million of additional capital. And it was definitely concerned about how my shifting role would play with those new investors or shifting role, focusing on more public speaking, more building the movement of responsible business. You know, I was a board member of Greenpeace for 13 years.

3 (1h 11m 53s):
I was getting arrested for standing up for things that we believed in. And my board was definitely not comfortable with a CEO who was getting thrown in jail. That was one area of tension. Another area of tension was employee ownership. We had built ourselves up to having a company where the ownership of 20% of the company was resting and the hands of the employees. One of the things that I was the most proud of hoping to get that to 30%, and that was another source of tension with the board, because they felt that the employees had enough stock. They didn't really need any more.

3 (1h 12m 34s):
Yeah. And there was a third area which we had hired this guy, Chuck <inaudible>, who was going to be the sort of business operational leader. He was the Gatorade guy who grew Gatorade from a billion to 4 billion. We hired him together. I came to the conclusion that he was the wrong person for that role, that his values really weren't aligned with the company. My mistake, my fault, the board loved him and the board wanted to keep him. And the board was very nervous about the tension between Chuck and myself.

5 (1h 13m 12s):
So one of you had to go, one

3 (1h 13m 13s):
Of us had to go and it wasn't going to be Chuck

5 (1h 13m 18s):
In 2010. You were fired.

3 (1h 13m 21s):
Yes, indeed. I'm

5 (1h 13m 22s):
Wondering though, if the year you were pushed out of the business was the most profitable year. Were you surprised that you were asked to leave to a, to step down?

3 (1h 13m 34s):
Yes. I was shocked and totally caught off guard. We were totally unexpected, totally unexpected. And you know, it was done in a somewhat brutal fashion because not only was I let go, but I was let go over the telephone on a Saturday morning and told that I wasn't even allowed to go back into the office ever again. I mean,

5 (1h 13m 59s):
You, you really took this company to where it was, you know, it was a little male or a business when you started with Alan and now its a huge force,

0 (1h 14m 13s):
A $150 million. Were you okay? Were you, I mean, how did you respond? Were you, did you get, I think I would get depressed. I think I would go probably need to see somebody talk about it. I think it would be a really hard for me to handle that, but that's me. How did you? I was an I did, yeah,

3 (1h 14m 35s):
It was like a child that had been stolen

0 (1h 14m 38s):
From me. I was incredibly depressed, sad, angry, and

3 (1h 14m 47s):
Yeah, it hurt. It hurt boy. I don't know that I've ever cried as much as I cried in the weeks and months. Following

0 (1h 14m 54s):
That experience when we come back in just a moment, we'll hear How Jeffrey is a former partner. Alan Newman reacted. When he found out that the man who ousted him from his own company had now been ousted himself, stay with us. I'm Guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

8 (1h 15m 24s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor bank of America. You decided to upgrade your outdoor deck. So you ordered the essentials, a power washer or a set of patio chairs and a shiny new grill. And you used your bank of America cash rewards credit card. She was going to earn 3% cash back on online shopping or up to 5.2, 5% as a preferred rewards member, which you put towards the cost of your most essential deck. Addition of a bird feeder apply for yours@bankofamerica.com slash more rewarding copyright 2020 bank of America corporation.

3 (1h 16m 5s):
Hey, my name is Peter Sagan and I am here to help you with the most pressing problem facing civilization today, there are too many good podcasts to listen to now why not avoid that whole problem by listening to an extremely silly podcast hosted by me on wait, wait. Don't tell me it's wisecracks about a week's news shenanigans, fart jokes and general silliness. And it doesn't that sound pretty great right now. Listen to the wait, wait. Don't tell me podcast from NPR.

0 (1h 16m 31s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's 2010 and after 20 years of building and leading Seventh Generation Jeffrey Hollender is kicked out of the company by the board and it felt like a gut punch, but at the same time,

3 (1h 16m 51s):
I feel like I have to take responsibility for what happened to me. It didn't happen on its own. I contributed to what happened. I have to understand how my behavior lead to getting fired. I was very headstrong. I was impatient

0 (1h 17m 8s):
And I too focused on doing what I was passionate about doing and not focused enough on ensuring that I had brought the board along with me. Jeffrey ah, I want to bring Allan back into the conversation, Alan. I know you've been patiently listening for a while, so, so thank you for your patience. No problem. And at the time when Jeffery was ousted or you following what was going on inside of Seventh Generation like, do you remember how you felt?

6 (1h 17m 38s):
I, I definitely followed it. I was aware of that people it's a small town. I know a lot of people who were working in Seventh Generation so I was certainly aware of what was going on. And also while we're on the topic, you know, you didn't ask me, what did I learn from being ousted from Seventh Generation and what's really interesting is I would have given you the answer, the Jeffrey just gave you, I really let Jeffrey handle the board. They were his investors. I was busy trying to run the business. The board meetings were down in New York and I really stayed out of it. In retrospect, I realized that was something that I had never done since, you know, I always stay as Jeffrey polluted, I think.

6 (1h 18m 20s):
Well, put, you've got to bring your board along. You can't be out there in a different place, otherwise you will lose. So yeah, it, it, I did follow it and I saw the similarities, but I'm not going to lie. I took solace in. Okay. How does it feel? Jeffrey and the deja VU certainly occurred to me,

0 (1h 18m 44s):
Ellen, several, I think five or six years after Jeffrey left the company, Unilever acquired it for a poorly for $700 million, which is incredible. When you found out about that or did it

6 (1h 19m 1s):
Well, first of all, I think what Jeffrey did with the business after I left was in many ways, brilliant, you know, certainly deserves a lot of credit for taking this concept and this fledgling business who was really down on its luck and finding the way it's what entrepreneurs do. They find opportunities. They climb over the mountains and there was a hell of a mountain that Seventh Generation had to climb and to get it into a condition to sell to Unilever. You know, when I got all the calls saying, well, how do you feel about big bed, Unilever buying your, your company? It's like, well, number one, it's not my company. And number two, I'm so excited as hell.

6 (1h 19m 41s):
I always wanted to see Seventh Generation go international. I saw no reason why it was a local regional national brand. And so the fact that Unilever took it over and is now expanding internationally to me was exciting as hell. It was my dream for it.

0 (1h 19m 57s):
So I will actually want to rewind in time for mum because before we left off with you, Allen, you mentioned that after you left Seventh Generation you went to, to, to start

7 (1h 20m 8s):
A whole new venture. And this is going to get to the mind blowing for craft beer lovers. And it was called magic hat, Berlin company, which became a pretty successful a craft beer one. What's the story. How, how did that happen? So I had been looking for a business to buy. It was trying to get it into the music business. I had this friend who was working on the, the warehouse Seventh Generation he came in one day and said, I listened to that. This is not what I had in mind. I'm going to go. And I said, what are you going to do? And he said, well, I'm going to go learn how to start a brewery. He had done a lot of home brewing, had one, a lot of competitions. And I said, well, you know, we could start one here. And he said, really?

7 (1h 20m 48s):
I said, yeah, I got nothing else to do. All right. See you in this friend. His name was Bob Johnson. Yeah. Just decided like, like let's do this. Exactly. And did you have a, some kind of strategy? Like what why'd you even know about the beer business? I knew nothing about it. I, I was not really a craft beer guy. You know, I was much more of a pothead than an alcohol guy and I figured, well, I better get educated. And Bob had been following it. So he knew what was going on. And he said, why don't we fly out to the Pacific Northwest? Because that's where it's most developed. And we flew out to Seattle, we rented a car and we drove down to the San Francisco and it took us 11 days.

7 (1h 21m 33s):
We stopped. And I think the number was like 33 breweries along the way. And the aha moment for me, Vermont already had three craft breweries. This is 93. And I said, This Vermont. Really? With a 600,000 people really need a fourth craft brewery and everybody was doing the same thing. And so I was really struggling with, well, how can we be different? And all of a sudden I went, Oh, don't make this about beer. Everybody was everybody a hundred percent of the craft breweries was saying made With only the finest wall and natural ingredients.

7 (1h 22m 13s):
I banned that from our label. I banned that from our thinking, I wanted to be in the music business. So we're going to do a craft beer company, but we're going to focus on pretending we're a music company and supporting

6 (1h 22m 27s):
Music became the lifestyle.

7 (1h 22m 28s):
And this was long before anybody else was doing

6 (1h 22m 30s):
The thing that nobody in the craft business was putting their beer infest in music festivals. You know, I always thought that I would measure my success at magic hat when Ben and Jerry's was at its prime here in Vermont, nobody ever went to a party without taking at least the pine or two pints of Ben and Jerry's with them. They grabbed Ben and Jerry's because Ben and Jerry's was really cool. And they knew that everybody there would be thrilled to see Ben and Jerry's there. And so I made that my North star, I said, I don't want to be a beer company cause that's too limiting. I just want them to buy it because it's fucking cool. And they, this is a great thing to take to a party

4 (1h 23m 13s):
And, and magic had kept growing, right? I mean, you, you started to, to distribute it nationally. How did you guys do that? You know,

6 (1h 23m 21s):
No success in no failure is ever because of one issue. One factor was that there was Bob and me. There were two of us. Most other craft breweries in those days were started by an engineer who loved home brewing and knew nothing about business, knew nothing about finance. They just were fascinated with being able to put this equipment together and make beer. Well, I just come out of an experience with Seventh. Generation where I had seen the effects of growing too fast and hitting a wall. And so when I got into magic hat, I said, we're not going to do that.

6 (1h 24m 1s):
We're going to grow organically. We opened up new territories very slowly. We let the demand exceeds supply for 18 months before we started trying to match supply. And it kept the demand for our beer growing until, you know, we were in the top 10 largest craft breweries in America.

4 (1h 24m 23s):
Allen, I know that, you know, both of these enterprises magic hat and Seventh Generation, I mean, they're, they're a different chapters in your life and, and some, you know, maybe fonder memories than others. And I know that that magic had got eventually gotten to some, some pretty severe financial problems during the 2008 recession. And, and ultimately you had to sell it off and you're not involved with it anymore. Yep. But I mean, if you think about it, right, I mean, you, you helped to create two really iconic brands. Right. I mean, that's, that's pretty awesome. I mean, do you, do you, do you take pride in that as any part of you take pride in that?

6 (1h 25m 4s):
Absolutely. I'm very proud of what I've left behind, more proud in some areas than others, but on hold, I look at what I've done more as, you know, building opportunities for people to, to grow, find passion in work and find a way of earning a living, doing what they love doing. And that to me is what's most exciting. You know, I, unfortunately I just had an experience were at the same time that Seventh Generation was being sold to Unilever. And I was feeling really good about that. I was watching magic hat, you know, tank and you know, it it's continuing to tank and it it's, it's probably not going to make it much longer.

6 (1h 25m 48s):
And it made me really sad to realize that that's not living in my legacy. Seventh Generation I feel, you know, has been a nice part of my legacy along with go to the supply company. And I'm just, I do have a sadness for the fact that magic had didn't make it

4 (1h 26m 7s):
Ellen. Do you think? Cause I think, I think you are, you're a visionary. Okay. And you've got a vision and you are, you're a dreamer and you've got these incredible ideas, but I think you are a stubborn to write. Is that fair to say? Yeah. Okay. I'll go a little bit stubborn. And so maybe that stubbornness and by the way I am too, I'm not an easy person to work with. I love my team, but I'm not always easy to work with. I think that sometimes you're a little hard to work with maybe.

6 (1h 26m 37s):
Oh, I'm a really tough. So let me tell you a story that you'll probably like since the beginning, it relates back to how I built this. I'm well aware how difficult I can be. I've gotten less difficult as I age, but I'm still difficult. And I'm listening to you and the woman who, who had a cosmetic company was a Bobby Brown and she was talking about, you know, the sale to the bigger company and how that really allowed her to have a life and still grow the business and how wonderful everything was. And then you said, so why did you get out? And she gave the answer that has transformed my view of myself. And probably to some degree I think describes the relationship, you know, why Jeffrey, and I didn't make it.

6 (1h 27m 23s):
She said, well, you know, what I realize is at the end of the day, I like being the boss and I was not the boss at Seventh Generation, you know, Jeffrey and I both had that role. And I think Jeffrey also likes being the boss. And I think it was always a friction when we needed each other, you know, and we really needed each other during the growth spurt, but it ended rough because I wasn't the boss

4 (1h 27m 49s):
Knowing what you know now and, you know, having mellowed With age and this part. Have you ever wished that you, that maybe you did it a little different and maybe you kind of gave a little bit more accommodated Jeffrey or, or didn't take that sabbatical? I don't know. I'll just defer regret. Not seeing if you could make it work with Jeffrey.

6 (1h 28m 9s):
I, I think it was not possible to make it work and back in those days, and I have thought frequently, and I have even said this publicly, that the shame of it is seventh generation would have been much stronger had I stayed and had we both been there. Cause I think we were very complimentary. I think we shared a sense of values and I think Seventh, Generation probably would have been better off. I don't know this for a fact, obviously, had we both been in there and found a way of working together that said, I don't know that that's within either one of our DNAs

4 (1h 28m 44s):
Jeffrey do you, does any part of you agree with Allan's assessment that maybe if it would've worked it out and we would have stayed there, seven generation would have been an even better company and brand.

6 (1h 28m 54s):
I certainly think that that's a possibility, but you know, who knows? I mean, as I said, I learned a lot from Alan, he's an incredibly talented,

1 (1h 29m 3s):
Capable Guy he had many skills that I didn't have. And I, you know, in many ways I tried to do the things that Seventh Generation that I had learned from him. He was a master at creating an incredible culture and community. So, you know, who knows how things might have gone had we stayed together. We didn't. So no one will ever know.

0 (1h 29m 30s):
What do you think? I mean, lots of people obviously listen to the show for business ideas and also for guidance. Jeffrey what do you think somebody should look for in a co-founder?

1 (1h 29m 41s):
Well, first of all, they've got to make sure that they want a co-founder it's not for everybody. As Alan had suggested some people maybe like him and I are happier being in a leadership role alone. So if you're going to have a co founder, I think you need to have a very, very transparent and clear agreement about the relationship, not just who's doing what, but how you handle disagreements, how you handle things that when things go wrong, it's a challenge. I mean, it's, you know, to, to me, in some way, being married is like having a partner and it takes a tremendous amount of work.

1 (1h 30m 22s):
So, you know, I think if you're not prepared to do the work, you shouldn't get into the relationship. You know, I agree with a lot of what Jeffrey said. I think that my most successful partnership was with, with Bob Johnson, With magic hat. He clearly recognized that I was the lead dog. I had the experience that I was putting in the money. And then at the end of the day, I was going to make critical decisions. The other side of it was we had very complimentary skills. He just wanted to be a brewer. He just wanted to make great beer and my entrance was growing the business. And so we never stepped on each other's toes.

1 (1h 31m 5s):
And I think it's critical if there are a co-founders Jefferies, right? I think that having written agreements on what the roles are and whose responsibility things are a really critical and as things changed to update that, I think it's really important because at the end of the day, you really need to be in the same page.

0 (1h 31m 26s):
You know, Jeffrey, I've been meaning to ask. Cause we mentioned earlier that that in 2016 Seventh Generation was, it was acquired by Unilever. And at that time you were actually invited by Unilever to return to the board. And I think this was like five or six years after your ouster. Were you surprised?

1 (1h 31m 48s):
I was very surprised. Very surprised. Thrilled, but very surprised. Yeah.

0 (1h 31m 54s):
Yeah. Anybody on the board who was also on the board when you ran it, there were a couple of people

3 (1h 32m 0s):
Who were on the board briefly, but cycled off pretty quickly. And there was a little awkward quite honestly, but there were also some incredibly wonderful people who were new along with me. And it was a, it was a terrific experience and it's been a terrific experience. And I, I have had a unique opportunity to sort of continue to shepherd my legacy with Unilever in a way that I never imagined I'd have the opportunity to do. Yeah.

5 (1h 32m 34s):
Jeffrey when you think about the journey you've had and all of the ups and downs and the incredible successes and challenges, how much of this do you attribute to your business acumen and hard work and how much do you think happened? Because you got lucky and it kind of rode the wave of the natural food revolution?

3 (1h 32m 54s):
Well, there's no question that you have to be a little lucky to be successful. I don't think anyone is successful without a fair measure of luck, but I, I attribute a lot of my success to my unwillingness to give up to no matter what challenge I'm facing, no matter how things are bad things. Look, I'm glad that I have have not given up and I've stuck with it. And if you don't have that passion, if you don't have that love for what you're doing, you won't make it through the hard times. You won't be around to experience the luck that might be waiting out there for you.

5 (1h 33m 31s):
Alan luck, skill hard work. What do you think?

7 (1h 33m 35s):
All three, you know, I got lucky numerous times. I got lucky when I took a good, a job at gardens for all that took me on a ride. And it really taught me the, the catalog business, which then took me on my next bride through Seventh Generation and neither one of those was planned, you know? So were they lucky? I don't know I was in, I was in play. So I had the opportunity to see the opportunities and say yes to them. And then I think you make your own luck. I think once you say yes and, and Jeff's ability to continue. I mean, it's one of the things that I was marveled that, you know, when things were looked impossible, Jeffrey would just dig in and grunt through them.

7 (1h 34m 24s):
That causes luck to happen to you because you stay in play and it's your ability to climb those mountains. And then when you see an opportunity to be able to move on those opportunities, which other people would then call luck

5 (1h 34m 39s):
That's Alan Newman and Jeffrey Hollender co-founders of Seventh Generation these days Jeffrey still has a seat on the board. And it was also the CEO of the American sustainable business council. As for Allen, he's busy with a number of small ventures, including a live music venue

4 (1h 34m 58s):
In Burlington called arts riot. It's been closed during the pandemic But yolks to open up later this year and the motto for the place it's actually pretty catchy destroy apathy. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week and why you're with us. Please do take a moment to subscribe to this podcast. If you wanna write to us, our email address is H IBT at NPR dot org. If you want to follow us on Twitter, it's at how I built this, or I'm at Guy Ross. And my Instagram is at a guy that Ross This episode was produced by Casey Herman with music composed by Ramtin Arablouei thanks also to Ferris Afari there's Metzker Derek gales, JC Howard, Julia Carney Neeva grant, and Jeff Rogers.

4 (1h 35m 47s):
Our intern is Janet <inaudible> I'm Guy Roz. And you've been listening to how I built this.

2 (1h 35m 60s):
This is NPR.