2 (2s):
Hello, Danny. Hi. Hi, it's guy here. How are you doing? Well, it's good to hear your voice. You too. I think my conversation with you is probably one of the last conversations I had yeah, was that a was at a Thursday or Wednesday to Thursday? Well, that was the day that was the day we made we made our decision that night. Where are you right now? So I'm up in North Western Connecticut where I've been since March the 13th our youth you've

1 (29s):
been inside the whole time pretty

2 (30s):
much. Yeah. Yeah, in fact we have we have four kids all of whom are somewhere between 20 and 26 and we have conversations every single day. You know, I'm 62 years old. So I'm in the category. That should probably play it safer

1 (51s):
Danny as you mentioned. We did this conversation the last conversation we did in the studio before before we are all kind of sheltered in place. Let's listen to it because the story is the same. Same I mean how you built this incredible Company still fans. So let's listen to it. And then at the end kind of come back and just get an update on what's going on. Now. Is that okay? Okay,

2 (1m 15s):
let's cut right to the chase. This one of the greatest piece of advice. I got from my late grandfather Irving

1 (1m 21s):
Harris. He said, you know stop complaining about problems. He said problems is the definition of business the people who do best in business. Start the ones with the least problems are the people who solve their problems better and have more fun doing it with better people. From NPR how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they vote. I'm Gyros and on today's show how a project to revitalize an old city park LED New York restaurateur.

1 (2m 4s):
Danny Meyer to create the very first Shake Shack and then turn it into a billion dollar hamburger Empire. A few years ago. I interviewed Tony hsieh the founder of Zappos on the show Zappos sells shoes and clothes, but that's not how Tony thinks of the company he describes a pose as a customer service company that happens to sell shoes. Now. It's kind of the same story with restaurants asked a lot of chefs and restaurateurs what business they're in and you'd think they'd say The Food business but actually food is what Happened to sell you the business.

1 (2m 47s):
They're in is Hospitality restaurants are places where in normal times people come together Where We Gather where we have an experience now when it comes to any business only about half of them survived long enough to celebrate their five-year anniversary, but for restaurants only 1/5 will make it that long. The food industry is a tough industry and covid has made it even harder. So many restaurants will not survive this crisis and that also goes for some of the restaurants created by Danny Meyer today's guest which should give you a sense of how deep this crisis is hitting restaurants because Danny Meyer, he's widely considered to be the most influential restaurateur in the United States and not just for Shake Shack, but for his higher-end restaurants like Union Square Cafe and Gramercy Tavern in New York City.

1 (3m 42s):
Danny's influence is so deep that many Chefs and restaurant owners are looking to his team at Union Square Hospitality Group to figure out what to do next. In the meantime. Shake Shack is still a huge business of publicly traded company valued more than two billion dollars. You may have read about how Shake Shack received a government payroll loan, which it promptly returned but still cause some controversy Danny. We'll talk about that later in the show, but for now a little bit about how Danny had started his day. Dad ran a travel agency when Danny was growing up in Saint Louis. So from an early age, he was able to visit Europe and learn about food which didn't immediately launched his career in the restaurant industry.

1 (4m 28s):
In fact after college Danny floated around a bit before he decided to apply to law school.

2 (4m 35s):
I was never interested in the law, but I didn't know what else to do and the true story is that the eve of taking my LS 80s. I was out to dinner with my aunt and uncle and And my grandmother here in New York and my uncle said I don't know what's bugging you tonight. And I said, well I have to take my L SATs tomorrow and he said well, of course you do you want to be a lawyer and I said and he got really really mad and he asked me probably the most pivotal question of my life, which was do you have any idea how long you're going to be dead? And I said no and he said I don't either but I'll tell you one thing a hell of a lot longer than you're going to be alive.

2 (5m 19s):
Why in the world would you do something you don't want to do and I said because I don't know what else I would do and he said you got to be kidding me all I've ever heard you talk about your entire life is restaurants and food. I really did love the idea of becoming a restauranteur, but I didn't have any idea what that meant. And probably it was the Monday morning after that that I called one of my best friends from college and Said you know how much fun we used to have going out to eat all the time up in Hartford. I said, I'm actually thinking about maybe opening a restaurant but I need some help. How about if I be the food guy and you be the money guy I said I just found out there's this thing called the New York restaurant school and there's a course in restaurant management.

2 (6m 7s):
Would you consider taking it with me? And I said sure and he was he was in a bank training program at that time with us Trust. So he took the class with me and we went through 2 out of the 8 by the time his dad found out and his dad who was a very proud yalie said no, son of mine is going into that awful business. So my pal dropped out felt terrible about leaving me in the Lurch and he said I feel so bad that I want to introduce you. Our Bank u.s. Trust has exactly one restaurant client. And this was an Italian. Seafood restaurant and the restaurant was called Pesce and my interview consisted of the owner asking me to walk back and forth a couple times and then stand in front of him.

2 (6m 59s):
And as I stood in front of him, he looked me, you know from my curly hair down to my wallabies and he said you'll do that was my

1 (7m 7s):
interview. It was an interview to do what well it was an interview to

2 (7m 12s):
become the assistant lunch manager.

1 (7m 15s):
And so every

2 (7m 17s):
morning I would check in the waiters, make sure they had done their side work and then I would type the specials in

1 (7m 24s):
consultation with the

2 (7m 25s):
chef. And so I got what I

1 (7m 27s):
wanted. I'm curious. I mean you weren't going to Pesce to be the assistant lunch manager and to turn that into a career you were really going there to learn the business because in your mind already at that point you thought I want to open a restaurant is it was that absolutely okay. Absolutely. This was a very strategic decision that you Making already thinking I've got to learn this completely strategic and I told

2 (7m 50s):
my parents that I was going to try this

1 (7m 52s):
and the way that I could get them to sort of take. It

2 (7m 57s):
seriously was not to say I was going to be a restaurant to her but to say I was thinking about becoming a

1 (8m 2s):
chef and my plan was let me

2 (8m 7s):
do you know a year or so at Pesco to see if I like

1 (8m 11s):
it and then after that the plan was that I was going to go. Go cook in Italy and in France and my dad agreed to connect me with one or two of his friends. So he connected

2 (8m 25s):
me with a restaurateur and in France and I got to work there. I got to live with the chef and wow go to the market every morning and work into of the Skies restaurants. I took cooking classes from a woman who was purported to be the Julia Child of Italy in Milan, and I also got to Work in ROM and so being in the restaurant business for me. Once my uncle opened that that can I couldn't get it out of my system and it was like having a mosquito bite where everybody says don't scratch. It don't go into that business and it kept itching and when no one was looking I would itch it.

1 (9m 9s):
So you go to France you learn a little bit more about cooking and you come back to the US. S with a plan to open a restaurant, you've got some savings and this is the mid 80s in New York a very different New York than it is today the parts of New York. I think people don't realize this were, you know comparatively affordable to today like you could take a look like a normal person could take a lease out on a

2 (9m 34s):
building as a matter of fact the place that I bought at. What I did was I just started walking. That's all I did for January of 1985 was walk, but I was walking everywhere. I was walking to neighborhoods and just trying to imagine what might that neighborhood One Day become and so I got to know Tribeca and it wasn't hot back then. I got to know the Meatpacking District and nobody was there back then. I got to know the Union Square. Nobody was there and finally I walked into a what I would come to learn was a 49 year old beloved vegetarian restaurant called brownies the first vegetarian restaurant in New York City and I I just introduced myself and I said could I meet the owner?

2 (10m 19s):
Well, he's not here right now. Why well, I just want to see if he's ever interested in selling the restaurant. I mean, can you imagine saying that to

1 (10m 26s):
somebody? Yeah, there was no there was no sign out said for Lee knows nothing. No,

2 (10m 31s):
you just like this spot. Yes. I like the spot because it was a half a block off of the Union Square greenmarket and it reminded me of what I had done in France and Italy which was Starting every morning shopping for food bread chef at the market.

1 (10m 49s):
So basically I guess it turned out that you were able to purchase this restaurant you found because luckily the owner was wanting to retire and the deal you took over the lease on that space, which you had what 14 years left on I read,

2 (11m 3s):
correct,

1 (11m 4s):
correct not I think about this. You're like 27 years old. I mean 14 years must have felt like a really long lease. I mean weren't you scared of making a note the commitment to at least for 14?

2 (11m 15s):
Years. No, not at all because I think I've come to learn that a Hallmark of being an entrepreneur is

1 (11m 21s):
that you are

2 (11m 23s):
up sided as in you can only see up you don't see what could go wrong and it

1 (11m 28s):
just not only did it never

2 (11m 31s):
dawned on me that this thing would fail or could fail

1 (11m 35s):
but it almost didn't matter because

2 (11m 39s):
if it had failed I was confident that I was not going to spend all the money that I had. And I was also confident that I had nothing to lose because reputationally nobody had ever heard of me. So who would know her care if it fails I just had to get it out of my system.

1 (11m 57s):
And do you remember what the what the lease was going to cost you

2 (12m 1s):
two hundred and forty thousand dollars for the 14

1 (12m 4s):
years for the 14 years and then I spent

2 (12m 8s):
$500,000 building it and that was it. That's I was

1 (12m 12s):
actually we should be effective. That's an insane. Shane bargain certainly by today's standard. Well, I couldn't today. I don't think I could

2 (12m 18s):
build a, you know a restaurant with

1 (12m 20s):
our parking lot stuff. You couldn't build a you can get a parking spot for that today and he said you got a 14 year lease effort under 40,000 and then you put in 500 thousand dollars up to build out the restaurant. Yeah, presumably you had to ask people for to help you out right you couldn't do this with all your

2 (12m 37s):
savings. Yeah, I asked my so I asked my mom and one of my aunt's and one of my uncle's and I Not ask my dad and sadly. My dad did not come to the opening. We were sort of on the outs back at that point which is really sad, but I also think that he felt somewhat threatened by it and to my mom's credit my aunt's credit my uncle's credit. We all structured this as a loan, which was great because they then put me in a position where I could actually own all the equity after I paid off all the loans. So it was a it was a good

1 (13m 14s):
deal. All right, so you borrow this money to build it out but like you got to find a chef and the staff and like what did you how did you start to do that?

2 (13m 22s):
Well, remember now, I'd spent an entire year working in a restaurant in New York and in Europe with chefs living with chefs cooking, but you learn a lot and so

1 (13m 33s):
when I wear would you advertise just like in the

2 (13m 35s):
classifieds? I didn't advertise anywhere. This is an interesting part of the story before I went to France. I was taking a wine glass it a place called la How to me do that in New York and there is a person in the class who I really hit it off with an every night after the class the two of us would try to go discover a new restaurant in the city to go eat at his name was Brian Miller and he had just left the Hartford Courant as a young journalist. So I'm now in France cooking and I get a letter one day from Brian and his letter says I've got great news the New York. Times has just hired me to become the journalist responsible for a column called Diner's Journal.

2 (14m 22s):
I wrote him back and I said guess what? I've got really good news. I'm going to be opening a restaurant in New York. And so I don't want to diminish the role that Brian Miller played in helping me because he introduced me to some pretty important people in the food world people like Craig Claiborne. It was really the first restaurant critic in America. People like the top meat purveyor to all the French restaurants in New York named Mark Sarah's am. Who knew every chef and sous-chef it all the French restaurants in New York and that was back in the days when you weren't taken seriously as a chef if you were not able to cook in a French restaurant.

2 (15m 6s):
So he introduces me to a young guy and his audition with me was the same audition that I think I've given to two other people. I hired them to

1 (15m 17s):
I heard them to be sous chef Leslie. Where were you doing this what kitchen were using? Where are using the

2 (15m 23s):
In in my apartment on the Upper East Side at that

1 (15m 27s):
time. So you started to kind of piece together a team, but you were kind of collecting names and meeting people who you knew I guess down the road could help you build this restaurant. Is that is that right? You're absolutely right

2 (15m 40s):
and I had a vision for what I wanted to do and it was a weird Vision. The vision was to open a restaurant that you couldn't necessarily put your thumb on and that was different you had Italian restaurants. You had French restaurants. You got American restaurants, but you didn't have eclectic restaurants. You didn't have a restaurant that

1 (16m 1s):
had a little bit of Rome with a little

2 (16m 4s):
bit of Tuscany with a little bit of Leon with a little bit of Bordeaux with you know, with a little bit of San Francisco. I might add and And so when Union Square Cafe open, even though we had absolutely no idea what we were doing and we made mistakes left and right and it was a different kind of restaurant and it worked.

1 (16m 25s):
And so you so you basically said all right, we're going to make this restaurant right now. It's going to be this sort of, you know, high-end food but not a high-end

2 (16m 32s):
feel exactly right and at a fraction of the cost and without one ounce of snootiness whatsoever and you know my hiring if you were from New York, I didn't pretty much want to hire you I was looking for because I didn't think of New York as being a very friendly Place back then huh. I wanted a place that with it was welcoming and basically that's That was the gift. I got from growing up in st. Louis and I did like going out to eat in St. Louis but much more for the hospitality. It turns out then for the

1 (17m 4s):
food. When did you open in 1985 to did it must have taken a while,

2 (17m 9s):
right? Yeah. We opened. I'll never forget. The first day of construction was Memorial Day weekend of 1985 and then we open October 21 of 1985 and we didn't have the internet. I didn't have a PR agency, it was pretty slow at the beginning. It took us an entire month before we ever needed to use any more than one of our three dining areas. Wow, and the next thing that happened was we got our first review from The New York Times and it was Brian Miller.

1 (17m 42s):
It was Brian Miller your old friend that you met in that wine glass. Yeah, and

2 (17m 46s):
I was so nervous leading up to this point because he and I had stopped talking to each other because we couldn't yeah, but we ended up Getting a really really good two-star review to this day. Brian will say that if anything he was extra tough on us because he did not want to be seen as being favorable and he actually had had been so concerned about this that he had asked others from The New York Times to come to the restaurant and he asked what their opinions were, but it really put us on the map and that two-star review that we got I think it tripled our business overnight.

1 (18m 20s):
Wow, and you were always there in the restaurant

2 (18m 24s):
every day. Always and did you ever cook in the kitchen? I cooked in the kitchen. I think a total of three times one of which was disastrous. It was the first Thanksgiving we were open and by this point the chef in the sous chef had fallen in love and we were not very busy and when the sous chef said that she wanted to take the chef back home to meet her parents. I said, that's fine because as far as I was concerned the restaurant was not going to be busy on the Friday night after Thanksgiving. And so I had my Brooks Brothers suit and red tie on with a white shirt and the kitchen went down everybody in the dining was begging for their food.

2 (19m 7s):
Where is it? Where's my appetizer is my salad. Where's my bowl of soup? We couldn't even Ladle soup. We were so far behind. So I threw on kitchen whites over my suit and I started trying to help the kitchen dig out of all of this mess that we were in and the next thing I hear from one of our servers is Is Danny I need you in the dining room right now? Because there's a gentleman who's had too much to drink. He's walking around the dining room with a tie tied around his

1 (19m 36s):
forehead and he's complaining that we don't have baked potatoes on the menu. No, man, I

2 (19m 41s):
go out into the dining room and true enough. There was the guy walking around and he said you can't cut me off your server just told me they won't serve me anymore. And I said, yes we can

1 (19m 54s):
here's your bill and he said you can't make me

2 (19m 56s):
pay. We then go chest to chest and I said I can't make you pay but I can make you get out of my restaurant and we start walking chest chest up the stairs and he throws a punch lands. Right right on my jaw.

1 (20m 9s):
And for the first time in my life. I

2 (20m 12s):
punched someone else right in the face right in front of everybody and I pushed him out the door and lo and behold what I didn't know is that the restaurant critic of the Daily News was sitting in the restaurant. In the whole thing and that would become part of our review which was how much he loved the restaurant except for this one night when the food was absolutely horrible and other the other things transpired that made me wonder Danny did you well as

1 (20m 44s):
Union Square Cafe really growing prominence through the 80s. What does your dad think about any you? You know, I gather your dad did not come to the opening. Maybe there was some tension between the two of you and I don't know maybe I don't What but I miss been proud of you, but I mean it

2 (20m 60s):
did he well he was but unfortunately I didn't learn that really until after he died. He died in 1990, but he told a lot of people how proud he was. And so after he died the floodgates would open with people sharing those stories and I really do hope that I tell my own kids in their real life because you didn't know I didn't know and you know what? I wasn't so much doing this to make him proud. I was doing this to prove to myself. Self that I could do this because I think all of us are to some degree motivated by trying to prove something to ourselves or to somebody else sure 10 years after opening Union Square Cafe when I finally had the courage to open a second restaurant.

2 (21m 44s):
So that was in 1994, but a big part of what I had to prove was that I was not an imposter because I had this nagging feeling that Union Square Cafe had been all luck that I never could have opened it if it hadn't been for getting that loan for my mom and aunt and uncle I never could have succeeded if I hadn't known Brian Miller before opening and so that led to Gramercy Tavern and Gramercy Tavern ended up working out not immediately, but it worked out pretty well. And then what was kind of fascinating was that

1 (22m 20s):
for many many

2 (22m 21s):
years Union Square Cafe in Gramercy Tavern were like these two siblings that have the biggest Rivalry,

1 (22m 28s):
and they would

2 (22m 29s):
Vie for one and two is sagat's favorite restaurants in New York City. And I realized there was something

1 (22m 38s):
that was working at that point. I read that when shortly after he Gramercy Tavern opened in 94 Union Square Cafe went down to like number three in the Zagat rating from to and and you were kind of kicking yourself thinking. Oh, this was a mistake. I can't do both things really. Well, I can only do one thing really well. And I'm like take my eye off the ball at Union Square Cafe and it was that we were you did you have anxiety about that

2 (23m 4s):
boy. Did I have hang side? I was so depressed

1 (23m 6s):
but it really forced me to learn to articulate a

2 (23m 11s):
bunch of things that had

1 (23m 12s):
perhaps been intuitive

2 (23m 13s):
before but that I had never actually been intentional about the biggest one was that I really really understood the power of hospitality for the first time. I understood that

1 (23m 24s):
Hospitality was a

2 (23m 26s):
completely different Thing than service I think service

1 (23m 30s):
is a way to describe the technical delivery of the product. Did you do what was expected did you

2 (23m 36s):
get the right food to the right person and I think hospitality is a very different thing which is oh by the way, how did you make the recipient of your service

1 (23m 44s):
feel? Yeah, you're doing it. How do you train for that? How do you hold people accountable to that? You can't be in both restaurants at all time. How are you able to make sure that because it's not you can't just say to somebody because Be really nice to the people who come in be really kind to them. Like it's not that simple. Right

2 (24m 3s):
right. Now, let's just let's cut right to the chase. This one of the greatest piece of advice. I got from my my late grandfather Irving Harris. He heard me complaining one day soon after Union Square Cafe opened about how hard something was or he said, you know, stop complaining about problems. He said problems is the definition of business. Yep, and he said the people who do Some business aren't the ones with the least problems are the people who solve their problems better and have more fun doing it with better people. And so I think about that all the time because whatever you do for a living whether it's what you do or what I do or what a banker does.

2 (24m 44s):
We're all solving problems all day. And the question is, who do you want to be solving those problems with whose it's kind of like if you were a tennis player, who do you want to have a beer with after you're done playing doubles, right? And so I was able to identify in our top performers that there were six emotional skills that were always present at a very very high level and we could celebrate them and we could teach people how to spot them in an interview, but we couldn't teach you. What are they? It's kind of optimism. Yeah, it's curious intelligence. Yeah. It's work ethic. It's empathy self-awareness and integrity and so in one Respect we made our lives a lot tougher because I'd say it's challenging enough to find a great pasta cook, but I don't let our chefs hire that pasta cook unless they believe that the pasta cook has those six emotional skills.

2 (25m 42s):
Meaning that now you've got someone who's really good at what they do and who is motivated to do that thing because they are happier themselves when they're making you feel better. Let me come back in just a

1 (25m 55s):
moment have Danny took his eye. Ideas about hospitality and fine dining and decided to try them out in a different setting a hot dog cart in Madison Square Park and how it still took him five years to realize that that idea could become something much much bigger. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz you're listening to how I felt this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsor Comcast business Comcast business knows there are times when the need to connect really matters to keep customers and employees in the know and to keep business moving Comcast business is prepared for Times Like These powered by the nation's largest gig Speed network to help give you the speed reliability and security your business needs tools manage your business for any device anywhere and a team of experts here.

1 (26m 57s):
You 24/7 to learn more go to Comcast business.com. Thanks. Also to American Express. There are proud to support small business owners through this unprecedented time and whatever comes next to help your small business. Get back to business visit stand for small.com. That's the powerful backing of American Express. You may have noticed something that all these protests over police violence. There are a lot more white people there than you'd expect but how long will that

2 (27m 31s):
last this awoken among white American voters how far are they really willing to go beyond dethroning

1 (27m 37s):
Trump Adam server on race and lessons from history. Listen And subscribe to it's been a minute from

2 (27m 43s):
NPR.

1 (27m 46s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's the mid-1990s. And Danny Meyer is looking to expand his business. He has his eye on a building on Madison Square Park in New York's Flatiron District. He wants to open a fine dining restaurant called Eleven Madison Park, but the parks not in great shape New York is just beginning to think about revitalizing its public spaces and Danny wants his new restaurant to be out of that movement.

2 (28m 15s):
Here's here's how this story goes. So I sat down to negotiate this lease with the company that owned the beautiful Eleven Madison Building, but before even talking about money I said, I need

1 (28m 27s):
to know that you would join me in an effort to restore this park because this part could be gorgeous just like it was

2 (28m 35s):
in

1 (28m 36s):
1898. Yeah. So we together

2 (28m 39s):
created something called the campaign for the new Madison Square Park

1 (28m 43s):
and And we raised money. We raised 11 million dollars

2 (28m 47s):
and fast forward several years. We engaged the public art fund of wonderful organization in New York City to help us bring art to the park and there is an artist from Thailand and his idea was to have for taxi cabs on stilts with a working hot dog cart to go with it and he needed someone to operate the hot dog cart. And so I said, well, of course, we'll be glad to do it. It and you know, all of my colleagues at eleven Madison Park and table are Indian restaurant, which was right next door. They looked at me like I was crazy. Like the last thing we need to be doing is Chicago-style hot dogs in the middle of

1 (29m 27s):
a park that's you want to do Chicago-style hot dogs. I

2 (29m 30s):
wanted to try to prove that this Hospitality concept that I've been thinking about so much was not just for fancy restaurants, but it was everywhere and I wanted to prove that it even mattered at a hot dog cart. The reason that I wanted Chicago-style hot dogs was there's eight toppings and I wanted the people who worked the hot dog cart to remember. Everybody's favorite toppings because everybody for over almost everybody. There's like one of those eight toppings. You don't

1 (29m 58s):
want right?

2 (29m 59s):
Yeah. I don't like mustard or I don't like neon relish or something like that for

1 (30m 4s):
Peppers. You gotta like I love this or fingers love tomatoes gonna go for the tomatoes. I'm okay with the tomatoes celery salt, but I have the celery

2 (30m 12s):
salt. He's showing off now. Now you got them. So so anyway, we hired are out of season Co Checkers so they would now have a job, you know for months before code Seasons, they were happy and we cooked up in the private dining room of Eleven Madison Park. That's where the hot dogs were cooked. And lo and behold this this hot dog cart just killed it and we had you know, it was covered by Peter Jennings Tom Brokaw Dan Rather CNN covered it. And there'll be a hundred people in

1 (30m 46s):
line every single day that summer and this was as far as I sent us a non-profit, right? This is not a for-profit. I gotta stand.

2 (30m 54s):
Well what we had done was to offer to give all of our profits back to the Madison Square Park Conservancy, and it was pretty easy because we lost about 5,000 bucks that first year and then 9/11 happens in the city was really not only in a economic depression, but also an emotional Channel depression and so the following summer 2002 the community basically said even though we've moved on to a different piece of Art in the Park. Can you just bring back the hot dog cart?

1 (31m 25s):
I'll serve us because it feels good. So we did that. It was a long on it you didn't intend to return to but you correct like that. So we we did it

2 (31m 33s):
again and in 2002 then we did it the third year 2003 and that year we made seven thousand bucks gave it to the Conservancy, but me. While we were cooking up this idea and we got permission to create a permanent kiosk in Madison Square Park. And so I convinced my mom to join me in gifting this permanent kiosk starting with hot dogs. Let's gift it to the park. So the park will actually be the landlord we will own the business. But if it works

1 (32m 10s):
the goal of the only two real goals we

2 (32m 12s):
had were Can it attract people to using the park morning noon and night and could it potentially create a revenue source for the

1 (32m 21s):
park? This is going to be a standalone building in Madison Square Park that that you would build or that that and that you would give to the city.

2 (32m 30s):
It turned out that we had it built modularly somewhere in New Jersey. And so you woke up one morning in 2004 and it wasn't there and you woke up the next morning and there it was almost like the house.

1 (32m 43s):
The Wizard of Oz laughs and and this was going to be a hot dog stand or did you say let's make this something different.

2 (32m 50s):
Yeah. So I I said it we got to start with hot dogs and I just sat down one day just scribbled on a piece of paper the menu and the menu has scribble that day is kind of 95% what we serve at Shake Shack to this day and it was basically just going into my own memory bank from growing up in st. Louis all the things that I used to love. Love doing you know soon as you got your driver's license at the age of 16. The whole point was to get out of the house and be with your friends and the safest place to do that was a parking lot and was usually a parking lot connected to a burger joint and New York didn't have a people don't have cars kids don't have cars.

2 (33m 33s):
So there's not that culture but we do have parks and I said what if we could do for this park what parking lots always did for us and have a place that people could come together. So on the menu, Joining the hot dogs would be the same kind of burgers. I have loved growing up in the same kind of shakes. I'd known growing up and we just added, you know, crinkle-cut fries, which I had loved growing up. Yeah, and that became Shake Shack, but what I didn't know was that Shake Shack would work as well as it did

1 (34m 3s):
work what I think a lot of people we think about Shake Shack now, it sounds like a no-brainer but like this was still I mean there was five guys and you know, obviously in the West Coast You've always had In-N-Out burger and they've always been Regional great Regional Burger chains, but when Shake Shack open like for one thing it's in Madison Square to New York, but it was a phenomenon like there were lines around the block. I mean, they were really good burgers really good fries and shakes, but did you expect that? Did you expect it to be no. No what explain it? Well, how did you explain to yourself? I think we hit a really lucky

2 (34m 40s):
point in time,

1 (34m 41s):
and there was one winner where there was some Massive snowstorm and somebody used Twitter to announce big snowball fight in Madison Square Park. We don't pat blah blah blah and we heard about

2 (34m 52s):
this and we started giving away hot chocolate to everybody for

1 (34m 56s):
free who is in the snowball fight and somehow the tech crowd adopted Shake Shack at that moment and it became something more than a burger place. It

2 (35m 8s):
became exactly what it was supposed to be which was

1 (35m 12s):
a place that you went to. To see people and and this was going to be a place that kind of forced you to just slow down a little bit and to Vin to be with people here's what's amazing because I mean Shake Shack was in New York for like five and a half years and people were literally like getting off of flights out of Penn Station. They were going there. It's like there are things that people did when they got to New York and people are going to shake shack and there were people saying please like open this up and I'm sure you were hearing that for five and a half years, but You guys were sourcing your meat from like a really great meat place and you're really I mean, it was fast food, but it was kind of slow fast food. I call it fine casual find Castle right were you thinking I don't know if we can really expand this out.

2 (35m 57s):
Well, yeah, I was saying that wasn't

1 (35m 59s):
why we did it in the first place. We did it to take care of this park and we were learning a business that was very

2 (36m 4s):
different from anything. We had ever done. I mean it was nothing like Gramercy Tavern or Eleven Madison Park or the modern now we are serving Over a thousand people every single day

1 (36m 16s):
and learning learning the business learning how to do it. And also keep in mind. I still did not want to be viewed as a chain. Why

2 (36m 24s):
not because chains and fine dining people never wanted to be seen in the same room. They thought we were stupid and we thought they didn't have any taste. Yeah, and so this was a fascinating moment because we knew that we needed to learn some of the system's the chains were expert at we are also really for Not that we had a young guy who had been a general manager of table and a general manager of Union Square Cafe who had been our director of operations still in his early 30s, and he wanted to run Shake Shack Cornell Cornell grad named Randy. Groody Randy lives on the upper west side and he kept passing this space and he kept bugging me and saying can we please do a second Shake Shack he He said what's the biggest complaint we get at Shake Shack and I said the lines too damn long and he said what if we could actually cannibalize her online a little bit wouldn't that be a good thing?

2 (37m 24s):
We stopped getting that complaint. So we opened we opened on the upper west side 77th and Columbus five years to almost to the day later and not only did it work but the line got longer in Madison Square Park and I said, oh this is and then we open. The Upper East Side and then we opened at Citi Field with the Mets with their brand new ballpark. Then we open in the Theater District and every single time. We open one. We'd have the lines and you know, it just was kind of blowing our minds and we're trying to figure out what do we have here? We have to figure this out was it was that

1 (38m 3s):
challenge for your team to adapt once shake started to take off because of me, I mean by this point you would gotten really good at running these higher end restaurants, right? But let me check. He's a totally different business model. It's it's a burger joint, right? There's there's counter service or cooking Burgers and Fries and they can shake so so I mean you have to buy a frog raw and have a fancy wine list or do all those other things that you know that make Eleven Madison Park work as a restaurant, right?

2 (38m 29s):
That's true. There's about 70% of the cost taken out. There's not a if you look at any Shake Shack, there's not a chef or three Sous chefs or pastry chef or a maitre, d' or a reservationist or a florist. Or a linen company and I know that's probably only half the cost I'm talking there's no bartenders if you just take out all those costs, but then you continue to give the same level of quality ingredients you start to have a pretty interesting value proposition and that the old rule of two that we all grew up hearing about whether it's construction or you know, certainly fast food, which is there's only three Salient issues in architect will tell you speed.

2 (39m 13s):
Good quality and price. Which to do you want? Yeah that that's the rule of to get and so fast food always told us you can have a cheap and you can have it fast, but obviously your beef is not going to be antibiotic and growth hormone free and blah blah blah. So we realize we were actually onto something by accident which was it's still a rule of two but whoever wrote the rule that has to be 1 + 1 + 0 and what we found is that It was not as fast as fast food, but it was a lot faster than a full service restaurant and it was not as inexpensive as fast food, but it was a lot less expensive than a full service restaurant and the quality of what you put in your mouth was just as good because it's the exact same butcher that we use at Union Square Cafe Pat lafrieda, and and you're going to have to come up and get your own food when your buzzer goes off.

2 (40m 10s):
We're not going to bring it to you. So if you're willing to put up with a little

1 (40m 14s):
Less of the niceties we can

2 (40m 15s):
deliver a hundred percent. And so we found was the rule of two was working basically point six five plus point six five plus two point seven zero equals two and that was new were

1 (40m 26s):
you surprised that I'm just going to fast forward here for Mom because today I think they're like more than 250 Shake Shack's around the world and and I read that the average revenue of a Shake Shack locations like four million dollars, which is really I mean that's doing very well when you compare that to your Others but will you surprised back then in 2010 2011 how Shake Shack for performing in comparison to like you're fine dining restaurant?

2 (40m 53s):
Yes. Yes. They were grossing today there grossing on average of little bit more than four million dollars per Shaq. There's two hundred seventy eight of them in the world. And if somebody had told me that we'd be in 14 countries in addition to the United States with 278 of these and this is 16 years after. We opened our first one and yet it's only 11 years after we open our second one, you know, we didn't create burgers in the first place. And so you ask yourself. Well, what is it that makes people love it so much and again I come back to hospitality and I believe that if that there's a lot of restaurants that exist to create something you've never thought of or heard of in your life.

2 (41m 38s):
There's a lot of really really imaginative chefs who you know, you could give a duck to and they would create something you've never imagined and I quote Shake Shack does instead is it takes food, you know and Cooks it better than you knew it could be and and people are nice to you.

1 (41m 56s):
You know, there are parallels. We interviewed Steve Ells a couple years going to show he found a Chipotle in his dream what he worked at stars in San Francisco and his dream was really to be a fine-dining Chef. He wanted to open up a four diamond or Michelin three-star restaurant. That was his dream, you know, and he opened Chipotle to be to Money so you could open a fine dining restaurant. But of course, you're probably turn into fast casual place high quality. All the food is made on site. It's there's a similarity here, right?

2 (42m 24s):
Well Chipotle, I think Steve and chipotle really deserve an enormous amount of credit for really being the first national chain to break the barrier that fast food could not be gastronomic. There's real cooking that takes place in real time, and and I think Think he deserves a hell of a lot of a lot of credit for

1 (42m 46s):
that. What what was it about? I mean you say you were surprised when you started to see these numbers. Will you sort of thing just a how did I not see this until this point?

2 (42m 55s):
No, no because it just it was never my goal. My goal was to help beautify a park and help keep it funded, you know something that that I'm incredibly proud of just going back to the initial goal. Was that that one Shake Shack in the original the original Shake Shack in Madison Square Park Pays and rent a depending on the year anywhere between half a million and a million dollars per year right back into the park. So it did what we expected it to do did a whole lot more than that.

1 (43m 25s):
So what at certain point it became clear that Shake Shack you need to spin this out and make it its own business away from the Union Square Hospitality Group. Was that just a clear Direction the just was it just the obvious place to go. Yes,

2 (43m 40s):
it was a horse that wanted to run and it would have been irresponsible to choke it. Pointy really we let the reins out and we have the right leadership team. We had a bunch of people who are at the point in their career where they said I may have started at the Modern or Gramercy Tavern or Union Square Cafe

1 (44m 1s):
to this day. Our leadership

2 (44m 2s):
team almost all came from our fine dining restaurants and I feel so proud. I'm the chairman of the board, but I don't run the business right and

1 (44m 12s):
I'm proud that the culture it is if anything stronger than ever right now. You have had I want to make it clear that you have had significant failures along the way because if it's just success you're not interesting. I'm just being honest. He's success to success as boring and do you have to close restaurants down? Ya Sheikh Ali tablet tablet was like a one of the jewels in your crown as an Indian restaurant high-end beautiful space 2010 after years of losses. You very reluctantly had to shut this place down and I guess your team kind of had to push. To do this. They had to say Danny. Yeah that this down. Yeah, you know, I

2 (44m 52s):
think that I had a really bad relationship with the notion of failure. And it took me a long time to realize that not every restaurant is going to live forever. And what I also came to terms with is that I had probably kept it open two years longer than I should have and that in doing that my rationale was I don't want to put people out of work but in keeping it open two years longer than I should have where we couldn't make ends meet. I was actually doing something incredibly unfair which was too key people on the team just because they were so loyal and they were not getting raises that they were not getting promotions which just isn't right and everybody got a job somewhere else we hope job fairs for them and we went through the same thing a couple of years ago with the restaurant called North End Grill yeah and then we had a third restaurant that didn't work called Martina and that restaurant made it just barely over a year so we've made mistakes and the goal is To to actually not feel that bad with Martina.

2 (46m 5s):
What I try to do is to learn how to fail faster and not hang in longer than I should have. Yeah,

1 (46m 12s):
do you when you think about all that has happened to you and you open this restaurant and 85 to really well you open a second watch it really? Well and then Shake Shack was just exponential to publicly traded company does 600 million dollars in annual revenue to a huge growing business. Do you think that all this happened because of your your talent and your hard work or do you think a lot of it really has to do with being lucky?

2 (46m 39s):
I would say 80% luck and 20% work ethic

1 (46m 43s):
any other thoughts on that.

2 (46m 46s):
Nope fair enough.

1 (46m 50s):
That's Danny Meyer founder of Union Square Hospitality Group and Shake Shack. And of course given everything that's happened since this interview was first recorded on March 11 2020. We don't want to just leave it there. So I caught up with Danny about a week ago to hear what's been happening in the past few months and talk to them about the very big challenges that he and all restaurants are facing going forward. All right. So Danny as I mentioned at the beginning as our listeners, I think no we recorded this right before kind of pandemic shut everybody in and we was still uncertain was going to happen. You really were the first kind of major restaurant or to decide to shut down all of your restaurants immediately and you have to let go I think thousands of people tell me how did you guys come to that decision?

1 (47m 41s):
I mean, I'm sure it was agonizing walk me through what happened?

2 (47m 44s):
Yeah, they every day has been agonizing every day for the last eleven and a half. it has been agonizing because your alternatively in reaction mode to something that you've never faced before it was clear really quickly that while we had no idea how long this was going to last as a matter of fact when you and I last spoke it was the first day of spring break for our kids and college Etc and we were pretty sure that they might go back to school we want you know we just didn't know how long this was going to be and I think there was a really pivotal day in very early April where one of our former colleagues would be loved' Chef by the name of Floyd cardoz passed away from coded and it was about then or even maybe right before that that I said look as much as we want to pay all these employees of ours we can't we're going to we're going to run out of money and then where will where will we be we will we will not be around Mrs.

2 (48m 50s):
Over, we won't be able to get back to being good employers and that's when we shifted into this whole mindset of okay, if we cannot be good employers right now. How can we possibly recast ourselves as being really good on employees and we started making a whole host of decisions. The first one was pretty easy for me and that was that we would Set up an employee Relief Fund. I gave a hundred percent of my compensation to the fund. We started selling gift cards for a week with a hundred percent of the revenues going to the fund. That was a quick $400,000 right there.

2 (49m 31s):
Bottom line is we've raised about 1.4 million dollars Uncle already granted out about one and a quarter million of that and so we just felt that we would create a hole. Range of resources for our laid off team members and was everything from emotional resources to an amazingly robust job board because it turns out that a lot of like-minded companies are in fact doing really well right now and they wanted to recruit members of our team. Yeah. It's a lot. It's a lot, you know every Thursday morning. I host something called coffee with Danny and it's smaller groups and it's not at all connected to business strategy.

2 (50m 13s):
It's only connected. Into people and how they're feeling

1 (50m 17s):
Danny. Are you able to open up most Shake Shack locations at least for

2 (50m 22s):
take-out Shake Shack from the outset state and business in most of its locations, but immediately pivoted to a strictly curbside pickup and or delivery mode great and it's only been very very recently that a small handful of them have returned to welcoming guests inside the restaurant.

1 (50m 44s):
With respect to Shake Shack clearly a vote of confidence from I mean, it's sort of awkward to talk about this but a vote of confidence from investors because Shake Shack raised a lot of money for investors and I think in April and and it sounds like Shaq will be okay that it will have enough cash to weather out the

2 (51m 4s):
storm. Yes. That is true. I don't find it awkward at all to talk about. I think that Like every restaurant company the bottom dropped out at the end of March and the beginning of April and the opportunity because of the drop in the stock price at that point to buy a piece of the company at a price that everybody certainly hoped would would represent an outstanding value was there and the company said look this will be over in when it's over. There will be lots of opportunity to if you have money on your balance sheet number one. You can rehire number two.

2 (51m 44s):
You can beef up your all the technology tool kits that you're going to need more than ever right now. Yeah, the number three there will be some especially for a company that's growing as Shake Shack is there will probably be a lot of really outstanding real estate opportunities which did not exist before this, but you won't be able to do any of that if you haven't been able to Is funds to do that with

1 (52m 11s):
when asked about Optics. This is a really challenging time, obviously for business. And of course there was this moment of the I think earlier on when shake shake boot came under some criticism because you've accepted it or apply for a loan from the government and then returned it and people criticize that they're like, why does this you know Restaurant Group e the money when small business needs money re surprised at the reaction.

2 (52m 37s):
I was surprised at the reaction for about 10 minutes and then I completely understood it. Yeah, Shake Shack obviously would not have applied for the loan if it didn't perceive a need and the tenants of surprise were also connected to another speak surprise, which is the day that Shake Shack made it public that it had applied for and received a loan was within 24 hours of the government announcing that it had run out of money for this whole program. Right. That's when I say well, of course, of course, there's outrage right now. I look back and I'm incredibly proud that, you know within 36 hours of of understanding the government had run out of money the company in its board made the decision to return it and it was the first of any public company to do so and that actually began a Cascade of what I'm told as well well north of Of two or three billion dollars of funds that were returned subsequent to that.

2 (53m 40s):
So that's the kind of example that I would want to set it was of course never Shake sacks intention to Elbow their way to the front of the line to exclude other people and so it became a very simple decision to return the funds at that point

1 (53m 55s):
in terms of like just thinking about what's next. I mean you've been in business for a long time you've dealt with a lot of Difficult moments I have to think that you still have optimism about the restaurants recovering. I mean or DUI on

2 (54m 14s):
most days on most days I do. I think it's now been long enough that while I can still remember what it feels like to walk into Gramercy Tavern smell the wood burning from the fireplace and and see three deep at the bar and every Tavern table full of people. with cocktails and glasses of wine and Rich conversation in the clinking of glasses and yet if you walked by Gramercy Tavern today you see a window papered with a big mural that says we miss you and then about eight hundred things we miss and I just since I don't know what when are New Yorkers going to to start feeling normal about going out to restaurants I just don't know when that's going to be and when they do if the law says that the only way to do it is for Gramercy Tavern to be at 50% occupancy with six feet between tables and understanding that the economics of a restaurant are such that you can really only turn a profit when you're at least at 80% occupancy it starts to be a difficult equation because you start to go look as a citizen of New York and is a citizen of the restaurant industry I have an obligation to turn this engine back on Because people need it emotionally again, and then you go and as a steward of my business, I have an obligation to stop losing money because we've had you know, practically zero Revenue now since the middle of March and every day we lose money is another day.

2 (55m 51s):
We cannot hire someone back. So, you know, I turned to this Maya Angelou quote almost every day, which is something along the lines of long after people forget what you did and And what you said they will remember how you made them feel and it just it's true and good times and it's certainly true when you don't know where you're going

1 (56m 14s):
and update from Danny Meyer founder of Union Square Hospitality Group and Shake Shack. Thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to tweet at us gets at how I built this or add guy Roz our show is producers week. Casey Herrmann the music composed by rum team Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Julia Carney Canada slim, Sarah saracen, he's Grant and Jeff Rogers and Guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this.

1 (56m 54s):
This is NPR.

2 (56m 59s):
Public officials from across the United States have been blaming the recent violence and unrest in their cities on quote outside agitators on this week's code switch from NPR a history of blaming Civil Disobedience on Bad actors from out of town.