3 (0s):
Hey really quick before we start the show. We're launching a regular video conversation every Friday at 12 noon eastern time with a different founder to talk about creative ways to build resiliency in the midst of this crisis this week join. Me and Susan Griffin black co-founder of co-products. She'll talk about all the hand sanitizer. They've been making you can join the conversation and ask questions by going to facebook.com how I built this and you don't need a Facebook account to watch bring your questions for me and Susan this Friday April 3rd at 12 noon Eastern Time facebook.com slash how I built this

1 (44s):
we were out of money for I don't know the 10th time. It had gone to feel family and said we just need another 5,000 or whatever we can get the doors open. We did that a bunch of times and so we were at a point where it's like we can't go ask for money again. We've told him this was the last I'm like five times ago and I just thought to myself, you know, we're down to this desperate of situation. We got no money. We're we're not going to make it

3 (1m 19s):
from NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built I'm guy Roz and on the show today how Ken Grossman went from Brewing batches of bitter beer in his closet to building America's third largest Craft brewery, Sierra, Nevada. So just a few days ago, Ken Grossman and I were supposed to be sitting side-by-side on stage at the Sydney Goldstein theater in San Francisco for a live how I built this show to hear how he built one of the biggest craft beer companies in the country, but instead that event like every other event was canceled, but we didn't want to miss out on getting a chance to hear Ken story because it is too good and too inspiring.

3 (2m 15s):
To wait until we can all go out again. So we asked Ken to record himself from his home just outside Chico, California. And by the way, that's how it's going to be for a while because our staff our guests me probably many of you were all at home now and starting to adjust to this very weird new reality and I'm going to confess something here. I feel a little bit conflicted about doing a show that celebrates building and Dating when so many businesses are in trouble now and so many people are worried. But I also think of this show as a place of hope and possibility.

3 (2m 56s):
This is going to be a long challenging Journey for all of us and we're going to need stories of people who can Inspire us with the challenges. They've overcome and the battles they've waged and the odds they've defeated to build something truly special like Sierra Nevada now before we even get into Story, we want to hear from him about how things are going with managing the crisis so far. And of course in one way that company is in better shape than most because lots of people are in need of a beer these days. So in places where they can get it, they are buying it. They're buying a lot of it. And when I spoke to Ken a few days ago, he told me his production facilities are still open, but he has no idea how long that might last,

1 (3m 42s):
you know, a lot of the businesses that we We depend on to sell our products are severely challenged right now and you know having this kind of financial disruption happened to tens of thousands of small family owned and run bars restaurants liquor stores Across. The Nation is going to have a huge toll on the lives of those people in the economies and those communities so it's it's been one of the most difficult and stressful. All weeks in our existence. I've had a lot of them over 40 years. It was been a lot of sleepless nights, but this is sort of at the Pinnacle of things for us to have to work through and make decisions

3 (4m 32s):
about and yes over the course of buildings here in Nevada beer can has had a lot of sleepless nights starting with trying to build a craft brewing company in his twenties with barely any money when people didn't really know What craft beer was in fact, when can introduce his now? Legendary Sierra, Nevada Pale Ale to his friends in 1980. Most of them thought it was undrinkable. But today his company is the third largest Craft brewery in the US after Boston beer company and Yen Lang and Canton and his family owned 100% of Sierra, Nevada, but making money and becoming rich from beer was far from Ken's ambition at his core.

3 (5m 14s):
He is a beer brewer not a

1 (5m 15s):
Businessmen

3 (5m 17s):
totally obsessed with the process with the Hops and the barley in The Malt in the strains of yeast and his interest in brewing and fermentation actually started when he was a kid growing up in La San Fernando Valley.

1 (5m 30s):
We had a small neighborhood group of boys growing up through elementary school. So I met my neighbor. I think it was second grade and his father was a even back then was Making home beer and home wine and was a super very Progressive person for the time. He was and cooking and baking and fermenting and sort of the culinary arts. Yeah, as well as being a cyclist. So he was into bikes which later I got into cycling and touring and also was a scientist. He was a metallurgist and worked for Rocketdyne and so he sort of had all those Passions.

1 (6m 15s):
Of of life and and I guess it really appealed to me. So I was around fermenting beer from probably the the age of seven or eight or so and seeing things boiling on the stove every weekend when he would brew and his son and I were best buddies for many many years. I ended up moving up to Chico and he attended Chico

3 (6m 37s):
State. What was your friend's what was it? What was his dad's name? Was it a that's like

1 (6m 41s):
Al Mohler County since passed away, but Calvin molar and He was this a very early adopter of the the science of Brewing so motor home Brewers back in that day. You know, we're using English old sort of crude books on how to make cheap beer, but not necessarily, you know how to make great beer and had a how to do it at home what sort of a science-based. Yeah, so he approached from a pretty scientific side. So

3 (7m 14s):
here's what I'm wondering you are in high school. School and I guess from what I read. You bought your first home brewing kit around that time, which I think a lot more high school juniors today would do it but in the early 70s certainly that are late 60s really not comment. Did youdid you want to make beer because you just like liked it and want to drink beer or you know, what was the what was the thinking behind you buying a home brew kit? We

1 (7m 40s):
don't I was young so I couldn't buy beer right? I am and so I just wanted to experiment It with making beer that was it.

3 (7m 49s):
Yeah, and you know today if you want to brew beer, you just go on the internet and order the Hops the come and pellets and you know, whatever you need and then you just do it it was it what was it a little more complicated in 1969

1 (8m 1s):
it was so there were actually some home brew supply stores just getting started and you could buy beer and wine making supplies it at that point home. Bring was still illegal, but They did. Nobody got arrested for buying Mulder hops, but if you I guess think back to that era there was still a bit of a carryover from prohibition brewing and so you could buy malt extract even at hardware stores and it was sold with a crock and a package of yeast and a little block of some pretty lousy hops, but there were ingredients that were still available. I guess for an appropriation area and no real good information on how to make great beer at home there.

1 (8m 45s):
It's just for those people who wanted to brew a batch of home

3 (8m 49s):
brew and how how how are your early batches? I mean were they terrible linkable? Terrible? Okay. Thank you. Put them in a closet in your house or like where did you

1 (8m 60s):
go? I had to hide them from hide them from my mother and I actually made a batch of wine first, which was pretty tragic which was out of Welch's can of Welch's grape juice and some baking

3 (9m 11s):
yeast a can of Welch's grape juice. During a make it in Kansas anymore.

1 (9m 18s):
Well, and then I got some all extract and been about some East in a plastic bucket and and started brewing a little bit at

3 (9m 30s):
how did you not how did you know you weren't like making like, you know be a botch alinea more Anthrax or something.

1 (9m 38s):
Well, I guess one of the things about beer making is that things like that. Don't grow in beer. I got you. Okay fine. Good gets it on the alcohol the ph and the Hops are all inhibitory to toxins. Not that you can't make bad beer, but it's pretty impossible to make beer telling yourself those kind of toxins

3 (9m 58s):
you all right. So you you're you know doing home brewing and and I guess when you graduate high school in 1972 you decide that college isn't really going to be your thing that you you want to kind of just get out of La I move up to Northern California and you go You end up in Chico, California a small town in the foothills of the Sierra, Nevada. The idea was that's where you want to to be for a while.

1 (10m 24s):
Yeah, so I so I got a job in a bicycle shop which was a family-owned business with father and two sons working there in a pretty frictional environment. The dynamic was not great and after no less than a couple of months. I sort of had a change of heart and say well maybe She go to school and so I applied at the junior college to study chemistry and ended up eventually transferring to Chico State and continued to take science classes. I met my girlfriend and then later wife through a mutual friend about the same

3 (11m 3s):
time. This is this is your wife Katie that you met you met her at Butte Community

1 (11m 7s):
College. But why matter she was going to Chico State and and I was transferring to Chico State and we connected and then the Gather ever

3 (11m 16s):
since all right. Katie will affect her back into this story later on and we should just mention here that she when he met her and I think to this day does not drink alcohol. She's a teetotaler right there. Okay? Okay important it out important point to know the third largest Craft brewery in America founder as wife doesn't drink. Okay. All right. So you meet Katie 73 your cash because your baby you're like 18 years old, it's quite I mean you were so young. Yep, and I guess I guess you you got a job in that area around Chico to tackle Oroville managing a bike shop for a while.

1 (11m 54s):
Yeah. I had my f my parents got divorced. You know, I didn't get a lot of support. I think I got a $100 a month go away go away to school. And so I had to keep working. So I kept a part-time job as I went to school and then eventually I got the opportunity to go manage. One of the bike shops that the owner and Chico had recently purchased in the tenant were evil. And so the two of us got a dinky little one-room house sort of in the foothills of orbital and Iran that chopped for a few years and our daughter was born Sierra and born at that house at home.

1 (12m 36s):
We had all worked gets home birth. And then I had a neighbor who loved my home brew and convince me that I should open up. Brew supply store

3 (12m 47s):
and this is your neighbor on and what was his name Ron? That's Jesus Rhonda Jesus. Okay. So he's your neighbor and I guess you should point out that you are like 20 21 still home brewing. Yeah, presumably you've gotten better over the five years six years that you've been doing it. Oh, yeah and you because most people probably in 1976 75 or drinking like mass-produced beer right in America. They're raised just like the big Her right? Is that what most people

1 (13m 17s):
drink? Yeah, it was pretty much the approaching the low point of the u.s. Brewing industry the the breweries that had survived prohibition, you know, the family owned Regional breweries were in very difficult place with trying to compete with the national Brands. And so the beer industry was consolidating very very rapidly through the really since prohibition but 50 60 70 s hundreds and hundreds of breweries went out of business and Got down to write about the year. We started in 1984 the brewing for the brewery got down to the low point of 43 independent reqs. It's amazing. How are you - yeah that included the biggest and the small amount of small Brewers that hung on there.

3 (14m 3s):
So but going back to this time in like the mid 70s right brought like one Ron to Jesus when your neighbor like when you met him he would have before he met you he would have just normally been drinking like Budweiser probably or what

1 (14m 16s):
Of those behind probably not even anything that expensive. So, you know again we were young and didn't have a lot of money. So we were probably drinking, you know Buckhorn and the spring beer out of my ER Brewing Company and Los Angeles. I mean, there were a handful of Cheaper beers that were probably what our age group would be drinking

3 (14m 36s):
and these were not high quality gears. It's just

1 (14m 39s):
like they were certainly not interesting beers.

3 (14m 42s):
I got you. Okay, that's

1 (14m 43s):
right. I mean I was brewing industry is History of making you know, generate good quality products, but they're not necessarily products that have a lot of character.

3 (14m 54s):
So he meets you and your Brewing this beer and what was a style of the beer you were Brewing at home.

1 (15m 1s):
I was probably fairly Advanced by that time. So I was doing a little bit of roasting my own grains in the oven and sprouting my own wheat to make wheat beer, and and so I was pretty experimental and at that Point my wife when I were sort of back to the Landers. We had a small herd of goats. We had chickens. We were making cheese and bacon bread and so making beer sort of fit into our lifestyle.

3 (15m 31s):
So your neighbor Ron says, hey your your this beer is great. You should sell it and I guess that's sort of what from what I understand. It's sort of inspired you to Open up a like a home brewing business like a little shop where you could sit like Supply people write is that is it right?

1 (15m 50s):
Yep, so we found a little teeny building in a in what had been an old Downtown hotel and Chico that was being converted into a bunch of little shops and Studios and so for I don't think it was about sixty dollars a month rent. We could rent this little little room and it was just the bare shell which we Ended up playing them doing all the woodwork and finishing up and turning into just a little shop next to us was a Potter and a used record shop and jewelry store and a little teeny antique store. And so they were just a bunch of little Artisan crafts and shops up

3 (16m 30s):
there sound. So idyllic, especially from from 2020. Well, we

1 (16m 35s):
couldn't we couldn't pay the rent some months and so we worked out a deal where we'd be the janitors for the for the place and Lou Of rent so Kate and I

3 (16m 44s):
did that for a while. Couldn't you couldn't sell 60 bucks worth of home brew supply,

1 (16m 50s):
you know, we could tell $60 worth that would be a really big day but out of the $60 you made maybe 20 and then you had to pay the lights and shirt, you know a little bit of money to take home. And so no we didn't make a lot of money selling Homebrew supplies

3 (17m 4s):
and what we're home brew supplies in 1976.

1 (17m 9s):
So it was, you know, malt syrup primarily. Although we were pushing and teaching classes and trying to get people to actually brew from grain, which is the back to the beginning of the process you buy a malted barley, which is barley that's been soaked sprouted and germinated and dried at a maltster and that creates the base for then converting the The Malt into sugars and then sugars are boiled with hops, and so we stocked hydrometers and croxandlilt. And tubs to Bruin and glass

3 (17m 44s):
carboys so but you could prove what you could Brew the beer and I got you remember here and here she is. I'm wondering can write and in that in the late 70s, right? This is still a subculture like like craft brewing today, right like half of half of the staff of how I built this goes to craft brewing festivals. Right? Like it's just a very cut mainstream thing like every bar worth its salt has craft Brews on tap or in bottles, right in 1976. This is this is a subject Culture of people like like like Dungeons and Dragons. Yeah, so I'm just trying to understand something because obviously you've proved everybody right but when people said to you and I'd like Ken this is just like gross.

3 (18m 25s):
I don't what do you like about this? What why do you like the taste of this? What would you

1 (18m 29s):
say? Well, yeah, there was no knowledge of craft beer and Homebrew was, you know, not necessarily viewed in a positive light and and you know based sort of on what most people had tasted if they ever tasted. Homebrew it was highly alcoholic acidic and it looked murky and which today it is in again, but back then you know beer was supposed to be clear and so most people were pretty put off by it but I made some pretty decent beer and and I started to have a following of friends who wanted my home brew. Well, what did

3 (19m 7s):
you like about it? Like a here's that's what I want to know like when I talk to somebody who's really into wine, right? It's just the complexity and the different flavors and the it's almost like I don't know. It's like it's like somebody who's really interested in in like Mysteries there. They love the nuances is that what beer was like for healing making it?

1 (19m 29s):
Yeah, I mean our tub and I think was the Allure of the Alchemy, you know, just the ability to take things such as disparate as you know, a bitter Leaf off of a plant The Hop and the sweet malt from barley and yeast and sort of see that magic happen of converting those basic raw ingredients into something that has lots of nuances and character and flavor and can bring joy and social setting and yeah, so I think the process was as intriguing as the finished product because in the

3 (20m 5s):
late 70s, it would have been an unusual taste right like our taste buds were not attuned to You know multi. Hoppy

1 (20m 15s):
beer. No they weren't and you know, I don't know what percentage of my friends actually like the beer or the ones that told me they did but I'm sure it was off-putting for the majority of people who are used to drinking regular Lager beer and it was even that way when we first started the brewery and you'd go to a tasting and 90% of the people were like, wow. This is way too better. I can't drink this or I don't like Is yeah, but then you'd find somebody it's like God. I just love that bitter character. And so the you know, the human palate certainly interprets those flavors differently and I think as craft brewing and as beer culture evolved, I think people became much more appreciated of beer styles that really have a lot of

3 (21m 6s):
character. All right, so you've got this little storefront at what point did you think? No, maybe I should actually make beer and sell beer. Was there like a conversation did somebody encourage you to do? This was there because you've got the store and presumably like, you know, you can make that your career like we could be talking today and you could have started the you know, a chain of Homebrew Supply shops, right? But but at what point did you think maybe I should just sell beer?

1 (21m 38s):
Well, I actually I went down to a conference. And Oakland and on that trip. We arranged a tour to go see Fritz Maytag. Anchor Brewery

3 (21m 50s):
Fritz Maytag was the guy who founded anchor Brewery which makes a Christian but he didn't find it so

1 (21m 56s):
he purchased it. So because

3 (21m 59s):
it old Brewery he purchased it. Yeah, it's an old old Brewery, but he kind of be kind of revamped. It made it into what yeah revamped it,

1 (22m 5s):
right? So he helped sort of create what is now the craft brewing industry by realizing that if You're going to be a small boutique Brewery in this country. You better one produce a unique product and to figure out how to charge enough of a price that you can survive as a small

3 (22m 25s):
producer. So you meet him you meet him at this at this conference

1 (22m 28s):
book. Well, I didn't meet him at the conference actually went over to his Brewery and he gave me a tour of me and a small group of folks and pretty primitive at that time. It was a lot no Automation and not a lot of sophistication. Brewery and I was fairly sophisticated sophisticated as a home Brewer culturing some of our own yeast and doing things like that and making 20 gallon batches and I think at that point he was making maybe 50 Barrel batches and that sort of inspired me a bit that you know, maybe you could do it as a as a start-up as a home Brewer and then I went and visited new Albion, which was really the Sonoma right?

1 (23m 11s):
Jack McAuliffe who? Started that Brewery and and he had sort of gone pretty much home brew and opened up a commercial Brewery with all home-built primitive basic equipment very small batches, but 45 gallons per batch and after seeing his operation realized that you know, it was feasible to do as an independent glorified Homebrew set up and sell beer commercially.

3 (23m 39s):
So you were actively kind of exploring the Ability of doing this when you contacted, you know fritz or you when you went to go visit New Albion, did you say hey, I'm thinking about doing this myself. Can I can I come talk to you or did you just say, oh I have got the shop where we saw the equipment. Can I come check you out? Like, what was your what was your

1 (23m 60s):
approach? Well, you know thinking back then with Fritz. I don't think I yet had the notion that I wanted to try to go commercial when I went and visited Jack it was starting. Gel that. Yeah, this is maybe something I can do and I got together with one of my home brew shop customers Paul camozzi, and he was buying Homebrew supplies for me and from from other Homebrew suppliers, and we decided let's see if we can raise some money and open a

3 (24m 32s):
brewery. Wow, so that so basically that all right. This guy seems to know what he's doing and you knew what you were doing. And because you were like, I don't know 23 2012. 223 at this point and I read that you you guys sat down and wrote A business plan like a pretty detailed business plan and you figured if you figured that you need

1 (24m 52s):
$50,000 to

3 (24m 56s):
actually start a beer company brewing company. So you went to the bank's right? And and what did the bank say when you show them the

1 (25m 4s):
plan? Well, I mean, I guess in hindsight it was not a pretty detailed business plan after seeing, you know, more formal business plans. That was what we thought was a good business plan. So we had you know printed off articles of sort of the trends that were happening in beer one on Fritz Maytag and one on sort of what was happening in the import space starting to grow in the US and the demise of sort of much choice in the beer industry. We thought would give us a small slice of the pie that was wrapped leaping cut up. So I think we wrote several drafts of that business plan the original one. I think called for $50,000 total and went to Banks and we actually started so we started to pool our money.

1 (25m 51s):
I started a bike Whitman. I started to build equipment. I enrolled back at the junior college at Butte Inn welding classes machine shops anything that gave me access to use forklifts and drill presses and welders and everything else. I needed to weld all the pieces together took some business classes took. Adoration repair. I took a couple semesters of that started just to build skills and started to build the equipment as we were trying to raise money. The bank's pretty much said there's no way and if you were a banker of of any sort back then and you research the u.s.

1 (26m 32s):
Brewing industry, you would have seen that it was pretty rapidly declining Lee small Brewers were

3 (26m 39s):
you would not have given a loan a not only to a Craft brewing coming but two like two guys in their 20s trying to start a crap regarding.

1 (26m 47s):
Yeah who had no experience. No experience in the Brewing industry, you know, we'd never work today for a brewery or a beer distributor or anything like that. So yeah, not a very likely investment to make form a banker standpoint

3 (27m 2s):
got it. So you need 50k how much money did you and Paul have between you

1 (27m 7s):
so we had assembled $17,000 and I between it it between the two of us. I had sold my home brew shop for 3,000 or 4,000 dollars and I had some savings and my grandfather and giving me some bonds to go to college. I cashed all those in and Paul had similar sort of all his savings not a lot of money.

3 (27m 32s):
So how did you get the rest of the 50k that you need still need? Like 35k well actually went to all of our

1 (27m 40s):
family and eventually some friends and Got $5,000 $10,000 Investments and thought we had enough money several times but kept running out of money and we were so low on cash that we did not hire pretty much anything out. So we did the framing that sheetrocking I did the plumbing. I did all the electrical I did all the refrigeration.

3 (28m 6s):
Yeah, where was the location? Where was it? Where was the site that you found?

1 (28m 9s):
We found a little metal Warehouse building 3,000 square. Our feet empty shell had been a like a sheetrock warehouse and sheikah in Chico bright and so we came in and in order to keep sanitation and quality and a boring world you need floor drains and you need separation between the Brewing rooms and the fermenting lumps and so we went in and unbeknownst to the landlord. We jack-hammered through the floor so sod and put Drainage and then poured slope floors on top of that and but we did all that ourselves and it took a really long time.

1 (28m 51s):
I was taking my 57 Chevy and driving up and down the Sacramento Valley up into Oregon and Washington and looking for old pumps and pipes and tanks and things that we could scrounge for basically Pennies on the dollar to use to build the brewing equipment out of and I got pretty lucky even the daring industry was also sort of a tough point where these little family dairies were closing and there were hundreds of them scattered throughout that would have one milk tank and it was sort of a side job. I get a lead that you know, go down this road and you might find someone sold sold Dairy so knock on the door and asked if they had any old equipment and they take me up the barn and there'd be a Dusty pile of pipe and Maybe a pump and occasionally I get a tank and 300 bucks or 500 bucks.

1 (29m 48s):
I'd buy it all from him.

3 (29m 50s):
All right, this is an important point and I want I want you to explain this to me because I think that people are going to be confused and think that I hope they're not that you just kind of figure it out as you went along which is partially true, but you actually did a lot of research like you actually went to UC Davis which is a huge it has a huge agricultural department and you like met with professor. Acer there and and went to the research library to learn about Brewing what what like what did you do there?

1 (30m 19s):
So yeah, we were fortunate. So UC Davis had one of the only University Brewing schools in the nation, huh? It was started, you know, they have a big wine program as well, but they started a beer program quite a few years back and we availed ourselves of both their library and I would go down with stacks of quarters. I would either read there or photocopy everything I could get my hands on

3 (30m 48s):
like scientific journals, like like scientific academic

1 (30m 51s):
papers are still got boxes of them today and there were a couple really important scientific Brewing texts available and they weren't they weren't home brewing text. They were if you're a brewing scientist, you know for 500-page tomes on, you know, the every aspect of being a professional Or and I read them cover to cover and so I was a fairly learned Brewer from at least the literature side as we went into and to bring

3 (31m 24s):
commercially and it also sounds like in these this two-year period because it was like a really two years right 78 to 80 when you were kind of ramp working on ramping up Sierra, Nevada and really going public. I mean selling it public to the public that the other guys like the other folks in the craft brewing industry were really cool. A jewel like Fritz Maytag it Anchor Steam in like if you went to these folks for vice and they were really they were like, yeah, I mean, I'm just well, I'm just wondering where they just good people like it because you are you know in your early 20s. I mean they could have just I don't know looked at you and thought who is this kid? Like why are we taking this guy seriously, but what explains because they were right there was a lot of like go and ask them for tips and stuff.

3 (32m 6s):
Right? Yeah, and I think

1 (32m 7s):
that you know Fritz was probably the first one I leaned on. Bitten and he had had the same experience. So when he was starting out when he bought anchor he didn't know anything about Brewing or the Brewing industry and he would go and visit other Brewers and and he was shocked at how open and supportive they were but we did have a really open relationship with pretty much anybody in the Brewing industry. I joined the master Brewers Association, which was really the big Brewers. Technical group very early on but you could call up a technical person at another Brewery whether it was cores or analyzer Bush and or Miller and and ask a question and they would talk plow and wow, you know the commercial guys the guys who were selling beer in the streets.

1 (33m 0s):
They they didn't have the same relationship but the technical side of Brewing Brewers tend to stick together and to help solve problems.

3 (33m 9s):
So in this two year period when they're ramping up, right Who's Katie thing? And we've got a daughter baby girl at home. It was was she like I don't was Katie ever ever like get can like this is not what are you doing?

1 (33m 23s):
It was tough and we made a lot of sacrifices. He made a lot of sacrifices, you know, we didn't have any money and I was working all the time. So if I wasn't studying I wasn't welding if I wasn't working because I was still having to work another job if I wasn't building at the brewery. I mean I was it was 7 days a week 12 hours a day and I had the I guess the early opportunity right when I was committing to build the brewery Taxi by one of the bike shops. I had worked in the owner was getting out of the business and he would have sold it to me probably preferentially.

1 (34m 3s):
If I said I wanted to do that and there was a point where I thought you know, I could buy this bike shop and probably make a decent living and it's a sure thing. But I was you know in my mind thinking, you know, am I going to then question could I have ever really pulled off building a brewery and being a brewer for my livelihood instead of a bike mechanic and so we had a thoughtful discussion Katie and I about what should we do or what should I do and came down to you know, I think you got to follow your your passion and see if that's what you want to do. You should do

3 (34m 41s):
that. I read that you You you have even a book about about these early days. You wrote that and by September 1980 you're running out of money quickly. And this is a quote from your book psychologically. We you and Paul were starting to break down. What what do you mean what just from the stress of watching, you know, nothing had money going out like what was the breakdown?

1 (35m 4s):
Well, there were a few points of desperation and we were getting there we were out of money for I don't know the 10th time and Had gone defeat family and said, we just need another 5000 or 2000 or whatever we can get the doors open. We did that a bunch of times and so we were at a point where it's like we can't go ask for money again. We've we've told him this was the last time like five times ago. We had spent everything we had and said we'd borrowed enough that you know, not going forward would have certainly been a big failure. So it was like now we got to do this and we just, you know didn't have everything together to start burrowing and I needed a cold box refrigeration system for where we're going to age the beer and I remember a friend of mine said why no of this backyard butcher shop that the county shut down that's got a old refrigeration system of the coil on it and you probably have it or get it for a few bucks.

1 (36m 6s):
So I went over there and in his backyard, he would butcher chickens and Hogs Things for four neighbors illegally and there was a little cold box there. So I took it to the brewery and you know started to clean it up and it was covered in blood and feathers and was just completely corroded and I'm sitting there cleaning it up and I just thought to myself, you know, we're down to this desperate of a situation. We got no money making making beer still a few weeks off. We're not going to make

3 (36m 42s):
it. When we come back out of Ken finally brewed his first batch of beer to sell to the public and how people began to buy it not by The Keg not even by the six-pack, but bottle by bottle by bottle stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World.

3 (37m 25s):
Learn more at a jws dot-org. Thanks. Also to better help online counseling by licensed professional counselors specializing in isolation depression stress and anxiety visit better help.com built to learn more and get 10% off your first month. When the economy goes Haywire Planet Money is here to make sense of it

1 (37m 53s):
for you from the big bailouts to the tiny details of a vaccine stockpile.

3 (37m 57s):
One of the first thing we did was

1 (37m 59s):
to cure a large number of chicken

3 (38m 1s):
flocks. So these are like hard-working government chicken. They are hardworking government chickens. That's NPR's Planet Money podcast. Listen now. Hey, welcome back to how I built this time guy Roz. So it's the fall of 1980 and can and his partner Paul Community have basically jerry-rigged an entire Brewery at of hand-me-down dairy tanks and random pieces of scrap metal. They're almost out of money and they're totally stressed out but they're also almost ready to make beer except Ken needs one more thing.

1 (38m 38s):
I needed a hop strainer and I've been Trying to find a suitable use tank or container to use for a hop strainer and wasn't able to find one and didn't really have the money for it. And I had a few pieces of scrap metal stainless steel left over from something else. And I said, okay. This is it. I'm going to go well duh pops trainer. We're going to root beer tomorrow and so sort of the last piece or two. We just sort of made do and made Five Barrels of stout November fifteenth nineteen eighty and learned a few things, but it went okay, too. Around 12 or 13 hours to make a hundred fifty gallons of beer and more hours to clean up than that. But at least we were sort of on our way and then started burn pale ale the two days later and started to realize we were not able to make batch after batch taste the same.

1 (39m 29s):
They weren't bad. They were just pale ale three was actually pretty good. I remember and we were bottling a little bit and sharing it with friends saying I think we're there were really close. Close and we brewed pale ale for and it wasn't quite right and then we brewed fill L5 and it was different and we ended up dumping all those beers

3 (39m 50s):
the can I just can I just pause in it? Because this is this is your most famous beer, right? Sierra, Nevada Pale Ale is and I think it's still a cancer like most of your sales today the majority of your sales over half. This beer is a is got four things in a water malt yeast and hops, right? Is that as if I got a kid, I got the recipe, right? For people who don't know anything about fear, right? Like what was it about? I mean you're sitting you're going through a bunch of batches that beer right? What were you looking for? Because you said the first wasn't quite right. The second wasn't right that there is okay the 4,000 right? Like what what were the criteria you were using your mind?

1 (40m 31s):
Well, one way we knew we needed to be consistent and I think that's probably as big of an issue is as anything. It's just that they didn't taste the same. So some of them fermented faster some fermented slower so they had different nuances in the Aromas and character. So I think our concern was we couldn't make the same beer batch after batch and we better figure that out first. So

3 (40m 56s):
here's here's now another question about this right which is if you go to Germany, right? They've got this law where all German beers are certain kind of German beer has to have water

1 (41m 8s):
malt water malls ha The newest right? So it's the German Purity

3 (41m 12s):
law the German Purity law great. But when you go to Germany and you drink a lot of their beers like coal Shore or like a certain brands like War Steiner or bitburg their loggers, right? They're very clean clear light loggers, you're using the same four ingredients, but you were introducing or you were you were bringing into your beer a like the hoppiness was like that was going to be really intense like this was for some people the flavor was even going to be slightly burnt not more more than slightly bitter right like it was that was that something that I'm the most beers at the time just weren't focusing on the hoppiness of the beer.

3 (41m 53s):
Well, if you go back see back to

1 (41m 55s):
Germany in that era there were places in Germany making really hoppy beers.

3 (42m 2s):
What is it about the Hops that makes the beer taste more

1 (42m 6s):
bitter. Well, hops are added to beer for there. Alpha acids which are the bittering component or major part of the bittern component of the Hop and that's something that is variety little specific as far as those levels. So hops are a spice essentially in the Brewing process. Right? And I guess you could think of them like

3 (42m 28s):
chilies and they're basically leaves are like miniature leaves that grow like look like a berry. That's actually yeah. It's like a

1 (42m 35s):
flower flower. Okay guys, and the alpha ass is the bitter acids and those aromatic Oils are Geographic in some cases. So a variety that's grown in Oregon, maybe different same variety than it tastes in Yakima or Idaho that's showing in France or in Australia in this country. There wasn't really a Roma signature from the US hop industry until us and a few other Brewers started to focus on a new variety called Cascade. Which was bred up in Oregon State. Yeah, it was Piney and citrusy and had some real distinct character, but it wasn't what the the German Brewers who worked at.

1 (43m 25s):
Big breweries were used to using and so it really didn't find favor and the u.s. Brewing industry until sort of our wave of craft Brewers started to punch things up with Aromas and characters that were Way different than what beer had been before least beer brewed in America.

3 (43m 46s):
All right. So you you get this beer down this Pale Ale Beer down and how do you how do people respond to it? When they try it? I mean, obviously I'm sure there's some people who sort of were sophisticated and but were there other people who were not just you know, super sophisticated and they tried it and I thought yeah most like like if the yeah, yeah. Well really most

1 (44m 9s):
people's people do in like it. No again, if you're used to drinking an American light lager style and you're hit with a very aromatically hoppy and bitter balance in your beer and and you know, just for a reference point in the numbers are sort of going to be meeting this but just as a relative number today domestic lager beers might be in the eight to ten bitterness units and there's there's outliers to that.

3 (44m 40s):
That's

1 (44m 41s):
about the range are pale ale when it came out and still is is that 38 bitterness units? And so if you again equate that to sort of chilies, it's you know, it's quite a bit more than what people are used to drinking. And again, we were trying to feature very aromatic pops and Pine and citrus and all these other nuanced Aromas that come out of hops. So we were producing a Beer that was polarizing to say the least.

3 (45m 13s):
Yeah, I mean but it's interesting because we've had Founders on the show who say who said in the past, you know, if the thing you're producing is polarizing that might just you might just be on the right track, right which obviously you were but I mean this was going to be the backbone of your business and lots of people are most people were saying this is a this is a I don't know about this. So, how did you convince? How did you start to sell it? Like, what was your first? I mean did you go to bars did you were going to sell it on tap or you going to sell it to shops? What how you get people to buy

1 (45m 46s):
it? Well, you know we looked at how we were going to go to market. We couldn't afford six-pack carriers that was sort of out of our budget. So we had individual bottles and we started out in all returnable bar bottles that we would charge a nickel deposit on so we would buy used bar bottles at 85 cents a case from bigger breweries who had Surplus bottles are willing to sell us and we would charge a nickel a bottle. So a dollar twenty a case when we sold the beer and we give them a nickel back when we got the empties back and we pretty much loaded our van up. We bought an old van from a friend of ours took the seats out.

1 (46m 30s):
And that was our delivery van. I hired an old high school friend of mine Steve Harrison to be our first employee and salesperson. He would help bottle during bottle days and he would drive the van around and tried to sell beer. If you go back to that era there wasn't a lot of options for draft beer. So if you went into a normal bar, they might have one or two or maybe three Taps, but it was normal just for one or two beer tabs. So we actually did not go into the the bar trade at all initially. We at least not on draft. We just said there's not enough money there none.

1 (47m 10s):
Aftab, right so we priced ourselves at the highest price. We thought we could get by with we did no market research. We just was the price 85 cents a bottle

3 (47m 21s):
and that was at that time in 1980-81 that was expensive for a bottle of beer.

1 (47m 25s):
That was what the you know, the higher priced Imports are selling for on the Shelf. So we thought well we're going to price ourselves and stylistically try to be like unique import beer

3 (47m 36s):
and and you were just going like, how are you Treating this at me was presumably was just you guys, right?

1 (47m 44s):
Yeah, our man, we would just drive around and go knock on bars restaurants supermarkets wherever and try to see if we can convince him to buy a case of 24 loose bottles.

3 (47m 56s):
And we're most of them dismissive or were most of them like interested or what was the reception you got in

1 (48m 3s):
our hometown. We got at least quite a few of the bars and restaurants to take a case. So in the hometown and since we had been in the press a couple of times about this little Brewery opening up we were able to get some placements once we started leaving Kiko and went to the Bay Area. It was a real slog, you know, there was no craft knowledge that they have no internet, you know, there was not a way for a business that didn't have any money to get much notoriety. We couldn't pay for any of it. We were you know, really Fortunate that there were a few writers who were intrigued by the whole startup of this craft beer scene and started to write stories

3 (48m 49s):
including in the when like the San Francisco Chronicle

1 (48m 52s):
or yeah, San Francisco Examiner. Actually, there was a I think with five page color spread on the brewery the little Brewery in Chico. Wow, that was just an amazing shot in the arm. We got this huge amount of publicity and we are also very fortunate there. Was a beer buyer for one of the large grocery store chains whose daughter was going to Chico State and so he would come up to visit his daughter and he was in the beer and so he can buy the brewery and have a beer with us. And so he started to run some promotions for us without us really being involved or knowing about it. All of a sudden we get a bunch of calls from Distributors with wanting beer and and then the Grateful Dead actually they Somehow earlier on I got hooked into the beer.

1 (49m 42s):
And so when the dead would travel around we'd have to watch where their concert series were and we get all these orders for beer ahead of them hitting town

3 (49m 52s):
and how are you able to produce enough beer? I mean you pray if the demand was was starting to go up. Well,

1 (50m 1s):
well, so my business Plan called for us to brew hopefully 25 hundred barrels of beer a year. I was able to brew 1210. Barrel batches a month so three bruise a week that was sort of our Phase 1 and we had planned in an expansion to go up to 3,500 barrels a year doing some some more modifications of the facility. So we did that pretty quick and our business model was so flawed that we couldn't survive that thirty five hundred barrels of beer year. It just was not enough things cost more and there was always some Financial need we hadn't planned. So we pretty quickly realized we better we gotta grow we got to figure this out quick.

1 (50m 45s):
And so I went over to Germany, I think an end of 82 83 and I bought a defunct Brewery over

3 (50m 55s):
there was just a was just like a shutdown Brewery you just borrow their equipment

1 (50m 60s):
out. I bought their whole Brewing side so didn't get their packaging equipment. But but the Rue house and paid basically the scrap value $15,000. To buy all the equipment and we spent more than that creating it and shipping it back to the US. I went over with the high school buddy, and we spent three weeks in Europe helping dismantle equipment and getting it out of the building and and wrote another business plan and could not borrow money still so we had this equipment sitting there and a crate but we needed what we thought at the time was like a million dollars to US.

1 (51m 40s):
Move into a new facility and to equip it with enough equipment to use that bigger brew house. So it actually sat there for years. I think almost four years in a crate and we just came up with every way possible to expand production. So we knocked out walls. We took over other metal buildings in the little Street and put tanks outside and brewed around the clock. So we eventually got the production up to about but twelve thousand barrels or a little less than 12 thousand Barrels in 87.

3 (52m 15s):
Will you just we tween 1980 and 1987 or maybe even longer were you just working like because you are the beer brewer right? You were actually the guy making the

1 (52m 26s):
beer? Yeah. I did all the brewing and all the packaging in the beginning. So I would Brew three days a week and I package two days a week and then as we got a little bit bigger, I was starting to focus on how to On expansion, so I was building tanks and Welding pipes and adding things and so I started to hire some Brewers and then hired somebody to run packaging so I could free myself up to do all the expansion side of the business

3 (52m 59s):
which was your day. Like I know what time does your day start in the early

1 (53m 2s):
days? Oh boy 4 to

3 (53m 6s):
5. Wow, you had to start brewing that

1 (53m 9s):
early. Yeah. Dart in the dark because it particularly as we grew we needed to bruise much as we could and so it was almost 24 hours a day. I mean, we typically have operated 24 hours a day.

3 (53m 21s):
So something that we haven't discussed yet, but there was I guess probably fair from a fairly early Point quite a bit of tension between you and Paul Community or co-founder from what I understand like there was tension over work. Commitment like he you felt like you were working 10 15 hours a day and that he was working fewer hours and and that tension seemed to kind of continue what what happened between the two of

1 (53m 54s):
you well that there was certainly what I felt and I think everybody around us who were involved in the business, you know saw as well that you know, there was a disproportionate amount of effort being put in. I mean my days were Her always longer than his and more physical. And so at one point it became a critical issue between us and we did end up adjusting compensation. So I was making double what he was making and so we did try to address it. But you know as the business grew and the value of the business grew and you know, we were 50/50 Partners it started to feel that I was doing a disproportionate amount of Building value in the company and so we started to have discussions in the late 80s of this is something I'm not going to continue doing for much longer and we've got to come to some resolution.

1 (54m 54s):
So as we moved into the new Brewery in the late 80s and into the 90s it became, you know, a bigger and bigger sticking point and where you were the two of you.

3 (55m 10s):
Was it uncomfortable at times? I mean Sam I'm action. It was yeah it

1 (55m 14s):
grew uncomfortable at times. Yeah, I mean early on he was he'd lived in our house and he was a just to save money. He was a roommate. Yeah, but then as as things went on it became a bigger and bigger fish can friction point you would

3 (55m 29s):
go on to buy him out in the late 90s, and I think you had to need to really take a bunch of loans to do that because by that point the business was worth Lot of money. So how did you do it?

1 (55m 45s):
Well initially, I didn't think that was a possibility. You know, I didn't have any money and the thought of going into debt at the kind of dollars that we were starting to have the company valued at was just it wasn't in my thought process that I can figure out how to do it.

3 (56m 6s):
What were they valuing the company at the time and in the in the 90s early

1 (56m 9s):
90s the valuations cross-industry were sort of all over the place, but also were going up pretty steadily and you know, 30 million 40 million 50 million and this me buying Paul out took years to work through with attorneys. And so, you know as that time went on we were still growing and so the value of the business was growing and you know, I had a really tough decision do I you know hamper the growth of the Company in order to not have the number get bigger and bigger so I could potentially afford it or do I do what I think is right for the business and continue to grow it.

1 (56m 49s):
So it was a really challenging time for me personally, you know, we were in a market that was sort of exploding from some some of our competitors were making big moves and we were becoming hampered by our Leti

3 (57m 11s):
why what was going on with that?

1 (57m 13s):
Well the brewery that I had designed and in 87 and 88 when we move into the new facility. I had designed for 60,000 barrels worth of annual capacity. You know, if I think back to that time, you know, it was more than anchor was producing and and they were the oldest of the sort of winners in the craft world and we had produced a little over an 11 or thousand or twelve thousand barrels or so. In 87 and so I thought you know these if we could grow four times that big or more than that, that would be an amazing achievement. And so 60,000 barrels seemed like a pretty lofty projection.

1 (57m 54s):
And so our first year in the new facility, I think we brewed about 20,000 barrels or next year 30,000 barrels or next year forty five thousand barrels and next year. We were at a capacity again. And so we started doing whatever we could we put tanks. Outside we added brewing equipment. We started Brewing multiple times around the clock and I think we got to a point. It was 1997. We brewed 363 days 24 hours a day. We took Christmas and Thanksgiving up I think and just other than that just kept going and wow, and that's right when I was trying to figure out how to buy Paul out.

1 (58m 36s):
So very very challenging period

3 (58m 40s):
Did you have to go into debt into serious debt to make that happen?

1 (58m 44s):
Well, so we explored again. I didn't think it was possible for me to buy him out. And so we met with every group you could imagine, you know, Venture lots of venture funds and I had lots of dinners with groups that you know told me they were going to be my best friend and but I got caution from other people saying watch out, you know things go south you In trouble and so I started having real angst about okay. So I'm going to have a an Investment Group in as my partner. They're going to have some really tough metrics that I've got to meet give them the returns are looking for and then they're going to want out and five or seven years and yeah, I'm going to be right back where I am today, but in a worse place, so I really got cold feet about doing a venture

3 (59m 38s):
deal. So what you decide? To do instead.

1 (59m 40s):
So I had a really great attorney in San Francisco and we started looking at Alternatives and he brought in a friend of his who was very experienced with working with banks and structuring Deals and it was at a time when money was relatively easy to get compared to how it had been and we got a couple proposals from some banks and put together a That it was as much leverage has I would ever want to have on myself and the company and sort of just rolled the dice and said, you know, if this goes, well it'll work.

1 (1h 0m 24s):
If it doesn't, you know, I gave it a good try and that was right when if you look at a graph of the trajectory of craft brewing in America. It was that year that we did the deal that the bottom fell out and the growth wait growth rate. Had been slowing but it essentially went down I think to 1% growth across industry the next year. Wow, in 99 in 98. I think 98

3 (1h 0m 49s):
99 Y what explains that

1 (1h 0m 51s):
I mean, we're sort of there today again and who knows how will come out of our current situation with the with the industry will look like but you know, there was starting to be a saturation of craft players, but the the Imports really probably sort of reasserted their place in the market and so craft. Been somewhat The Darlings during the late 80s and mid 90s, but then I think the imported beer started realized that they had a place in the market and pushed and I guess the craft industry also lost a little bit of credibility some of the bigger players back then were contract Brewing meaning they weren't brought their own bear.

1 (1h 1m 36s):
They were going to one of the big Brewers and having their beer made and there. Was sort of an expose from some of the big Brewers saying, you know, here's who's really brewing your special craft beer has been brewed at a you know at Astros Brewery or whatever. So there was some negative industry PR that also probably hurt the industry a bit. So you are

3 (1h 2m 0s):
super leveraged at that beer sales kind of kind of kind of fall. We actually came out of

1 (1h 2m 8s):
that in a pretty good place compared. A lot of our peers in the reason was you know as we were Bruin 363 days that year we were starting to ration and not ship to all of our markets and not chip all of our Brands and we had some pent-up demand. So when we came out of that I did do a big expansion right during that period of buying Paul out which also added stress and debt to the picture, but we pretty much doubled capacity. Is that your 97 and we were able to sort of immediately go into some of that pent-up demand.

1 (1h 2m 48s):
So we grew I think double digits when the rest of the industry was flat. Wow,

3 (1h 2m 56s):
so we know what happened right? Because today Sierra Nevada is the number 3 Craft brewery after Sam Boston Lager Boston beer company that makes Sam Adams and Yen Ling. in Pennsylvania, when you can what you think about I mean the the just incredible journey that he you know, you took right and the unlikely maybe not unlikely because you clearly you were motivated and you you were learning about different things chemistry and machining and Brewing you were learning these things all you know in a very deliberate way you were talking to people you're finding mentors you were To visit, you know other breweries and reading technical journals, but still to me, I don't know if I Met You in 1980 when you were 25 working on Sierra, Nevada.

3 (1h 3m 51s):
I don't know I would have thought. Oh, no, I don't know about this guy. I don't know if I was I don't know if I would give him it. I don't know if I part with my money for to invest in this company, but you you built the third largest Craft brewery in the United States a company which has an enormous valuation and I mean, do you know do you think that this happened because of all those things I mentioned because of your work ethic and your commitment to the craft or do you think a lot of it just had to do with luck

1 (1h 4m 24s):
the hard work part? I think it was a good component around when I opened. I mentioned I think there were six of us and the five other craft Brewers that opened in that same era have all failed today. I'm the last man standing. Adding so we all sort of had an equal shot at it. I guess. Yeah timing. I think we were you know at the right time and sort of American culture when people were looking for better unique different distinctive. There were Coffee Roasters popping up and bakeries and the restaurant scene was starting to grow and but it you know the work part of it.

1 (1h 5m 10s):
It's been a lot and you know, it was a lot for me but a lot for my family. I mean we my kids grew up in the Brewing industry. I have two children still active in the Brewing industry. My son's out in North Carolina and my daughter Sarah is here in Chico. So it's been a family business but it's not an easy business and even though a lot of people think being a Brewers romantic, you know, it's been hard and it's going to stay hard. And I think you know we're still around because we were passionate about beer and passionate about having a great company.

3 (1h 5m 48s):
That's Ken Grossman founder of Sierra Nevada Brewing Company. The ongoing pandemic won't be the first crisis that's impacted the company and the community at the end of 2018 the camp fire destroyed the town of Paradise, California, which is the next town over from Chico and about 60 employees of Sierra Nevada lost their home. Can responded with a relief fund and Sierra Nevada brewed a special beer called the resilience IPA all proceeds from that. Beer were donated to the long-term relief effort and thanks so much for listening to the show this week.

3 (1h 6m 28s):
You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. And by the way, if you've got a business that's working on ways to tackle the global economic and Health crisis, please let us know we may feature it on our How you built that segment go to build npr.org to tell us your story. You can also write us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or add guy Roz our show this week was produced by Neva Grant and Rachel Falkner with original music composed by rum Tina of Louis. Thanks. Also to Candace limb, Julia Carney Casey Herrmann and Jeff Rogers are in turn is rainy toll I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built.

3 (1h 7m 10s):
this this is NPR.