0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, Intuit, QuickBooks, dedicated to helping small businesses be more successful for those working to achieve their own definition of success. QuickBooks smart suite of business tools is designed to help them get there. Learn more@quickbooks.com. Hey, it's guy here. You know, a lot of people have been asking if we're going to be holding a, how I built this summit this year, and today I am very excited to tell you that the answer to that question is yes, and it's going to be super easy to attend this time because this year it's completely virtual from May 24th to the 27th. We'll be bringing you four days of inspiration conversations with iconic entrepreneurs and change makers, plus immersive networking sessions designed to help you build and grow your community of support.

0 (50s):
And of course your business, you can learn more about the summit and get tickets at summit dot NPR dot O R G N. I cannot wait to see you there. Thank you to go daddy, the presenting sponsor of this year summit and to our supporting sponsor Dell technologies.

1 (1m 12s):
The conversation usually centered on me saying that I thought that Dorothy has, could be successful and her not being able to make the leap because of health insurance. Yeah, that's exactly how it went. And it was really my brother telling me that if you don't take this risk, you're going to be really upset with yourself. If somebody else does it. And I think this is what got her over the edge. I told her that she was going to be more upset, like having a buy in almond tortilla from somebody else, knowing that it could have been her from NPR. It's how I built this show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements.

1 (1m 57s):
They built I'm guy Raz. And on the show today, how the Garza family opened a CrossFit gym in Laredo, Texas pivoted into selling paleo-friendly tortillas and built Yeti foods into one of the fastest,

0 (2m 15s):
Just growing Mexican American food brands in the country. The first business idea you will ever have is unlikely to be the one that works. I mean, how many times have you heard entrepreneurs on this show? Talk about ideas they considered before they landed on the one that actually took off and how many businesses start out as one thing, and then turn into something slightly related, but bigger and smarter. Starbucks began as a shop that only sold coffee beans. The e-commerce platform, Shopify grew out of an online store that sold snowboards Stacy's pita

1 (3m 0s):
Chips was originally an outdoor sandwich cart and today's story. The Mexican American food brand CSA foods can trace its origin to an earlier and totally unrelated business idea. A CrossFit gym in Laredo, Texas, the Garza family, all seven of them pitched in to launch the gym. And as they got more into CrossFit, they also got more into the paleo diet than many CrossFitters. Swear by no grains, no legumes, no dairy, no refined sugar. Now it also happened that one of the Garza siblings, Veronica had developed an auto-immune condition.

1 (3m 41s):
And when she ate grains, her symptoms got worse. So together the Garza family decided to basically go paleo. In fact, their family motto is <inaudible> together is better. Now this is no small feat for a fourth generation Mexican American family that loves food, especially Mexican food, because the building blocks of Mexican food include corn, wheat, beans, and rice. And if you're paleo, you can't eat any of it. But instead of turning taco night into lettuce wrap night, Veronica Garza started experimenting with grain-free flowers, with the hope of making authentic Mexican style tortillas.

1 (4m 28s):
And eventually she started selling her tortillas at the family CrossFit gym Laredo, Texas after all is a border town. And it turns out paleo eating CrossFitters really missed Mexican food, but how that CrossFit gym became CSA foods. Now the largest paleo-friendly Mexican food brand in the U S that is our story today, Miguel Garza and his sister, Veronica, who originally founded the company, grew up in a family of five kids, all of whom work together at CSA foods today, Miguel is the youngest, his family, by the way, he calls him Mike and Veronica, who's known in the family is Beto is in the middle.

1 (5m 14s):
They grew up surrounded by a hybrid of TexMex culture in Laredo.

2 (5m 19s):
It very much felt like one big community. A lot of people had family, you know, living on one side, but spending a lot of time together because it was, it's so easy to just cross back and forth. And we were probably in the minority and not speaking fluent Spanish. I know I always felt a little embarrassed that I didn't, you know, I wasn't as fluent as I should be because most everybody that I was friends with did speak Spanish. Even if they were, you know, third or fourth generation Americans, but we definitely do have dos and Thea's and my Theo

3 (5m 58s):
And my Thea, they are not my aunt and uncle. Like, I just wouldn't, I wouldn't know him as that, but I think what was very fun about our house was it wasn't just all of the siblings, but all of the siblings had friends or we had cousins. And so I saw I'm the youngest, my oldest sister is I think about 12 years older than me. Hopefully, I don't know, maybe less 10, nine, nine or 10. Yeah. Cause if I get that wrong and she hears it, I'm going to hear about it after. So, but everybody invited friends and there was always this, like, they're just always people in and out of the house.

0 (6m 43s):
Did, did you growing up, did you grow up with a strong sense of identity? Did you was Mexican culture and Mexican heritage, really an important part of, you know, family traditions and gatherings and get togethers, just the contours of, of your life.

2 (7m 0s):
I think it was an important part, you know, but I didn't really realize it at the time. Part of that was because I grew up in a town that was, you know, 98% like me. I didn't really realize that it was Mexican culture. It was just our culture. And it actually took me leaving Laredo to realize how much my life had been influenced by Mexican culture. I was no longer around so many people that looked like me and were part of that same culture. Yeah. Tell me about food when you were growing up, what was, what, what, what kind of food did you guys eat?

2 (7m 44s):
So we always had a ton of food in our house. I remember my mom cooking, like very simple food, but it was a combination of Mexican food, lots of tacos and tortillas, but you know, we would also have a lot of like spaghetti nights and pizza nights.

3 (8m 3s):
I remember a lot of <inaudible> which again, simple, just like ground beef, chopped onion, some potato. I think I went through a phase where I was the biggest Bret and I just wanted like McDonald's every night. I do remember that and I, and the family doesn't let me live it down. They're like, Oh my gosh, you used to bag and cry for McDonald's every night. You were so annoying.

2 (8m 29s):
Yeah. He's not joking, but actually cry.

3 (8m 32s):
But we ate a lot at home. So my mom, she was cooking for seven people every day. It was seven o'clock and we're eating dinner and my mom made something and we were sitting around the table.

2 (8m 49s):
Hm. And Veronica, I guess, from what I've read, you started to have some, some around time you were

0 (8m 56s):
In high school with your health. Is that right?

2 (8m 58s):
So I would say I was very healthy throughout my childhood. And when I was 17 years old, a senior in high school, that's when I first got sick, what happened? So I was in cheerleading and I was very active and I started noticing that I just had bruises all over my body and I kind of just told myself, Oh, you know, I must've gotten hit doing this stunt or tumbling, but it just kept happening. Wow. And the bruises were just black and huge. So I finally went and got it checked and it turned out that my platelet counts were just extremely low and they couldn't figure out why.

2 (9m 42s):
So the diagnosis was an auto-immune condition called ITP

0 (9m 48s):
And, and it just happened. It just came. I mean, your entire life, you'd never experienced anything like this and that at 17 bam, all of a sudden these symptoms start to show up.

2 (9m 58s):
Yeah. So it really changed my lifestyle. So at the time, you know, doctors were kind of like, well, you know, you probably shouldn't be doing the type of exercise you were doing before. Like no tumbling, no, this, no that, and you know, I was put on medication, a lot of steroids and start gaining a lot of weight and it was tough.

0 (10m 20s):
And then eventually they diagnosed lupus and something called Hashimoto's and essentially these are auto-immune conditions.

2 (10m 29s):
Yeah. And over the years there have been additional diagnosis. So I think lupus was in 2004, maybe

0 (10m 37s):
From what I understand, lupus is basically, it's like when your immune system becomes overreactive and then it kind of attacks the tissue in your body. Right.

2 (10m 46s):
Right. And they don't know what causes it. So it's very hard to treat because you don't know what the underlying causes.

0 (10m 55s):
So you're kind of dealing with these, these health challenges. And, but you still went off to college. You and you graduated from the university of Texas in Austin, I think in 2003. And what did you do

2 (11m 10s):
After college? So from 2003 to 2007, maybe I was lost. I had gotten my degree. And when I was living in Austin, I had gotten really into music. And I started looking into how I might have a career on the business side of the music industry. And I found this program in Austin. The focus was, you know, in all of the different entertainment industries, like music, film, and television. So I just wanted to work in the music industry and thought, well, let me get this MBA.

2 (11m 51s):
Cause then maybe somebody will hire me, but I never got a job in the music industry. Instead, there was an adjunct role for an instructor at the university in my hometown. So I started as an adjunct faculty and ended up doing that for six years. And what were you teaching? So the course was called university seminar. And the easiest way for me to explain it is that it's like a intro to college class for freshmen students. So they're really learning all about time management and study skills. And I felt terrible because I am probably the worst person to learn any of those things from.

0 (12m 38s):
All right. So you're doing that. You're back in Laredo. Tell me about, cause this is important part of the story, cause there is a, another brother and what's his name

2 (12m 47s):
Roberto, but we usually call him Rob,

0 (12m 50s):
Am I right? That Rob is like, was like a cross maybe still I spent at the time was getting into CrossFit.

2 (12m 56s):
Yeah. So I think in about 2008 he discovered CrossFit. And I think through that, he had learned about, you know, this different way of eating.

0 (13m 8s):
A lot of CrossFitters are eat like a paleo diet. Like no grains, no legumes, no dairy, no sugar, no refined oils. Like I did it for a while. I think people listening to the show have heard me say this, I'm sorry, I've done it before. It's an end. Did he kind of adopt that diet?

2 (13m 27s):
You know, I don't think he fully had at that time. I think initially when he had read about it, he had seen people talking about how it had helped them deal with different auto immune issues. So he suggested that I try it and probably around the same time my brother Mike and Becky had also gotten into a CrossFit at the time. And they had also started sort of dabbling in eating this way. It was almost like we all just sort of decided we should just all like go all in and do this together.

2 (14m 7s):
So yeah, I think it was kind of a group decision.

0 (14m 11s):
Right? What, like where were you guys getting like almond flour and I don't know, cassava, whatever you were using too. Or were you just not doing that stuff? You were just like eating vegetables and meat.

2 (14m 22s):
Yeah, no. I remember having to go online and order almond flour. I think I went to like nuts.com or something like that and bought a bunch of almond flour. And I do remember even my parents got in on this and my dad would just eat whatever my mom would put in front of him as long as it tasted good. But my mom really got into the kitchen and started, you know, working on different recipes just so that we could continue to sit together around the dinner table and have a meal as a family. So my mom got very creative in the kitchen and she and I were often in there and also with my sister and we would try to recreate a lot of the meals that, you know, we would normally have.

2 (15m 6s):
So whether that was like, Mike, do you remember eating like meets us? We would do that often.

1 (15m 12s):
Yeah, there was, I remember my mom and <inaudible> and my sister, Becky making all sorts of paleo recreation's or grain-free recreations of different foods that we missed. Hmm.

2 (15m 29s):
Yeah. So we would try to make bread and pizza and whatever we could so that we could follow a grain-free diet, but still enjoy, you know, a lot of the foods that we loved.

1 (15m 40s):
So here, here's kind of a curious part of the story, which is around this time, right. You decide to adopt this day, the whole family decides to adopt a style to see right. If this would help your condition and by the way, did it, I mean, did you start to see effects pretty quickly on how you felt?

2 (15m 57s):
Yes. So I actually have a memory of being in the backyard, working out with my family. We were doing squats and I distinctly remember not feeling pain in my knees. And they used to be like very squeaky. Like I could actually hear the squeak in my knees and it wasn't there anymore. And that was probably like several months, maybe three or four months into eating paleo. And I looked over at my mom and I was like, my knees don't hurt. This is crazy. So I knew it was helping.

1 (16m 33s):
I'm still, I'm still hung up on the idea that the whole family was doing squats together. You guys must be, you guys are like a, like an Instagram family, the whole family, that all seven of you, like doing a CrossFit in the backyard and like doing this together. Like that's pretty cool.

2 (16m 47s):
Well, let me paint a picture for you though, of kind of how that started my mom and I would watch my brother and his friends and my sister do CrossFit in the backyard and they invited us to join them. And I was terrified of working out in front of people. To me that was scary. I don't want anybody to see me exercising. What if I do it wrong? So she and I started doing sort of our version of CrossFit workouts inside the house while everybody else was doing CrossFit in the backyard. And I remember Mike coming inside the house and trying to help my mom do a squat without falling.

2 (17m 29s):
And that probably happened a couple of times. And very quickly, my mom got really good at CrossFit. And then we got comfortable enough to join them in the backyard. But now my mom is a beast and she can do more pull-ups than me. So it's kind of embarrassing.

1 (17m 48s):
So, alright, so you guys are doing

0 (17m 50s):
CrossFit in the backyard. You're eating basically a paleo diet. And I guess Miguel, around this time you, you had plans to go to law school. And then in the middle of all of this, you guys actually opened up a CrossFit gym in Laredo. How did that happen?

3 (18m 9s):
There really wasn't an intent at first, but we were all working out together a lot. And so we had like a couple of my friends, two or three of my sisters, my mom, we had a couple of neighbors and then our neighbors friend. So there were 20 people in the backyard and I actually had a fight. You know, my dad was an attorney and we had this argument where I told him, Hey, I'm like, I don't want to go to law school. I really liked this like gym business type stuff. I'm going to do that instead. And he looked at me and he was like, no, you're not.

0 (18m 49s):
You want it. You want it to open up the CrossFit gym. Yeah. I

3 (18m 52s):
Wanted to stay in town. There was all this momentum and everybody like the whole family's together. Everybody's having fun. And the gym was born at that point.

0 (19m 3s):
But because you did actually wind up pulling off to law school in Austin. And so who, who was the driving force behind opening the gym?

2 (19m 12s):
So my sister and I were the two that were in town that were sort of managing the opening of the gym.

0 (19m 21s):
And I'm assuming it's not like rent is not that crazy high in Laredo. Right. You can probably get a reasonable deal for a space.

3 (19m 29s):
Yeah, I think so. I don't think it was like ridiculous, but I do remember feeling a little bit of anxiety because both of my sisters were texting me saying, Hey, we're we found a space and we're about to actually make this a gym. And they just did it. <inaudible> athletics was born.

2 (19m 50s):
Yeah. I sometimes do just do things without thinking about it.

0 (19m 56s):
And, and I mean, but so you, you found a space to open up a gym and I mean, I don't know that much about CrossFit, but I'm imagining like you have to become a certified trainer to train. So who was the trainer? Who were you guys? The trainers?

2 (20m 10s):
Yeah, it started with my sister and I, and I think we even hired some of my brother's friends who had been doing CrossFit with him in the backyard. So four of us who would coach classes in the evenings after we all got out of our full-time jobs and then on the weekends as well.

3 (20m 27s):
Well, I mean the gym just started growing at that point. Everybody was actually like mom and dad were there every evening. And then I think my older brother, he maybe saw that there was some fun happening and he eventually moved from Sugarland to Laredo because we needed somebody manage the gym full-time so yeah, we jumped through the hoops, became a business, had a gym and we're coaching people in the evenings.

0 (20m 57s):
And you were living in Austin and going to law school. And what kind of helping them manage it from Austin

3 (21m 4s):
Ish? I was doing the programming, but I was also coaching classes here in Austin at a gym called CrossFit, Austin.

0 (21m 11s):
I'm looking at a family photo of the 70 of you guys, your dad. How old is your dad? By the way,

3 (21m 16s):
Is he currently 60, 66 going to turn 67?

0 (21m 22s):
Your dad is like, like Lou Ferrigno, man.

4 (21m 24s):
Yes.

0 (21m 28s):
All right. So, so you've got this CrossFit gym going. And how was that as a business? Was that, were you guys making money? It's freaking hard, right?

3 (21m 38s):
This, it was the topic of conversation at our dinner table for about five straight years. Okay. It's a business. How do we grow it? What do we do? Are we missing anything? Maybe we need to go get another certification. Maybe we have to offer another class because it was really like, the model is service-based right. It's like personal training, but in a group setting and that kind of business is hard. Service-based businesses are hard. So I remember just feeling constantly defeated, but also very excited about the community that we were building at the time.

0 (22m 16s):
Yeah. Cause it is a community. I mean, CrossFit is, I mean, some people call it a cult, but it has, I mean the good way. Right. But it is a community and I'm wonder was the investment significant? Did you guys have to put in a lot of money? I mean, yes. You signed a lease and yet to have a space and presumably a to buy some equipment. Right. So did you have to put in considerable money into this venture?

3 (22m 40s):
Yes. Luckily my parents were giving enough and they had a little bit of savings for the gym. And so they bought the equipment and for them it was like, okay, now we have a gym that we come to. And then after that, after the equipment expense, it was, I think that's when we really learned a business has to make money in order to be sustainable. Well, what's that,

0 (23m 4s):
I mean, what was so hard about the money side? I mean, you're charging people, what, 20 bucks, a class or 30 bucks a class or a monthly fee or something like that.

3 (23m 13s):
At that point in time, it's like a monthly fee. It's probably anywhere from 75 bucks to 115 bucks a month. If my memory serves me. Right. And you can only have so many people in this space, right? So at some point you outgrow the space and then you have overhead and then you you're paying coaches. And then at some point you're trying to pay yourself. And I'm speaking again, mostly from a far because my brother started to manage it. Full-time but it is a tough business. That's my own, my own experience.

2 (23m 52s):
I honestly don't think we ever really saw it as a money-making business. It was more just, my parents made this investment because it allowed us, even though we were all living in separate houses, working different jobs, we could all get together every evening and exercise as a family. And then with our extended gym family, I think we, we were always talking about potentially closing the gym because it wasn't bringing in money, but it was, it was okay. It was kind of the decision we always came to. As long as, you know, Rob could support himself, you know, pay himself a salary as the general manager, you know, as long as we weren't losing money, we felt like it was okay.

3 (24m 37s):
And I think that's an important distinction. Everybody was working on it, but like Vettel was still had a full-time job at the university. And my sister, Becky still had a full-time job at the university as did my, my mom, my mom, my other sister and my dad. So this was really about like, the gym became this after work place to exercise, hang out and be with family.

0 (25m 6s):
Meantime, Veronica, I guess, around you're in Laredo, you're experimenting with different recipes. And I guess, I mean, given that you guys have, you know, Mexican heritage and you did eat Mexican food growing up, I mean, there is a challenge with Mexican food because this is not, grain-free friendly. You like, it's like corn and flour and it's not, you know, in Bryce and it's not paleo from this beans. I mean, it's, I'm assuming that, you know, this would have posed a problem when, you know, when you guys wanted to have like a Mexican dinner.

2 (25m 43s):
Yeah. There were a lot of times. So my family and I love to, you know, we would get together after we did our workout and just have a meal together. And then on the weekends we would love to get together in the backyard and you know, somebody would grill and, you know, we'd enjoy these Godness Sada with tortillas and we couldn't really do that anymore. And then we would just take like a piece of lettuce and put it in there and call it a taco. But

0 (26m 16s):
It's not saying let's be honest, let us, they're not the same.

2 (26m 22s):
That was okay. When I did it with my family, not fun, but at least everybody else was eating, you know, a lettuce wrap buckle. But then I would go to like Godness sodas with my friends. And it was really awkward showing up with like a bag of lettuce so that you could have your thought goal while everybody else. Yeah. It was embarrassing of lettuce. Yeah. There was definitely the sense, like, especially being in Laredo, like we were missing out on part of the culture there, every household has tortillas, every meal has thought of Thea's sometimes even if you're not eating like Mexican food, you still have your thoughts, ideas on the table as your bread.

2 (27m 5s):
So it was, it was really tough.

0 (27m 7s):
Did you guys grow up with tortillas at home often? I mean, cause, or, or just every day. Oh, you always. And, and flour or corn tortillas or both.

2 (27m 16s):
So growing up in Laredo, I, at least in our household, it was more flour. I grew up mostly eating flour throw to the us because that's what our grandmother would make us. So when I would go to Baytown and visit her, we would always show up to a fresh pile of tortillas and a pot of beans that she had freshly made, you know, and got a chance to make them with her. Sometimes I think probably every single one of her grandkids had an opportunity to do that. So she would make the they're called the stylus, the dough balls. And then, you know, we would help her roll them out with some flour on the table.

3 (27m 54s):
Well, and these things are like pillows of delicious.

0 (27m 59s):
Yes. Cook them on a cast iron pan.

3 (28m 2s):
Yeah. And all you need is like, you don't need to add anything to them, but you may add a little bit of butter or you add some beans or you add, I mean, they're just like

2 (28m 14s):
Did a snack at grandma's house. You would just walk into the kitchen, get some butter and roll up with Thea and walk around with it as a snack. So yeah, they were a big part of our life and it was kind of sad being without them. Yeah.

0 (28m 30s):
So it sounds like you started to think about ways you could make a version of them that, that you could eat.

2 (28m 36s):
Yeah. So I had already started experimenting with almond flour to make breads and pizza crusts. And I don't know, I had just had this idea that maybe it could somehow work in a <inaudible> and just started experimenting with it. I didn't really tell anybody that I was working on this, but as soon as I had something that resembled a tortilla and tasted decent, I sort of put it on the table. And just one day at dinner, let people grab from the pile. Didn't really say much. I was like, I made those, but I'm not gonna tell you what's in them and watch their reactions. And when everybody wanted to know more and continued eating them after their first bite, I realized that, okay, that's a good start.

2 (29m 24s):
But at the time they were probably a little more like a Posada.

0 (29m 27s):
Yeah. They're Christy. Yeah. They weren't, they weren't like chewy with none of that. Like chewiness. Cause it was basically like almond flour and water and salt.

2 (29m 36s):
The initial recipe was yeah, very close to that. But I did a lot of internet of just like grain-free flowers and ingredients that were fairly easy to find, not in a grocery store, but I could go online and order some almond flour, tapioca flour, and you know, see what worked and thought. Maybe there's something here that I could call it <inaudible> and continue to eat my fajitas. Maybe even share them with some friends, you know, show up to a <inaudible> with them and not feel embarrassed about like, if somebody else tried them, I wouldn't be, you know, nervous about it.

0 (30m 17s):
Or are you always a Baker? Like, were you always into baking?

2 (30m 22s):
I'm actually a horrible Baker. Horrible accidentally made a lot of good things, but I am really bad at measuring and weighing things. And my mom had to stand over me and watch me make them so she could write down exactly the measurements so that I could do it over and over again. Otherwise it would have been a different product every single time.

3 (30m 47s):
Yeah. I was just gonna say that there's like creative genius where people are like, I don't know how it works, but like I do it and it works. And if you were to see my sister in the kitchen the entire time, she would be telling you don't watch me. I don't know what I'm doing. I don't know what I'm measuring. And then at the end you're like, Holy crap, this tastes good. What do you mean? You don't know what you're doing when I don't know what I'm doing. It doesn't taste like

0 (31m 18s):
At what point did you like in your experimenting with tortillas, did you come up with something where you were like, this is actually pretty close to the thing that my grandma used to make?

2 (31m 28s):
Ooh, I am a little bit of a perfectionist. So I think even to this day, I'm still trying to get it to be like my grandma's tortilla, but it was very telling, there was a point probably maybe a year and a half after I started making this sort of Thea, maybe two years, my mom didn't tell me this, but she took up a sample to my grandmother in Baytown and let my grandma try the tortillas and recorded her, trying them and then commenting on what she thought. And there's still a video that my mom has of my grandma's saying that all these third Thea's are good.

2 (32m 13s):
They're good. They're better than mine.

0 (32m 16s):
They're delicious. Wow.

2 (32m 19s):
And then very grant at least is very much my grandma. She said they're too expensive for my belly, but they're very good.

0 (32m 29s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment to Veronica's tortilla recipe eventually moved out of their mom's kitchen and onto grocery store shelves in Austin. And also some advice from Miguel on what not to new. If you're looking to sell your tortillas at whole foods, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Discover any credit card can offer cash back, but only discover matches all the cash back you've earned at the end of your first year.

0 (33m 12s):
It's like getting one of those birthday cards that shaped like cash. So you already know there's cash inside before opening it, but in this case, it stuffed with your first year cash back match and you don't even have to send a thank you note, cashback match only buy discover card, learn more at discover.com/match. Discover something brighter. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Epson. Are you tired of buying expensive ink cartridges? Now you can kiss expensive cartridges goodbye with the Epson EcoTank printer. This cartridge free printer has super-sized easy to filling tanks and comes with a ridiculous amount of ink enough to print thousands of pages.

0 (33m 54s):
This means you will never hassle with buying or changing expensive in cartridges ever again. The Epson EcoTank printer. So you can just fill and chill, learn more at epson.com/npr. This message comes from NPR sponsor ADP. With more than 70 years of experience, helping businesses run smoothly. ADP helps clients navigate these complex times and compliance challenges. So businesses can pay their people accurately. And on time, more than a payroll company, ADP is HR talents, time benefits and payroll informed by data and designed for people

2 (34m 36s):
On NPRs consider this podcast. We don't just help you keep up with the news. We help you make sense of what's happening. Like what the case about George Floyd's killing means for the ongoing fight for racial justice or how to best navigate a pandemic. That's changed life for all of us. All of that in 15 minutes, every weekday. Listen now to consider this from NPR.

0 (34m 59s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Ross. So it's around 2012 and after a bunch of trial and error experiments with different ingredients, Veronica is feeling confident enough about her recipe for grain-free tortillas, that she's starting to sell them to a few friends.

2 (35m 20s):
I was making them and people in Laredo who were, you know, members of our CrossFit, gym and friends. They were asking me to make them for them. So I had sort of started selling them as a

0 (35m 30s):
I'd hustle, like a dozen of them in a package or something. Exactly. Yeah.

2 (35m 35s):
And we'd love to, you know, with our extended gym family and have these Godness brought us together. And I actually never told anybody what the ingredients were and people trusted me buying these sorts of ideas and eating them, even though they, all they knew was that there's almond flour in them, but they knew no other ingredients. Cause I was so scared that somebody was going to copy me, but yeah, they started asking for them and then it became this thing where every weekend, my mom and I we'd get together and make just this huge batch and sell them to people at the gym throughout the week

0 (36m 14s):
And how much reselling it for, I think

2 (36m 16s):
At that time it was like a dollar authority. So it was $12 for

0 (36m 20s):
It. Doesn't was there any part of you that was thinking this could be really big or, or were you really focused on just kind of making it for people who were asking for it?

2 (36m 31s):
I don't know if I was thinking it could be really big, but I think, I thought it was a possibility that maybe I could start making these thoughts, ideas and perhaps get them into like some local stores. Also. I didn't love the job that I had at the time and I really wanted a way out of it. And if I could sell enough tortillas just to allow me to do that, like make up for the salary that I'd be losing teaching, which wasn't much by the way. So it wouldn't have been that hard. That was enough for me, but I wasn't thinking it would be what it is today. That was just not even imaginable.

0 (37m 12s):
Yeah. I'm curious. We're I mean, given that, you know, Mexican culture is such a huge part of Laredo culture were people alike tortillas that are not made of flour or corn. Like what, like what do you, what is this like, this is weird. Will you getting any of that?

2 (37m 30s):
Yeah. I got a lot of that comment and I was very nervous anytime somebody tried them because I knew that they, they understood what the real thing was supposed to taste like, but I think they usually set that skepticism aside after they would try it and it just tastes so good. Cause I mean, almonds are just so sort of buttery cause they have a lot of oil in them and for a lot of these people, they weren't even following a paleo diet. Like we were, they were still eating flour and corn and all of the things and they still wanted to buy the product. So it was really interesting to see that.

2 (38m 10s):
And then they would tell me how they would keep them in their fridge and try to hide them from their husband or their kids, because these were like their tortillas. They didn't want to share. It was pretty funny to see that happening. Like just people getting so excited about it.

0 (38m 25s):
And were you and your mom just making them at home for people who were buying them in Laredo?

2 (38m 30s):
Yes. So we didn't have a business. We probably weren't supposed to be doing this. No,

0 (38m 37s):
No, no, no judgment. I'm just trying to figure out how you, how did you cook so many tortillas? Because honestly you roll them out yourselves, but like you'd have a lot of cast iron pans in your kitchen at home to make this work. Even, even if you were only selling it to like 20 or 30 people.

2 (38m 52s):
Yeah. We were able to purchase some griddles that you sort of place over two burners at a time. And I think my mom had a kitchen with four burners. So we had the whole stove top set up sort of like a flat top where we could flip to Thea's maybe put, I don't know, six to eight at a time. So I think we would maybe do like 50 packs of tortillas in a weekend,

0 (39m 19s):
But that's still like super time-consuming. I'm like thinking one side, it's like a minute, minute and a half, then flip it over and you might be on a hotspot on the griddle and you've got to move it to another spot and then you get them burn spots and that one's not good. Like that's a lot of work

2 (39m 36s):
And we would recruit whoever was willing to help that weekend. So it was at my mom's house. So sometimes, you know, my dad would have to help with like packaging and my younger sister would help make the tortillas when she could. So it was, that was a family affair in itself.

0 (39m 53s):
Meantime, I'm trying to figure this out because I imagine this is, this is how it went. Miguel is in law school. He's like thinking about all right, what am I going to do? He's got all these ideas in his head and you start scheming in your head thinking, wait a minute, maybe Veronica is onto something. Maybe this is a business. Is that, is, was it that linear or did it, did you kind of stumble them on that thought over time?

3 (40m 16s):
Almost. I think my sister would tell you, I snuck into the business at some point in time. I think I pulled the baby of the family card, but now I, I had, I had graduated from law school in 2012. I'm here in Austin. And then I saw like, if you walk into cafes in this city or you walk into whole foods and you're just seeing these people that are building businesses from behind a Mac book and I, that fascinated me. So I actually started to sell my sister's Dorothea's to the gym that I was a coach at. It was around that time where I started having conversations with veterans and the conversation usually centered on her saying that she wanted to do something new me saying that I thought that Dorothea has, could be successful getting stuck at this point of her not being able to make the leap because I mean really because of health insurance, I think that was like a big thing.

0 (41m 25s):
Yeah. I mean, cause you had, presumably you had health insurance through the university where you were teaching. Right?

2 (41m 29s):
Right. And they would just have to approve my health. It being like a group plan. They were not looking at the fact that I had all of these pre-existing conditions. And every time I thought about leaving, my parents would be like, ah, but your health insurance, this is really important. So I think health played a big part in me, never doing it. And then also a lot of fear because initially it would have been something that maybe I would have done alone. So I kept staying

3 (41m 60s):
And Miguel, you were what you were saying to your sister, Hey, maybe we should start a business around this. Is that, was it that explicit? Yeah, kind of. And I think at the time I actually didn't envision myself being a part of it. I just knew that she really didn't like her job. And what I was realizing was, man, life's too short to not chase what you really want to do or to stay somewhere that you're not happy. And so it wasn't selfishly motivated at that time. Maybe it was later when I asked to join the company because I needed a job. But at that point in time, I was, I was mainly telling her like, look, I, and I think this is what got her over the edge.

3 (42m 41s):
I told her that she would, if she didn't start this business or didn't at least attempt that she was going to be more upset, seeing another person put this product to market and having to buy that product, like having to buy an almond tortilla from somebody else, knowing that it could have been her. And then

2 (43m 1s):
He said, and I'm going to help you do this. So you're not going to leave your job yet. Cause I know health insurance is important. We're just going to see if this works out, let's go to a store and see if they want to carry them and then we'll take it from there. We'll see what happens.

3 (43m 18s):
Yeah. It was, let's go get a customer and that's going to be our proof point. If we can go get a customer, a retailer, that's going to put our product on the shelf, then that's going to be an indicator that maybe we should pursue this further. Hmm. So what did you do? Who did you approach? So there's a food co-op here in town called Weeksville and I remember it was an unfortunate name for a yes. So it's a, a, it's one of the only food co-ops in Texas. They have two locations and it was just after Christmas. So into the new year. And I remember me and Vettel meeting in the parking lot.

3 (43m 58s):
We walked in, we had a very small appointment with this buyer and it was it relatively easy to get the appointment. Cause Weeksville is like a relatively small company. It wasn't a very difficult and they're good about working with supporting local vendors. And so this guy named Chris Moore, I think is his name. He comes to the front of the store and we hand them a tortilla. And I knew that we had to get them to try it right on the spot. And so he grabbed the bag and he was about to head to his office again. Yeah. And I remember stopping him and saying, come on, man, like you gotta try this in front of us because I want to know what your actual feedback is.

3 (44m 40s):
Like. I think it's really good. I want to know what you think. And so me and my sister are there. He tries to throw it at the, and you could tell, he went from maybe like skeptic to, Oh my gosh. Tell me again, what's in this. And my sister explained to him like it's paleo, it's vegan, almond flour and tapioca. And

1 (45m 0s):
Did you, and you presented it to him where they were warm. The tortillas were warm.

3 (45m 5s):
Yeah. I think what we had done was we didn't have access to a stove top. So we did probably one of the things that we would never do again, which is a microwave that Dorothea's, I think my sister was probably like, no, please. Like we got to present them in a way, like, do they have a kitchen or can we put them on a cast iron? And I'm maybe more of the 85% is good enough person. I was like, no, it's fine. Microwave. He's going to try it. They're good. And so he ended up telling us on the spot. He said, I like this, go to our website. And on our website, there's a list of everything you need

1 (45m 42s):
Have in order to be a vendor for us. Huh. And I remember we walked out, we called my mom on speaker. She's like, Oh my gosh, how was it? And well, we told her like, yeah, we, they accepted the tortillas. Like now we got to go do everything else. And immediately my mom started crying. I'm so proud of you guys. I can't believe you did that. That is so awesome. But that was really just the beginning because from there was, Oh, now we have to figure out how to start a business and we've done the gym thing. But the food business is very different in what's required. I mean, you need packaging and a logo and like ingredients in your label and need, need to be making your tortillas in like a, a health department inspected kitchen, which, which is relatively easy to find a commercial kitchen like that.

1 (46m 35s):
I mean, right. They exist. I think they exist all over the country. It, it is. But we had to find the gluten-free one. So 2014 finding a gluten-free kitchen, I think there were maybe two in Austin and we found one that was about probably 10 minutes outside of Austin. And you pay like a fee to get, to use the kitchen for a couple hours a day. Something like that. Yep. And in terms, and then you need packaging and things like that, but these are not huge expenses, but they still cost some money probably at least 10,000 bucks to get started or maybe I'm wrong. I don't know.

1 (47m 15s):
No, I actually think so. It was Ziploc bags, not Ziploc, but like twist, tie, top bags, stickers for the label. Like we went as scrappy as possible. Yeah. It was probably maybe like under,

3 (47m 30s):
Just to get going maybe. Yeah.

0 (47m 32s):
Under 2000. Yeah. And what did you call? I mean, you had no name at that time. So he was like, yeah. And what's your company called? What was it called?

2 (47m 39s):
Yeah. Mike, Mike came up with the most brilliant idea. He decided that we should call our <inaudible> brand must be nutty. And it wasn't like bee. Yeah, just, it was just the letter, the letter B letter B.

0 (47m 56s):
Let her be nutty, nutty, nutty,

3 (48m 0s):
Just with the letter B easier to trademark.

2 (48m 4s):
Right? Because you're thinking like a lawyer

0 (48m 6s):
As your lawyer. All right. It's okay. It works.

2 (48m 10s):
There was a little bit, we weren't excited about it, but the discussion that we had and told herself this could work. Maybe we could change it later if we need to. But it made a little bit of sense at the time, because we all had these graduate degrees. I had an MBA. Mike had his law degree and my dad has law degree practicing attorney, my mom counseling psychology. It was primarily the four of us who kind of kicked the business off the ground. And we were like, yeah, we must be nutty to be doing this.

0 (48m 43s):
He got must be nutty. And he got, and you find a commercial kitchen and he started making tortillas. Yeah.

3 (48m 51s):
I actually like, I think along the way, we got really lucky finding this gluten-free kitchen, better bites bakery. The individual's name was Leah Lopez. And she was kind of like a guardian angel in our first few weeks, months of getting started because she had a food business and she had already figured out a lot of this stuff. And so we would ask her questions like, Hey, what stores are you in? And so she was letting us initially use her kitchen weekends and then eventually nights and weekends.

0 (49m 28s):
So describe how this work, I mean, it was the two of you and who else was helping you out?

2 (49m 34s):
Yeah, so Mike was living in Austin and my parents and myself were living in Laredo and we would drive up from Laredo. It's a three-and-a-half hour drive and we would do this on a Friday evening after we all got out of our full-time jobs, hop in the car, drive to Austin, meet up at the kitchen. So we probably wouldn't arrive at the kitchen until about 9:00 PM. Wow. And get started with making tortillas for maybe till one in the morning, get back up early the next day to do the same thing. So it was primarily the four of us, but often with help from my now sister-in-law Alex, she would help with a lot of the like packaging and stuff.

2 (50m 17s):
And my now husband, David,

0 (50m 21s):
This is my wife and David, your husband, who was not your husband at the time.

3 (50m 25s):
Yeah. And we really liked what was crazy was we were trying to make as many as possible because, so we had put these ideas on the shelf in may of 2014 at Weeksville and we put two cases to the shelf and we had learned a little bit from owning the gym on like marketing a service-based business. So, you know, what we did was we took a picture, we posted it to Instagram and we posted it to Facebook. And I came back the next day and we were sold out of two cases. Wow. Which is how many tortillas at that point in time, that would have been 30 packs of 10, so 300. And they were, they were selling like $12 at the shelf at Weeksville again, that was super exciting, but it basically, it meant that for the next year, my sister and my now brother-in-law and my parents and my wife were going to a kitchen every weekend to make tortillas.

3 (51m 29s):
Yep. Just making tortillas,

1 (51m 31s):
But you could only make tortillas on the weekend.

2 (51m 34s):
Yeah. So what happened was, I think we put tortillas on the shelf in may. And then in October I decided to leave my teaching job because we had gotten so busy where we needed to produce every night, at least so that we could keep up with the demand. So I couldn't pay myself anything, but I took out my little retirement with teaching and just decided that I could use that to survive for a few months and then hopefully pay myself a salary. But I packed up a bag and started staying at Mike's house every single day. And I remember not going home for like two months because we got into the kitchen every single day, just got so busy.

3 (52m 19s):
It really started to take off like at, so the reason we were in there every night is because at this co-op at Weeksville we had become the number one selling item in the entire refrigerated case.

1 (52m 34s):
So, I mean, you guys are making these things, like, imagine it was hot in there. Cause you have all the burners on, you've got all the cast, iron pants go and like you've got people patterned that, you know, like then rolling it. And then like somebody just cooking them on a cast iron pans everybody's sweating. Was it like that? Yeah,

2 (52m 56s):
It was hard work. So instead of rolling the tortillas, we found these little tortilla presses where we could, you know, press one tortilla at a time. So it took a lot of arms to get that press down. And I remember always having to go and get my shoulder worked on just cause it was always in pain from pressing so many thoughts, fears. And we would often like just go home with our eyebrows, probably like halfway burned off. We were just like burning from the heat. Yeah, exactly. Yeah.

0 (53m 34s):
I re I don't know if this is true or apocryphal, but I read this story that at a certain point, like you needed help for people to make tortillas for you. And like you were in a grocery store and saw some lady with like a bunch of Masa and her shopping cart and you're like, Hey, you want to help us make,

2 (53m 47s):
Is that, is, did that happen? Yeah. Well, so we started with just recruiting like friends, but even that wasn't enough and happened to see a woman in the aisle where they sell the tortilla Masa. And she actually had like three or four of those in her basket. So I just approached her and asked if she would be interested in a job making tortillas. And so she ended up being one of our first employees

0 (54m 18s):
And Miguel, you were what? Doing the biz dev stuff like going out and, and try to drum up more stores to sell out. Or were you still mainly focused on Weeksville?

3 (54m 28s):
No. So we were trying to drum up more business and we were trying to do it in a way that we could manage against. And so obviously the big account that we really wanted was whole foods. And I made the mistake of showing up to whole foods office and leaving a Ziploc bag of Dorothea's. And I thought, Oh, this worked for Weeksville. But when I did that at whole foods, they thought that we weren't a real business. And so they were like, yeah, we're not gonna carry you because you just showed up with a Ziploc

0 (54m 60s):
That clearly didn't work. So how, what, what did you, I mean, did you go back and try again?

3 (55m 5s):
Yeah, we actually kept on trying, sending emails and then I was driving around doing deliveries one time and this individual messaged us and said, Hey, big fan. I buy him at the Weeksville that y'all started at. Like, I live really close and I'm actually a, I'm a director producer and we're, we're doing this film with whole foods. And so I, I saw John Mackey the other day and I told him he should carry your <inaudible>. And so here's like, the deal is that I didn't know much about the food industry. And so even the mention of that name, I had to Google, like, I didn't know.

3 (55m 48s):
No, I know. So I, I Google and I'm like, Oh my God, the founder of, so I'm having this moment where like I remember calling my sister and my mom and I'm telling them like, Hey, we just got this message. She told me that we should be expecting to hear something soon from whole foods, from whole foods. And I kid you, not that we got an email the next day or the day after. And it was a forwarded email from a forwarded email, from a forwarded email.

0 (56m 16s):
And that's all because this filmmaker like mentioned it to John Mackey and John Mack is like, sounds great. And he sent an email to somebody and he's like, Hey, check this, this comes out. And then they forwarded and they forwarded. And then like this, person's like, well, it's coming from John Maggie. I guess I better call him.

3 (56m 30s):
And it came from our local buyer who bought for like the five Austin stores. And so I think that is, I don't know, luck is very important. You know, we were working hard. We were making tortillas night and day and on the weekends and trying to build this thing, but we couldn't get in the door of whole foods. And then it ended up being a fan of the brand that kickstart,

0 (56m 57s):
When we come back after the break, tell Miguel and Veronica renamed the company, it's got a chunk of money and we're poised to expand even further when they got the worst news imaginable tortillas covered in mold, stay with us guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR support for this podcast. And the following message come from NPR sponsor, TD Ameritrade, you have an investing style. TD Ameritrade has a mobile app to match it.

0 (57m 37s):
Check out TD Ameritrade, mobile, and think or swim mobile to find the one that's right for you

5 (57m 44s):
Support for this podcast. And the following message come from Upwork. The world's largest remote talent platform, devs designers, writers, strategists, you name it, find, hire, and pay all in one place needs to find a coders outside your area code and SEO specialist for six weeks or a UI designer through December pro's available short or long-term and they're proven, rated and reviewed when you need in demand talent on demand. Upwork is how learn more@upwork.com.

0 (58m 21s):
Hearing loss is a fact of life for many humans, but not for fish reptiles or birds.

3 (58m 26s):
We'll notice then chickens that they could take them to say heavy metal concert blasts the ears really to oblivion. And then within days, new hair cells would begin to sprout

0 (58m 36s):
The science of sound. That's next time on the Ted radio hour from NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's around 2015 and after struggling to get their grain-free tortillas into whole foods, Veronica and Miguel are starting to get them into a few stores so far only in Texas, but it's a start.

3 (59m 3s):
We put the thought at the, as on the shelf and this is going to sound redundant, but we like, we had built up this following on Instagram and on Facebook. And I remember taking a picture and then coming back the next day and the same thing had happened. Like we had sold through the product that we put on the shelf. Wow. And people were really excited about it and we were based out of Austin. So I think there was this added excitement about being local.

0 (59m 29s):
What's remarkable also is that you were introducing a product that wasn't only new and different and a little bit, you know, weird, unless you were already familiar with grain-free products, but it was expensive. So like a business school professor might look at this and say, well, the barrier to entry is really high because it's expensive and it's different. And, but actually in some ways, because these were like 12 bucks a pack, right?

3 (59m 52s):
Yeah. Well, when we got into whole foods, we moved them to 10 bucks, but yeah, still very expensive.

0 (59m 59s):
And did you guys get pushback from initially from people who were, who were saying, Hey, why is this so expensive? How would you answer that question?

3 (1h 0m 8s):
Our answer is that we are using more expensive ingredients and almond flour at the shelf is expensive. So I think there is also an association of people that were walking the baking aisle and they saw almond flour. I think there was a price correlation that people, people could have made with that.

0 (1h 0m 32s):
All right. So you are, you get a couple of cases in whole foods, and this is in February of 2015 that they agree to do this. And what point do you become CSA foods? When do you drop the name must be nutty and become, and actually get, I mean, no offense, but get a great name. What do you track when you drop that name? Did that happen shortly after you got into whole foods?

3 (1h 0m 57s):
Ish. So we ended up going through an accelerator here in town called SKU.

0 (1h 1m 3s):
You got like you applied to, to become part of this accelerator.

3 (1h 1m 6s):
Yeah, we, so we were essentially just dissecting our business. And I think one of the most meaningful exercises that we did was put everything. We were four on one half of a whiteboard and everything we were against on another half of a whiteboard. And then we actually got to talking to one of the mentors. He told us that like, we should really understand who we are and then leverage that in the marketplace. And I think what he meant by understanding who you are is we had been producing this Dorothea and it was authentic because this is what we grew up eating.

3 (1h 1m 50s):
So we ended up coming to CFA because the number of family members that we have in our family and using Spanish, it was kind of written there the whole time. Like <inaudible> athletics, like family is so much a part of who we are and see that there was the representation for that.

0 (1h 2m 12s):
Yeah. So, all right. So you guys, you've got your name and I guess another part of this accelerator program was also helping you to ready to,

1 (1h 2m 20s):
To raise money from potential investors. Cause you guys were starting to get to that point, right?

3 (1h 2m 25s):
Yeah, for sure. And we ended up at the end, we, we did a pitch, like we pitched to a, a room of investors and we did end up raising money about a few months after the accelerator ended.

1 (1h 2m 39s):
I think it was about a million dollars that you raised from,

3 (1h 2m 41s):
Right? Yeah. We raised a million dollars from a few angel investors here in town and then a natural foods broker who's based out of Chicago. And we were really trying to raise money for a pretty specific reason. We wanted to make sure that we could buy a piece of equipment that could help us make the jump from manufacturing by hand, to utilizing a machine that would automate a good chunk of the process.

1 (1h 3m 12s):
By the way you guys were still making the tortillas or, or did you now have other people making them for you? I think at that point we had hired like 10 people to help make the tortillas on a daily basis.

3 (1h 3m 25s):
Yeah. And right around that time, we ended up flying to Baltimore because this investor, this natural foods broker had gotten us a meeting with whole foods up in Baltimore at a natural products, expo East. And so we met with this guy, Joe White Richmond. He was the whole foods buyer for us. And we had been told like, Hey, he doesn't, you know, he's not going to have much expression. He's just going to meet with you. And so just do your pitch and don't expect.

1 (1h 3m 58s):
And by the way, was he like a mid Atlantic regional buyer? Or was he a national, you know, he was a national buyer national. Okay.

3 (1h 4m 5s):
So he ended up going to Baltimore and we're making this pitch and I'll never forget because Dwight ended up cracking a smile. Like he laughed a little bit, which was exciting to me. And then he ended up saying like, yeah, I'm going to tell the regions that, that they should take this product. Wow. And so for us, that's like, we're super excited. Yeah. I remember like high-fiving because you feel so good. And our parents are like, Oh my gosh, that was awesome. And then battle gets a phone call and she looks at me and if this is wrong, then I'll let me know. But I remember you looking at me and you.

1 (1h 4m 44s):
Yeah. And you pass the ghost. So she passes

3 (1h 4m 47s):
The phone to me and I'm like, okay. Huh. Huh? Who was on the other line? It was our regional distributor, Labatt and Labatt distributed to the Southwest region of whole foods. And so what they were telling us was, Hey, you know that pallet of product that you shipped us so that we could ship it to whole foods. Yeah. It's all moldy.

1 (1h 5m 10s):
Wow. Th this was the, the stuff you were going to ship to the whole foods in Texas. Right? Yep. And that, that pallet of was moldy.

3 (1h 5m 19s):
Yeah. So the entire pallet of product, I guess hadn't been kept to temperature. We had made one of a mistake basically, which is don't store <inaudible> in a produce warehouse because produce warehouses are humid. Right. There's a lot of moisture and produce has mold spores on it. So our distributor was telling us, Hey, we're going to throw this away. And you got to figure out how to replenish whole foods. And so we, we got on the first flight out of Baltimore, which is this 5:30 AM flight. We drove to the produce facility. It was pretty devastating.

3 (1h 5m 60s):
It was, it was a gut punch. It was so bizarre how it happened because I, I remember this moment, it was like, euphoric, you're just excited. You whole foods just said, yes, they wanted our product to go national. And then yeah, but you have multi pallets

1 (1h 6m 19s):
By the way, how much, how much money is a palette? Like how much like retail value

3 (1h 6m 24s):
That happened. So it must've been about like 20 to $30,000. That was unsaleable. And it was, it was also, you know, Vettel mentioned that we had these individuals helping us make those deals. It was also about half a month's production.

1 (1h 6m 41s):
So what did you do? How did you, I mean, now you have to produce those tortillas that are going to go on the shelf. So

3 (1h 6m 48s):
Did you, do we actually got back in the kitchen, so the team was still producing what we had to produce. And then I remember going back in there, my parents coming back up again and us just having to get back in the kitchen to produce more throw at the S

2 (1h 7m 4s):
I actually think mom took some time off of work for like almost a week so that we could just be in the kitchen every single day making tortillas. Wow.

1 (1h 7m 14s):
So clearly you guys kind of get through this crisis moment, because I think at this point you start to ramp up to sell to other whole foods regions in the U S right. I mean, and presumably they still want it to go forward with you, right?

3 (1h 7m 29s):
Yeah. We, so we got lucky because what ended up happening was they had their regional call and four regions ended up being very excited about the product. And so January of 2016, we ended up launching in four regions.

1 (1h 7m 48s):
And, and I have to imagine at this point, you're out of the, like the co-working kitchen and you're in a, like a bigger facility, right? Like a co-packing facility. So did you find one?

2 (1h 7m 58s):
So even getting to that point of finding the manufacturer was tough, this was kind of a little bit of a coincidence, but one of my really good friends from Laredo, she had told me about this family friend of hers that own this manufacturing facility in, and I should reach out to them just to see if they add advice. And I was really terrified. I thought, well, why would I reach out to them? They're going to copy my idea. Like I'm not going to reach out to them, but my brother is just on his own. He hits, started researching different manufacturing opportunities and came across this company and went and knocked on their door.

2 (1h 8m 39s):
Just like literally showed up at the facility and asked to talk to somebody. And it turned out that that was the same family friend.

0 (1h 8m 46s):
This will be, this is like, I guess what you call it a commercial manufacturer and you give them your precise instructions and then they produce it for you. Yes. Yep. Yeah. I mean, this is an interesting dilemma, right? Cause you had this great idea and this great product and clearly, you know, there was a market for it. And you rightfully worried that maybe if you went and worked with a co-packer, they would just steal your idea and make it themselves. But the reality is they usually don't do that because to start a brand from nothing is not easy.

3 (1h 9m 17s):
Yeah. But we had heard some horror stories and I think we had heard enough horror stories. And I actually think so. I cold emailed the CEO of Annie's at the time, John Foraker and I asked him for 30 minutes of his time. And my question was, what's the biggest piece of advice that you might have to enough start brand. And his response was run as fast as you can. If you have an innovative product, it'll probably get copied. And like the only thing that you have to play defense against that is building a brand and running as fast as you can.

3 (1h 9m 57s):
Right. And so I think we did just that we were making hires and we were building this brand and, and we felt that if we could do that, that that would be our best defense. So you did end up going with it with this co-packer the co-packing manufacturer in Austin. Yep.

2 (1h 10m 17s):
Yeah. And they had never done anything other than flour and corn, Dorothea products and chips. So taking on this little almond flour Dorothea company, I remember having to cry to the owners of this manufacturer and just telling them, please take us on, we need you, my shoulder hurts so bad.

3 (1h 10m 44s):
So I think

2 (1h 10m 45s):
Partially having that friend connection, they felt really bad and decided to take us on.

3 (1h 10m 52s):
So we, we ended up, you know, we bought a piece of equipment, we installed it. And then we were there every day, basically with this manufacturer, trying to make sure that we could get our product to run on this piece of equipment that we had bought. And the equipment was like, what? Like tortilla making machine. Oh yeah. So I actually remember the product, not actually running on the line until about a day before we had to ship it to the four regions of whole foods. Wow. So we were, we were cutting it very close and we were there till about three in the morning,

0 (1h 11m 34s):
But clearly this many, I mean, if they weren't starting to make it until a few days before you were shipping it, it suggests that this was a much faster process than 10 tortilla makers in a shared kitchen. Right. And this is like a big, this is like a fast tortilla machine.

2 (1h 11m 51s):
Yeah. It was amazing to see, like I was in awe the first time I saw the product running and I could just picture myself like pressing each throat at the <inaudible> how much that would have hurt

0 (1h 12m 6s):
The tortillas is dropping, dropping, dropping next, over next, something like that. Yep. So it sounds like 2016, your tortillas are kind of rollout into other whole foods around the country. And that's also the year where you start to develop your tortilla chips.

2 (1h 12m 23s):
Yeah. I had an idea just based on kind of what I was doing in my own kitchen. I wasn't eating corn anymore. And if you're in Texas, I mean, any restaurant you go to, you're going to be served chips and salsa, even non-Mexican restaurants, that's just something that you eat as an appetizer. So I had already started, you know, taking our <inaudible> and cutting them up into triangles and either frying them up or putting them in the oven and creating my own chips. But the truth is Mike kind of promised them to whole foods before I really had a product

0 (1h 13m 3s):
You guys have in the pipeline. You're like, Oh, we got tons of, we got tortilla chips.

2 (1h 13m 7s):
Okay. So a lot of sauce meantime, a little bit. Yeah. So he came to me and he's like, remember, you've played around with chips a little bit. Well, a whole foods wants them. So can you have a sample in two days or whatever it was. So I literally just threw some stuff together that first time. And thankfully they were good enough for them to get approved. And in the meantime, while we were waiting for them to get on the shelf, I was able to experiment a lot more and pin a recipe down that we could work with.

0 (1h 13m 41s):
You know, wonder when you, I mean, now you're, you're making tortilla chips and you've got tortillas and there's more demand from whole foods. Were you guys profitable?

3 (1h 13m 52s):
Yeah. Yeah, because we were, at that point in time, we were making enough money to grow the business sustainably. And we were, we weren't making big bets beyond the innovation. And we were also lucky. Like my sister, I always say, my sister is like a billion dollar and D department and that's, and that's not what she gets paid, but we weren't having, like, we were able to do a lot of stuff in house because we had this team of scrappy people.

0 (1h 14m 23s):
All right. So you are obviously you're in this kind of interesting position because you're growing but sustainably and you can't supercharge it because you don't have the financing to do it. But I guess in 2019 you did accept a huge investment. $90 million from Stripe group. Did they come to you? Did they say, Hey, we were really interested in being involved with you guys.

3 (1h 14m 45s):
They actually reached out to us and we started to build a relationship and we ended up raising money from them because we saw this opportunity in the marketplace where we could supercharge the growth. And we shared several meals with them in our like cafe that we have at the office. And I was having a conversation with one of them and I told them, here's what I want you to know. We are building a billion dollar, Mexican American food brand. If we're not building the next Tostito's, we're not building the next mission.

3 (1h 15m 30s):
We are building a billion dollar, iconic Mexican-American food brand and sitting across the table, you know, my family was there and they were there. They said, that's exactly why we want to partner with you because we also see that opportunity.

0 (1h 15m 47s):
I mean, was this kinda mind blowing that like, they were like, yeah, we want to put $90 million to this business. I mean, it's, it's amazing. Right? Cause he, even at this point, I think when they invested in you guys, you just had like two or three people who are doing sales and you were tiny group of people where you just like, Oh my God, this is, this is insane. This is huge. Yes. Still, I still feel like that. Looking back on it almost a few years later and with that investment, I mean, you can be everywhere. You can be at Costco and Walmart and you think you are there now in those places.

3 (1h 16m 23s):
Yeah. It's been a crazy two years. So we're now in a little over 16,000 retailers where in places like Kroger and Costco and target and Walmart. And so it was, it was around that time, like right before we got the investment that we started, our battle created our cashew Gessell and we launched hot sauces and we had started to really build out this full portfolio of Mexican American food products.

0 (1h 16m 59s):
You know, what's so interesting to me about what you're doing is you're not competing against paleo or grain-free or products you're you're, you're competing against other Mexican food burners. Yeah, yeah, yeah.

2 (1h 17m 14s):
In lots of different categories. Yeah.

0 (1h 17m 18s):
Miguel, you're the CEO, Veronica. You are the president and, and you head up innovation and I think your dad and sister Linda do legal, your mom manages purchasing and then your other siblings, Rebecca and Robert, they handle customer service issues. Is that right? Yup. So every, this is a, this is truly a family business. I mean, everybody is now doing this full time. Yeah.

2 (1h 17m 46s):
Yeah. We have to succeed. We have to do well. I mean,

0 (1h 17m 51s):
I mean, I, I hesitate to even ask this question because I think I know the answer, but given the fact that you guys would do like air squats together and CrossFitting together, you know, your backyard and stuff like you guys really are like a YouTube family, but is there ever any tension like you guys ever argue about because running a business is stressful and intense.

3 (1h 18m 12s):
It is a, I mean it's a business and I think there are disagreements, there are arguments, but we always take it back to our core values. And so our first core value, the one that we outlined right from the beginning was family, first family, second business third. And like, my mom wouldn't let us keep doing this if we weren't getting along. So knowing that we have to end at that place that we always have to get along, like there's going to be bumps in the road, but we're all kind of, we're all focused on this idea of building a Mexican American food brand.

3 (1h 18m 56s):
And we're focused on doing it together, which is the <inaudible> assessment hold apart. And so we have to figure things out

0 (1h 19m 3s):
When you guys think about this journey that you've gone on and you know, all the things that happen from Veronica, you, you were like teaching a class that you weren't really that interested in teaching at a college at a university in Laredo and, and Miguel, you were sorta thinking about becoming a small town lawyer in Laredo. When you think about where you've come now, I mean, how much of that do you, do you think is because of how hard you guys worked and how smart you are and how much do you, I don't know, chalk it up to luck, Miguel.

3 (1h 19m 35s):
I don't know that. What, what do you think

2 (1h 19m 39s):
For me personally? I feel like it's been a lot of luck and a lot of hard work, but I feel like when I look back on everything that's happened, I've been very lucky. I'm sure my brother has a different perspective. No, I think

3 (1h 20m 0s):
We are very blessed. I think luck's apart of it hard, work's a part of it,

2 (1h 20m 5s):
But there is a

1 (1h 20m 8s):
Of 80 plus people that work at there and all along the way, I would say where we have been blessed or lucky, whatever you believe that's such a big part of it. And it's been because we've been able to work with amazing people.

2 (1h 20m 29s):
You know, especially when we were starting off, we were looking for mentors and it had been my hope that I could find somebody who had done this before and maybe somebody liked me a woman of color. And that was really hard to find in our industry. So I think not being able to find these mentors, ourselves, Mike and I decided pretty early on that we probably had to become that. So, you know, I hope that we're doing that today. I hope that we can be an example for other people, not just Mexican Americans, but other people of color who are starting businesses. And that would make me really happy to know that

1 (1h 21m 13s):
That's Veronica Garza and Miguel Garza co-founders of <inaudible> family foods in 2020 CSA hit $200 million in total retail sales in the U S and by the way, even though their original family gym G seven athletics closed down in 2015, they did open a small gym inside the CSA foods office in Austin. And before the pandemic shut everything down, Miguel would actually leave CrossFit style workouts, most evenings for anyone in the company who wanted to join in. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week.

1 (1h 21m 54s):
If you haven't subscribed to the show yet, please do so. Wherever you get your podcasts, if you want to write to us, our email address is H ivt@npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter or at how I built this, or at guy Roz, my Instagram is at guy dot Roz. This episode was produced by Casey Herman with music composed by Ramtin era bluey. Thanks also to Liz Metzker Farah Safari, Derek gales, JC Howard Juliet Carney Neeva grant, and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Janet Fu John Lee, I'm guy Ross. And you've been listening to how I built this.

1 (1h 22m 38s):
This is NPR.

5 (1h 22m 43s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, Meryl guided investing, offering the option to work with an advisor@lowcostmoreatmerrilledge.com slash investing goals, Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner, and Smith incorporated both a registered broker dealer and investment advisor member sip C.