0 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor VRBO. Are you dreaming of a family vacation, like a holiday get together or a beach getaway with VRBO? You can book a vacation home with room for everyone, so your family can be together again. Download the VRBO app. That's VR, BEO.

1 (17s):
Hey everyone. Just a quick announcement before we start the show. So a lot of you may know how much I miss seeing all of you at the live in-person shows that we do around the country turn normal times. So I am really excited to finally announce our first, how I built this virtual event. It's happening next month with Jay Shetty. Jay is a best-selling author, former monk and wellness coach. And if you're searching for purpose, peace and clarity in your life, or you're struggling to find meaning and motivation at work, you will not want to miss this conversation. Please join us. It's happening on Thursday, March 11th, and anybody around the world can take part for more information and tickets, head to NPR, presents.org.

1 (1m 5s):
And I hope to see you there.

3 (1m 11s):
The weekends where I wasn't going to production runs, I was doing demos in the stores. And so my like rule of thumb was if it was a three hour demo, I needed to bake for three hours in order to make enough muffins for the

1 (1m 23s):
Demo. How many muffins would that be for three

3 (1m 25s):
Hours? I would guess somewhere around like

1 (1m 28s):
600. Oh my God. Right? Cause somebody would come up and say, oh, that let me just take one for my, for my husband, he's over in the dairy aisle

3 (1m 35s):
Or the best is the kids that are unsupervised and they will just steal them off the table. Like you're not supposed to give them to a child who's unsupervised with. Sometimes the child takes it and runs

1 (1m 50s):
From NPR. It's how I built this show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Raz. And on the show today, how Katelyn Smith took almond coconut and cassava flour built the largest paleo-friendly baking brand simple milk. If you were going to tell the story of consumer technology over the last decade, you'd probably start with smartphones. I mean, think about the consumer categories that smartphones have enabled or supercharged things like one click shopping or social media apps or mobile games or ride sharing or even podcasts.

1 (2m 44s):
Now, if you think about the story of food over the past decade, that story could be told with two words, organic and natural. It's why whole foods market exploded in growth and why huge corporations have up brands like earthbound farms and honesty, organic and natural is where consumers are willing to pay more and where the margins are higher. But there's another part to this story. He might call it the natural and organic adjacent category. And that category might include diets like whole 30 or ketogenic or raw foods, or perhaps the biggest trends of the last decade, paleo.

1 (3m 28s):
And gluten-free now before anyone tears my head off and says gluten-free is not a diet trend. That is true for people who have gluten allergies or sensitivities, but the reality is lots of people who go gluten free, do it for other reasons. And the main reason is they say they feel better, which is sort of where the story of simple mills begins because back in 2012, when Katelyn Smith started a muffin mix brand, it wasn't easy to find grain-free baking mixes and Caitlyn loved baked goods. It's just that she felt better when she avoided gluten.

1 (4m 9s):
So she started to wonder, could she build a baking brand that was totally grain-free and without refined sugars, was there room in the baking aisle for a paleo version of Betty crocker or Duncan Hines? And the answer is yes, because today simple mills does about a hundred million dollars in revenue. In addition to muffin and cake mixes, it makes crackers and cookies all with grain-free ingredients like almond and coconut and cassava flour. Their products are more than 28,000 stores in the U S but back in 2012, Caitlin Smith was not someone you would necessarily have bet on.

1 (4m 54s):
She was barely out of college. And the other thing, she had almost no money herself and very little access to outside capital at the time Caitlin was living in Atlanta, working as a management consultant for Deloitte. It was her first job out of college. And the life of a very junior management consultant is a life of hotel rooms and airports. You are always on the road, which means the food you end up eating is usually an afterthought.

3 (5m 25s):
Yeah. So I was eating a lot of pasta, a lot of bread, a lot of dairy. I remember having like burrata for lunch, there was a point actually on one of the client projects where I just literally had baked Brie for dinner. It was delicious. I will tell you it was delicious, but too much of a good thing is also a bad thing to,

1 (5m 45s):
So you were basically living off bread and pasta and cheese while you were.

3 (5m 52s):
Yeah. Yeah. And I also loved, of course, like your process foods, your cereals, your chips, what have you. All

1 (5m 59s):
Right. So you're basically working at Deloitte and you're on the road a lot and you're living out of hotels and eating a lot of this, like not so great kind of food. And just tell me about how, how you were feeling physically.

3 (6m 12s):
Yeah, it really wasn't great. I mean, I was, I was exhausted. I didn't feel like I was 22 years old and I just really looked at it and thought 22 year olds shouldn't feel this way. And I had another friend who just told me, you know, maybe you should take a look at your diet and see what happens if you change your diet. This was something that I'd never really been exposed to before this idea that the food that we eat, like growing up, I was taught that food affects your waistline and it affects diabetes, but we didn't talk about so many other things that it could affect. And back in 2012, which is when I really had this realization, paleo was just like in, it's in a very nascent form.

3 (6m 59s):
There were just like these fringe bloggers out there. And so I just decided I was going to go paleo for a couple of weeks. And just to see if that would change things

1 (7m 11s):
Fully paleo, which meant no grains, no legumes, no dairy, no refined sugar, just lean meat, vegetables, and like nuts and dates basically.

3 (7m 21s):
Yeah, basically. Yeah. And eggs. Yeah. It was actually pretty difficult in those days to figure out what you could eat. Like I actually have this memory of, I went out of town at one point. I was trying to figure out what I could eat in the grocery store. And I, I wandered up and down the aisles for, I think probably 30 minutes. And all I walked out of the store with was just an avocado. And then I sat down at a table and I ate an avocado with a spoon, but I mean, over time I figured out what I could eat. And so I would develop these recipes. Like I came up with this crepes recipe where I would use coconut flour and eggs and, or I would just try to get a lot more vegetables and meat that I had historically Ian, and definitely more cooking for myself than I'd historically done.

1 (8m 12s):
So, so when you went paleo kind of like as, as an experiment, what happened?

3 (8m 18s):
Yeah. So to my shock and awe, everything changed all of these kind of things that I'd struggled with for years, I no longer had to deal with, like I, at one point looked up and my Zyrtec had expired, which had never happened before. Like,

1 (8m 38s):
Is it is, it is like Clairton, right? It

3 (8m 41s):
Is. Yeah. And I felt like I had so much more energy and if I would go back and I would put the sugar back in or put the processed food back in, I could tell the difference. And I just, I couldn't believe that food could have that kind of impact.

1 (8m 60s):
So you're working at delayed. And in the meantime, are you, I mean, what was your plan? A delay? I mean, D was your, when you, when you got there, were you thinking I'm going to do this for a couple years and then start my own thing? Was that how you were thinking about it from the very beginning?

3 (9m 16s):
No, not at all. I, I think I was a little bit bored and then around the same time was when I decided to try cleaning up my diet. And so I started thinking about going and getting my master's in public health. I simultaneously started thinking about how I could help change what people are eating from a business perspective.

1 (9m 38s):
So in your mind, you knew you had to change something. And what were some of the ideas you started to come up with in your head? Okay.

3 (9m 46s):
Yeah. So I remember coming home from the client one day and just sitting on my patio that afternoon and just brainstorming different ways that I could help change what people are eating, because part of the problem is it's figuring out how to eat better. Yeah. It's something it's not necessarily convenient and easy and it's hard to make it taste good. And so I just wanted to figure out how to make it easier for people.

1 (10m 10s):
How did you, I mean, how many ideas did you have before you landed on, on what would become simple mills?

3 (10m 16s):
I probably had 10 different ideas on that list. And simple mills partly came out of this idea of almost like a meal kit company that would make it easier to eat real food. And so one of the meal kits could be like a sauce that goes on salmon. So then it's a lot easier to buy salmon and figure out how to cook it. Another one of the meal kits would be maybe like a Fecaccio bread. So that got me playing and the baking space I'm playing with with breads and muffins. And I realized that that was a space where it would be, I guess, a lower barrier to start. Like when you're working with sauces, that's pretty hard to make them shelf stable.

3 (10m 57s):
And so it was a place where I felt like I could start. I should also add that at the same time I was applying for business school.

1 (11m 4s):
How did you end up landing on baking mixes that didn't use any grain-based flowers that only used almond flour and coconut flour and things like that.

3 (11m 16s):
So I figured that people needed breads to go with their food. Like people love bread, right? Yeah. It's still to this day, one of my favorite foods. And so part of the question was how do you just make it out of things that people should be eating more of? So less of tons of carbohydrates, more of things that have nutrition like almonds or coconut flour, which has a lot of fiber. And so I started playing with those flowers. Now this is 2012. Those flowers are just beginning to hit the market. Right. And so I was playing with these ingredients that were kind of new and different.

1 (11m 52s):
Where are you going to the supermarket and to the Bob's red mill section and just buying bags of,

3 (11m 57s):
Of almond flour and coconut flour and stuff. I was just going to the grocery store and buying bags of, of those flowers, but some of these ingredients weren't even readily available. So you talked about like coconut sugar, like I'm having to buy that off the internet.

1 (12m 11s):
Gluten-free also had lots of sugar and, but you were thinking, Hey, maybe there's a, an alternative, but I wonder whether you were looking at this as an opportunity. Cause paleo in 2012 was just starting to kind of become more popular, like with CrossFit. Did you research this category and discovered that there was an opportunity there,

3 (12m 35s):
You would think as a management consultant that I would have done more research that I did, Like in hindsight it was shocking to me what little market research I did. I think the one piece of market research that I did do is I watched the turns of, of almond flour at my local whole foods store. So I watched that it was almost always sold out. And so I could tell people are buying it. But part of my theory was that I was building something for an audience that wasn't there yet. Right. And so it didn't really matter to me that much what the data said.

1 (13m 11s):
And by the way, where are you always like a baker? Is that something that you were always into?

3 (13m 16s):
Yeah, no, I was not a baker by any means. My sister in fact was, was ironically the baker of the family. Actually, it played to my advantage because I came in with just a complete naive view on how you bake something. And so I would just put these things together and see if they worked versus saying you can't make a baked good out of almonds.

1 (13m 39s):
Where were you, where were you experimenting with your recipes in your apartment?

3 (13m 43s):
Yeah, this is in my apartment

1 (13m 44s):
In Atlanta. And you were doing this on the unlike weekends and nights where you were actually in Atlanta, not traveling for your consulting job.

3 (13m 52s):
Yeah. This is basically primarily weekends and Friday nights. I stopped traveling quite as much on the weekends during that time, because I just wanted to be at home working on this.

1 (14m 6s):
And how are you, where were you going to get inspiration on, on how to even mix these flowers and try to turn them into what breads at initially?

3 (14m 15s):
Yeah. There were some bloggers out there who had started working on some recipes in this space where I would go out and try the recipes and then I'd just kind of play around and modify and figure out different ways of, or use different ingredients. I mean, there were at least a couple of bloggers out there that I could draw inspiration

1 (14m 33s):
From. And what were you trying to make anything in particular?

3 (14m 36s):
So I started out by trying to make bread mixes, which then quickly morphed into making muffin mixes. So our first three muffin mixes that I worked on were chocolate muffin mix a a actually blueberry muffin mix and our banana muffin mix.

1 (14m 55s):
So you start out by making muffins, cause I'm assuming muffins are probably a little bit easier to make an, a paleo form. Like making paleo bread is really hard. Like it's super hard to make it good. So is that right? Like I'm assuming that muffins like grain-free muffins, you can actually, it's relatively easy to make them pretty great.

3 (15m 15s):
I tried to start in the easiest way possible and I thought that muffins were a good place for that. Cause it was easier to create delicious food and that space, I really thought about like some homeowners it's like this equation of making it convenient, but also it needs to taste really good. So it couldn't just be this product that tasted good for fill in the blank. Good for paleo. Good for gluten-free and he had to be something that tasted good, full stop.

1 (15m 47s):
What was the, the like lag time between when you came up upon this idea to try and make a grain-free baking company to when you actually like chose the name and got a website and filed an LLC, was it, was it like within days or did that happen later on

3 (16m 4s):
When I thought of this idea, I think I actually first worked on the products. The products came before the brand name at first, I wanted to name it simple foods and I went out and searched for the domain name for that. And it was $3,000 and I couldn't afford that. So I was like, okay, what's better than simple foods. And came up with simple mills and the domain name for that was $12 and 99 cents. Sorry, decided that was my winner. Yeah. Which, which is such a, I mean, so much better than simple foods.

1 (16m 35s):
So you're experimenting. And, but how would you know, when it was right? What was your, like, what metric were you up against? It was just you and your kitchen and like, how did you know when, when you got it right.

3 (16m 49s):
I never knew when I got it right. I, it was a complete accident that I actually took the product into stores. I was more trying to investigate what the timeline was and how you actually got into whole foods. And I called up my local whole foods store and asked them, I said, okay, how do you get into whole foods? And he said, well, you come down here and talk to me. What product are you developing? And I told him, I was developing an almond flour baking mix. And he said, well, just come down here and show it to me. Are you available on Wednesday?

1 (17m 23s):
Wait, how long? I mean, this was what a few months in,

3 (17m 26s):
This was, this was this point about a year

1 (17m 29s):
End, but a year in. Okay. And he didn't, presumably he didn't have like a plan on how to package it or anything. It was just, you just had something that you thought was probably good enough to sell. Is that right? Did you, did you go to anything more than just like a recipe in your mind? At that point

3 (17m 47s):
I had actually developed a packaging. It was basically this label that you could print off with a printer and it was laser cut and you could then take it off and put it on a clear package. Right. So I had sourced the packaging and so all I needed to do was print it off my printer.

1 (18m 5s):
These are going to be bags of muffin mix. And by the way, what, what was required of the person who bought it? Just add water.

3 (18m 13s):
Yeah. So you'd have to add water oil and ex got it.

1 (18m 17s):
Okay. So pretty standard with muffin mixes. And I'm like, how did you go pitch whole foods? I mean, you just showed up and, and met with the manager and what happened.

3 (18m 28s):
Yeah. So I baked up some muffins for him. I brought him a bag of mix. It was just five minutes from my house, went in there. And I remember being so nervous to show him the muffins and see what he thought of them. And to my, I don't know why I was surprised, but to my surprise, he said, this mix made these muffins. I was like, yeah, it's like, they're really good. And we sell a lot of almond flour

1 (18m 58s):
And that means what he was like, I want 5,000 bags. Like, what did he say?

3 (19m 4s):
So when he says let's do this, it means I have to fill out the paperwork to get into whole foods. And then they placed their first PO three months later. And that PO is something like two cases of muffin mix, which would be 12 units.

1 (19m 19s):
It's a 12 bags of muffin mix. Exactly. So you will not, at this point, you're not quitting your job.

3 (19m 25s):
I had gotten into, I got into business school. Okay. So I was still at Deloitte, but I was leaving

1 (19m 32s):
In a couple of months. And how are you making it? Cause I'm assuming in whole foods, it's probably not legal. Right. And probably violates health department codes to make your products in your kitchen. Usually you have to do it in like a health inspected kitchen. So where were you, where were you making the powdered mix?

3 (19m 49s):
Yeah, so I had gotten this commercial kitchen right outside of Atlanta. I rented space. It was by far the cheapest option. I researched all these different commercial kitchens. And this was really, really cheap. I mean, I think across the first six months of manufacturing the product, I probably only spent $200 on the kitchen. No.

1 (20m 9s):
So cause this, what you were, were you working like overnight,

3 (20m 13s):
Typically be like a Friday afternoon, I'd drive out there and then work until like two or three in the morning making product. And I would source the ingredients from either online, like I'd buy like 50 pounds of almond flour or I would go to my local, no Joe's trader Joe's and buy like 30 bags of almond flour, which was always perplexing to the cashier. And then, yeah, I would, I would make product there. I couldn't afford a mixer which costs $2,000. So I had divine this idea to all of the powders, into these food grade barrels and then I would roll them back and forth across the countertop to mix them together

1 (20m 55s):
And mix the flowers. Yeah. And you and you're, so you're really focused on the proportions. Like you got the proportions down and you just had to mix it all together.

3 (21m 4s):
Exactly. Which is, it sounds easier than it is mixing together. A ton of powder is not the easiest thing,

1 (21m 11s):
But I mean, why is that so hard? You

3 (21m 13s):
Kind of have this vision of it, of like, oh yeah. It'll take me 30 seconds to measure it out. Right.

1 (21m 18s):
Scoop it up and scoop it

3 (21m 19s):
Out. But then you put it in and then it's like off by, you know, 10 grams since then you take a little bit out and then all of a sudden it's off by 10 grams in the other direction.

1 (21m 28s):
Just be exact weight that you're advertising. It would

3 (21m 30s):
Probably take me five minutes to make every single mix. Every single bag.

1 (21m 34s):
Yeah. And what about like compliance and all that weird stuff that you have to do as a business? Like I'm assuming there's like rules for how you label things and how you put ingredients on like, did you go online just to find out how to do all that stuff? Yeah.

3 (21m 49s):
I mean, it's, it's not the easiest thing to do, but yeah. I mean the FDA rules are publicly available on the internet. You can figure it out.

1 (21m 56s):
And presumably you are funding this through your salary, from Deloitte at any money you'd saved up basically because you weren't spending money. Right. You were always eating on an expense account because you were doing work for clients and you are staying in hotels. And so you probably were just saving most of the money you were earning.

3 (22m 13s):
Yeah. I was trying to save every dime. I actually moved into a smaller place in Atlanta. Around that time. It was like this basement apartment that had a lot of issues, 400 bucks a month, so that I could again put all the money toward the business. Right.

1 (22m 29s):
So, so this is 2013 where you start to, like, now you're starting to sell your product. Did you start to sell through your own website at that point or not quite yet. Yeah.

3 (22m 38s):
I actually started selling through the simple mills website and also Amazon before I got the product into whole foods. Right. So I put her on Amazon back before I was ready just to like get some feedback on it and see how it would sell. I had these visions that like, if I put the product on Amazon and all these people were searching for almond flour, the people would just find it. Right. And that was not at all the case. I mean, I put it on there and we'd sell gosh, maybe like one or two a month. And those people usually knew me. Like I could see the address and see that person knows me. Okay.

1 (23m 16s):
How does it work? I mean, presumably there are search terms and words that you put in there when you put your product up on Amazon, right?

3 (23m 22s):
Yeah. Amazon ranks things based on what sells. Right. And so without us selling history on Amazon, it's hard to get your product picked up. Like you're going to be on like the 12th page. And so no one was seeing the product.

1 (23m 35s):
So how are you going to create awareness for it?

3 (23m 38s):
It honestly wasn't crossing my mind back then. I don't think, I think it was more focused on the retail path, but a few months later, a influencer what's now called an influencer, discovered the product and wrote about it on her Facebook page, which just kind of astounded me in the, and we sold out of the product and probably an

1 (24m 0s):
Hour who was the influencer.

3 (24m 2s):
So Daniel Walker against the grain.

1 (24m 5s):
Yeah. It's an incredible cookbook. She blogged about it or wrote about it, about your product.

3 (24m 10s):
She wrote about her muffins and said how great they were. And so it was really that that helped us take off on, on Amazon because at that point, Amazon had a sales history and said, wow, this product actually does sell. And so then they started putting us higher up in the, in the search results. And pretty quickly we became the best-selling muffin mixes on Amazon

1 (24m 32s):
Best-selling muffin, mixes, full stop, more than like Duncan Hines and Betty crocker, wherever makes muffin mixes are the best-selling like gluten free muffin mixes.

3 (24m 42s):
It was probably something like 50 to a hundred units a day. And Martha White was number two.

1 (24m 49s):
Wow. And so you were, you were still able to make them yourself at the commercial.

3 (24m 55s):
At that time, I had started transitioning to a contract manufacturer. They're classically difficult to find if you Google search contract manufacturer for, I don't know, crackers or baking mixes, the one that you end up working with is typically on like the 12th page of Google. And it's it kind of, I remember it looking almost like a phone book list of contract manufacturers and you have to call every one of them and figure out what they do and figure out what their minimum run sizes are. And we were running pretty small run sizes and we were using nuts and we were gluten-free, which made us very unattractive to work with.

1 (25m 34s):
Did you, I mean, I I'm thinking at this point you've put in, I don't know, maybe 10, $20,000 or, or, or my overestimating it,

3 (25m 44s):
Right? Yeah, yeah. I'd say yeah. 10 or 20,000. And

1 (25m 48s):
This is all your own savings at this point.

3 (25m 51s):
Yeah. I mean, before it was all said and done, I put all my savings, which was about $70,000 in it. I sold my car. Yeah.

1 (26m 2s):
So you, I guess you, you eventually you find this place in Vermont, that's like we can do this gluten-free and you can have nuts in it.

3 (26m 11s):
So at that point I plan our first production run. I ship all the ingredients there. I was still still working in consulting. So I flew there from the client site, did a production run on a Friday and it needed to get all of the product back to Atlanta now because I was in consulting and flew a lot. I actually got upgraded on the way back, which on the flight, which I really loved because it meant that I got three checked bags and the check bags could be up to 70 or 75 pounds. And so I decided to get these, you haul boxes and put all of the product in there from the production run and check it into the fight. It was free shipping.

3 (26m 52s):
Right?

1 (26m 52s):
How'd you get those from the factory to the airport? Did you have to rent a U-Haul truck?

3 (26m 59s):
I had a rental car, but I do recall packing those boxes as it's about to thunder storm outside. And so I'm throwing all of the cases into the U-Haul boxes in the parking lot of the residents in

1 (27m 12s):
Yeah. As somebody who's moved many times. I know those, you haul wardrobe boxes pretty well. So you you're throwing all their stuff in there and then driving to the airport and then flying back to Atlanta because I'm assuming when you got an order in, from Amazon or your website, they were in your apartment, you were like shipping them out yourself.

3 (27m 30s):
Yeah. So for, for Amazon, I actually had them store the inventory and they would fulfill both Amazon and our websites sales, but for whole foods, I'd actually drive to the stores and give them the product myself. Or I would ship it using USBs if I couldn't drive to the store. But most of the time I was driving to the store to save the

1 (27m 52s):
Money. And how is it doing in that whole foods in Atlanta?

3 (27m 55s):
Yeah. So the weekends where I wasn't going to protect your friends, I was doing demos in the stores. There's like that old adage that it's easier to get the product on the shelf than it is to get the product off the shelf. And it's getting the product off the shelf. That's really important. And so I would do demos every weekend and each demos supposed to be about three hours, but I could fit in one, like they were like two hours and 45 minutes to allow for time for me to transit between stores. But because this is a baked product, I actually had to bake all of these thousands of mini muffins ahead of time. People eat a lot of samples at those demo

1 (28m 34s):
Stations. They do like more than

3 (28m 36s):
Trade shows.

1 (28m 38s):
People are shameless,

3 (28m 39s):
Shameless. And so my like rule of thumb was if it was a three hour demo, I needed to bake for three hours in order to make enough muffins for the demo.

1 (28m 48s):
How many, how many muffins would that be for three hours?

3 (28m 51s):
I would guess somewhere around like 600,

1 (28m 54s):
600. Oh my God. Right. Cause somebody would come up and say, oh, let me just take one for my, my son. Let me just take another one for my husband. He's over in the dairy aisle

3 (29m 3s):
Or the best is the kids that are unsupervised and they would just

1 (29m 8s):
Shove them in their mouth,

3 (29m 10s):
Steal them off the table. Like you're not supposed to give them to a child who's unsupervised with sometimes the child takes it and runs.

1 (29m 15s):
Yeah. And when you were demoing it, was it clear? Were you like, Hey, come try these gluten-free grain-free refined sugar-free muffins. Was that your pitch to people or was it just like, Hey, come try some great muffins.

3 (29m 28s):
It was more focused on like the gluten-free grain-free paleo-friendly, which I later realized that that wasn't serving us as well. Because part of my mission with this is to change what people are eating. Right. And when you talk about all those things, it scares people off. Like people think it's not going to taste good,

1 (29m 49s):
Right. Because you're thinking, Hey, I'm going to market this towards people who are already interested in this, but actually really what you should have been doing was focusing on just getting people to try something that you thought was delicious.

3 (30m 1s):
And honestly, all in far is not scary to people. People like almond flour, because it sounds like it's going to taste good too. Right. And so focusing on the things that really differentiate the product without scaring people off,

1 (30m 13s):
When you were doing these demos, presumably I don't know, you have friends in Atlanta and people, you knew I was there any part of you that was just like, cause being doing demos, you're on stage, you're performing, right. You're putting yourself out there and your product out there was any part of you ever nervous that somebody would come in and be like, Katelyn, what are you doing here? Or at that point, it pretty much everyone, you knew, knew what you were doing.

3 (30m 36s):
And everyone I knew knew what I was doing, but I mean, I think the part that did make me nervous about demos was first of all, I'm an introvert. Like I don't love talking to people that I don't know. And so it was overall just something that I was not the most comfortable with. And I was always terrified that someone would tell me that they didn't like the product. I mean, that's just like

1 (30m 58s):
Heartbreaking. Did that ever happen?

3 (31m 0s):
I did have. So you're making so many samples, right? So sometimes I would burn some of the batches of muffins, but you're just so far behind or the number of batches that you need to make. And you're like, I don't want to lose 30 minutes. And so I brought some burned muffins to a demo and I still recall this older woman coming up and trying it and she tries it and she looks at me and just kind of smacks her lips. I didn't care for that.

1 (31m 28s):
Wow. Because she's thinking you're just like a rep for a huge multinational conglomerate. She doesn't know that you're the person. Yeah.

3 (31m 38s):
And it was, it was heartbreaking. I mean, I just remember thinking in my head, I'm trying, I'm trying so hard, but you know, I, in retrospect she was right. I had a lot to learn in general about brand management, which like packaging, what have you. But one of the, one of the things that I did need to learn too though, is that every single interaction with the brand matters and every one of those impressions matter, I shouldn't be bringing burned muffins to a demo.

1 (32m 12s):
Why don't we come back in just a moment. Caitlin learns a few more hard lessons about running business, including how not to manage your new employees and why a muffin company should not give away bottled water at a trade show, stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, betterment of full service, 401k provider.

1 (32m 56s):
As Americans head back to the office this year, they're looking to their employers for support when it comes to their physical, mental, and financial wellbeing, help attract and retain talent by helping your employees save for retirement with a betterment 401k, it's easy to use for businesses, both large and small and considers your employees. Overall financial picture, learn more at betterment.com/n P R.

4 (33m 25s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor. Coravin bringing the luxury of choice to the world of wine. Want a Cabernet after a long day or sparkling because it's Saturday, Corbin's wine by the glass systems allow you to explore different wines at different times or even multiple wines at once. They keep wine fresh. So every pour tastes like the first visit coravin.com to see how you can explore any wine, any time Coravin, everything is open.

1 (33m 55s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's early 2014, just a few months after Kaitlin has launched simple mills and already her muffin mix is doing pretty well on Amazon. And it's even expanded into about 20 whole food stores in the south, but Kaitlin doesn't want to stop there. She wants to get her muffins into other grocery chains to,

3 (34m 19s):
So it was a lot of cold calling. So I'd call them up one by one and say, Hey, you want to try this almond flour baking mix. I'll send you a sample. And I had a couple entrepreneur friends by that point, and we would share the names of the grocery buyers. So we had like these little spreadsheets that we'd pass around, but it was also partly you just call them up and ask and say, Hey, who is the buyer? And you'd write down their name. And so then the next time you call back, you asked for Susie or whomever.

1 (34m 52s):
Yeah. So where were you? Where was the next place you got into?

3 (34m 57s):
So the next place was natural grocers by vitamin cottage, which also you can sell into store by store, like whole

1 (35m 4s):
Foods, chain of chain.

3 (35m 6s):
It is, yeah. It's a chain of probably 70 ish stores. So they, we would sell into them store by store as well. And there aren't that many grocery stores that let you sell in store by store other chains. Like if you think about like Walmart or target or Kroger, you're selling into large numbers of stores at one time.

1 (35m 27s):
Hmm. And meantime, like, Y you're you're running around trying to get your, your products and all these stores. You've also, I guess I started business school. I did. Why did you feel like you, you had to go to business school.

3 (35m 42s):
Things changed really quickly when I, the day that I started at booth, but you were still unproven.

1 (35m 48s):
This is the business school at the university of Chicago.

3 (35m 51s):
That's correct. Yeah. I didn't know if we were going to succeed back when I applied for business school. I don't think we even had a name yet.

1 (35m 59s):
I also have to assume you're not profitable yet, but I have to imagine at this point, the savings that you have are not enough to fund the company. I mean, did you go out, did you try to raise money from people? Did you do like a friends and family around?

3 (36m 13s):
Yeah. So around this point I had totally underestimated the impact of working capital. I kept needing to make more product. We kept selling more than we made in the run before. A lot of times when you're working with grocery stores, it's like 30 or 60 days after you sell the product to them that you actually get paid. And really like the second that I get paid from whole foods, I would immediately call up the contract manufacturer and say, we got to make more product. And I would immediately place an order for, for more ingredients. But it was just like this constant nailbiting cycle of we need more product and I don't have money in my bank account.

3 (36m 53s):
Right. So I had put in all that I possibly could. And I had modeled out my little Excel model that we needed probably $200,000 as a business to fund the business period ever end us in it.

1 (37m 10s):
Once you got 200,000, the cashflow would just fund the rest of the needs.

3 (37m 14s):
It was, the theory is pretty naive. And so I worked out a deal with a, with a family friend to give us $200,000. And the day that we're supposed to close, he emails me and wants to renegotiate our deal. And we'd met earlier that week and I'd kind of told him how well the business was doing. And so he was excited once more equity, he wants more equity. So this is

1 (37m 42s):
Like, this is like a shark tank deal.

3 (37m 43s):
Oh yeah. I mean, if, if we had done that deal, I wouldn't know, in the business today. Wow. It was very fortunate that it fell through why

1 (37m 52s):
Did it fall through?

3 (37m 54s):
So he wanted to renegotiate. And so I came home to my parents and I told them what had happened. And I was really upset. I was in tears. I was really frustrated, but I was backed into a corner because I needed the money and my parents mortgage the house to give me that money. They pulled $200,000 and they're not, they're not wealthy. They don't come from wealthy families. And this was so far from proven at the time. Like, I just think back on how risky that was for them to do that. Well,

1 (38m 30s):
What was the $200,000 spent on, what did you need it for almost

3 (38m 35s):
Exclusively? The product itself. I wasn't spending money on, on marketing. I wasn't spending money on team. Most certainly no one was earning any money from this business. It was just on keeping the product in stock.

1 (38m 50s):
It's still just you or, and, and just working with contract manufacturers, or did you have anybody helping you at this point?

3 (38m 57s):
At this point I had the contract manufacturers I was working with and I had one woman, Jenna and Atlanta who was helping me with demos and running deliveries to the stores. And then another woman, Jesse, who was at booth with me, who is helping me build a business at the time. Right. And it was pretty soon into, after I started at booth that we became the best-selling muffin, mixes on Amazon. And I, around that time, just kind of realized I was really onto something and it was taking off and I needed to focus on it really full time. And so I made the decision to take courses that let me work on the business while earning course credit.

3 (39m 41s):
So that, that way I could stay in school.

1 (39m 44s):
You know, presumably there are things you're learning at business school that are useful and practical. Right. That, I mean, cause you, you already had a business. So you, you knew like which classes you wanted to take that would help you run your business better. Yeah.

3 (39m 59s):
I was most focused on which classes were going to, this sounds bad, but involve the least amount of work with me spending the most amount of time working on my company. So I took classes like cases and entrepreneurship or honestly, accounting was great because I could sit there in class and because I was doing all of our QuickBooks at the time. Right. Yeah. So I would raise my hand and say like, let's say theoretically, you have a transaction like XYZ. How exactly would you recognize that transaction? And so I got very real-world experience there. In fact, one of the classes that I took while I was in business school was called entrepreneurial selling.

3 (40m 39s):
So part of the assignment was actually doing even more cold calling than I already was. So on a weekly basis, I would devote Wednesdays to cold calling. I had this quote that I hung above my desk that said the difference between success and failure is a few small disciplines practiced every day. And I had to read that every Wednesday to remind myself that like the discipline that I needed to practice was cold calling, which I hated.

1 (41m 5s):
So while you were at business school or are you able to, to get into any other stores?

3 (41m 10s):
Yeah, I did next once we got into where earth fare and Wegmans and Wegmans we got into, because I figured out who the buyer was and I just shipped him a package of our product. I hadn't even written him an email yet the largest trade show of the year, which is natural products, expo west was coming up in a few weeks. And so I wanted to ask him for a meeting at the show. And so I had preemptively sent him a sample and before I could email him, he emailed me and said, Hey, I want to meet you at the show. Wow.

1 (41m 42s):
That's amazing. Cause he probably gets hundreds of packages a week.

3 (41m 46s):
Yeah. So almond flour was one of their best-selling items. And so he saw a lot of potential in the product, but I mean, going back to the small discipline's point, I mailed that package in the middle of a polar vortex. Like I walked down to the USBs, the middle of the polar vortex. And so there's like these little tiny decisions that you make on a daily basis where you're like, that's really inconvenient, but I'm going to do it anyway.

1 (42m 9s):
And I mean, Wegmans, I think it's like a mainly Mid-Atlantic supermarket chain. Right.

3 (42m 14s):
They have probably 90

1 (42m 16s):
Stores. Yeah. But super influential. I'm a super influential chain. And so, I mean, at this time, I guess you're like, you're about to go to the, to the big expo and like really trying to get in front of new customers and I guess new retail customers who might sell your brand. Yeah.

3 (42m 33s):
Yes. Expo west is it's a huge show. I mean there's 70,000 people. I don't know how many exhibitors

1 (42m 41s):
Just like lost and hard to stand out. And probably some of the big companies like Hain celestial or, you know, right. These huge natural foods companies have massive booths. Massive. Whereas you probably had like a little card table. I did,

3 (42m 58s):
We had like this little card table. And so yeah. I mean, I think for the most part, like it was hard to stand out, but you do like the little things that you can. And so we had come up with this idea that in hindsight is terrible, that we would give away water in our booth that everyone is thirsty at trade shows. So we put symbol mills labels on the water and put gluten-free on there. Oh

1 (43m 20s):
God. And everybody thought you were a water company. Everyone

3 (43m 23s):
Thought we were a water company and oh, I

1 (43m 25s):
Love your water. Simple mills.

3 (43m 27s):
So good. And let's just talk about how heavy water is to transport and do a trade show.

1 (43m 34s):
You know, I'm, I'm listening to all this and I'm, I'm wondering Katelyn, like how are you doing all these things and going to business school? Like how are you juggling everything?

3 (43m 45s):
I think it came down to the clarity of what comes first. I watch a lot of other students who try to start companies while they're in business school, not succeed. And I think part of it is they try to do everything well and you just kind of have to choose at some point and say, this is going to be my number one. And it's perfectly fine to say my number one is I want to build social relationships with people during business school. Or I want to become really good at finance, but for me it was, I want my business to succeed. And so anytime there was a conflict between a course or a social function and the business, the business one, I mean, I didn't even date, like I did nothing,

1 (44m 31s):
But I guess the one thing that did happen at business school was a class you took was, it was like a startup challenge, like a

3 (44m 38s):
Competition. And, and that I guess, led to your first investment. What, what story, what happened? Yeah. It's really neat. They teach you how to fundraise. And so you develop fundraising decks. And at the end of it, there's like this big competition with probably 200 investors that are based in Chicago. And so we did end up co winning that year. So we won $35,000. But the biggest deal was that a Chicago based investor group got to know us through the new venture challenge. And so maybe a month or two later is when we closed our first round of funding.

1 (45m 17s):
And this, this happened after your first year of business school. Right. Is that right?

3 (45m 21s):
Yeah. So I started in the fall of 2013. We won the new venture challenge, the spring of 2014. And I mean, the investors want to know, are you really going to continue business school? We want you running this business full time and they weren't wrong. I mean, I knew what was coming. I dropped out after the first year of business school and went on to focus exclusively on the business. Wow.

1 (45m 45s):
And I read that, I think you raised like $2 million from those investors and what, like, what was your plan? What were you going to do with that? Funny?

3 (45m 56s):
So after we raised our first round, we got like a 700 square foot office and hired five people. So Jesse who'd been working with me on the new venture challenge, took over our finance role. I hired a extern Bain extern to oversee our operations.

1 (46m 15s):
What's an extra. And for people that don't know, it's

3 (46m 17s):
Someone who works for a consulting firm, but gets sponsored by the consulting firm to leave for six months. Got it. And so it's a really affordable way to get great talent.

1 (46m 27s):
And that person was, was in charge of what

3 (46m 30s):
He was in charge of operations, which means just about anything Logistics, supply chain. He actually developed our frosting. Wow. Yeah. I mean, at a small company you can do anything.

1 (46m 44s):
All right. So you got to see the operations guys, I'll see your frosting guru and then you get roles for

3 (46m 50s):
What else? Marketing and then a head of sales. Got it.

1 (46m 55s):
All right. And you are the CEO, you, you you've obviously. Yeah. And how was it with this, with this team?

3 (47m 3s):
It was a hard year. I mean, you're just trying to figure things out. You're still operating in a very, very lean environment. I remember I would get to work before it was light outside and I would leave work when it was dark outside. So it was, it was working really long hours and it was a lot of just trying really hard to get into stores while simultaneously running a very junior team. And honestly, I wasn't great at hiring hiring is really difficult and it takes a long time to perfect that skill

1 (47m 36s):
Because you basically are looking at resumes and then you do a couple of interviews and you just have to hope that your intuition is right and intuition is, is something that almost nobody can rely on.

3 (47m 46s):
No, it, I also just inherently believe that people are good. I just kind of assume that people are going to be great at what they say. They're great at which an interviewing. It's not the best place to believe that. So I became a lot better at hiring over time, but I had to make some tough people decisions that first year and

1 (48m 8s):
Like who to basically

3 (48m 10s):
Yeah. Who to keep on the team, who to cut loose and how to do it in a graceful way is also not the easiest thing, because at the point where you've hired the wrong person, that sucks for both you and them.

1 (48m 24s):
Right. And by the way, Kaylyn, I think at the time that you got that initial investment of $2 million, I think you guys were, were still only making muffins, right.

3 (48m 35s):
Just muffins. It was still muffins for probably the first four to five years of the business.

1 (48m 40s):
And presumably you had other plans to expand out and to make lots of other things. Right.

3 (48m 46s):
I started the company. I did always see expanding into other areas, but the investment thesis was largely based around being the next Betty cracker.

1 (48m 54s):
It's interesting that the investors saw you as like the grain-free Betty crocker brand. Right? Initially Betty crocker I think is mainly mixes. I don't think they make like crackers and cookies, but eventually you guys went into cookies and crackers, you know, things that were not mixes, things that were already made was that part of the vision back then to

3 (49m 21s):
When they first invested in us, we hadn't built out a longer-term pipeline. So we didn't know where we were going to go from there. I knew that I always wanted to get into things that were more convenient because that makes it easier for people to eat better, but I didn't know where we were going to go yet. And so we were like, thinking about all these different categories, we thought about cereal, but we ended up going into crackers actually after I took our cake mix home. And for whatever reason, decided to make crackers out of it and put it in my oven. And I brought them in the next day and all of us sat around and said, Ooh, that's really good. Maybe we should go into crackers.

3 (50m 2s):
And so with that, we went into crackers

1 (50m 5s):
With the early teams. I mean, what were they doing? I mean, I'm assuming the, the goal now is to expand and to get into more and more retail or was it to focus more on direct to consumer or was it both,

3 (50m 20s):
It was focusing on, on more and more retail, but the natural food stores, the next thing we needed to do was expand more nationally and to whole foods. So that was tough because all of those regions get so many emails for new products every day and you're not selling in store by store. So you're not calling in a local store. You're trying to reach the person who's in charge of like 40 whole food stores. And so they never answered your email. And so I had to figure out a way to get through to them. So I came up with this plan where we would go to every whole foods region and we would email them the day before and say, I'm going to be in your regional office.

3 (51m 1s):
I'm going to bring you baked muffins, please, please, please meet with me for five minutes. I can do any time during the day. And I would, I'd go out there whether or not they would answer my email. And I would show up in their office with baked muffins and to do this, even though we raised money, I like I'm staying in like these hostels that had like, I remember this like crazy water stain on the ceiling. And I was on the top bunk. I'm taking public transportation everywhere. And most of the buyers still wouldn't meet with us, but three of them did

1 (51m 34s):
For what regions. It

3 (51m 36s):
Was the Pacific Northwest, Southern California and Denver. It was those three regions that were our first whole foods regions.

1 (51m 46s):
So I read that there was a point where as you were kind of expanding, right, and, and bringing on more people onto your team, you kind of had to work through your own leadership skills because let's face it very few people. I don't know. I mean, I don't know anybody who's born a leader and knows how to do it. Right? Most everybody who's been on this show learns how to do it. And it requires making a lot of mistakes and not knowing how to have difficult conversations and kind of feeling overwhelmed at times. And I read that you went through a period of time where you were not connecting with your leadership team and it caused quite a bit of friction.

3 (52m 29s):
Yeah. I think there's a fallacy out there that people are natural born leaders. And I hate that. We tell people that because it makes people feel really inadequate when they're not good at it. Leadership skills are something at spurned and usually learn through a lot of pain too. For me, I think one of the first places where I really saw this was after I had started hiring some more senior leaders as I got that team on board, I pretty much immediately started de-motivating them. I have been running this business and I had set ideas about the way that things operate. And so I would get in their shorts, tell them the way that things needed to be done when really they were the experts in a lot of these places.

3 (53m 18s):
And so one of the big things I had to learn early on was how to defer to them and where to defer to them and how to hand over the decision-making rains. It's one of many leadership lessons that I've learned over the years. I think every year, the business teaches me a different aspect of leadership.

1 (53m 38s):
So how did you kind of come to the realization that you, you needed to kind of figure that out?

3 (53m 45s):
I had really fortunately hired a, a leadership coach and it was really because I found that she was really smart with the people stuff I'll call it. And I realized that I wasn't really smart with the people stuff. And so I thought I needed her help. And so I had her working with, with me and also with our, with our key leaders. And so I think she started to hear some of the sprinklings of this and both worked with those leaders to figure out how to have the crucial conversation with me, but also set the groundwork and me to be able to hear that conversation.

3 (54m 28s):
And so that was, it was, I believe it was our head of marketing. Who's still with us today who sat down with me and like basically told me, like, you got to trust me on these things. You got to let me run these things. Like, this is what I'm good at. I've got 20 years of experience here. Let me use it.

1 (54m 43s):
Yeah. I think you're today. You're in like, how many, how many stores are you in today? I read 13,000. Does that sound about right?

3 (54m 52s):
Actually probably about 28,000.

1 (54m 56s):
Yeah. So you're in pretty much every major grocery chain now.

3 (55m 1s):
Yeah. So we're in everything from Walmart to Kroger, to Safeway, whole foods, Costco.

1 (55m 7s):
So by now, I mean, you've gone through, through several rounds of fundraising and obviously, I mean, you've raised lots of money, millions of dollars. And by the way, are your parents still like equity owners or, or did you, did you pay them back for the loan?

3 (55m 22s):
I paid them half of it back. They wanted to keep some in the business. So they continue to be equity holders in the company. That was smart. Yeah. They actually wished that I would've let them keep the whole thing in the business, but I couldn't have slept at night if I did that. Right.

1 (55m 37s):
I'm curious. I mean, why this is a category that is growing so fast, right? The grain-free category, presumably, a company like general mills, which owns Betty crocker could, could enter this space in a big way. Does that ever worry you?

3 (55m 56s):
They certainly could. In the very early days for our business, funny enough, the Betty crocker kitchens actually placed an order for our product. I got a kick out of that. I got

1 (56m 5s):
It. They want to see the competition. Sure.

3 (56m 8s):
Yeah. I mean, they absolutely could. It really doesn't have me lose sleep at night though, because I don't think that they'd execute it in the same way that we would. We make a lot of decisions that large food companies wouldn't like you take, for example, natural flavors. Like we don't use natural flavors and it kills our margins in places. That's a decision that it's hard to make for a large food company, because they don't see the ROI in that decision.

1 (56m 35s):
And natural flavors are misleading because it's not, it's just usually like extract.

3 (56m 40s):
So like when you see like natural vanilla extract, the one thing you can be sure of is that is not vanilla, right? It is typically chemical extractives. And we have actually it's our sourcing manager used to work at a flavor house. And that's part of where we develop that perspective is we just know how they're made and we don't agree with it and we don't want it in our product.

1 (57m 1s):
And I know your growth has been huge. I think you're like the number one, natural baking products company in the country, in the U S right now, and I imagined COVID has had an impact, right. Because people are, are basically baking and cooking more at home.

3 (57m 17s):
Yeah. People are baking and cooking a lot more, which is something that's really exciting. If you think about it like McCormick, I think they said that the number one phone call that they've gotten during those time is, is what is a teaspoon. And there's a lot of people learning to cook for the first time. So we have seen, I mean, at times this year we've seen our baking mix up 50% over prior year numbers. And this is a, probably the most established of all of our product lines.

1 (57m 45s):
Yeah. By the way, I use almond flour when I do, I'm like, grain-free chicken CalArts when I like, you know, from,

3 (57m 53s):
Oh, lovely. Yeah. Great years. You know what you can also use? Well, I don't mean to sell us, as I say, this is a selling point, but I also love using our crackers for that.

1 (58m 3s):
Yeah. Yeah. Could do that. Add some, I had a little bit of error root starch, and there you go. Easy enough. When you think about your, you know, the journey you've been, I started this in 2012 and, and where the business is now, just eight years later, how much of your success do you attribute to how hard you worked and how smart you are and how much do you think is because you got lucky,

3 (58m 26s):
You have to have both. I don't think we'd be anywhere near where we are without luck. I mean, we've talked about a number of the things that I did wrong, but you also have to work crazy hard. So I think it takes both,

1 (58m 42s):
By the way, can I ask you about your frosting? Because to me, frosting is like butter and powdered sugar and food coloring, right. And maybe cheese. So how did you guys make it without all that stuff?

3 (58m 56s):
Yeah. So we, we make it out of a combination of coconut oil and Palm shortening. And then we use a combination of powdered sugar and Monkfruit to sweeten it. So we use probably like we use a lot less sugar than you would ordinarily need. I mean, we look at frosting as something that people don't consume every day.

1 (59m 18s):
People don't need buckets of frosting every day. I'm

3 (59m 22s):
Sure there are people who do

1 (59m 23s):
I have done that before. I have taken a spoon into a Betty crocker frosting jar just shoved it in my mouth before. Maybe more than once I've done that too. That's Katelyn Smith, founder of simple milk. And thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you are not a subscriber, please do subscribe to our podcast. Wherever you listen to podcasts. If you want to send us an email, you can write to us. That's H ibt@npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter or at how I built this or my account at guy Ross, and on Instagram, you can follow me at guy dot Ross. This episode was produced by Casey Herman with music composed by rum teen era bluey.

1 (1h 0m 6s):
Thanks also to Liz Metzker Farrah safari, Derek gales, JC Howard, Julia Carney, Neeva grant, and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Janet who John Lee I'm guy, Roz, and even listening to how I built this. This is NPR.

5 (1h 0m 28s):
There is so much black excellence in the sciences that we want to celebrate. So in honor of black history month, all this week, shortwave is featuring conversations with black scientists and educators. He will doing incredible work and pushing for a world where science serves everyone. Listen now to the shortwave podcast from NPR,

1 (1h 0m 48s):
For how I built. This comes from 3m committed to protecting healthcare workers, globally. 3m employee. Chris knows that healthcare workers like his daughter may need to get up close to provide patient care. He's working hard to direct high performing personal protective equipment to hospitals and hotspots. So she and nurses like her can be protected while caring for their patients. Hear their story at 3m.com/improving lives, 3m science applied to life.

6 (1h 1m 21s):
How do you keep up with all the important news that's happening on any given day? You could get?

7 (1h 1m 25s):
I like your phone alerts every minute, but you might string your neck

6 (1h 1m 29s):
Or you could listen to up first and consider this NPR short daily morning and afternoon podcasts

7 (1h 1m 33s):
Bookend your day with them wherever you live.