1 (1s):
This is my voice. It can tell you a lot about me, and I'm not changing it for anyone in NPRs, Black Stories, Black Truths, you'll find a collection of NPR episodes centered on the black experience. Search N P R Black Stories Black Truths Wherever. you get podcasts.

Capital One (23s):
The Spark. Cash plus card from Capital. One helps you earn Unlimited 2% cash back on every purchase. And with no preset spending limit, your purchasing power can adapt to meet your business needs. Jorge Gaviria, founder of NDA reinvests, his 2% cash back to help grow his business with new products. And I really love the idea behind NDA. It's a supply chain company connecting Mexican, heirloom corn farmers with restaurants, chefs, and consumers And. while NDA is connecting more people to the culinary and cultural richness of the Mexican kitchen, it's also elevating traditional heirloom farmers that work in areas that live below the international poverty line. Imagine what The Spark Cash plus card from Capital one and Unlimited 2% cash back on every purchase could do for your business. Capital One, what's in your wallet? Find out more at Capital One dot com slash Spark. Cash plus terms and conditions apply.

Airbnb (1m 16s):
Maybe you stayed in an Airbnb before and thought to yourself, this actually seems pretty doable. Maybe my place could be an Airbnb. It could be as simple as starting with a spare room or your whole place when you're away. You could be sitting on an Airbnb and not even know it. Maybe your kid is heading off to college in the fall and you'll have an empty bedroom. You could Airbnb it and make some extra cash while they're away. Or, if you have a vacation plan for this summer, that could be a good time to Airbnb your entire place. Whether you could use a little extra money to cover some bills or for something a little more fun, your home or spare room might be worth more than you think. Find out how much at Airbnb dot com slash Host.

State Farm (1m 59s):
This episode is brought to you by State Farm. If you're a small business owner, it isn't just your business, it's your life. Whatever your business might be, you want someone who understands, and that's where State Farm's small business insurance comes in. State Farm agents are small business owners too, and know what it takes to help you personalize your policies for your small business needs. Like a good neighbor, State Farm is there. Talk to your local agent. Today

3 (2m 31s):
We started putting out job postings and one of the first girls we interviewed, we had we, we told her to meet us at the Starbucks because we didn't even have an office and we didn't even order anything. That's how cheap we were. We just sat outside at the little metal tables and met this, this young girl who was in interviewing for a customer service position. And, you know, we would promise that we will have an office if when this position is filled. And that's, that's how, that's how rough the start was.

2 (3m 8s):
Welcome to How I. Built This. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I am Guy Raz and on the show today how Spencer and Jeff Jan saw the early appeal of e-commerce and the beauty of a smokeless fire and built Solo Stove from a lifestyle business into a nine figure brand. If you're the kind of person that grinds away at a job that you don't love all that much, and you're looking to earn more money and work less, well, this is not the episode for you because you will learn how two brothers came up with a brilliant passive income idea only to Discover that the more successful they became, the more work they generated for themselves.

2 (4m 5s):
Now, not to fast forward too much, but the idea they had ended up working out pretty well. And today both brothers Spencer and Jeff Jan are only in their forties and also pretty much retired. What they started was a brand called Solo Stove. Initially it was a camping Stove that produced almost no smoke. Today the company sells everything from smokeless fire pits to pizza ovens, to patio heaters. The idea came from years of trial and error and a desire to build a stress-free lifestyle business. Spencer and Jeff tapped into Amazon's direct selling platform back in 2010 when it became open to anyone.

2 (4m 48s):
And they realized early on that you could source relatively inexpensive products from China and then just resell them in the US on Amazon. By the time the brothers sold the majority of the company to investors in 2019, their stake was worth hundreds of millions of dollars. Spencer and his younger brother, Jeff, grew up in the eighties and nineties in Ontario, Canada. Both of their parents had immigrated from China, although the brothers were close, they eventually wound up working on opposite ends of the world. Jeff in Dallas and Spencer in Shanghai, where he helped manage a firm that connected Chinese factories to buyers around the world.

3 (5m 31s):
I mean, I guess it was about seven, almost seven years that I was in Shanghai working for that sourcing company. Boy, I ran around north, south, east, west, just going to all sorts of factories, trade shows, and it just depended on what our clients wanted and what industries we were in. Oddly enough, we were in heavily in the RV niche. Huh? So recreational vehicles and campers, we did a lot of parts and products for that market. Sofas, recliners, tables, faucets

2 (6m 4s):
For RVs. For

3 (6m 5s):
RVs, yeah. Elkhart, Indiana.

2 (6m 7s):
Elkhart is where, is that where Winnebago is? Yeah. Are made, yeah. Yeah.

3 (6m 12s):
A lot of the, a lot of the RVs are made in that area, so,

2 (6m 15s):
And the component parts obviously made all around the world. And, and so there are factories specialized in just making the sofas and beds for RVs. Yeah. And and presumably their biggest market was the United States.

3 (6m 26s):
Yeah. Yeah. For RVs for sure.

2 (6m 29s):
I guess, you know, you're, you're doing this job and you're, you know, it seems like it's doing pretty well, but I guess around 2008 with the financial crisis, it also affected your, the company you worked, you worked for, right?

3 (6m 42s):
That's right. Yeah. We, we held on by the skin of our teeth. We had to let go, basically the entire office. So, I had to, I had to go through that. That was a, that was a experience. I won't forget. I, I, I was probably a year, a year or so into my job in charge of 20 some odd people, local Chinese in, in my office in Shanghai. And then suddenly my boss tells me, well, you gotta lay 'em all off. Mm. You know, have at it. and I was like, I don't, like, why do I have to do that? I was young, young in my career, and it was a horrible experience to have to do that. and I remember tearing up when I had to tell them that, you know, here's what we can pay you if you leave now and if you decide to wait until we let you, like formally let you go, there might not be anything.

3 (7m 29s):
And I hated. I hated how it, everybody rightfully so were upset at me. And, and I just hated that feeling of, of, of looking at these people in the eye who I thought were my friends and peers kind of all turn against me and feel like it was my fault. And everybody was blaming me. and I just, I took a big pay cut and I'm really hunkered down with my, my boss at the time, and I remember telling him that I still believe in what we can do. It's just the market conditions are horrible and let him know that I wanna stick with them, but hopefully I'd get some equity in the future for kind of roughing it through.

3 (8m 13s):
And that's kind of the direction I took. Yeah.

2 (8m 16s):
I guess in the meantime you start to think about maybe doing some like side hustles. Yeah. Like, tell me about how you, how that happened. I mean, obviously you're in China and everything's made there and what, how did, how did you even start to think about maybe getting into that? Yeah.

3 (8m 36s):
That, that's the, that's the rabbit hole. That's always fun to look back on. You know, I was there going through the rough patch in, in the great recession. I was married and had a young kid and I got invited over to a friend's house

2 (8m 50s):
In, in China

3 (8m 50s):
In Shanghai. Yeah. And she invited me over for dinner and she had made these amazing, like cinnamon sugar donuts and I was just blown away. 'cause in Shanghai, that was a real treat. And went home that night looking online how to make donuts like that. Ended up on a blog that was a really good donut recipe blog. And at the bottom of it, there was this video of this guy saying, learn how this, this blog helps me continue doing what I love doing. And he was a school teacher. And that led me down this rabbit hole of blogging and people making money by blogging and I. I quickly dove into this program and showed it to Jeff. and I was so excited. I was like, look like people can actually, you can write something, write blogs was, it

2 (9m 34s):
Was like a blogging piece of

3 (9m 35s):
Software. That's right. It was a blog. It was like a program, a course that Okay, right. That that you could take Yeah. That we could take and sign up for. And they would show you how to blog and what to do. And step by step kind of going through the, the whole concept of blogging and making money off of AdSense and clicks and traffic and, and affiliate marketing. And it just blew my mind. And we quickly signed up to blog and Jeff was blogging and I was blogging. What

2 (10m 2s):
Were you blogging about? Yeah,

3 (10m 3s):
I blogged, I had a, you can go back to the way back machine and find it. It was called China Business Traveler and, and had hyphens all between the words. and I was like, well, I'll blog about traveling as a business person in China, what to expect of culture. Oh yeah, that's cool. And travel and currency and culture and all of that. and I trying to make a few clicks off of AdSense and maybe some affiliate mar money off of travel websites. And we did that for a year. And Jeff, he did one on personal finance. He was working Oh, wow. For a bank at the time, I think.

2 (10m 37s):
So you guys were, you and you guys were both just getting into this. You're like, let's try this blogging thing and see, let's make

3 (10m 43s):
Some, let's make some money. Let's supple,

2 (10m 44s):
Let's make some money, let's supplement our income. And, and, and what happened?

3 (10m 48s):
And it, we didn't make any money. We didn't, I mean, I think I made $75 of which, like 50 never got paid out from Commission Junction because it didn't meet the threshold of the payout. You had to have like a hundred dollars to get it paid out or whatever it was. And, and it just didn't, it just didn't turn out financially for us. But I enjoyed it. I mean, I learned so much. And So I, I transitioned from that. I said, well, the blog's not working, but what if I sell something? And it just happened to be that there was this mattress program that we were trying to do at my day job that ended up not working out.

2 (11m 24s):
What do you mean a mattress program?

3 (11m 25s):
So we call these projects programs. So pro a a yeah. A project for a US customer. A mattress. Yep. Company. A a bedding company. He actually had retail stores in the, in the Pacific Northwest. And he, he, he, he wanted us to source mattresses out of China. Memory foam mattresses and So I went out to tons of memory foam mattress suppliers and figured out how the product was made, you know, and the costing of it. And through that, I had, I had taken the liberty of, of taking some of the samples and putting 'em in my own apartment and using them. and I loved it. I was like, these memory foam beds are great. and I was just thinking, well, what if I started another website where instead of blogging, I just sold memory foam mattresses to expats living in China, who all were looking for soft beds as the Chinese locals.

3 (12m 17s):
They actually enjoy hard beds. They think it's better for your back. And so this soft memory foam bed was a, a rare find in Shanghai. And So I started pedaling these mattresses. Set up a website.

2 (12m 32s):
What was it called? It

3 (12m 33s):
Was called Slumber Max with two a's it was M A A X because m a X was taken.

2 (12m 38s):
And did you, by the way, did you just set it up and tell friends about it? Or did you start to buy, like, you know, did you start to, to sort of, you know, get paper click ads and stuff? Yeah, yeah.

3 (12m 51s):
I, I set it up knowing that there were little communities online for Shanghai expats. So there's expat forums that all the expats would go to. And it was very active. I also did other creative marketing tactics that didn't cost a lot. I would go talk to all the, to the chiropractors within the city and all the ones that service the expats. I would talk to real estate companies who are dealing with the relocations of expats.

2 (13m 20s):
And this is all the while you are still working as an, a sort of an agent between us companies and manufacturers in China?

3 (13m 27s):
That's right. I had a day job. I was working all day long at my day job. And then at night I would turn on slumber Max, see what orders came in, deal with all the emails, customer service, and then actually physically myself, I would rent a taxi truck and I would, that would come to my apartment. I would dolly down as many mattresses as I needed to deliver that night, put 'em in the back of a truck and I would make deliveries around Shanghai.

2 (13m 54s):
Where did you store all those mattresses? Just like against the wall

3 (13m 58s):
On the 25th floor of my high-rise apartment. I'd move the sofas to the side and stuff the entire, I mean, we had a tiny, it was like 150 square meters Wow. Apartment in Shanghai. And so they were like 80 pounds each. and I attribute a lot of my back problems to having moved so many mattresses. The worst was when I would ask if there was an elevator or not. And sometimes some of those apartments they lived in didn't. And they were on like the fifth floor and it was just hot and sweaty and moving those mattresses up. The strategy was to take off the cardboard box and they were encased in this plastic casing. And the sweat of my arms, I could wrap around and it wouldn't let it slide.

3 (14m 39s):
'cause I was so sticky that I would just get it up and then start making my way up the stairs.

2 (14m 46s):
Did And and so you were, you basically became the mattress guy for expats in Shanghai. And, and so at, at, at sort of its height. I mean, how much were you making?

3 (14m 58s):
I think annually you'd bring in a quarter million dollars or so.

2 (15m 1s):
It's a great business.

3 (15m 2s):
Yeah.

2 (15m 3s):
And you're probably, your cost was quite low, right? I mean, what, what did you buy the mattress? Like what would you buy a, a twin sized mattress for?

3 (15m 9s):
Well, I, I, I think more so, more so Queens and Kings is what I remember. Kings mostly. Yeah. You'd buy for about 200 bucks and I'd sell them for about a thousand dollars us. Wow. Yeah. And So I was making That's great. Yeah. The, the thought was not to sell tons at a very low cost. It was a very small market in Shanghai for expats, but they all have a lot of money and a lot of their relocation expenses are reimbursable by their companies. And so I knew that they, you know, would choose convenience and comfort over price as long as I provided them a good product.

2 (15m 42s):
And I mean, what was that sort of the, the plan, like I'll just keep doing this and, and make some money? Or did, was there a point where you thought, you know, I should, I should kinda lean into this a little bit more.

3 (15m 55s):
Yeah, I definitely felt leaning into e-commerce was the right move. And, and meanwhile, you know, Jeff, as we were both blogging at the same time, and, you know, he was learning about what I was doing with mattresses and, and it was, I, you know, I kind of felt like, oh, I wish I could do this with Jeff, but it's such a niche market in Shanghai. I don't know what he's gonna do. But, you know, my my feeling was he was on the sideline saying like, what about me? Let's do something together. Like we can do e-commerce and let's figure something out. and I was like, yeah.

2 (16m 26s):
Hmm. Okay. So Jeff, this is a good time to bring you into the conversation because Yeah, clearly you wanted to start partnering with Spencer at this point. Yeah,

4 (16m 36s):
Correct.

2 (16m 37s):
And I guess and I guess, while Spencer was working in Shanghai, you were raising your family in, in Texas and Dallas working at a, at a, like a chemical company for your day job. and I, I guess you were looking at, at other Chinese products that you could help your brother sell in the us And, and so did, did you have a specific idea in mind?

4 (16m 59s):
Yeah, so this was another very niche product, which was something we learned from the early days of blogging. They said, you know, pick something that's a, a niche instead of finding something that's extremely broad. And so there's these products for seedlings in the UK called CLOs, and they're basically these covers that you put over seedlings or plants to protect them from frost or just,

2 (17m 32s):
It's like a mesh cover, right? That goes,

3 (17m 34s):
It's like a plastic bell cover

2 (17m 36s):
And it goes directly over the little seedling. Yeah.

4 (17m 40s):
It, it's like a mini greenhouse. And so they were very inexpensive and they, it didn't seem like there was a much of a market in the us They're pretty hard to, to buy.

2 (17m 55s):
Lemme just, lemme just understand how it worked. So you, you, there was a, a, a manufacturer that you found in China and obviously Spencer, you, you knew how to find these places, right? Because this is what you were doing. And, and the idea was to just buy up a bunch of these, buy a lot of these CLOs, and then sell them on a website, just like set up a website called, I don't know, cloche.com and hopefully people would come or the

4 (18m 19s):
Garden clos.com. Yeah. So that was the website, which in hindsight is not the best name. It's very niche. But if you're looking for a close, we probably ranked quite high.

3 (18m 32s):
Yeah. You know, we'd buy these things for 20 cents a piece and bundle them in maybe a pack of five and sell 'em for, you know, 15 99, 19 99 and, and just start selling. And we did, we sold, we sold closes. We were, we, we cornered that market.

2 (18m 52s):
And, and this is sort of, I mean this is, you know, at a time when, when sort of third party logistics businesses are really starting to, to also to blow up. How did you guys manage it? I mean, Jeff is in Dallas. Spencer, you're in Shanghai who fulfills the orders?

3 (19m 7s):
Yeah, Jeff, Jeff is in Dallas. And, and we would, I would get all the product and get it shipped over to his house. Okay.

2 (19m 14s):
And you just had a garage full of Cloches in

4 (19m 17s):
Dallas? Yes. This was the beginning of many years of, of no garage. Of no garage. And it just being filled with all sorts of product and, and yeah, my wife wondering what's going on?

2 (19m 30s):
And so how did the business do, how, how much money were you guys making with this business?

3 (19m 35s):
Yeah, I, in my mind, I, I think it was, it was under a hundred thousand dollars each year. I wanna say it's closer about 50 $50,000 a year.

2 (19m 45s):
So meantime, I mean, so you've got this website going, but, but Amazon is also a place sort of an opportunity. And were you looking at, at, at Amazon as a place to also sell stuff?

3 (19m 58s):
We did. And those were the early days of f b A fulfillment by Amazon. I had, I had started to explore it and, and so we, we signed up for Amazon and we would put stuff on Amazon and we started to realize that Amazon is a huge opportunity and we definitely leaned into that.

2 (20m 19s):
So once you realized that you could sell a lot of these, you know, you could sell things, right? You guys had your own business selling these. It's such a weird thing. I'd never heard that word before until today, so thank you.

3 (20m 33s):
We're probably not even pronouncing it right? Yeah, right. 'cause I think it's a French word for Bell this and I think there's like an accent on the end. And we're probably saying it all wrong.

2 (20m 43s):
I should given that my children and WIS speak French, I should know this word. But, so, so what did you, I mean, you know, that business was doing okay, $50,000 in revenue or so a year, but I mean, did, did the two of you guys start thinking or start saying, well, what else, let's try other stuff on Amazon and let's, let's set up other websites or

3 (21m 6s):
Yeah, it was, it was really just, what else can we sell? Yeah. If we could create a site that sold a hundred thousand dollars and we repeat those little niche sites 10 times, well that's a million dollars. And for me, who was making 40, $45,000 a year, that's a big deal. And Jeff was probably in a similar boat.

2 (21m 24s):
So tell me what, tell me about your brainstorming process to figure out what the next thing you would try to sell would be. What, what did you guys kind of next land on?

4 (21m 36s):
I think at a, about this time I came across the four hour work week book. And that was eye-opening. There's kind of a formula in there with the different types of products that work in a e-commerce type of business. Yeah. And there was a list in there and I don't remember everything, but there were definitely things, it was basically something that was, that you could ship easily that wouldn't break, that was high value, you know, wasn't overly complex or overly

3 (22m 13s):
Seasonal. Yeah,

4 (22m 14s):
Yeah. And so with that in mind, we were thinking, oh, what, what could we do that that would fit that?

2 (22m 22s):
So you are thinking about a bunch of different things and, and I guess you start to think about the category of camping, right? And, and tell me about why you kind of veered in that direction. How did you land on camping as a category?

3 (22m 38s):
Jeff was the one who came up with the idea, you know, we grew up in Canada and did a lot of camping. Yeah.

4 (22m 45s):
We explored so many different industries and products and we thought, oh, there's some opportunities with camping stoves. They're, they're small, they're compact, easy to ship, they won't break. And so we came across the concept of this double walled gasification Stove. A lot of people on YouTube would come up with their own ideas and just, we started just trying to make our own, seeing if this gasification Stove if it actually worked.

2 (23m 24s):
Yeah. And, and, and for people who, who aren't familiar with this Stove, which you, which you'd eventually come up with, is basically this stainless steel cylinder kind of like a, a can within a can that kind of sucks the air up from the, the bottom to feed the fire, but also sends the air out through these holes at the top to, to like, to burn off the smoke. and I mean essentially you wanted to build a camping Stove. I gather that reduced or eliminated smoke. But you also wanted to make it easy to start because starting a campfire is, is is not easy for most people. Right? Well

3 (23m 56s):
That was the beauty of when we looked at YouTube and saw how people were DIYing and when we were playing with cans and cans, we realized that the airflow, how it works just naturally makes it easier for, for fires to light. I mean, it's, it's not rocket science. Fires need oxygen. And so the more oxygen you give it from different areas from underneath it, fires take a lot, a lot faster. And then it being contained within the camping Stove, it's protected from wind. And then you add on the, the, the ring that sits on top, which supports the pot that's put on top, that kind of creates an added extra windshield as well. And so it naturally was easier to start fires. Huh. But we weren't thinking like, we're gonna revolutionize this category with something brand new.

3 (24m 38s):
It was just, can we make a slightly better mouse trap? Right. Right. And with my experience on the China side, I could be able to mass manufacture these and then with our e-commerce abilities and with our understanding of digital marketing, we could have another portfolio brand that would bring in a hundred thousand dollars and, and be another drop in the bucket for our path towards financial freedom and the four hour work week. and I mean the thought process wasn't complicated, it was just, what's next? This looks good. Yeah. Let's iterate, let's design. And,

2 (25m 10s):
But I guess, I mean, neither of you guys were or are engineers and is this, is it complicated? I mean, how long did it take you guys to figure that, that out, that design out?

3 (25m 21s):
Yeah, I mean Jeff was right that time when we were playing around, we were literally getting cans outta the pantry and going, buying different size cans and putting cans in cans and seeing what worked. And it is somewhat complex. It took us a while to find a supplier that was willing to work with us and we actually shelved the idea for a year or so because it was so difficult. It was far more difficult than anything we had done up to that point.

2 (25m 47s):
What, what I'm trying to figure out though is given that you had sold things that were already being manufactured, why didn't you just find a Chinese factory that was making camping stoves and just sell those on Amazon?

3 (25m 59s):
Yeah, I mean that's a good, I it's a that's a good thought. I mean, I think one of the ideas as our evolution of thinking changed as to what was a good product. It needed to be unique. And if we were able to buy it off the shelf at some manufacturer and it, they're selling it to other people as well, it would be that that much just as easy for the next guy to buy it. Yeah. But no manufacturer was making this. And so for somebody, you know, if you understand how manufacturing works, nobody wants to help a little startup. And we didn't even consider ourselves that. 'cause we were like, well, we'd buy $5,000 worth of this product. Well, the tooling and dyes and everything that you need to set this product up to even try to make is more than that. Why would a manufacturer take a risk on, on us?

2 (26m 42s):
Well, we come back in just a moment. A manufacturer decides to take that risk. And Spencer and Jeff Discover that the four hour work week of their dreams is about to get a lot longer. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This

Mint Mobile (27m 7s):
After years of fine print contracts and getting ripped off by big wireless providers, if we've learned anything, it's that there's always a catch. So when I first heard that Mint Mobile offers premium wireless starting at just 15 bucks a month, I thought, well, what's the catch? But after talking to them and then using their service, it all made sense. There isn't one Mint Mobile's secret sauce is that they're the first company to sell wireless service online only they cut out the cost of retail stores and pass those sweet savings directly to you. I live in the Bay Area and you'd be surprised, but cell reception in San Francisco can be terrible. I know the capital of technology, but with my Mint Mobile phone, I get crystal clear reception everywhere I go. To get your new wireless plan for just 15 bucks a month and get the plan shipped to your door for free, go to Mint Mobile dot com slash built. That's Mint Mobile dot com slash built. And when you use that uur l you're also showing them how much you support our show. Cut your wireless bill to 15 bucks a month at Mint Mobile dot com slash built.

LinkedIn (28m 17s):
As a business to business marketer, your needs are unique. B two B buying cycles are long and your customers face incredibly complex decisions. So isn't it time you had a marketing platform built specifically for you? LinkedIn ads empowers marketers with solutions for you and your customers. With LinkedIn ads, you can build the right relationships, drive results, and reach your customers. In a respectful environment, you'll have direct access to 930 million members, 180 million senior level executives and 10 million C-level executives. And you'll be able to drive results with targeting and measurement tools built specifically for B two B and for How. I Built This For this show, LinkedIn has been an incredible resource. When researching prospective guests for the show, make B2B marketing everything it can be and get a $100 credit on your next campaign. Go to LinkedIn dot com slash built this to claim your credit. That's LinkedIn dot com slash built this Terms and conditions apply.

3 (29m 21s):
One more thing before we get back to the show. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And it's totally free.

2 (29m 42s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 2010. And Jeff and Spencer are learning that finding a Chinese manufacturer to make a camping Stove is complicated.

3 (29m 53s):
It's like finding a dance partner as you really need somebody to match your level, match your size, match your stride, match your ambition. And so finding that was really just an exercise of, of meeting a lot of different factories, talking with them, understanding the machinery, getting my dumb questions out at the front so that when I met the next guy it was a little bit more able to speak the lingo of, of different machinery needed and different welding techniques and all these different things that were needed to find that right partner. But I found a guy who was making coffee percolators for the, for Europe, huh? He was an engineer by trade and was very curious about what we were trying to do.

3 (30m 38s):
And it was a puzzle for him that he became pretty obsessed on how do I make this thing if I have to, if I have to make this from scratch, right? How do I bend the metal this way? Can you bend it this way? And you know, perhaps, perhaps there, I don't know what else he saw in us, but he was willing to say, Hey, let's try this.

2 (30m 59s):
And and when you got that prototype, did it, did it do the job? Yeah,

3 (31m 3s):
It performed and it was beautiful. I mean a flame when it burns using the, the double walled design that that we had in this Stove it's mesmerizing. It looks like there's jets shooting out the side of the Stove and for anybody who uses it for the first time or sees it is just kind of taken back and is like, what is going on right now? I've never seen a flame burn like that. And that's, that's the feeling and that we got when we burn this and we thought this is gonna be, this is gonna be awesome. People are gonna love this.

2 (31m 34s):
Alright, so you've got this prototype and you want to start to mass produce it and then create a direct to consumer company around it. First question is, how much, how much money did you need to get this off the ground? I mean 'cause you guys didn't have a lot. Yeah,

3 (31m 51s):
We didn't have a lot. I remember it's $15,000 we put in

2 (31m 56s):
And that was to, to do

3 (31m 58s):
What that was to get the tooling paid

2 (31m 60s):
For. Yep.

3 (32m 1s):
It was all we were willing to put at it because we didn't know guy if this was gonna work or not. Wow.

2 (32m 6s):
Alright, so first of all, you guys listen, you, you, you made the decision to try, you know, to make a go at this and, and, and you call and you decided to call it the Solo Stove. Where, where did the name come from?

3 (32m 20s):
Yeah, I mean, we literally just sat around thinking of names and really just at the same time searching for what domains were available that we could get. And we had gotten to the point of realizing that a long name, a long drawn out name like China business traveler.com is very hard to remember and to type in. And so we always wanted something really short and something that spoke to what we were doing and we really thought it's the only Stove you need if you're backpacking or camping. And it's great for one person. It's kind of a single person size. And so Solo kind of clicked on all corners for us.

2 (32m 59s):
Okay. So you've got the name. And, and by the way, did you, did you apply for patents for this product?

3 (33m 6s):
Yeah, we did.

2 (33m 7s):
And you create a website presumably called Solo Stove dot com. That's it.

3 (33m 12s):
Yep.

2 (33m 13s):
And and the same playbook, the same playbook that you had used for the, the the gardening business and the mattresses. You do AdSense, you buy, you do search engine optimization, the same playbook,

3 (33m 26s):
Right? Yeah. Combination of creating content that people would search up and, and stumble upon our website. And

2 (33m 32s):
What was the content like? What were you writing?

3 (33m 35s):
I don't know if we did a lot of blogging in the early days for it. We actually, we spent a lot of time on making the site look beautiful and evoking emotions. You know, being in the outdoors and camping is, is is a very emotional exercise. And, and, and we really wanted to lean into that. We eventually got to the point of buying banners, ads on different sites that we thought were useful. So eventually then putting it on Amazon, which was another source of traffic and revenue, everything we could think of to bring people to our website.

2 (34m 9s):
And I mean you flip the switch, right? The proverbial switch and the website launches and I mean, is it an instant hit or do people, are people discovering it? What, what's the, what's the response from anywhere? Yeah,

3 (34m 26s):
It was quick and fast. It was more than we expected. A first year was about half a million dollars. Wow. In the first year of, of putting it out there.

2 (34m 35s):
And how much did the stoves cost you to, to, to make

3 (34m 39s):
Yeah. This, this, you know, the, the margins were really high. You know, we were in the 80, 80% margins. Wow.

2 (34m 47s):
And you also sold them on Amazon, right?

3 (34m 49s):
That's right. Yeah. And, and that's where a lot of the sales really did come from, is Amazon.

2 (34m 54s):
Alright, so you've got this product that seems to be taking off, but both of you guys kept your jobs, right?

3 (35m 3s):
Yeah, yeah, yeah.

2 (35m 6s):
I mean, at what point, you know, if, if you're doing the first year half a million in sales, at what point did you, I mean, did the two of you start to say, well maybe we need to think about this in a bigger way. Like what was, what happened to get you there?

3 (35m 22s):
Yeah, I think for, for me it was, you know, it was just being overwhelmed with everything is just, you know, we had this, I had this idea of this four hour work week. That's why we set out to do this. And as things became too much, you know, performance in my day job kind of slipped. Huh? It it, it was a situation where I had a tough conversation with my boss. I called him my business partner, I gained some equity in that company I was working for. And, and that was a tough conversation. I mean, even now it's hard to articulate all the, all the feelings that went into figuring that out and the misunderstandings and, and what I should have done maybe. But I never thought any of this would really amount to much.

3 (36m 5s):
I thought it would be a great side hustle and why talk about it? Yeah. If it's not gonna be a big issue. And yeah, the problem was, is the bigger it got, the more I was afraid to bring it up to the guy I was working for because now it is an issue.

2 (36m 21s):
Was he, was he disappointed in you? I mean you or did he understand or what?

3 (36m 25s):
He was upset. He felt like I had talents that maybe I didn't share with him, which I think is understandable. But then, you know, after a night's night of sleep, you know, the next day was a different tone and it was, you know, a more tone of, you know, you betrayed me and this was, you know, this, we were supposed to build this together. And in my mind I was like, this is what I was building with my brother. This was never gonna be something that Yeah. You know, we were gonna create and then bring every, you know, bring him on board. It was just me and Jeff's side gig that ended up blowing up.

2 (37m 3s):
Wow. Alright, so you've got this product, you've got this company and, and I guess you guys decide in 2014 to to turn to Kickstarter for the next iteration a a larger version of the Stove And, and and, and was the idea to go to Kickstarter to generate attention? 'cause I think you guys, I mean, I'm assuming the cash flow was was pretty good. I mean, you guys were probably all of a sudden both of you guys were making pretty good money. Yeah,

3 (37m 34s):
Yeah. No, cashflow was good. It was profitable. You know, we didn't pay ourselves anything in those first years 'cause all the money went back into buying more inventory. Yeah, yeah. We, we did Kickstarter in Jeff's backyard with our kids, their feet. So you can see kicking around in that video. Yep. But yeah, that was our first foray into Kickstarter and we did all, all right. And we were pleased with the results. But once Kickstarter's over, it's back to back to building, you know, our website and selling on Amazon. Hmm.

2 (38m 5s):
So, alright. Meanwhile, I think this is around 2013 Spencer, you make a major move, you decide to come back to, to the US and you settle in Dallas where your brother is and, and I guess you're still working your day job for that same company in China, but, but Jeff, around, around that same time, you actually decided to leave your day job, right?

3 (38m 29s):
Yeah, that's right.

2 (38m 31s):
Like, like what, like, I guess you became confident enough at this point point that this thing was gonna be or was already successful and that you needed to put all of your attention into it. And by this point it was still just the two of you. Like, help me understand how you were running a business doing, you know, close to a million dollars in revenue. Well, I mean, it's, it's possible to do it, but you had to fulfill the orders, you had to deal with customer service. I mean, you were, you were building a brand and it was just the two of you.

4 (39m 2s):
Yeah. I think I knew before 2014 that this was on its way to be more successful than any of the other businesses. But I don't think my wife had the same confidence. Hmm. And So I, I kind of had this plan of, well, if we can get rid of all of our debt, it was basically three things. If I could bring in enough income to allow her to be a stay at home mom. And we had I think two kids at the time with a third on the way, and we could pay off our mortgage and then pay off our cars.

4 (39m 43s):
If I could do those three things, then I had permission to quit my job. And So I eventually met those goals.

3 (39m 52s):
Guy, just to add more, more flavor into this, we had started yet another brand as we were doing Solo called Fox Outfitters. And Fox Outfitters was a lot of products, but they were in the camping space. So like camping mats, hammocks, stainless steel, drinking cups and microfiber towels.

2 (40m 15s):
All branded Fox. Yeah. Outfitters. And you, you, and it was a, again,

3 (40m 19s):
Same play. You, you

2 (40m 20s):
Can, you can go to Alibaba or one of these sites and you can pick the, the products you want Yeah. And put your logo on it.

3 (40m 26s):
That's right. Yeah. And we would do as much customization as we could to make our own unique styles or bags or sizes or whatever it was. But I mean, they, they were very commodity products and we sold more of that than, than Solo did all the way, I mean, I don't wanna say, I mean, I don't remember when we stopped selling Fox, but probably about 2016 we were selling more on Fox than we were for Solo. Millions and millions of dollars of Fox stuff. I mean, we probably all together, by the time we got to about 2016, I mean just with those two brands, we were probably doing like three, $4 million with.

2 (41m 6s):
Wow. I mean, so you had, and and they were again, all being handled by third party logistics. But did that enable the two of you to, to, to have a lifestyle job? I mean, I mean, given that, you know, you had these manufacturers in China making it being shipped to the third party logistics center. I mean, did that mean you could just kind of watch the money come into your bank account?

3 (41m 33s):
Some days it felt like that there were days on Mondays that we would, you know, go fishing and realize that everybody else is going to work and we're going to the lake. And that felt great. But those days became very few and far between as the business continued to grow and that, that quote unquote lifestyle business was fading quickly. Everything between supply chain and fulfillment and customer service, we were doing every customer service email. It was just a lot.

2 (42m 2s):
So most of your day was probably taken up by just dealing with customer service emails. Yeah.

3 (42m 8s):
Yeah. Guys on Solo Stove, would they love the product so much? We would, I mean, we didn't take phone calls early on because we tried it once and people would just call in wanting to talk about camping and hiking. I was like, you know, old timers that had nothing better to do and they were great, but you'd get on these calls for 30 minutes and realize like, this can't, this can't happen. We gotta just switch customer service to an email only. Yeah. And for me it was, it, it became way too much and I just didn't want it anymore. I mean, there were times where I was like, the money's good, but you know, this isn't worth it. And now we, we were approaching that point, you know, this is probably about 2016 where we have to say, if we want keep growing, we have to hire people.

3 (42m 49s):
And we never wanted to do that.

2 (42m 52s):
Why? Why didn't you wanna hire people?

3 (42m 54s):
I personally just had a bad experience with managing teams. I just, I felt like I went through 2008 having to lay off my entire team in a very short period of time. And, and going through that I felt like I wasn't a great leader. I felt like I wasn't the type of person that was skilled at building teams. and Don don't know if that's a narrative I just told myself. Huh.

4 (43m 21s):
I think about this time as well, it was becoming more and more competitive on Amazon. Yeah. And so we were realizing there was a lot more competition and we noticed that in our sales. And so we had to start making hard decisions as to what direction we were gonna go.

2 (43m 41s):
And I guess the direction you guys kind of landed on in 2016 was maybe, let's see if we can sell our company, our business.

3 (43m 47s):
Yeah. I mean that was those two decisions, right? It's either let's get rid of this thing Yeah. And maybe start again and keep it small and manageable from, you know, we, we had learned a lot of things, so it's not like we were starting from zero. We would just start another company and make it even better and more efficient. Or we hire people and get an office. and I remember really just talking about it with Jeff and I. Remember him saying that you, you know, if we're gonna, if we're gonna sell this thing, then we should maximize the outcome. But that's what we decided to do was sell the company. So we found some brokers. We had a friend in, in this area, in the D F W area who had sold the company before.

3 (44m 31s):
And he introduced us to an investment banker and we found some other investment bankers through some other friends. And we just started talking to them saying, this is our business.

2 (44m 41s):
And what was your revenue at the time?

3 (44m 42s):
Revenue at that time I think, I think was, I mean, between Fox and Solo, I was probably close to about, I wanna say like seven ish million bucks. Jeff, is that, do you think that's about right? Okay. Yeah, probably. Yeah. Seven to 10 or somewhere around there.

2 (44m 59s):
And it was just the two of you?

3 (44m 60s):
Just the two of us. And it was really profitable. Wow. And so that's

2 (45m 3s):
A super efficient business. Yeah.

3 (45m 4s):
I mean profits, I remember between everything we were selling, I think it was, I think it was a few million bucks of profits every year. So we, we started talking with people and said, here's our numbers, here's what we're doing and here's how profitable it is. Isn't it a great business? Like are there buyers out there for this? And really the feedback was, is like, yeah, we could find one. They're not gonna be, it's not gonna be a great outcome. And really your business isn't a business because it's just you two working out of your homes. But

2 (45m 33s):
You had a, you had a brand, you had Solo stuff.

3 (45m 35s):
That's what we thought, right. Is like, here's a brand. Yeah. Here's a great product. Here's websites that we thought were amazing and we could tell the next person exactly what we're doing. What buttons to push. Yeah. And how to drive traffic and what to, and we thought that was a very sellable asset. And by

2 (45m 53s):
The way, what would you, what would you have sold it for?

3 (45m 55s):
Well, I think at the time one of the bankers told us that we could probably get about seven or $8 million from, from Solo. I think that was the number in my head in my recollection. Yeah. Of, you know, carving out just Solo on its own. That it was, if you can build that out to be a, a real company, then that would be a really attractive company for, for someone to buy.

2 (46m 23s):
So, alright, so you basically, everyone, the feedback you're getting is, listen, you know, it's, you don't really have an infrastructure, you don't really have a company or you've got a brand. You can make a little bit of money on it, but it's not really, you're not gonna have a lot of people like banging down your door to buy this thing.

3 (46m 39s):
Right. Which was hard for me to understand. You know, I thought businesses were all about making money. I thought businesses were all about being profitable and what we had was something that made a lot of money and was really profitable. and I couldn't understand why, why, why this wasn't something that everybody was pounding down the door and wanting to buy and I, you know, we, I have a liberal arts degree. So. I never understood how m and a works. I didn't even understand the term until we started selling our company that that was the term you used. and I remember the, one of the investment bankers we met, we had to borrow an office to even have the meeting because we didn't even at the logistics office? At the logistics office, because we were like, well, they either come to me and Jeff's dinner table or we actually find someplace to look, you know, presentable.

3 (47m 24s):
Yeah. And that's how far off we were from having a company that was sellable.

2 (47m 30s):
When we come back in just a moment, Spencer and Jeff start to hire a team out of a new open floor office, a metal table and chairs outside. Starbucks, stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How, I Built This.

ZipRecruiter (47m 51s):
If you're an entrepreneur looking to hire, you know that it's incredibly hard to attract top talent. That's why you want a partner who gets it and ZipRecruiter gets it. ZipRecruiter knows how tough it is right now, but they figured out solutions for the problems you are facing. You can see those solutions for yourself because right now you can try them for free At ZipRecruiter dot com slash built. ZipRecruiter is ready to help you tackle your recruiting challenges. You can reach more of the right people because ZipRecruiter posts your job to 100 plus job sites. Team up with a hiring partner who understands what you need. ZipRecruiter four out of five employers who post on ZipRecruiter get a quality candidate within the first day. Just go to this exclusive web address to try ZipRecruiter for free ZipRecruiter dot com slash built. And when you use that U r l, you're also showing ZipRecruiter how much you appreciate their support for our show. Again, that's ZipRecruiter dot com slash b U i Lt ZipRecruiter, the smartest way to hire

Angi (48m 59s):
Angie has made it easier than ever to connect with skilled professionals to get all your home projects done. Well just bring them your project online or with the Angie app and answer a few questions with Angie. You can book instantly at an upfront price or request and compare quotes from multiple pros so you can find the best price for your project. So the next time you have a home project, just Angie that and start getting the most out of your home. Download the free Angie mobile app today or visit angie.com. That's a n g i.com.

2 (49m 42s):
Hey, welcome back to How I. Built This. So it's 2014 and at this point Jeff and Spencer want to sell Solo Stove, but nobody wants to buy it. At least not until they can build it out more. So in order to do that, they decide to get rid of their other company.

3 (49m 59s):
When we realized what we needed to do was build Solo, we focused in and we said, let's just focus on Solo and let's just forget about Fox.

2 (50m 7s):
So you, you sold Fox for like pennies on the dollar.

3 (50m 10s):
Pennies on the dollar is what we did. We really just said, here's the inventory, we'll give it to you for pennies on the dollar. We got introduced to some good guys in Houston who wanted to have a stab at e-commerce and we said, Hey, you know this, this is an opportunity you can go with and run with and kind of get your feet wet. Here's take it for pennies on the dollar and let's just clean up our books.

2 (50m 29s):
Alright, so you, you realize that now you've got to do the thing that you don't wanna do, which is to hire people and build a an infrastructure. Meantime, I think you go back to Kickstarter to launch a new backyard fire pit. And this, this one does amazing. I mean, you think could raise over a million dollars. Yeah. On Kickstarter. I'm curious about, I know they were all patented and you filed, you know, you got your patents and it was trademarked and everything, but I, I'm surprised that there weren't copycats or were there copycats popping up on Amazon?

3 (51m 8s):
So in the early days, no. and I think, you know, a big part of that was one, the Amazon Rush was starting, but it wasn't in full force. And then two, you know, we were really quiet about things, you know, we did Kickstarter and that was one of the concerns we had is if people see how much we sell, then there's more likelihood that people will want to copy. But at that point, product development needed to get going. And we said, well, what's next? And that led us to creating Bonfire, which was our first backyard fire pit. And the other point of it was, if we could show demand for the product, perhaps we could get interest from retailers, well-known retailers who, who we know are always looking for new product.

3 (51m 52s):
We thought this would be a great resume builder for us to approach a potential retailer like an r e i who if we could get in, that's yet another check mark on the box of what we need to build in terms of our resume. Hmm.

2 (52m 5s):
You thought, okay, you thought we in order. 'cause now you're focused on how do we sell this company? This was the goal. Yeah. And so one of the ways was Kickstarter, the other one was, now we've gotta get into brick and mortar. We can't just be DTC Sure.

3 (52m 18s):
A little bit. We just wanted to show a glimmer of hope. Yeah. That retail was an option because when you sell a company, you're selling hope and future and future growth.

2 (52m 28s):
Yeah. And, and So I guess the Kickstarter was really what attracted re i's attention. Right. I I

3 (52m 34s):
Like to think So I don't know. You know, in the past we thought about reaching out to r e I and talked to some guys who had sold into R E I and yeah, they had explained how difficult it is and how hard it is to pitch them, and then you gotta fly to Seattle and all of this. And after hearing it all, I said, you're right. That sounds horrible. I said, I don't want to do that. We're gonna stick to selling online. But during Kickstarter, when we were doing that, we were in our first little office, which was no bigger than a shoebox. and I remember Jeff, we saw that email come through from the r e i buyer and he said he wanted to carry all of our products and we couldn't believe it and I Wow. But that was the one thing that I remember getting really excited over. It just felt like validation for all the years of grinding, trying to build a brand, trying to, you know, create something unique.

3 (53m 20s):
I felt like getting into r e I was a was a badge of honor and it was such a e easy

4 (53m 26s):
Experience. Yeah. It was just one email, very brief email saying that he wanted to carry all of our products and, and we just replied back like, there was no meeting, there was no testing. Wow. It just went straight into their stores. Yeah.

2 (53m 40s):
And, and, and again, in terms of like protecting the, the brand, I mean you, you briefly mentioned there were copycats coming onto the market, but not it, it never seemed to, to sort of threaten you guys. How did, how did you avoid that?

3 (53m 53s):
It never felt like there were big copycats. We were afraid of all the way through when we sold the company. And even through those early years, I think the key to it was nobody really understood how much we were selling. It was hard to gauge. And then the second part of it, it's a very difficult product to create because we had invested a lot into custom machinery with our manufacturers. And so the barrier to entry was much higher than any other me too product that somebody could go get.

2 (54m 22s):
So essentially when you made this decision that you have to figure out how to turn this into a sellable company, one of the things you had to do was to hire employees. Right? Right. And so, and this was something you both resisted doing. So what, how did you start?

3 (54m 37s):
I mean, it's, it's just that we started putting out job postings and one of the first girls we interviewed, we had, we, we told her to meet us at the Starbucks and we didn't even order anything. That's how cheap we were. We just sat outside at the little metal tables and met this, this young girl who was in interviewing for a customer service position. And you know, we would promise that we will have an office if, when this position is filled. And that's, that's how, that's how rough the start was.

4 (55m 7s):
And we realized from when we tried to sell it the first time that we needed a leadership team, we needed managers in place. And so we could explain to any potential buyers, Hey, if we step back and aren't involved in the daily operations, there's a team here Yeah. That can run the business without us being involved.

2 (55m 32s):
How was it, how, how was that for you guys to start to train people and essentially become leaders and managers? How did it go?

3 (55m 41s):
It was a, it was a exercise of trial and error and there was a lot more error happening in those early days. and I feel really bad to those early employees. You know, we gave it our best effort and, you know, I openly apologize to those that had to suffer through our, my inexperience in being a leader. You know, I wish I was the one that could rally the troops and, and, and care about every aspect of their personal lives and, and, and work wholeheartedly to make them a better person. But that just wasn't me. I was about doing and getting things done. The problem was I wasn't excited to get better at this.

3 (56m 21s):
Yeah. I was excited about the stuff that, that we used to do product dealing with marketing strategies and grow the brand and what the brand means. Like those were the things that were fun and exciting. We just didn't get to do 'em a lot in the latter times.

2 (56m 33s):
And, and so you, but meantime, in the back of your minds, you're always thinking, we gotta find somebody to lead this team.

3 (56m 39s):
Yeah. And Jeff was the one, I remember him saying that, you know, the root problem isn't, isn't our people, it's us and we need to find somebody to replace us. And so we did. We just started talking with everybody we knew.

2 (56m 53s):
Yeah. And, and I guess eventually you landed on this guy John Marris, but he, he was not, I dunno, initially you guys approached him to, to talk about something else, like for advice, but, but I, I have to assume that secretly you were thinking maybe this guy will come work with us. Yeah.

3 (57m 10s):
John was a, a guy who was working at a, a local company called Claris Glass Boards, and So I knew of this company, obviously, and I knew that there were some, some really capable guys over there. Yeah. We reached out to John over LinkedIn really and honestly just to ask about how to build a sales team and chatting with him, it just felt like when he left, I kind of looked at Jeff and said, this is, this is a guy that I think could run this thing. He's very sales oriented and he was a very energetic guy, really likable guy. And I think it was a matter of weeks. And he was in there taking the bull by the horns.

3 (57m 50s):
Hmm. If anything, I felt like we probably let go too fast. We really just, we didn't just hand over the reins, we balled him up into a tight ball and threw it at his face.

2 (58m 2s):
So what you just introduced John to the company one day and said, Hey everyone, this is your new boss.

3 (58m 7s):
Pretty much that's how it went. But, you know, time freedom and financial freedom was all we had our sights on. And anything, any means to that end was acceptable by me. And if that meant, you know, quote unquote handing my baby over to somebody else, I was ready.

2 (58m 25s):
So the idea was once you brought him on, John, to build a company 20 18, 20 19, and then, and then explore a sale in 2020. But it didn't, it, it turns out that in 2019 you already started to get some interest from people who started to approach you. They were clearly there were people who were, had been following your growth and now there was, there was interest.

3 (58m 50s):
Yeah. Most of it came unsolicited, but yeah, it started to come in and they started to get really attractive. But I, I remember Jeff and I explicitly telling John, stop entertaining all these inquiries because we'll get 'em when we're ready to get 'em, and they'll be there when we run a process and put it on, on the market and have that competitive bidding process. Just grow the business. Don't worry about selling. But as those inquiries came in, they started to throw numbers at us that we didn't ask for. And those numbers started really big and just got bigger to a point where we couldn't turn it down and we couldn't say no. It

2 (59m 28s):
Got to a point where you, you were being offered in the low nine figures valuation in the low nine figures for the business. And, and some of these private equity groups were like, listen, you know, and, and I guess you, you couldn't ignore. It was a lot of money.

3 (59m 44s):
Yeah. I mean, those offers came in and, and John said, here's what one company said. and I remember us just saying, we gotta entertain this. I,

2 (59m 52s):
I So I think the first, the first 'cause you would go on to have essentially three exits from your company in a sense. And the first one was when this private equity group bought a majority stake and you and your brother retained a minority stake. And at that point, this is 2019, what did you guys do? Did you, did you fully disengage from Solo Stove? Yeah,

3 (1h 0m 19s):
We were, we were ready to be out and to kind of move to a, a board seat as board advisors, we were, man, I was so stoked to get out and to, to get to a point where I don't have to go into the office. I mean, all of that stress, I could now shut off and spend time the way I wanted to spend it. So we've moved to board seats

2 (1h 0m 41s):
And then the timing is both great and also would get even better because turns out Covid Yeah. Could be an incredible engine for, for, for growing this brand even further. and I think about a year later, after a year after the private equity group made that investment, another private equity firm came in with another offer to buy, essentially to buy out a huge part of most of your remaining stake. Yeah,

3 (1h 1m 16s):
That's right. There was this new group that wanted to come in and buy a majority stake at a much higher valuation. Well, north of what we, we had just exited for a, a year ago. Wow.

2 (1h 1m 29s):
Wow. So they were gonna make money and you guys were gonna make more money. Yeah.

3 (1h 1m 33s):
Really. That's right. I mean, it was mind blowing to me that, you know, from, from being in the low nine figures just over a hundred million dollars to now being well into the mid nine figures on this next Yeah. Private equity exit, you know, we would sell less shares than we did the first time, but the rewards were much greater the second time.

4 (1h 1m 54s):
And I think one of the things that made it much easier the second time was that we weren't involved in the whole process of selling it. Yeah. Which was nice to step back and let other people deal with that part of the business.

2 (1h 2m 10s):
The company eventually went public in 2021 and, and, and you guys had shares. I think you still retain those shares, right? You old stock. Yeah,

3 (1h 2m 18s):
That's correct. We, we didn't sell any stock at the, at the I p O that I p o was truly a, an I P O where new stock was issued. Yeah. So it wasn't a liquidity event for us.

2 (1h 2m 29s):
And and you guys today are completely not involved with the company at all. You have no connection to it. Yeah.

3 (1h 2m 36s):
Other than we own some shares an equity stake. Yeah. And we own shares of the public com company from an operation standpoint. We're totally out. It feels great to say it. I mean, we don't, we don't, we don't do anything with a company and hardly hear from them these days.

2 (1h 2m 52s):
What do you think, Spencer, what do you think, I mean, you've got a long life to live. Do you see yourself starting another business? I mean, what do you see yourself doing with the rest of your life and, and how, how will you keep yourself occupied? I, I know that it's, some people are gonna hear this question be like, what do you mean guy? He's gonna, he's gonna go running every day and go to the gym and do yoga classes and be involved in this church and go on vacation. But I don't know, there are a lot of people who I've interviewed on the show, hundreds who are, who are multi-millionaires, billionaires who, who don't stop working until the day they die because it gives their lives meaning. and I understand that i I work is also can also be incredibly fulfilling and meaningful.

2 (1h 3m 37s):
and I wonder if you see that in your future.

3 (1h 3m 43s):
Yeah, I think fulfillment's the right word. And if that takes me down a road of starting something for whatever reason, then I'll never say never. And at this current stage in my life, the most impact I can make, I think is with my family, is with my kids and making sure that they grow up with a father at home with the support of parents and, and until I, until I finish that task, I don't think I'm super hungry right now to start something that would take me away from doing that.

2 (1h 4m 17s):
What about you, Jeff?

4 (1h 4m 18s):
Well, I think one of the important things in life is to know when you have enough, I don't necessarily look at work as working at a job to make money or get a paycheck, but there's all sorts of different types of work where there's work at home that parents do all the time. And I'm trying to be better at that. There's work in inside your community that you can do work at our church. And I don't see starting a, a new company right now, but I'm not gonna say I won't later on.

2 (1h 4m 59s):
Do you, when you guys think about your journey and, and you know where you've been and what happened, how much of, of what happened to you do you at Tribute to Luck? And how much do you think has to do with the hard work and the skill that you have?

3 (1h 5m 12s):
For me, I think luck is definitely a, a, a huge part of our outcome. And the paradox is, as I think about luck, right? It's something you can't control. You have to realize that it's a part while at the same time working as if it doesn't matter. I think it helps you not pat yourself on the back too hard when things go right while at the same time not getting too hard on yourself when things don't go right. Some, some things are just out of your control and and luck is definitely one of 'em.

2 (1h 5m 46s):
Jeff,

4 (1h 5m 48s):
I think the older I get, I'm not sure if I believe in luck as much, but I definitely believe that there's some something out of your control, some sort of, you know, divine help. All of the important things that have happened in my life, including starting this business with Spencer and meeting my wife and having kids and all of those other important things I don't really consider as, as luck, but as things that I was blessed with. I certainly think Spencer and I both worked very hard at it, but I think we both acknowledged that there's something that was beyond our control that definitely helped with this.

2 (1h 6m 33s):
That's Jeff and Spencer Jan, co-founders of Solo Stove. By the way, remember how years ago they sold garden closures, those little tent like things that protect plants from Frost? Well, it turns out that business is still a wide open frontier. In fact, the domain name clo.com is currently on sale for $120,000. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. Please make sure to click the follow button on your podcast app so you never miss a new episode of the show. And as always, it's totally free. This episode was produced by Carla Esteves, with music composed by Rum Arablouei.

2 (1h 7m 13s):
It was Edited by Neva Grant with research help from Casey Herman. Our audio engineer was Co Takasu Chervin. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Sam Paulson, Liz Metzger, Alex Chung, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, and Chris Masini. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This Hey Prime members. You can listen to How I Built This early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts.

2 (1h 7m 57s):
If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built This merch and gear at Wondery shop.com.

4 (1h 8m 5s):
Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at Wondery dot com slash survey.

Mary's Gone Crackers (1h 8m 12s):
Hey, while we're taking a short little break here, I wanna take a minute to tell you about an episode of How I Built This that we released a few weeks ago. It's about the brand Mary's gone crackers. So after being sick most of her life, Mary Walner was finally diagnosed with Celiac's Disease at age 43 in the early nineties. Trying to live a gluten-free life was pretty hard. So with no good bread alternatives to turn to, Mary decided to create her own. She made great tasting gluten-free snacks that she could carry with her so she wouldn't go hungry when her friends and family were out eating pizza or you know, other bread. I really love this interview with Mary because it sheds a lot of light on a common thread I see with a lot of successful brands, which is that by solving her own problem, Mary discovered that millions of other people shared that problem as well. You can find this episode by following How I Built This. And scrolling back a little bit to the episode, Mary's Gone Crackers or by searching Mary's Gone Crackers. That's M A R y SS G O N e crackers, wherever you listen to podcasts.