0 (0s):
Support for NPR and the following message come from VSP, vision care. Isn't it. Time we say thank you to our eyes for working hard for us every day. Thank your eyes by enrolling in a vision plan on your own today. Learn more@vsp.com. Hey, it's guy here calling on all of you to join us. This may, for the, how I built this summit at home from May 24th to the 27th, we'll be bringing you four days of incredible interviews with people like Bernay brown, Gary V Troy Carter, and many more and opportunities to connect with other entrepreneurs in our global community. Thank you to go daddy, the presenting sponsor of this year's summit and to our supporting sponsors, Dell technologies and bulldog online yoga for more information, head to summit.npr.org.

0 (54s):
So really quick, we're running a super fun episode from the archive this week. It's story of Julie Rice and Elizabeth color of soul cycle, and like many fitness companies during the pandemic soul cycle has moved lots of its classes, outdoors to rooftops and parking lots. You name it. But of course, soul cycle started as just one indoor space with Ikea furniture and a rickshaw out front for advertising and how Julie and Elizabeth grew it from there. It's a pretty great story and I hope you enjoy it.

2 (1m 33s):
I'll never forget. The first time I took my parents, they came to the studio. My dad looked around and my mom sort of opened doors and peeked under desks. And my dad looks around and he says to me, no showers who is going to come here. I've had visit. This is not a battle worth fighting

0 (1m 59s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built. I'm guy Roz and on the show today, how to women with no background in fitness, set up some stationary bikes, dim the lights, boosted the music and built a multi-million dollar business called soul cycle. Okay. So imagine going to an electronic dance show, right? The music's throbbing, the lights are flashing. The DJ is twisting the knobs and his computer. Everyone is moving to the music, turning and swaying and sweating and oh yeah, you are doing all of this on a stationary bicycle.

0 (2m 45s):
That basically is soul cycle and indoor cycling business that grew from one little studio in New York in 2006 to nearly 90 today. And when it sold to a larger company, about 10 years after it started, the founders walked away with $90 million each. And if you haven't heard of soul cycle, well, it's one of those fitness companies that people get super excited about. Like, if you have a friend who happens to be a, <inaudible> be careful because once they get started, they can go on and on about the celebrity style instructors, the scented candles in the studio, the merge, the music in that sense of loyalty of near tribal devotion is kind of what the founders of soul cycle envisioned when they set out to build it.

0 (3m 34s):
Julie Rice and Elizabeth Cutler met in New York in 2005. At the time Julie was working as a talent agent and Elizabeth was doing acupuncture and real estate on the side. They were both in their thirties and both of them married with young children at home, but they were also hungry to start something new in their lives. Here's Elizabeth.

3 (3m 57s):
After our second daughter was born, I started to really have this strong entrepreneurial urge and I really wanted to dig into something. And I kept on thinking about the struggles that I had gone through and having the kids and how much way to hit gain and how difficult it was for me to lose it. And I joined gyms. I went everywhere. I begged friends of mines who belonged to other gyms to take me as their guests. So I could try the classes. I really wanted to find my class and I couldn't find it. What was,

0 (4m 25s):
What was wrong with them,

3 (4m 27s):
For me? What was going on in there? It just wasn't inspiring. People would play the same playlist over and over. They would phone it in, it was super boring. It was, I remember somebody yelling at me, pretend there's an 800 pound gorilla on your chest. And I thought to myself, are you really getting me right now? Tesla, last name music

2 (4m 43s):
And terrible music

3 (4m 44s):
Themselves in the mirror. Oh my God. Yeah. You know, the bright lights and bad smells and people walking in and out of class. Exactly.

0 (4m 53s):
Julie did, I guess you kind of found yourself in, in kind of a similar situation is you had moved to New York from, from California, I guess in, in 2002. What, what was going on in your life at the time when you guys met?

2 (5m 6s):
Well, I, I really missed what I had had in Los Angeles in terms of an exercise community exercise. For me, it was social. It was a huge part of the way that I connected with people. It was a big part of the way that I spent my time bonding with my friends. We would go hiking. I can think about some of the most important moments that we had together. Having really deep talks, going up a mountain and then solving the problems coming down. The other side of that mountain. And I got to New York and all I could really find were gym classes and boot camps where you were definitely going to burn some calories, but not get much more out of it than that.

0 (5m 44s):
And truly when you, I mean, you were a talent agent at this time before, long before you meet Elizabeth, do you remember starting to think, I think I want to start a business.

2 (5m 57s):
I didn't think, oh, I want to start a business. But what I did think was in Los Angeles, there was some boutique fitness that was starting to happen in New York, nothing like that existed. And I had been, I had taken some indoor cycling classes in Los Angeles and I had been, I really actually loved it. And I had found a community in a small studio there. And because I had been in a business where, you know, I built

0 (6m 23s):
Businesses out of people. I kept thinking about how this could be different and how could this could be marketed differently and positioned differently. And what would make this unique? And it could be about empowerment rather than about putting pressure on yourself. And so it wasn't that I just had this need to start a business. I had a need for a very particular business. It was really more about a need for a product than it was. Oh, I just want to be an entrepreneur. Julia, a lot of people have ideas, right? Like, like I I've walked into like kombucha shops and thought I could do a better kombucha shop than this. You know, I, and then I might talk to a friend say, you know, I, I just, I kind of want to do a Caboolture shop, but then I just move on and I keep doing my shows.

0 (7m 4s):
Like, did you start to say to people, I I'm really intrigued about like doing a cycling studio. They have these in LA. And I think I kind of want to do one would, is that what happened? Did you start to talk to people?

2 (7m 16s):
I did. I started to say at first to my husband who told me I was insane. And then to my parents who told me that I had good health insurance and then to a couple of friends who told me that, you know, they loved the gyms that they belong to. And why would anybody ever do something like that? But it was one of those things that just would not go away from me. It was one of those things, especially because exercise was such a daily ritual of mine that every day I would wake up and try some sort of an exercise, leave, feeling unfulfilled and go back to thinking about this idea again. And remember what made it one, you know, one notch even more difficult was that I was talking about charging people to pay per class for this.

2 (7m 58s):
Whereas Jim's already offered cycling classes. They were on the buffet. They were included in memberships. There were plenty of them around,

0 (8m 6s):
Got my cycling class and the, my gym. Exactly. And Elizabeth in parallel, the parallel universe you were living in also in New York city, not knowing Julie, were you thinking, Hey, we can, I don't want to do a cycling studio or was it much more sort of abstract in that? No,

3 (8m 26s):
I was thinking that I wanted to start an indoor cycling studio because what I felt like I could find on that bike wasn't out there and I started researching what it would take to open one. And I, I started talking to a couple of friends and one of my friends said, you know, I really don't have the heart to tell you this, but you know, spinning is over, over

0 (8m 46s):
It's over 2005, it was over, it

3 (8m 49s):
Was over, it had, it had been really popular in the 1990s for outdoor cyclist, but had, and it had mainstreamed in gyms for sure. But that trend had kind of fallen off and he just said, there you'll never make anything happen out of this

0 (9m 5s):
Were either of you guys, like, I don't know, a little bit embarrassed when, when you would talk about it and people kind of sort of say, eh, that concept just doesn't make sense to me.

3 (9m 16s):
I was not embarrassed. I was for sure doing this. This was a calling. This was definitely happening. My husband told me I was going to ruin my life and I was going to work 24 7. And I said, I I'm going to handle this. It's going to be fine.

2 (9m 30s):
Well, I was also not embarrassed. I had such conviction in this idea that this was something that was definitely going to work. My husband was definitely embarrassed and I can remember several times before we went out to dinner, he would say, please, don't talk to my friends about it. Don't talk about this weird thing. But I think for me, you know, it was meeting Elizabeth that really allowed me to take the leap and not, I'm not, I'm not as quite, I'm not quite as convinced that if I had just been on my own that I wouldn't have been, you know, like you with the kombucha shop, but

0 (9m 58s):
The two of you ended up meeting, how did that happen? How did you even get connected?

3 (10m 5s):
Well, I had been taking this woman's class and indoor cycling class out in east Hampton. And I tried to find one in the city. And eventually I ended up as a guest at a class at one of the clubs uptown in New York, which is near Julie's apartment. And I met this teacher that I liked. And I talked to her after class and said, listen, I'm thinking about starting indoor cycling studio. And she said, it's really funny. There's another woman who takes my class on Saturday. And she has been talking to me about the same thing, YouTube, we should go to lunch.

0 (10m 33s):
And so she said, you should contact her. And, and what happened like she gave you her number.

3 (10m 38s):
We went to lunch, all three of us and my husband. So the four of us had lunch and Julie and I started talking and we just

0 (10m 46s):
Clicked. Why would you like about her? We,

2 (10m 49s):
We S you know, we very quickly discuss, we both had babies that were the same age and we made some small talk. And then I think we quickly got to a conversation that was, that was even more philosophical than just what we wanted to open. I think that we fundamentally saw two different things. I think we both felt that exercise did not have to be torture, that it could be joyful. And that by creating a place that was chic, and that was aspirational and turning our instructors into more like spiritual gurus than being drill camp sergeants, we felt that we could really create something that people would value. And then at the same time, we could create a new product.

2 (11m 30s):
I mean, there was no marketplace in New York at the time, there was no opportunity to take pay per class fitness. At the time we were talking about 2005, there were some yoga studios, but other than that, you know, the model for gyms. And this is a lot of what we talked about. We talked about how the traditional gym model was take your credit card, charge you for a monthly membership, hope that you don't show up so that then you can add more people's memberships, you know, trying to understand what the utilization rate of your gym was. We said, you know what? We're so confident that we can make people feel good, that we are going to challenge ourselves every time, every time you come, you'll have a great experience because you'll have to pay all over again to come back.

0 (12m 13s):
So you're at this lunch and end, and what you say, Hey, let's do it. You just like, leave the lunch. And you're like, let's do this. Yes,

2 (12m 21s):
That's exactly right. Yes. Yes. So, so we leave. So we leave the lunch and, you know, I leave, I get in the cab, my cell phone rings and Elizabeth says to me, okay, here was here's, what's going to happen. I'm going to look for real estate and you research towels, and I'm going to call you on Thursday and true to her word, Thursday, the phone rang. And she said, I found something on Craigslist. It's on west 72nd street. You should meet me there tomorrow. And on Thursday, we met at the studio at what would become our first soul cycle studio. It was an old dance studio that they were subletting for five years. We could take a sublease on it. The entire thing was about 1200 square feet. And we walked through and we looked at each other and we said, it's perfect.

2 (13m 3s):
Yes.

0 (13m 4s):
Signed a five-year lease. Like pretty soon after, yes.

2 (13m 9s):
Within three weeks we had the lease signed,

0 (13m 12s):
However, for, okay. Let's just pause for a sec because I want to break this down a little bit. Like, did you do formal partnership agreement? Did you do all that stuff or was it still pretty much handshake like you and me are partners. We're just going to figure it out. So

2 (13m 27s):
At lunch that day, the woman that introduced us, the Ruth ARF, the fitness instructor, our third partner and I were friends. And so we decided at the end of the lunch that we each brought a really particular skillset to the business and she was going to be the fitness instructor. And she was going to help us to find other teachers and help us to create the program. Cause neither of us had ever created anything in fitness before. And Elizabeth was going to work on all of our design and all of our business and all of our technology. We were going to work on the branding together, Elizabeth and I, because since we had such a similar vision and I was going to work on the people, I was going to do the PR I was going to train the studio staff.

2 (14m 9s):
And so that's the way that we were going to divide the business.

0 (14m 11s):
And Julie, did you have any money at that time? Did you have like Wealthery personal, you know, like a huge stash of cash.

2 (14m 20s):
So ironically I had actually no cash at all. One of my very close girlfriends had just gotten married and she had one of the great last, the last great rent control apartments left in New York city. It was a first floor. Walk-up over Harry's burrito on the corner of west 71st street and Columbus avenue. And she was nice enough to say, you know what, for, for as long as we can keep the lease, why don't you take the sublet? And so it was 900 and something dollars a month. Wow. And that apartment really allowed me to take that kind of a risk. We had a five month old baby at the time. So you quit your job. I did well, I worked, I worked while we planned soul cycle.

2 (15m 1s):
We met in January. We met in January and we opened SoulCycle in,

0 (15m 5s):
In April. And did your husband, Julie, did he continue? Did he have a job at the time?

2 (15m 10s):
It was actually perfect timing because he had just gotten a new job. He had just figured out a way to switch careers. We had this $900 a month apartment. And I remember at the time, once we made the decision to start soul cycle, we cut up our credit cards. And on every Sunday night, Spencer would hand me an envelope with $200 in cash. And he would say, here's your money for the week? And so, you know, I remember with my baby folding up the stroller and taking it on the Crosstown bus and, you know, Starbucks, wasn't really an option. I drank a lot of coffee at home and all of those things, it's, it's amazing. It's, it's, it's amazing how quickly $200 can go in New York city when you're walking down the street every day.

2 (15m 50s):
But, but we did it. We really, we, we, we did it because it was something that we really had. Well, I really had conviction of, and he's always been really supportive.

0 (15m 59s):
Hmm. And so, okay. So Julie, you were at 200 bucks a week and Elizabeth, did you, did you guys have any money?

3 (16m 7s):
I had ha I had bought a little studio apartment and I had recently sold it. So I had about a hundred thousand dollars. And then Allen, my husband had a great job working at this investment bank called Lehman brothers. And so I said to him, I said, I really want to start this business. And he said, I, I get it. If you want to do it all, you know, let's, we can do it. So we took $250,000 and, and started and started SoulCycle with that. And we built the studio out and expensively, we built a website, you know, reasonably inexpensively. I feel like we got a lot done for $250,000. And the worst thing that could happen was that in five years, Julie and I could look at each other and say, you know what, we tried it and it didn't work, but we would give it, we would, we would commit to that period of time.

3 (16m 56s):
So in that way, it didn't really feel like a huge risk. Yeah.

0 (16m 58s):
Yeah. That's what I'm curious to you. When you sign a five-year lease, what do you, what do they want from me? How much do they want? Like six months rent? Like how does that,

3 (17m 7s):
I think we gave them three months security and the rent on the, on the studio was $5,000 a month.

0 (17m 14s):
Oh, so that's upper west side in New York. That's not bad. Well,

3 (17m 18s):
It was hidden in the rear lobby of a former mortuary. So it was not a very fancy location.

0 (17m 25s):
You w and then what, like how, I mean, you had to start get the bicycles and get furniture. And like, that must have taken some time. Right.

3 (17m 36s):
It took a little time, but it really didn't take that much time. There wasn't a huge build out to do. Which one is it? One of the things that we liked about the space and our front desk, our original front desk had no access to it. So you either had to climb over it to get behind the front desk or vice versa, or you had to walk through the studio to get behind the front desk. It was, it was very,

2 (17m 55s):
We built, we built from Ikea. You know, we, we,

3 (17m 59s):
We had a, we had a huge mural on the back wall that was reflected in the mirror that was of a, a road, probably Texas, like one of those roads that just goes straight into the horizon. And we thought that that was like a metaphor for the journey of getting on the bike.

2 (18m 14s):
And we planted some bamboo outside the window. So then the press release, we could write that we had a Zen garden. Oh, I see.

0 (18m 20s):
I got you. Okay.

3 (18m 21s):
I forgot about the bamboo.

0 (18m 23s):
And how did you come up with the name soul cycle?

2 (18m 26s):
It was neither of us. We had

3 (18m 28s):
Been thinking for a long time, we had a lot of really bad names. And

0 (18m 31s):
Then we had like, what, what were some of the names?

3 (18m 33s):
MYC. They were not good. They were not good at all. And I kept on saying to my husband, I, Willie, I kept on describing that the, the feeling that I wanted to have when I was on the bike. And when I got off the bike and he got out of the shower one day, he's like, what about soul cycle? And like

0 (18m 48s):
That, what about soul cycle?

2 (18m 50s):
Yes. Yes.

0 (18m 51s):
I was like that. You could have paid a branding company, a hundreds of thousands of dollars. He was just like shaving in the mirror. And it was like one of my soul cycle.

3 (18m 58s):
That's what happened

0 (18m 60s):
Before you even opened the doors, like in this period of time where you're like between, when you sign the lease and when you're building it out and building the Ikea furniture and did the three of you like sit around and say, this is going to be huge. We are going to French. What's going to be all over the country. It's going to be massive. Like, was that your ambition or was your ambition to just make this one studio and see what happens?

2 (19m 22s):
All three of us were ambitious. I don't think you can ever say we weren't ambitious. But when Elizabeth and I first saw the space, we went across the street to Starbucks and we wrote our business plan. And our business plan was that if we could see between 75 and a hundred people

3 (19m 34s):
A day, Julie, it's always

2 (19m 35s):
Been a hundred. I always thought it was 75, a hundred, a

0 (19m 38s):
Hundred people

2 (19m 39s):
Now. So, you know, we brought on the back of this napkin, which Elizabeth has framed in her office. And it, it, it shows that if we can see a hundred riders a day, you know, that we would have enough money to pay our rent, to pay the minimal staff that we had to keep the lights on and have a little bit of money leftover to pay for, you know, people that were helping us raise our children. And that was really our goal.

0 (20m 1s):
Yeah. So explain something to me, because of course, soul cycle was not the first spin cycle studio in the world that they existed. Not, not quite like they do today, but what I mean, what was it that was going to make it different? I mean, I know you talk about community and I get that, but what specifically, like, was the music going to be different? Was the, were the lights going to be different? Was the, the, the, the, the design, the, like the experience, how was the experience going to be so different that people would have to go to SoulCycle because they just needed it? Well,

3 (20m 37s):
The first thing was that we were going to have technology so that people could, it was 2006. So this sounds crazy to talk about now, but there were very few booking apps out there, if any. And we felt that in order to become part of someone's life, we had to help them plan their weeks. So we worked on this booking app. You get on your computer at noon on Monday, and you could sign up for your classes for the week. And in that way, you would know what you had to look forward to. The second part was the people who worked at the front desk were trained to remember your name, to ask about your vacation, to remember if you liked your water room, temperature or cold. We wanted people to cross the threshold of, of the studio and feel like they had gone from the crazy world of hustle that is New York city, and that they had walked into a place that was fun.

3 (21m 29s):
That was a sanctuary. And that was a place that welcomed everyone

0 (21m 32s):
Before you even opened up. How, how did you determine what you would charge? Did you look at like, like, w did you look at like how many people you needed per day and rant, and like, how did you come up with a number? And then what, what initially were you, were you charging?

3 (21m 48s):
We started at $27 a class. We thought about it as two cocktails or inexpensive personal training, because we w we thought it was actually important for people to pay for the class because people value what they pay for. And if they pay for something, then when they walk in the front door and they participate, they're going to bring something different than if they aren't paying for it.

0 (22m 12s):
And Julie, what was the idea that just like open the doors and put some balloons out and hope people come in, or, or how did you get even get people to, to know that this was gonna be,

2 (22m 23s):
So we did a few things. We, we made postcards and we went door to door. I remember pushing my baby carriage around the upper west side and sort of, you know, making friends with doorman, hoping that would let me in and put flyers and mail rooms and asking other business owners, if it would be okay if I left some postcards near their counters. But then we had one other plan, which was when we were all done building the front desk and we'd saved enough money so that we had enough of a run rate for a year. Elizabeth looked at me and said, okay, we have $2,500 leftover, what do you want to do for marketing? And so we decided that we were going to make a t-shirt at the time, people were just starting to come around to the concept of swag. And we printed this yellow camouflage t-shirt with the logo of the wheel on it.

2 (23m 5s):
And, and it said soul cycle over it. And I remember taking the first t-shirt out of that batch. And I looked at Elizabeth and I said, you know, one day it's not even going to need to say soccer, SoulCycle. It's just going to be like the Nike swoosh. People are just going to know what it stands for.

3 (23m 18s):
And we were like, yeah, that's

2 (23m 19s):
Definitely going to happen. And so we decided, we decided that we would make 250 t-shirts and we would try to get, you know, the 250 coolest people in New York city to wear them so that there could become some sort of brand recognition looking back on it. It's kind of funny to think that 250 of anything could make an impact on. And so we put on cute outfits and we thought, oh, great. Today's the day that we're going to deliver the package to the editor of glamour, thinking that somebody was going to let us upstairs to handle liver and package and little, did we know that we would now spend the next two weeks in cars getting, you know, rerouted from, from front mail desks to back alleyways, where you're allowed to actually drop off packages that may or may not ever make it upstairs.

0 (23m 59s):
So then you, I guess you, you finally get ready to open that's right?

2 (24m 4s):
Yeah. April 26th, 2006. And I'll never forget. The first time I took my parents, they came to the studio. My dad looked around and my mom sort of, you know, open doors and peeked under desks. And my dad looks around and he says to me, no showers who is going to come here, I've had visit. This is not a battle worth fighting.

0 (24m 29s):
Why don't we come back, have Julie Rice and Elizabeth Cutler grew that no shower, bike studio into a big business, why they sold it and what it was like to leave it all behind them, stay with us. I'm guy Roz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, checker, want to diversify your workforce and change the future studies show that employment is the number one factor in reducing recidivism fair chance. Hiring provides a path to employment for 70 to a hundred million qualified Americans choose checker for fast, accurate, and fair background checks that give people a fair shot at their futures.

0 (25m 17s):
Learn more@checkr.com slash NPR support for how I built this and the following message come from. Weeks' e-commerce the international e-commerce platform. Weeks' e-commerce enables online stores to sell to customers worldwide in local languages and currencies with multi-lingual storefronts and in cart currency conversion sell globally to grow your revenue and give customers a local shopping experience in their own currency and language, go to wix.com/ e-commerce today, and join more than 700,000 active stores selling worldwide.

0 (26m 0s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's 2006 and Elizabeth Cutler and Julie Rice have just opened their first soul cycle studio in New York. And they're facing a problem that many brick and mortar businesses face getting people on the street to actually take notice and come in. So Julie and Elizabeth, they had to get creative.

2 (26m 24s):
Elizabeth bought a rickshaw on eBay, and she spray painted the rickshaw yellow and silver. And we put a sign on it that said soul cycle with an arrow pointing to the front door,

0 (26m 35s):
Because you put this on the, on the

2 (26m 37s):
Sidewalk, on the sidewalk because, you know, we didn't have a sign. And so if, if you know, starting a business in New York city, without the ability to use the density of the passer buyers on the street is sort of a disadvantage.

0 (26m 49s):
And you did not have a sign because why?

2 (26m 52s):
Because when we had signed our lease, we had sort of, our landlord had pulled a bait and switch. When he told us he had a sign, he meant that it would be on an interior door, in the rear,

0 (27m 1s):
The exterior sign on the building because the building would not allow it correct.

2 (27m 5s):
It was landmarked. So we had no exterior signage.

0 (27m 9s):
So you took a rickshaw and said soul cycle this way, and you just parked it on the

2 (27m 14s):
Sidewalk. So we changed it up to a parking meter.

0 (27m 17s):
I see, right? Like a big chain lock. Like they would put us around a motorcycle. We did.

2 (27m 22s):
And unfortunately the community board did not really like the rickshaw in the middle of the street. So we would get a ticket for $65 a day for each day that the rickshaw was chained up to that parking meter. But what we, what we quickly did was we, we studied the traffic patterns outside because $65 a day was actually a lot to us. You know, some of our classes had nobody in them and some of them had two people that could be, you know, the whole price of the earnings of what we made on, on running a whole class. And so we learned that, you know, Saturdays, it might make sense to put the rickshaw out there because there would be a lot of traffic walking by foot traffic to, and from central park, but maybe Wednesdays around lunchtime on the upper west side, not so busy, not worth the $65 ticket. And so we would put out our marketing vehicle on days that we thought that returns would be good.

2 (28m 6s):
And that was that.

0 (28m 8s):
So, so this is a slow burn. People are coming in. And I don't know, it was like, Julie, was your husband like, Hey, you know, a little nervous, we got this apartment and I got this job and I'm making that much. And you know, you quit your job. Like, are you sure about this? Did he ever

2 (28m 26s):
Well, in fairness it was a slow burn, but the truth is in, you know, in business years we started to cash flow pretty quickly,

3 (28m 34s):
How fast we started cash flowing by the fifth month. So we're positive cashflow by month five.

2 (28m 40s):
And, you know, we, we did all the jobs ourselves and we certainly weren't out there, you know, buying expensive dinners, but we definitely began to make money.

3 (28m 49s):
And we, we also liked keeping it lean because it allowed us to learn every job. So we put ourselves in the position of understanding how the website worked, you know, what could work better there? How the, what was the functionality of somebody checking in? How was it for some, what were our cleanliness standards? Like how, what did the bathroom needed to look like? Maybe we just had to make sure we started doing checklists to make sure that when there was downtime where people were always doing things and because we were always doing things. So

0 (29m 18s):
You were cashflow positive five months, it's just amazing. So after, you know, you start to see people come into the classes and the classes filling up, it becomes apparent. You got to open up a second studio. So what'd you do?

3 (29m 32s):
Well, we weren't quite ready to open up a second studio, but Julie had the idea to open a studio up in the Hamptons in the summer, which was a great idea

0 (29m 39s):
The way at the tip of long island. Well,

3 (29m 41s):
Because we had a lot of, we were concerned about the summer business. The studio is located in a residential area, and we w as you listened to your customers, you hear them talking about what their summer plans are. And we realized a lot of people were going to be leaving and we wanted to captivate, keep them captivated with the brand. We didn't want them to get distracted and get interested in something

2 (30m 3s):
In New York city. A lot of people do migrate out to the east end for the summer. And simultaneously Elizabeth got a phone call from friends of ours, who had said that they had heard that there was this old barn that had housed an exercise studio before. And it was coming up for rent that summer.

3 (30m 22s):
It was a legendary was Lottie Burke. People had gone there for 20 years and then somebody was doing pole dancing there one summer. And that didn't really work out and it was going to be

2 (30m 30s):
Available. And Elizabeth and I looked at it and we said, you know what? This is a three-dimensional marketing experiment. You know, we had to rent houses out, out in the Hamptons to house our instructors and our staff. We had to be on top of our rent for the, for the actual fitness studio to operate this thing with our New York city organization. We needed to take houses and rent cars and

3 (30m 51s):
Illegally on the second floor for the first summer. And they had Nikes. So we didn't get to the cars and the houses until the second summer. Yes, that's true. I forgot.

2 (30m 60s):
We were having, we were having employees in the upstairs that were very scrappy,

3 (31m 4s):
But

0 (31m 4s):
How did you guys manage that when you're trying to run your soul cycle studio in the upper west side, and you decided that the next summer summer of 2007, we're going to open up in the Hamptons. Like, did both of you just like constantly go back and forth and back and forth? We did.

2 (31m 17s):
We made a decision that, you know, Elizabeth would spend a little bit more time out and run the studio out in, in Bridgehampton. And I was going to come back and forth. We were, we were actually talking today about how our retail operation actually exploded that summer. And we had this, this older gentleman on the upper west side who basically printed, you know, let's say you had a friend's birthday party and you wanted to print 10 t-shirts that said, you know, happy birthday, that's the kind of printing he did. But somehow we made him our printer because our quantities were very small in the beginning. And then slowly but surely people started to get fanatical about the SoulCycle clothing. And so we would design one collection a month. And I remember I would go to Harvey's office on east, on west 83rd street.

2 (31m 57s):
He had a cat that sat on his desk and I would say, Harvey, you know, I know that I only needed 50, but now I need 250. Can you get them to me by, you know, Friday? And every couple of weeks I would go back, the quantities would increase. And I would load up my car on Friday nights and bring them out to the barn at Bridgehampton with all the new merch. And we would, we'd stay up late on Friday nights and we'd set up the merchandise and I would stay for the weekend. And then during the week, Elizabeth would run the Hampton studio and I would run New York. And then we'd get back together on the weekends.

0 (32m 26s):
I need to take, like, I need to take a break from this interview, just cause I'm exhausted by the descriptions of this. I mean, you had this studio, New York, the studio in the Hamptons, you were making a line of clothing by the way, who is designing the clothing we wear like shirts,

2 (32m 40s):
Just shirts or no. So first it started with t-shirts and they don't want to t-shirts and sweatshirts. And then it went to t-shirts and sweatshirts and hats and tote bags. And then

3 (32m 46s):
It went on the leggings. I forgot about the leggings. Correct.

2 (32m 48s):
And then we, we branded leggings and then we went to, to sports bras. And then after sports bras, we went to athletic shirts. And I would say by the time the collections really got into full swing, which was probably about three, four years into the business. We were designing about 65 to 125 skews a month.

0 (33m 10s):
Unbelievable. Because essentially people are paying you money to advertise SoulCycle.

2 (33m 16s):
I always say that the merchandise at soul cycle is almost like having to buy the t-shirt from the best vacation that you've just been on. My mom still calls me when she sees somebody in this whole cycle of shirts. I don't have, I don't have the heart to explain to her the tens of thousands of people come to soul cycle a day. But yes, my mother still calls me. I saw somebody in a soul cycle.

0 (33m 35s):
Yeah. And so when, when, so when you opened up in Bridgehampton in the summer of 2007, was it also a slow burn or did people know about it? And w what happened?

2 (33m 44s):
That studio was a game changer for us in every way,

3 (33m 47s):
Much to do out in the Hamptons. People think, you know, the, all the kids were at camp and, you know, people would come out as if people are on vacation and the adults needed something to do besides drink. And so people would do what they did all day, but in the morning, everybody was at SoulCycle. It started at seven 30 in the morning, and it had ended at two o'clock in the afternoon. And on the hour everybody was there.

0 (34m 7s):
And that was profitable probably from day one

3 (34m 10s):
Day one. And then after that, we came back from that summer. And we had gone from being a neighborhood business to being a full city-wide location. People were taking the subways up from downtown several times a week. People were really coming across the park. We, we were like, wow, what is going on? And then we would walk out because our studio was in the rear lobby. We would walk out and we would see the town cars, and the SUV's lined up, like back to back to back to back. And this was before Uber. So, you know, fancy people would have their, have their cars and drivers and all the cars and drivers were lined up in front of SoulCycle. And the neighbors were wondering what was going on. And everybody was there riding.

3 (34m 50s):
And it was so fun

0 (34m 53s):
At a certain point. I don't know if it was at this point, but at a certain point, your original third partner, Ruth leaves. Why, why did she go?

3 (35m 4s):
You know, there's not much we can really say about it, but what I can say about partnerships is that it's just really important that everybody has the same vision and the same work ethic. And if you have those two things, you fight a lot of battles. And then, you know, your struggle is not internal. Your struggle is more external. And that's really where, you know, the F the focus needs to be, and, you know, with this amazing teacher and she continue to teach for us for years. And

0 (35m 35s):
Was that, was that a hard, was it hard for, for the two of you and when, when it happened, I mean, Julie, she was your friend. Was it like, like emotionally, was it difficult at all for that, that split?

2 (35m 46s):
Oh yeah. Look, I think it was, it was, it was very early on in the business. It was, we'd only, we'd only been open for about a year. And so it didn't, it didn't feel so dramatic at the time. The business was, the business was very small and also she, she stayed on for several years and continued to teach. You know, the really interesting thing is that, you know, after that happened, Elizabeth and I kind of decided that we were going to really invest in our partnership because we had, we had seen partnership not work out. And I think that we really felt like the success of soul cycle was a real combination of the two of us. And so Elizabeth found us a business therapist, coach.

2 (36m 31s):
And I remember she called me one morning. I didn't even know her that well, we'd been in business together for a little over a year. And she said, you know, I, I Googled in the middle of the night last night and I Googled NYC life coach. And I found somebody that we're going to start seeing. Okay.

3 (36m 44s):
And she was like, I'm not going to see anybody that you meant on that met on the internet. And I was like, let me explain to you. I am a very relaxed person. And at 1155 on a Sunday night, I'm having a full panic attack. I need some help. So I'm going to talk to her, let me see how it goes. And then if she's good, maybe you'll be up for meeting her. And so,

2 (37m 6s):
And so that started us down this journey of, we have an amazing coach that we still work with today,

3 (37m 12s):
And the person that we met on the internet that we met on the

2 (37m 15s):
Internet, and what was amazing was, you know, we really made a commitment at that time to saying, you know, there are going to be moments in this business when you see it one way. And I see it another way, or, you know, you want to grow another five studios and I don't want to, or whatever, whatever it is, but we are going to make those decisions together. We're going to really communicate about them. And I think that that was ultimately one of, one of the things that I think made the business most successful is our dedication to our partnership.

0 (37m 43s):
Hmm. Okay. So it's, I guess around 2008, and you guys decide to open up another studio in New York in Tribeca, but I mean, I mean, this was 2008, this is the start of the recession. So w w where did you get that money to expand?

3 (37m 58s):
Yeah, it was, it was interesting timing. So a couple things happen. One, I check the bank account after Lehman collapsed and I was, I mean, Alan and I share funds and I was so proud of him cause he had, he had sold, you know, when stuff had invested, he had sold it. And so I was like, oh my God, there's money in the bank account. It's so awesome because Julie and I need some cash to open Tribeca and I want to borrow $600,000. And he was like, what are you talking about? I've had like the worst month of my life. Are you kidding me? And I said, no, I'm super not kidding you. I'm going to pay you a huge interest rate. And you were going to lend me that money.

3 (38m 38s):
I tried to be honest with you. I tried to get money from other places. I had a friend that I grew up with that ran a private bank of one of the big, big banks in New York. And it was after the collapse and the feds are funding these banks. And I said, I need a credit line of $3 million. I can start with a million, but I need three. And they looked at me and they said, okay, well, if you put up for collateral, your apartment and equities, that equal the same value as the amount of the credit line, then we will lend it to you. And I was so furious. I said, how dare you do that? My taxes are funding you right now. I am not asking for that much money. We are running $10 million of cash from our, our, all of our transactions through your bank.

3 (39m 21s):
And you, that, that is your message to me. And they said, that is our message to you. Once you have $60 million of revenue, we can help you. I said, by the time we have $60 million of revenue, I will not need you. I got up and left the room, never forgotten. It was really stressful. I was so mad, but that's when I that's actually, when I called Alan and said, Hey, I checked the bank account. And I realized that there's some cash in there and we can probably do it for that. But it was tight. I mean, we, when we opened Tribeca, we almost didn't make payroll. We didn't have we, somebody called up to the office and said, oh my gosh, Elizabeth, do you know, we need to buy some toilet paper and the credit cards aren't working.

3 (40m 3s):
And I said, how much toilet paper do I have? And they said, well, we've got about 20 Wells. I'm like, that's great. Well, you better wait till tomorrow to buy the toilet paper, but we never missed payroll. And we always had toilet paper. And you know, that part, that part really worked out well.

0 (40m 17s):
All right. So you guys in, you know, you managed to open up a couple locations in New York, you're doing well ran 2010 competitors start to come up, including one called flywheel. And this was started by your former partner, Ruth ho w w was, were you shocked by this? Did it work? Did it make you nervous? Did it upset you that

2 (40m 41s):
That happened? Well when flywheel opened and they were going to become a competitor in the fitness space, I think rather than sort of freak out about it, which of course we did for, you know, the first year or so kind of monitoring the scene and what was going on. And,

3 (40m 59s):
And there were some new bikes that were coming out. There was a bunch of stuff coming on the scene.

2 (41m 3s):
It wasn't just them at the time. I think that, you know, look, we, we started of a boutique fitness marketplace and a lot of things were now coming into the market. People had, you know, beyond just flywheel, people had other choices that they could do per pay per class. So we were no longer the only option in that marketplace, but we really, we really took the opportunity, but we talked to our coach, of course, and we really took the opportunity to say to each other, you know, who do we want to be? You know, let's not react. You know, we always did things. And many times people thought we were nuts to do them, but we always made the choices that felt good for us.

2 (41m 44s):
And I think we really just tried to keep our heads down.

0 (41m 46s):
Yeah. I I'm, I'm really curious about the relationship between the two of you because trying to grow businesses is fraught and filled with tension. And, but it strikes me that that getting a coach to like, kind of like a therapist that you forced yourself to go and talk to together was kind of the key that, that, that, that really helped you guys develop your relationship.

3 (42m 13s):
There's no question that it did. I mean, I think that we also lived by this, this one thing we always said to each other high road, long view, high road, long view, we would never allow ourselves to get down in the mud and get dirty. We would, we would, we would do that if something needed, if something was, was broken and needed to be fixed. But once we did that, we really kept our eye on what was most important. So I think that, that, that's the, that's the piece that, you know, both of us decided mattered.

2 (42m 48s):
And you have to remember, you know, we actually weren't even the stars of this business. We haven't really talked about our instruction.

0 (42m 54s):
Yeah. The instructors were the stars. They were the face of the company. Correct.

2 (42m 57s):
So we were sort of, we sort of thought let's build the stadium, let's put these rock stars on this stage. Let's let them sort of, you know, be the faces of, and basket and the glory of, and change these people's lives. That was really what we were doing. We were building a brand. We weren't, you know, we weren't in it for either of our egos, you know, to the point where we really turned other people into the faces of the brand.

0 (43m 21s):
I think it was around 2011. When, when you sold a pretty big stake to Equinox to, to the, this huge sort of high-end fitness company, Y I mean, you had this great thing going and you were running it, did you, did you need like, need that money to, to further scale the business?

3 (43m 41s):
We felt like to have someone to have a strategics playbook would be really valuable. We wanted to expand to the west coast. And we felt that by being able to work with these guys, that it would, it would allow us to do that. And so we, we did do a partnership with them in 2011. Let's just be

0 (44m 2s):
Frank at this point, both of you are rich, you know, that you are going to have money and Julie for you, you, you didn't have a whole lot of money. Was it? I mean, that, must've been amazing too, to know that you were going to be financially secure at that point.

2 (44m 19s):
Yeah, that, that first part of our sale to Equinox was really that, that was life-changing obviously for me and for my family and, you know, beat beyond what we could've ever. I remember thinking, you know, the day that we actually got that wire to come through, my, my kids are good. And I I'll I'll remember the time that that was able to put them each in their own bedrooms. I mean, each child having a bedroom in New York city is a monumental, it's a monumental task, you know? And so, yeah, it was, it was truly life changing. W when that happened,

0 (44m 54s):
How many soul cycle studios are there today? 88. Good. Could that have happened without outside investment? You think

3 (45m 1s):
It gave us the confidence to do it? The truth is looking back. Yes. We could have done it. Could have done it. Yes, we could've done it, but it really gave us the confidence to do it. And sometimes that's what you need. I mean, I think that listening to people always say, entrepreneurs are such good risk-takers and the truth is sometimes you do take a risk, but a lot of times it's really terrifying. And we had a lot on the line.

0 (45m 26s):
So soul cycle did expand, but there, but I guess there was some tension after Equinox took over. And eventually you both divest you, you left the company and today neither, neither of you are owners of SoulCycle. Right? Correct. You own, you own not a piece of it. That's

3 (45m 47s):
Right. That's correct.

0 (45m 48s):
Is it weird to, to walk down the street in some city and see a soul cycle? And I don't know, know that saw yours

3 (45m 57s):
For me. I, every time I see a soul cycle, I still feel like it's a love child. And I feel proud of, I feel proud of the, of the energy that I know is contained in those rooms and what it, what it does for the people who opt into that experience. I will say that there are those who said to me, when we were getting ready to do our original deal in 2011, you know, selling a business is not like selling a child. I mean, you have children. This is your business in a very detached way. And I will say that that is super not true. I obviously didn't know fact-checking as to whether or not the person who said that to me or the people who said that to me had ever started a business because it is a child.

3 (46m 42s):
In fact, I, when we were, when it was funny story, we were PE people, somebody was coming to us early on in the business and saying, you should franchise. And I looked at Julian, I thought, oh my God, we already have four children between us. How many children do we? So we just kind of felt like soul cycle. Each one of the studios was like a child. And, and, and when we left, we, you know, we left a piece of our heart there because that's what you do.

2 (47m 11s):
I think Elizabeth's right. Look, I think that somebody should write a book for, for founders about what it is like to, to sell their businesses. You know, I, I think that there's, you know, there's, there's definitely a mourning period. There's definitely a peak, there's definitely, you know, a period where you spend some money and then there's definitely a period where you begin to think about, you know, what am I going to do next? Yeah, for me, it still is a really significant part of my day and my life, you know, more so as a customer than it is as, as somebody who founded the business, you know, I'm able to go there and sort of enjoy the product that we created for ourselves.

0 (47m 47s):
I'm curious, because a lot of, a lot of very experienced entrepreneurs listen to this show, famous entrepreneurs, but most people who listen are, are, are starting out, you know, or they're, they're in the middle of it. They're kind of grinding away. And I'm curious if you had to go back to 2010 and you had a crystal ball, would you have said, let's try to just do this on our own and not bring in any outside investors. Let's, let's keep bootstrapping this thing.

3 (48m 16s):
I mean, if there were two alternate universes, I would certainly play that out. But on the other hand, you know, we never forgot why we started the business. And like we said, we, we really started the business to create an environment for people that was like a secular sanctuary, where people could feel safe coming in there and they could burn their cheesecake from the night before, or they could tap into something tribal on that bike. And that was why we did it. We never, ever, ever forgot why we did that. Sure. It would have been interesting to kind of play that out. But the thing is, on the other hand, the way that it did work out, we, we still got to do all those things.

0 (48m 54s):
It may be, must be weird to go from this like fast paced, like really, you know, especially when you were co-CEOs you had a staff you'd people around, he probably every second of your day was scheduled. It was a team that was energy. And then like one day you wake up and you're like having coffee in the kitchen and you're like, okay, what am I going to do today? Like, is it, what was it like that?

2 (49m 16s):
Well, we're busy still. I mean, you know, we tried to catch our breath a bit and we, we actually, I remember saying to Elizabeth on the day that we made the decision to leave, I said, okay, but you have to make sure that we get an office together. So at least I know that we're going to have two computers and sticky notes, and we're going to have a place to meet in the morning. Like I can do this as long as we know that somewhere. There's an office where we have two desks that are side by side and we did it, we took an office and it was definitely something psychological about sort of knowing that there was a place where we could touch base with, with each other every day. And I think, I think we're kind of just coming up for air right now. I think, you know, for the first time it's like the two of us can look at each other and kind of, you know, it's like your, your eyes adjust to the light a little bit differently.

2 (49m 59s):
We were just having a conversation this morning about how, how much the world has changed and you know, what, what do you think the world needs now,

0 (50m 5s):
As you may know, I ask this question of everyone who comes in the show and I want to share with you, Julie, how much of, of what happened with soul cycle do you think is because of your intelligence and your skill and how much, because you just got lucky.

2 (50m 20s):
It's interesting, you know, in thinking about the next time around now that you know, so much, it turns out that, you know, the lesson that I would tell people that ignorance is actually bliss, right? We made so many decisions. We made so many mistakes, but we just kept going because we didn't know any better. Now, you know how to look at all those Excel spreadsheets and P and L and all that stuff, and you can make yourself crazy. But I think at the time, you know, what we didn't know helped us and we just trusted our gut and we went, and I don't think anything about it was lucky. I think the only lucky thing was that Elizabeth and I bumped into each other,

0 (50m 53s):
Elizabeth,

3 (50m 54s):
I mean, how do you top that? But I'm topping, this is not a competition. I think it was lucky that I got to meet that we got to meet each other, that I got to meet Julia. And then she got to meet me. I think it was lucky that we got to have these incredible writers who inspired us every day and get to work with people that we loved. And it was extremely high touch. We always had our, our, our office attached to a studio. We never stopped using the product. And, and I think, you know, that kind of effort that we would, that we brought to it created, I guess you could call it like a certain kind of cumulative magic that happened over the years that everybody participated in and created

0 (51m 37s):
Elizabeth Cutler and Julie Rice co founders of SoulCycle. And by the way, do you remember how Elizabeth says that her husband used to give her a hard time about opening a cycling studio? Well, even a SoulCycle really started to take off. He still had his doubts.

3 (51m 54s):
I could tell he was getting mocked at work because one day he comes home and he's like, if you guys ever make $10 million, I will run naked through the streets of east Hampton, New York on a Saturday in

0 (52m 11s):
July that he lucky he didn't make the bet. He

3 (52m 14s):
Made the bat. What? We never, we never, we never made him make good on the bed. You never know.

0 (52m 19s):
I made him do it now. Okay, let's do it next summer, Alan, this week, we're going to have him run naked through the streets of the Hamptons. It's going to be a video

3 (52m 28s):
Podcast. You're such a visionary guy like this.

0 (52m 32s):
Thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you're not a subscriber to the podcast, please do subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. If you want to write to us, our email address is H ivt@npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter, we're at how I built this or at high rise. Our Instagram is at how I built this NPR and mine is at guide dot Roz. This episode was produced by James DeLuise with music composed by Ramtin Arablouei thanks. Also to Liz Metzger, Ferris, safari, Derek gales, JC Howard, Julia Carney, Neeva grant, and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Janet Lou, John Lee, I'm guy Roz. And you've been listening to how I built this.

0 (53m 16s):
This is NPR.

4 (53m 21s):
The news is about more than what just happened. You need to know why it happened. Who made it happen, how it's felt in the communities. You care about NPR NPRs daily news podcast. Consider this gives you all of that. With context, backstory and analysis on a single topic. Every weekday, it's not just information. It's what the news means. Consider this from NPR

0 (53m 41s):
Support for how I built. This comes from 3m committed to protecting healthcare workers, globally. 3m employee. Chris knows that healthcare workers like his daughter may need to get up close to provide patient care. He's working hard to direct high performing personal protective equipment to hospitals and hotspots. So she and nurses like her can be protected while caring for their patients. Hear their story at 3m.com/improving lives. 3m science applied to life.

4 (54m 13s):
The news is about more than what just happened. You need to know why it happened. Who made it happen, how it's felt in the communities you care about. NPR is daily news podcast. Consider this gives you all of that. With context, backstory and analysis on a single topic. Every weekday, it's not just information. It's what the news means. Consider this from NPR.