0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

1 (9s):
What if the greatest tragedy of your life was just covered up? I have never seen any, anything like that before or after. This is the story of the worst marine on marine friendly fire in modern history. A story kept from the public. It's like, what did y'all have to hide?

2 (24s):
Listen to NPRs embedded podcast and its latest series taking cover.

0 (30s):
If car designers can make cars look like anything, why are there so many boring cars? Nissan dares to design what others won't. By approaching each project in a completely different way. Nissan Design gives you everything from the adventurous frontier to the Z's iconic sports car styling to the futuristic aria all in one brand. Each Nissan vehicle has its own story and identity. Nissan knows that thrill isn't just about zero to 60. Thrill should start the moment you see a car from the arc of the roof to the way the headlamp meets the grill. Every detail of a Nissan vehicle is designed to get your heart racing before you ever press start. Nissan knows what thrill looks like because they designed it into every vehicle they make.

0 (1m 12s):
Learn more about the 2023 lineup@nissanusa.com. If

3 (1m 17s):
You're struggling with stress, burnout, anxiety, or have trouble sleeping, cerebral can help. Cerebral offers 100% online personalized mental healthcare plans that include therapy and medication management. You can choose your clinician from cerebrals, vetted and trained team of experts, and attend all your sessions from the comfort and convenience of your own home. Get started with or without insurance and only pay one flat monthly rate. And for mental health awareness month, this may, you can get an exclusive 50% off your first month with cerebral.com/wondery. That's cerebral.com/wondery for 50% off your first month.

5 (2m 1s):
In the middle of my meeting with her, I could tell I was losing her and I just knew I was my one shot. So I said, you know what, Diane? Will you come with me to the bathroom? She goes, excuse me. I go, I know, I know it's a little weird. Will you just please come with me to the bathroom? I wanna show you my own product before and after. And she, she said, okay.

0 (2m 28s):
From npr, it's how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Ross, and on today's show, the story of how Sarah Blakely designed a new kind of underwear, called it spanks, and eventually became the youngest female billionaire in America. So when Sarah Blakely was growing up in Florida, she didn't exactly dream of designing ladies undergarments. She actually wanted to be a lawyer, but when she took her LSATs, she failed twice.

0 (3m 9s):
So after college, she got a job at Disney World as a ride greeter. And then in the early nineties, she got another job. It was selling fax machines door to door. By the way, did you ever feel like demoralized with all the, with all the rejection and just people sort of saying, you know, no soliciting, please get outta here, or were you was like, water off the duck's back.

5 (3m 27s):
Oh my gosh, no. I would feel very defeated. And many times I would get in my car and drive around the block multiple times, you know, just trying to convince myself to walk through the door. And sometimes I'd walk through the door and they were small offices where the whole office would turn and look at me at the same time, you know, and sometimes I would completely lose my nerve and just say, oh, sorry, I'm, I'm in the wrong place, and turn around and walk out. So I stumbled my way through it. Believe me, and I know this sounds crazy, but when I was selling fax machines door to door, I kept feeling like I'm in the wrong movie. You know, like, where's the director? Where's, where's the producer? This is not my movie. And I was really determined to create a better life for myself.

0 (4m 9s):
So how did working there like help you discover what it was you were supposed to be doing?

5 (4m 15s):
That that was when I first started wearing Hory Daily. And I realized and figured out what the control top portion of the Hory was doing for me in my clothes. It was really making my clothes fit so much better. But I had spent money on a pair of cream pants. I spent $98 on them, which for me was a lot of money. And they just hung in my closet unworn because every time I would go to wear them, you could see the undergarment, regular underwear left a panty line. The thong wasn't a great solution. It also left marks that you could see. And then the shapewear was, so, it was like the girdles were so thick and overdone, and I saw an opportunity for something right in the middle that would just create the perfect canvas undergarment for women.

0 (4m 60s):
And, and I guess I should say for people who have never worn spanks, it's just like, this is an undergarment made out of an elastic material that basically tightens and, and, and everything around your, your butt and thighs.

5 (5m 12s):
Yes. And so when I cut the feet out of my own control top pantyhose so I could wear those cream pants, the light bulb went off. And then I started pursuing the idea,

0 (5m 21s):
Like, how do you then start to build a business? Like did you have any money? Did you have access to capital? Did you have wealthy friends or family?

5 (5m 28s):
I had set aside $5,000 in savings from selling fax machines door to door. And that's what I started Spanx with. And so the first thing I did was started to research if the idea existed, and I went to the Georgia Tech Library in Atlanta every night after work for a week and a half researching every pantyhose patent that ever existed. And then probably on the seventh or 10th day of me being in there, some guy came up to me and goes, you know, there's a website called uspto.gov. And I said, no, what is that? I scribbled it down in my notebook. He's like, you can search, you know, put in a patent and it'll search for you. So that website became one of my best friends.

5 (6m 8s):
And once I determined that there wasn't anything that existed in a patent form, I then wanted to see if there was any market appetite for it beyond myself. So I literally went and asked one person, I went to the Neiman Marcus down the street from my apartment, went in and asked the sales associate if she thought anybody would ever want something like a footless panty hose to wear under pants. And her face lit up. And she goes, yes. In fact, I have lots of customers who've been making their own homemade version of that because there's no right undergarment to wear under a lot of their clothes. And so that was my whole focus group guy. I was like, that's it. Okay, there's a market demand.

0 (6m 52s):
Had you ever sewn anything in your life? Like were you, did you have a background in design? No. Did you know how to like, manufacture stuff?

5 (7m 1s):
No. What did

0 (7m 2s):
You do? How did you even start to think, figure out like what material you needed to use?

5 (7m 6s):
I've never sewn, I have never taken a business class in my life. I, I didn't have anybody in the industry or even know anybody that worked in fashion or retail. And so what happened when I came up with the idea is I just started taking other pantyhose and then I went to Hancock Fabrics down the street and all these different arts and craft stores and started trying to paperclip different pieces of elastic to the bottom and different pieces of lace. And you know, obviously I didn't get very far and my idea actually needed to be made on a machine, and that's why I really needed a manufacturer to give me the time of day to see if I could even make the prototype.

0 (7m 45s):
And in the meantime, you were, you were still selling fax machines, right? Yeah,

5 (7m 49s):
Because I needed the money coming in and the, the health insurance and all, all that comes with that. So I was working on my idea at night and on the weekends. And when I kept calling all the manufacturers that I found that were mostly in North Carolina on the phone and not getting anywhere, I mean, no one would take my call or they didn't, you know, I, I just learned from my cold calling days, you gotta be there in person. So I took a week off of work and drove to North Carolina and just started cold calling manufacturing plants.

0 (8m 18s):
So you just showed up and said like, make me a prototype?

5 (8m 21s):
Yes. Hmm. So I walked in the door just cold and just said, hi, I'm here to meet, see the owner. And they're like, and you are, they always ask me the same three questions they'd say, and you are. And I'd say, Sarah Blakely. And they'd say, and you're with, I'd say, Sarah Blakely, and you're financially backed by. And I'd be like, Sarah Blakely. And so you can imagine how that meeting went. You know, most of them were like, have a nice day. It's great to meet you. You know?

0 (8m 46s):
Were they just not interested in the idea at all?

5 (8m 49s):
Well, yeah. The manufacturing plants didn't get it at all. And I found it very interesting that all I was meeting with were men. And then it kind of became clear to me why they'd probably been so uncomfortable for so long because the people that were making them weren't spending all day in them. Hmm. You know? And so, and if they were, they were not admitting it. So I had a hard time explaining why this product was so important and they couldn't wrap their mind around it. I was basically coming in and disrupting an entire industry, had been looking at something in one way, and they were on a decline year after year, but they were making hory to be seen on the leg. Hmm. And I knocked on their door and said, guys, I just want your hory material, and I don't need it to be seen anywhere. It's actually gonna be hidden under clothes.

5 (9m 29s):
It's a new type of undergarment. So

0 (9m 31s):
How did you convince a manufacturer to, to take you on to make the prototype?

5 (9m 35s):
Well, it took a few visits to North Carolina and a lot of really persistence. They all sent me away at first. And a couple weeks after I left one manufacturer, Highland Mills in Charlotte, North Carolina, the owner called me and he said, Sarah, it's Sam. I have decided to help make your crazy idea. And I just paused and I mean, I was about to jump outta my chair. And I said, really? Why? Why the change of heart, Sam? And all he said is, I have three daughters. And so later I found out when I got the chance to do it, that he had run the idea by his three daughters over dinner. And they said, dad, this is actually a really good idea. We think you should give this girl a shot.

5 (10m 15s):
And he still didn't understand it or think it was a good idea, but he said that my enthusiasm and my, my confidence in how good this idea was gonna be stuck with him.

0 (10m 27s):
Did anybody know about what you were doing?

5 (10m 30s):
No. So when I came up with the idea, I kept it a secret. For one year, I did share my idea with people like manufacturers or lawyers or people that I thought could help me bring my product to life. But I was very careful right away. It was just a gut feeling. I had to keep it to myself because I believe that ideas are the most vulnerable in their infancy. And it's instinct to turn to your right or left in that moment and tell a friend or tell your husband. Yeah. Yeah. And you know, when you do that, instantly ego's invited into the mix and then you end up spending all your time defending it, explaining it, and not pursuing it. So I needed to be at the place where I knew I wouldn't turn back no matter what I heard.

5 (11m 13s):
I had invested enough of my time and I had enough sweat equity into the idea that I, I told people and the things I heard were, you know, well, honey, if it's such a good idea, why isn't somebody else already done it? Yeah. And well, e if it is a good idea, Sarah, you know, you're gonna spend your savings on this, and then in six months, the big guys will just knock you outta the water. And that was all coming from a place of love. But I feel like if I had heard that the night that I cut the feet outta my patios, I'd probably still be selling fax machines.

0 (11m 42s):
So once you started to come up with something that you felt was really special, like unique, remarkable, did you, did you begin the process of getting it patented?

5 (11m 53s):
I did. So I went to three different law firms. I couldn't find a single female patent attorney in the state of Georgia, and I even called the Georgia Chamber of Commerce, and they said, there isn't one. So I said, okay, well I'm gonna do my best to explain this to, to three men. Let's see what happens. And you know, I, they were very nice. They were not super impressed probably with the idea. And they, they all quoted me between three and $5,000 to patent it. So I, I decided to write it myself. And I went to Barnes and Noble on Peachtree in Atlanta and bought a book called Patents and Trademarks. And I wrote the patent. And then my mom's an artist. And so I asked her if she would sketch me in the prototype for the patent.

5 (12m 36s):
And that is the picture in the US Patent and Trademark office. I, I went back to the one lawyer who gave me a little bit more of time of day than the other ones. And I said, listen, Dan, I have written my own patent. I have done all of the work except for the claims. That is the part that I am not trained for. I don't understand how to do that. Please, I need your expertise. Is there any chance you would do it for a discounted price? And he was blown away. He goes, you've written basically the entire patent. Yes. For $750. I'll do it over a weekend and I'll write the claims portion of your patent.

0 (13m 8s):
So you, so then you got the patent.

5 (13m 10s):
Yes. But you know, there was a moment in this journey that was quite funny. I, when we were in the final stages of the claims, the lawyer said, Sarah, there is, I need to know what's technically in the garment from a fiber and yarn level. And I said, okay, there's only one person to call on that. And that's Ted. And Ted had become my friend in the back of the manufacturing plant in North Carolina. And Ted had the most thick southern accent you've ever heard in your life. I mean, it was intense. And so I called Ted on the phone, I said, Ted, my lawyer's on the phone and we're trying to finalize the patent. Can you tell me exactly what's in the garment? And he's like, yeah, there's 70% nylon and 30% lacquer.

5 (13m 50s):
And I said, okay, great. And so my lawyer and I are writing and I go, thanks Ted. And I'm up all night guy the night before, I submit my patent to the US Patent and Trademark office. And I'm thinking, how is there lacquer in this product? Like, how is that possible? So I called Ted the next morning and I said, Ted, it's Sarah, will you, will you spell lacquer for me? And he's like, yeah, L Y C R A. I went, oh my God, it's Lyra. Okay, okay. Okay, thanks. So I called my lawyer, I'm like, do an all change on lacquer. It's Lyra. And he laughs already. He goes, you know how fast you would've gotten a patents there on trying to make pans outta paint thinner? I'm like, yeah.

0 (14m 32s):
Coming up how Sarah got spanks into the department stores and into the closets of many women you may know, stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I built this from NPR Here on how I built this. I like to take a deep dive and learn about a company's life cycle. And of course, its business practices, the things companies do to become successful. And you know what matters a lot? One word innovation. It plays a huge part in how a brand achieves continuous success. And that idea innovation helps brands evolve and diversify their practices and products to meet the demands of their customers.

0 (15m 18s):
A great example of this is Columbia Sportswear. They have made it their mission to produce innovative products that protect you so you can do what you love. They've perfected their fabric innovation and the design of their performance fishing gear known as Columbia pfg to stand up to time out on the water, especially in the hot sun. But how did they do this? Well, Columbia PFG works closely with athletes and fishing guides to test out their products and provide on-water feedback. And that allows Columbia to make better products when it comes to quality, durability, and comfort. That's how Columbia was able to create the super terminal tackle vent hoodie.

0 (16m 0s):
It's made with Omni Shade U F 50 sun protection, which helps prevent sunburn and long-term skin damage by blocking harmful sunrise. Columbia PFGs innovative products and technologies allow anglers and guides around the world to stay comfortable and protected from the elements so they can focus on their sport and make the most of every day on the water. If you're interested in learning more about Columbia PFGs innovative fishing gear, visit columbia.com/pfg. Columbia pfg proud to protect you and the places you love.

7 (16m 37s):
Unlock the power of streaming TV ads for your clients with Disney's Hulu Ad Manager, the one-stop self-service tool for businesses of all sizes. With Disney's Hulu ad manager, you and your clients can reach engaged streamers, access an endless portfolio of premium content and launch a campaign within minutes. You'll enjoy choice and control with industry leading planning tools and a single dashboard. Get started today with Disney's Hulu ad manager at www.huluadmanager.com/stream.

8 (17m 9s):
Hey everyone, I'm Patrick Wyman, host of Tides of History, the podcast that covers thousands of years of recorded history, taking you back in time and placing you in the lives of those who came before us. With five seasons and over 250 episodes, there's something for everyone. If you're interested in the Iron Age, check out the entire season devoted to that era, which explores myriad topics, including classical empires like the Neo Assyrians, the Phoenicians and Greece's Dark Age, or listen to our deep dives into Renaissance Italy, the invention of news, the Protestant Reformation, witch hunts, and even the Black Death. And if you prefer more contemporary history, listen to our episode about the unparalleled rise of capitalism. Whether you are a history buff or just have a passing interest, tides of history will fill you with wisdom and wonder for everything that came before.

8 (17m 56s):
Follow tides of history. Wherever you get your podcasts, you can listen ad free on the Amazon Music or Wondery app.

0 (18m 6s):
Hey, itty, I built this from p r, I'm Guy Raz. So at this point in our story, Sarah Blakely has designed a new kind of shapewear and then she wanted to get it out into the market, but first she had to come up with a name. So

5 (18m 21s):
The name was a journey the, since the time I cut the feet outta my pantyhose till the time I launched it in stores was two years. And I had been writing names on scrap pieces of paper everywhere I was, you know, and most of the names were on the back of rental car agreements because I had great thinking in in cars and I wasn't getting anywhere with it. I didn't like any of the names and I knew it wasn't right. And then I sort of narrowed down my thinking at one point in time and thought Kodak and Coca-Cola are the two most recognized names in the world. What do they have in common? And they both had a strong K sound to them. Hmm. And I had friends that were standup comedians, and I knew that the K sound makes your audience laugh. Hmm. So I just put all that

0 (19m 0s):
Together. Ideas

5 (19m 1s):
I know, I don't know, but it's a, it's a known trade secret among comedians. And so I thought, you know what? I need to have my invention, have the case sound in it for good luck. And almost as soon as I narrowed my thinking down that way, the word Spanx came to me while I was in my car. I saw the word across, like in my mind, across the dashboard of my car, and I pulled off the side of the road and I thought, that's it. And I went home that night, I didn't tell anybody, and I wrote down Sspa and Ks and I went on uspto.gov and I typed it in and I sat there and stared at it for a while. And at the last minute I backspaced and deleted the K and the S and put in an X I'd read that made up words do better for products than real words do.

5 (19m 45s):
And they're easier to trademark. And even though it didn't actually have the K in it, it had still the K sound. And so I felt great about it, and the name was just right. It's just my product was all about the rear end and it's about making the rear end look better and no panty lines. And so the word Spanx was kind of naughty and kind of funny and a little bit risky. And it just all worked. And I, and I hit send and I think it was $150 with my credit card. And then a couple months later I got back an official certificate from the government saying that I was the proud owner of the word Spanx.

0 (20m 20s):
Okay. So you've got a manufacturer, a patent, and a name. How did you, how did you start selling it?

5 (20m 27s):
My very first account that I called on was Neiman Marcus.

0 (20m 31s):
How did you even get in there?

5 (20m 34s):
I called them guy, I just called him. I went in the Yellow Pages and I looked up the Neiman Marcus number in Atlanta and I said, hi, I'm Sarah. I invented a product. Can I come and show it to you? And the lady laughed and goes, ma'am, we have a buying office and it's in Dallas. I said, oh, well, what's their number? So she gave me their number and I started calling them and I just kept calling and trying to get to the Hosie buyer. And I called for days at different times and she answered the phone and I took my shot and I said, Hey, hi, I'm Sarah Blakely and I invented a product that is going to change the way your customers wear clothes. And if you give me a few minutes of your time, I'll fly to Dallas and show you.

0 (21m 13s):
And what'd she say?

5 (21m 15s):
She said, well, if you're willing to fly here, I'll give you 10 minutes of my time. And I said, great. And I jumped on a plane and I flew to Dallas and I was in the meeting with her, and she was this beautiful woman, impeccably dressed. I'm at the Neiman Marcus headquarters. I have a Ziploc bag from my kitchen with a prototype in it, a color copy of the packaging that I had created on my friend's computer and my lucky red backpack from college that all of my friends begged me not to bring. They said, Sarah, you cannot go to the Neiman Marcus headquarters with that Red East Pack old dingy backpack. I said, yes, it's my good luck charm. I have to. And they, they were really pleading with me.

0 (21m 55s):
So, so, so what happened

5 (21m 57s):
In the middle of my meeting with her, I could tell I was losing her, and I just knew I was my one shot. So I said, you know what, Diane? Will you come with me to the bathroom? And she just paused. She goes, excuse me. I go, I know, I know it's a little weird. Will you just please come with me to the bathroom? I wanna show you my own product before and after. And she, she said, okay. And she walked down the hall with me and I went in the stall and I had on my cream pants that were the reason I invented this without spanks on. And then I went in the stall and put spanks on underneath and came out and she looked at me and she goes, wow, I get it. It's brilliant. And she said, I'm gonna place an order and I'm gonna put it in seven stores and see how it goes.

5 (22m 38s):
Wow. And I couldn't believe it. I got in the car and I was shaking, and I called Sam from the manufacturing plant. I go, Sam, Sam, it's Sarah. I need more. I just landed Neiman Marcus. And he paused it. There was nothing on the other end of the phone for a, it seemed like a minute. I go, Sam, are you there? He goes, Sarah, don't take this the wrong way, but I thought you were gonna give these away as Christmas gifts or something for the next like five years. What do you mean Neiman Marcus just took it. I'm like, Neiman Marcus just took it and I need more.

0 (23m 13s):
Okay. So you are in Neiman Marcus. Are you thinking, all right, I've made it.

5 (23m 18s):
Oh my gosh. That is the biggest mistake that entrepreneurs make. That is when the work begins. First of all, I, I paid people, basically friends to go buy the product and create a buzz about it because I, I was like, you know, I gotta have these things move off the shelf or the buyer's not gonna give me any, any more chance.

0 (23m 35s):
Wait, you paid people to buy them?

5 (23m 37s):
Yes. I called every friend I had in all the seven cities that Neiman's sent the spanks to and called friends that I hadn't even spoken to since fourth grade. And you know, kind of like, hi, it's Sarah. Remember me from fourth grade. Do you mind going to the store and buying Spanx and I'll send you a check. Wow. And it was really tough because I was one item in a, in a department and a new brand, and I didn't even get a whole row in the hosie department. I got a pocket. So I needed to do whatever I could to maximize this chance. And I went to the stores and I would explain what the product was. I would demo it, I'd show that the before and after picture that my friend took.

5 (24m 19s):
And then I would stand in the store from nine when they opened until about five or six every day.

0 (24m 26s):
So you're basically doing everything.

5 (24m 28s):
Yeah. And I realized that one of the biggest challenges I had was that where my product was being sold in the store was an issue. It was being sold in the hory department. And my customer was in the shoe department and she was in the ready to wear department. And so I started realizing I got, I have a challenge, I've gotta get my product out of the department. It's supposed to be sold in.

0 (24m 50s):
So how'd you, how'd you do that?

5 (24m 51s):
Well, I went to Target and I bought stands, you know, for envelopes. Yeah. And I ran around the store and put them at every cash register and everybody thought somebody else approved it. So they kept them there for a

0 (25m 3s):
While. You were in like Neiman Marcus moving your like piles of spanks, like next to the cash register and they just assumed that that was like some higher up approved said yes, do that. So other than that, how, how were you letting people know about what you were selling

5 (25m 19s):
It? It was a lot of, a lot of hard work for me to get the word out. I mean, I've never advertised. Spanx is 15 years old and we've never done any formal ad campaign or anything. And so it's a very word of mouth brand. I

0 (25m 30s):
Mean, you had no money, you had to get the word out and you did things like I read You sent it to Oprah? Yeah, I

5 (25m 36s):
Did. I sent it to Oprah with a note and she turns out she ended up picking it as her favorite product of the year.

0 (25m 42s):
How did she even find it? In the piles of mail she gets well,

5 (25m 46s):
Found out that Andre, her hairdresser got him and put them in her dressing room and she tried 'em and put 'em on and has basically worn 'em every day since.

0 (25m 56s):
Wow. So when after she like picked, picked up on them, did it just like, did the order start like flying out the door? I

5 (26m 2s):
Was shipping pantyhose to women or the spanks all across the world, basically from my apartment. So that's an enormous opportunity. And then another thing, I made a decision that was really, you know, unconventional at the time. I decided to go on qvc,

0 (26m 17s):
The TV channel, the ch the Shopping Channel. Yeah.

5 (26m 19s):
And I had a lot of people say, Sarah, your brand is at Bergdorf Goodman and Neiman Marcus, you can't also sell on qvc, you'll kill your brand. And I just, I just said, guys, I'm gonna be the one on QVC and I'm gonna control the message and it's gonna gimme an opportunity to explain what this is. And I, you know, I felt confident in that. And they gave me five minutes of airtime and I sold 8,000 pair of spanks in five minutes. And that was after, you know, a year of standing in department stores across the country. And on a really good day, I'd sell between, you know, 35 to 70 pair in a day.

0 (26m 57s):
And, and sales must have been, must have like, kept going up because I read that like by the end of your second year, you, you made like, the company made like 10 million. Yeah. So did that feel, I don't know, almost feel like it was too much too fast?

5 (27m 10s):
It was great, it was great. I, I never was doing it for the money, you know, so I wasn't really that ever that focused on it. I mean, I can even remember after a couple years of Spanx, I was still in my apartment and my accountant kept trying to convince me to buy a house. And I was like, eh, I don't, I'm not interested. And my little brother was always calling and telling me different ways to spend my money and, and I just, it was really just for the art of it. Like I loved, I loved being able to pay my own rent and stand on my own two feet as a woman. That was a really important thing for myself. But it was really just, I love making the product.

0 (27m 44s):
Did you have, like early on, did you have people coming to you saying, listen, you've gotta scale up fast, you're gonna need money, let me invest in this company and let me help you figure this out. Yeah,

5 (27m 54s):
I did. I had all kinds of things coming at me in the beginning and still do, you know, 15 years later. But I remember one of the most interesting was within the first six months I started having several people come up to me and say, what's your exit strategy? And I had no idea what they were talking about, cuz I've never taken a business class. And it dawned on me that people actually start things just to sell them.

0 (28m 19s):
And you still own a hundred percent of this company.

5 (28m 22s):
Yes.

0 (28m 23s):
Did you ever think the company would fail in its first few years?

5 (28m 28s):
No. I was always nervous, but I was always so connected to the product. I mean, I was so, I was so creating this before it happened, while I was selling fax machines door to door. I was, I was thinking about it, I was writing about it, I was visualizing it, I was preparing for it. I thought, you know, I don't have the most money. I don't have a business degree, I have no idea what I'm doing. Yeah. In manufacturing or retailer, any of this, but I do care the most. So let's see what happens

0 (28m 56s):
When you see these, these things, when you see things like, you know, Sarah Blakely, self-made billionaire. Is that weird when you see that, when you, when you see that number, that word,

5 (29m 7s):
Yes. It's very weird. It reminds me of, in middle school, there used to be these things in the malls where you could go in and pick the magazine cover you wanted to be on, you know, like your friends. And we'd all go in the booth and we'd smile and then we'd be on the cover of Vogue or whatever and it just says, it feels very surreal to me.

0 (29m 28s):
That's Sarah Blakely founder of Spanx. 15 years on the company has continued to grow and has yet to go public. Hey, thanks for listening to the show this week. This, by the way, is our very first episode of how I built this. And if you liked it, please do us a favor and subscribe on iTunes and do us an even bigger favor and write us review on iTunes. It'll help get the word out. You can also write us directly at h ibt npr org or tweet us. That's at How I Built this. Our show is produced this week by run Abdel Fata with Ramine Arab Bluey, who also composed the music.

0 (30m 9s):
Thanks also to Neva Grant. Sanz Meshkinpour and Jeff Rogers, vice President for programming at NPR is Aya Grundman. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This from npr. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the first episode of How I Built This. By the way, have you ever found yourself in a conversation about race and identity, where you just kind of get stuck?

0 (30m 52s):
Well, NPRs Code Switch podcast can help. It's hosted by Jean DBE and Sha Marisol. Mira and Code Switch is a podcast that helps us understand how race and identity crash into everything else in our lives. You can find code Switch on the NPR one app and at npr.org/podcasts.