1 (3s):
I knew where the risk was or at least I thought I did but ultimately there's there's just risk embedded in between the coolers and going up against the big soda guys and trying to do something really different in terms of the ingredients. All of that just was going to be challenging. So yeah, it was terrifying.

2 (29s):
From NPR is how I built this show that innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm Gyros and on the show today help Bill creelman started out with a business plan to sell mail-order smoked fish, but instead ended up creating Spindrift and selling a hundred million dollars of sparkling water a year. So back in 2019 the World Health Organization revised its guidelines for sugar intake sugar. It turns out is actually worse for us than we thought and too much can be deadly.

2 (1m 15s):
Now. I say this by the way, as I finish this delicious sugar cookie my kids made last night. Anyway, the new guidelines now suggest adults should not consume more than 25 grams of added sugar a day now think about this for a moment. A single 12 ounce can of Coca-Cola has 39 grams of added sugar that is a day and a half of sugar in a can of Coke and if you go to the movies and get a 32 ounce

1 (1m 41s):
cup, you will burn through nearly

2 (1m 44s):
five days of your sugar allotment before you get to the credits. So what to do. Well, the obvious answer is drink less sugar, which clearly is advice. Lots of people are taking because the last year the sparkling water industry hit in all-time high in sales nearly two and a half billion dollars according to Nielsen and it's why the beverage aisle of your local supermarket is now jam-packed with Lacroix and Topo Chico and bubbly and Poland Springs and Waterloo and several other brands and it's also why big players like Coca-Cola Pepsi and Nestle are all pushing into the sector one of the fastest-growing independent Brands and sparkling water is called Spindrift and unlike virtually every other.

2 (2m 30s):
Our bubbly water brand out there spin drips water is as basic as it gets literally just a mixture of sparkling water and fresh squeezed juice, which may not sound all that Innovative, but it's actually an incredibly challenging thing to make because fresh-squeezed juice does not stay fresh forever and Spenders founder Bill creelman took years to figure out how to make it all work and along the way he struggled to find bottlers and Distributors who would work with them. The story of how he was inspired to create Spindrift probably begins much much earlier back in his childhood bills parents chose to raise the family on a farm in Western, Massachusetts.

2 (3m 11s):
His dad worked for the sporting goods company Spaulding his mom was at home with the family and pretty much all the food. They ate was local and fresh

1 (3m 22s):
the thing. I remember the most is just that all of the food seem to come from our farmer or the farms around us. So, you know, Had a sugar house up the street from us. We had you know milk there was delivered with a huge head of cream on the top, you know, unpasteurized we would make butter from that. I think the key learning for me was just a very clear idea of where our food was coming from because it seemed always be delivered from our neighbors or we're just off of our own Farm, you know, it was local and

2 (3m 55s):
available and just be clear. I mean, we're not talking about like the 1930s or 40s like I believe at the time of this recording you are 45 years old. So this is like the 80s. This is not that long ago.

1 (4m 5s):
It really wasn't and that's what I mean. It was really a choice. And you know, I'm not sure what the message was We were supposed to dig away from it. I would say my mom she loved this idea of being out in the woods and being on a farm and and surviving off of Nature and she was surrounded by friends and felt the same way and we had almost no rules. Honestly. We she had this Ausa V that you know have fun do your own thing and be adventurous? I think she sort of thought of the farm is our playground are self-expression. And I think the thing I remember is that the Farmland just kind of continued in all directions.

1 (4m 46s):
And so we have Farmers to the left and right and around us and even to this day this neighborhood and in western Mass is really still the same way. It's virtually unchanged today.

2 (4m 57s):
Do you remember how quiet it was at? Night from like December to let's say the end of March because I'm imagining there was so much snow. It was absorbing all of the sound at night and it was just silent maybe a little wind.

1 (5m 13s):
I remember that really keenly and I actually think of that often because now, you know in the suburbs of Boston, you know you that level of Silence that type of Silence it was really hard to find, you know, we would keep buy firewood. For the most part we had a big wood stove and when that fire would burn down to nothing. There was really no sound left in the house safe, you know, your breathing or the shuffling of you know of a

2 (5m 40s):
sibling was it an old house would like World wooden floorboards?

1 (5m 45s):
Yeah. There's an old ratty me just where you imagine a red Farmhouse Big Red Barn creaking floorboards for sure. So I guess you knew if someone got up during the night, but other than that it was it was completely silent. Hmm,

2 (6m 1s):
so a rather eventually your family moved off of that farm to the town of Deerfield, which is also in I guess in Western, Massachusetts and you went to high school there. Yeah, and then to college in Washington DC at Georgetown and when you when you got to college like when you were 18 years old, did you have like any idea what you want to do with your life?

1 (6m 22s):
Yes, and now I was kind of out of the sort of grasps of Western, Massachusetts, and I was really starting to do. First time think about what I wanted to do professionally and you know, I should mention that kind of in high school. And then as I started college, I was starting to work on the fishing boats off of the cape and islands

2 (6m 42s):
off Cape Cod or like Nantucket and Martha's Vineyard. Is that right? That's

1 (6m 46s):
right. And you know, it was just it was just magical, you know, you're on the boat all day you're fishing for whatever you could catch striped bass and Bluefish. And so what I got to do, Georgetown I really I was working in the Summers and then going to school during the year and I started to really sort of solidify crystallized. You know, what I thought I wanted to do which was kind of try to figure out you know business that would be interesting to me. So as I was finishing up Georgetown, I took my Coast Guard test and then eventually got my captain's license right after graduation.

2 (7m 23s):
And by the way why you were at Georgetown you met somebody who became I guess for suddenly became a girlfriend. Today your wife Bray is a

1 (7m 32s):
right. That's right. Yeah, very lucky. I'm to meet my wife Harley while we were Georgetown and we started dating and we were 19 and so we've been yeah together ever ever since. I'm not sure she quite knew what she was getting into way back then but so while I was at Georgetown, I took an entrepreneurship class in my senior year and she got to see me present my sort of first business plan. So I Has she had some sense of what she was getting into even then in the 90s

2 (8m 4s):
and what was your business plan that you pitched to the class?

1 (8m 8s):
It was called Nantucket Smokehouse. So the idea was taking smoked Bluefish and striped bass and other things and creating a Smokehouse out on island that we would then offer the products from all over the US turned out to luckily not an idea. We ended up pursuing but you know the seed was planted for Our all

2 (8m 30s):
right. See you you graduate from Georgetown and in 1996. And and what did you do? Where'd you go work?

1 (8m 39s):
So the first thing I did was go back out to Nantucket and actually continue now with my captain's license in hand continue working on the on the fishing boats, you know, I was probably my fifth year and so I went out there with an idea of kind of finishing that summer and then and then ultimately going out to the Pacific Northwest to pursue the smoked food world or at least learn more about it. And so my life Harley was living in her girlfriend the time was living in Seattle and we piled into her her VW and drove up the coast and basically just started hitting smokehouses and asking them, you know what the industry was like today like it they not like it would they recommend going into it and I'll never I'll never forget finishing a tour and the guy who is leading me on the tour pulled me aside and said, let me You favor never get into this business, you know fish it's fire.

1 (9m 34s):
You know, it is a shrinking industry, you know, it's nothing we would

2 (9m 39s):
recommend and was that enough to convince you it was at least enough for me to

1 (9m 44s):
second-guess it and so I am incredibly grateful for that person's advice for sure and business idea that ended up kind of coming out of it was a company called Nantucket Harvest and and talking Harvest offered. Cooked food items that were already being produced even though it ultimately long-term was not terribly successful. It was much better than where we would have landed,

2 (10m 9s):
right? Okay. So you're so you decide I'm going to go back to Massachusetts. I'm going to start a business where I basically what like Source food from Nantucket and create like a mail order business.

1 (10m 24s):
That's right. It was mid-90s Nantucket at all these The interesting producers that you know, I'd gotten to know some of them over the years.

2 (10m 34s):
What were they making or what do they produce?

1 (10m 36s):
Yes, so they had you know, it's 30 miles off shore. So it kind of has some really interesting Unique Products only really only available out there. There was already a smoked Bluefish Pate really Beach plum jelly, really interesting jellies bay scallops, you know lobster's ice cream. So our thesis was will people love these in the summer. I I bet they would love to buy them the other nine months of the year and we wanted to provide them with a solution to do

2 (11m 5s):
that. So Bill, first of all, who's we you keep saying we who's the

1 (11m 9s):
we so in this case my business partner was a childhood friend named Gil MacLean, so we had grown up together. He actually lived in the farming community in Leverett. And so I recruited him to join me in this

2 (11m 20s):
business and this is like really pre e-commerce, right? Because I can imagine today. We'll just have to put in some Search terms into Facebook and or like, you know, AdWords and Google and you could reach people like in an instant back then you had to like male these catalogs out and what and you and your partner would just like sit around and wait for the phone to ring.

1 (11m 41s):
Yeah. It's almost hard to believe really but that's exactly what we did. We started, you know with waiting for the phone to ring and then gradually kind of into the 90s and early 2000s. We migrated and more of a kind of a call center model, but we really were pre-internet. Towards the very end we were able to take orders online but really the bulk of our business was all taken by phone.

2 (12m 6s):
So you would set up like a storefront or like a office bring in stuff from Nantucket and you set up. Where did you set up your office?

1 (12m 14s):
So we set it up in an Old Mill Town and kind of the the Port City to Nantucket called New Bedford creme took a couple thousand square feet. We put in refrigeration freezer unit in we went to work in 1997

2 (12m 29s):
blur. What if the money to start the

1 (12m 30s):
business or we didn't is really this short answer I said some savings from the fishing industry and you know, our parents helped us out a little bit. But ultimately we didn't and so we actually turn to the town of New Bedford and not a few other a kind of economic incentive areas in Southeastern mass. And that's you provided our seed capital for us to get the business off the

2 (12m 52s):
ground. What do you mean you like applied for Grants from the

1 (12m 56s):
town? We apply for Grants from? The New Bedford Economic Development cornhole and they line us $25,000 to start the business.

2 (13m 6s):
All right. So explain to me what you are going to do. You're going to bring in bay scallops and and Bluefish pate and ice creams and like on boats from Nantucket and you were going to do what with those products.

1 (13m 19s):
Yeah, so we were excited about really kind of Storytelling around their product. And and so we created a catalog literally, you know for and then eventually to 16 Paige catalog featuring their products we would mail it out and the end of the summer is because the tourists were leaving the island and what we learned is that people really, you know, other than maybe a birthday or special occasion. The big time for mail order food was really kind of going into Thanksgiving and then you know for that all of December it was just crazy every day. We talk hundreds and hundreds of these things and drive them up, you know just as the UPS store was closed.

1 (13m 59s):
Using and for the loading dock was closing. And so yeah, we were we were literally receiving orders in the morning packing things by hand as much as many as we could get out and then we would sort of count our shekels at the end of December and hope to you know, we'd sort of broken even

2 (14m 18s):
it sounds like you couldn't really make a six-week, you know sales window into a sustainable business.

1 (14m 27s):
We never could it really ever, you know, and that was really the decision for us was do we stay with this kind of on this crazy annual cycle or do we try to diversify and it was really through that hard kind of thinking that we were fortunate enough for us to stumble on the wholesale side of the business which is to say the side where you sell to stores on a regular basis,

2 (14m 53s):
and I guess like when you started wholesaling products like at that point kind of You met someone who really set your business off in a completely different directions. Is that

1 (15m 4s):
right? Almost? Yeah. So one of the products that we are featuring in the catalog was called Nantucket offshore seasonings, and it was a dry rub for grilling. It was in a silver tin really colorful label on the outside and and it was started out on Island by husband and wife had kind of a cult following maybe a half a million dollar business. And so we were really fulfilling his customers orders in the beginning and what ended up happening which was really sort of unexpected for us is that he was a real creative guy was always thinking about different ways to provide seasonings and he stumbled in one day upon a cocktail seasoning so assault for margaritas and we put it in a 10 just like the other seasonings and suddenly the consumer just sort of woke up in it at the time cocktails were Just beginning to become interesting and Mark.

1 (16m 2s):
It was the time of Sex in the City and Mojitos and this sort of thing and the idea of like a colored salt on the rim of the glass was actually pretty new at the time and it was exciting to us and the consumers seem to think it was pretty fun. And so that's how we got into the business. All right. So

2 (16m 21s):
you have this company called Nantucket Harvest. That was an okay business, right? It was kind of was it barely profitable at its height was it profitable?

1 (16m 30s):
It was never profitable. You know, I would say Breakeven would be generous got

2 (16m 35s):
it. Okay, so but I guess like at a certain point you decide. Hey, let's just focus on these cocktail seasonings and and salts whatever and forget about the like the other Nantucket Harvest products like the smoked fish and the scallops,

1 (16m 48s):
right? Yeah, that's exactly what happened. So, you know throughout all of these years. It's really just about survival, you know, trying to find something that to keep us going. You know you Around and is really through a whole bunch of trial and error that we landed on cocktails. And and so we really ultimately got into the cocktail business as a result of the other businesses really not showing that kind of Promise.

2 (17m 16s):
So at what point did you say that this was this is going to be a completely new

1 (17m 23s):
brand. So what happened was two things one. Was it our partner that I mentioned it decided he and his wife. If we're sort of ready to move on and my business partner and I Guild just you know, kind of asked ourselves. Like is this something that we want to pursue on our own and we actually purchased him out of the business. So that was a big step and then kind of within that we recognize that Nantucket offshore seasonings may not necessarily fully represent our full idea and the opportunity and we sort of got together and and engaged a whole bunch of people anyone that would listen to A you know, we want to create a platform and really just focus on cocktails.

1 (18m 4s):
We want to be the premium cocktail business and we ended up calling it stirrings. We love the name and and ultimately that was really the big idea that kind of catapulted us into you know, kind of a national

2 (18m 17s):
brand and it wasn't just the salts in the sugars, which was really that was what cut you a lot of attention, but it was it was mixers and like so dozens of it. How are you coming up with recipes for this stuff? You just did you work with other people that you have somebody make it for you. Did you making yourselves?

1 (18m 35s):
So this is where I would say we knew enough to be dangerous. You know, we knew what a good margarita tasted like, I think and Bloody Marys, you know, I remember standing in my kitchen with, you know, kind of tomatoes everywhere and really the value of the brand initially was just in helping kind of demystify a cocktail and making it accessible to a much bigger audience. It's we saw that there was an opportunity if you made the product interesting enough visually and you know, the label was these were elegant consumers would proudly display it in there, you know, Spirit cabinet or fridge wherever it was and it really helped make the product much more accessible and drove a lot more interest and brand

2 (19m 21s):
awareness. I mean, was it pretty quick after you kind of created this line of products or strings that it is. Darted to make money

1 (19m 30s):
what happened is this ales really took off So eventually a number of of liquor distributors ended up bringing it on but it was a really expensive challenging product to make you know, just for us to be shipping it around the country and doing so we we were chasing Break Even throughout the entire business, you know, that food business is really like that. You know, you're always faced with the decision. Do we want to go after the next? All of growth or be satisfied with where we are and try to manage the more break even and I would say we were we chose to really sort of Chase growth and make the brand, you know, the cocktail mix right in the US.

2 (20m 14s):
But how are you funding the production of all these orders? Did you have to eventually raise

1 (20m 19s):
money, you know crazy enough. We really didn't we never took outside Capital at stirrings. We borrowed like crazy mean we were We leveraged personally, you know, I had you know, millions of dollars of notes that I was responsible for. We just tried to be as creative as we could and our supply Partners worked with us on terms and that sort of thing. So it was really sort of moving moving deck chairs around trying to figure out where to you know, where to go who to pay. And what day

2 (20m 50s):
do you remember how many employees you

1 (20m 51s):
had? Our high point was around 60 employees or

2 (20m 55s):
so. So because from the outside people must have thought oh my God yours. Swimming in cash here like you guys are so you're crushing it. But meantime, all of the revenue was going to just make more product.

1 (21m 7s):
Yeah, I think that was really challenging because you're you're exactly right you have you need a big team at this point we were showing up at everyone's sort of corner store or liquor store and yet we were from a kind of a business economics fundamentals perspective. We were just making payroll, you know, I can remember Ember wow being in the North End of Boston, you know hearing that we needed to move find money to cover payroll that was three hours, you know later in the day and having to find the cash somewhere so that absolutely was a huge lesson for us. Just how the Optics of a brand and the expense associated with growing, you know isn't necessarily sustainable out of just cash flow alone.

1 (21m 56s):
Even when you're on fire The Way We

2 (21m 58s):
Were All right. So you've got this product that's just you know all the rage and people are doing their Sex in the City Home parties and using your cocktail mixers and brand meantime. Neither you nor your partner are probably even able to pay ourselves that that much and I guess around like 2006 you get an offer from Diageo the one of the one of the biggest liquor companies in the world to buy you

1 (22m 27s):
out. That's right. Right. Yeah, there's huge portfolio and they were seeing the cocktail craze and we were lucky enough to get an article in the Wall Street Journal right around the holidays talking about how stirrings was helping to demystify cocktails and the next week. We got an inbound from their business development lead who said he was interested in meeting with us and talking about partnering up to ultimately pair their Spirits with Cocktail mixes so yeah, it

2 (23m 1s):
was they own like smirnov Bailey's Guinness. I mean some of the biggest beers and Liquors in the

1 (23m 9s):
world. That's right. You know, there was there was a lot of synergies between what we did and what they did, you know, they had this huge Network and 30,000 people and Distributors and marketers and we had a cocktail line that kind of went perfectly with everything they did and so So the prospect of working with his sort of global Powerhouse and selling not just in the US but potentially in around the world. I mean all of that was intoxicating in the plumbing was that we ultimately ended up selling them. I know a percentage of the business with the idea that we would then exit the business to them entirely pending kind of growth and trajectory of the business.

2 (23m 52s):
All right. So basically you came to terms and you agreed I guess to stay on for a couple more years. Before you left in 2000 you would leave in 2009. Is that right?

1 (24m 2s):
Yeah, so actually what was interesting to me back then was the idea of actually taking the business abroad to other markets. And so I actually moved now my wife and our two very young children over to London and lived and worked with their international team out of London for two years that was intended to be the term of the partnership. What ended up happening is in. Thousand eight the business and the partnership really kind of hadn't fulfilled the potential that we at all imagined and there were a variety of factors for that one was the economy changing the other was sort of the fit between their big business and our tiny business.

1 (24m 45s):
And so we ended up agreeing to exit the business to them earlier just because it made sense for both of

2 (24m 52s):
us. So so you walk away from Diageo and stirrings Early, they bought it for 25 million dollars. Obviously, you didn't get all that money and you got to pay taxes and all that stuff. But but you did pretty well you come out of that pretty well and what at this point. I mean, you're like 34. Did you know that you were going to go to the next on to the next thing or did you think you know, let me just kind of and just take some time to just breathe and I don't know what was going on in your head when you left

1 (25m 24s):
I was exhausted honestly, you know that point we had pulled. Word this agreement with Diageo, you know, which was sort of hard fought and not quite the result we expected. It really was a quite a difficult deal to to finalize and you know, I felt like I had been going for a long time at that point and I needed a break. I'm just curious. Did you

2 (25m 50s):
walk out of that that deal because like people listening might think wow, you know, he sold it to Diageo. He walked away with a few. Looks like Triumph, you know, it's he's pumping his fist. He's feeling great. Is that is that how you were feeling where you feeling great triumphant? This was awesome. I'm so happy that it turned out this way.

1 (26m 12s):
No, it was it was really hard actually on the team side. It was really hard despite some Financial rewards it was you know, it was really hard to sort of disbanded and then ultimately walk away from it. So I would say at this appointment for me was it me? Motivator though, you know, I was still in my early 30s mid 30s and I felt like there was a way to do it a whole lot better than what we had just experienced

2 (26m 41s):
coming up in just a moment how stepping away from one business gave build a space to come up with a whole new idea and then how he spent a lot of that money. He just made trying to make that new idea work stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to one of our sponsors who helps make this podcast possible Lexus you'd think a car companies greatest curiosity would be a machine but you'd be wrong at Lexus their greatest curiosity is you because they know the most amazing machines aren't inspired by machines.

2 (27m 32s):
They're inspired by people. That's why Lexus spends time to better understand you before they craft any vehicle experience the rewards of their Yosity that Lexus.com curiosity

1 (27m 45s):
Support also comes from Uber

2 (27m 47s):
Uber is committed to safety and to continuously raising the bar to help make safer Journeys for everyone for starters. All drivers are background checked before their first ride and screened on an ongoing basis and now Uber has introduced a brand new safety feature called ride check which can detect of a trip goes unusually off course and check in to provide support to learn more about Ubers commitment to safety visit. for.com safety The indicator is a little show that tells big stories about the economy in just 10 minutes. We tackle important topics like unemployment housing market and how Justin Bieber saved the Icelandic economy that happened NPR's the indicator from Planet Money listen now.

2 (28m 40s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2009 bill creelman is in his mid-30s and he's just sold as cocktail supply business to Diageo and he decides to move his family back to Boston from the UK. And for the next several months bill is kind of in a holding

1 (28m 59s):
pattern. I was I was sort of I would say in in receiving position waiting for an idea or a thought or an inspiration and I still loved being around food. I mean it was you know, I just get a charge out of walking down Main Street, you know looking at what's happening in the world observing people and what they're eating and drinking and I was really sort of paying attention. It's to the trends, you know more than maybe just an average person would and and so at the time I was a big Diet Coke guy. So, you know, the absurdity of is starting a really interesting meal and going out and shopping for fun.

1 (29m 38s):
Ingredients which is what my wife and I love to do and then in the same afternoon, you know drinking three Diet Cokes. I mean it just there it was at a certain point it became confusing really because the kids didn't understand why would you know two messages around eating healthy and then why they couldn't have soda, you know, I was having a hard time reconciling it and so my idea started to coalesce around soda and how there might be an opportunity to do something different

2 (30m 8s):
all Right. So you are trying to figure out something. I have to assume that you sign some kind of agreement with Diageo that you could not do anything in the cocktail space. Right? I mean, that's usually how these things

1 (30m 18s):
go. That's right. Yep,

2 (30m 20s):
but you could do something in the beverage space that wasn't and you knew a little bit about beverages given that you were selling cocktail mixers.

1 (30m 30s):
Yeah, that's exactly right. And you know, I was still around my team, you know, so stirrings was still kind of going as a business now within Diageo. And I think it was hard to ignore backed and the kind of soda Challenge and so you'll recall this is when sodas were getting pulled out of public buildings and taxes were starting to get levied. And

2 (30m 51s):
so this is like mm around 2010, right? Yep. 2009 mm. Like I think New York was trying to get was considering Banning like the 32 ounce drink, for

1 (31m 1s):
example, exactly right it was Super exciting for me to start to think like what is going to happen with this decline in soda or soda is going to go away. It's carbonation going to go away and what's the root cause of all this is it sugar is it diet? And so that puzzle that idea was just hard for me to

2 (31m 25s):
ignore. All right. So meantime, you are a parent right and and you've got kids and like most parents. No and play, you know you prefer that they not drink soda because it's going to rot their teeth and it's really bad for them and they won't eat their dinner, but just full disclosure. I do let my kids have sewed on vacation. So in your mind you have this idea. Maybe there's something in soda and then how does it what's the first step you take towards trying to make something

1 (31m 55s):
well, so I so going back to my childhood. I mean, I was really interested in it ingredients, you know, I started to look at taking reeling greedy ants that you know something you would start a meal with a lemon and orange grapefruit and what if this could become the base for you know, a sparkling beverage and so I was I was in my house where the Sodastream I was cutting up fruit and squeezing it and seeing how it responded and settled and carbonated water and tasting it with my wife and our kids and I mean the idea is not complicated. Everyone has lemons and you know Has access to sparkling water, but the flavor that the disc created was just as anyone that sorted a sparkling water or you know with a wedge of lemon at lunch or whatever.

1 (32m 46s):
I mean, it really is quite unusual as a lot more dimension of flavor. It's got a little bit of sweetness a little tart earthiness to it. It's very different than what was out there. And so I began to research whether this was a unique idea or not or something that had been done before. Or and that was really the Genesis of

2 (33m 7s):
Spindrift so that I mean that is literally like the conversation you started to have in your head with yourself. Like wait, this is great. Why isn't this a product available for sale?

1 (33m 18s):
Exactly and it actually didn't take all that long to figure out why and the reason is because it's incredibly challenging. I mean that flavor that you get from squeezing something fresh and putting Water over the top of it is much much harder to translate than I think I imagine and you know Others May mean it what I did literally was, you know, go online. Luckily. There was the internet this point go online and and really dig in and at the end sparked, you know, this whole other workstream 2 really then decide why you know was a because they're these ingredients weren't available 12 months a year.

1 (34m 1s):
Was it because the product couldn't be made and then sold commercially for some regulation reason was there not the consumer demand and those are the questions that I set out to to solve.

2 (34m 14s):
So, what did you do? I mean you're living in Charlestown in Boston. And did you say all right. Let me get an office and I'm going to start pursuing this.

1 (34m 23s):
Yeah, so I set up shop in our basement and I went about solving all of those problems. So I found really at the time the only Ah-choo supplier on in the west coast and flew out there and they were squeezing juice and and found at the time a bottler that was willing to handle all of this fresh juice. They had the facility cold storage and I started a fresh supply chain. So the only way we can make the product then was to refrigerate it. So we I would run a batch in Worcester, Massachusetts. I would ship it to a cold Warehouse where it would remain And chilled and Taunton Massachusetts and then I would load samples in the back of my Prius and drive up and down the East Coast, you know, Boston Portland Portsmouth Nantucket Cape islands, and I would sell it.

1 (35m 18s):
I would get people excited about the brand follow them a week later and ship them product. Erect.

2 (35m 23s):
So initially the drink was going to be fresh squeezed fruits into soda water sparkling water in a bottle and it had to stay refrigerated. Because that's how it would be

1 (35m 35s):
preserved. That's right. Yeah, there was no other way to maintain that incredible fresh flavor that we were talking about at the time without keeping a cold. I mean it just was too volatile a product. Maybe I'll just add to that that it was also more of a soda profile at the time. So it had a little bit of sugar in it natural flavors and color, you know, just sort of whatever there were things added early on as we were just trying to dial in the flavor and and And in order to make it

2 (36m 5s):
sellable, this is the point right and we've had these conversations with entrepreneurs where you go to somebody and you say I've got this great idea. Now you had a track record. So people are going to take you a little bit more seriously because you're in your mid-30s, you've already sold a business, but you're going to go to people and say hey soda with a squeeze

1 (36m 25s):
of lemon or orange

2 (36m 28s):
and someone's going to say well if it's such a great idea Bill, why doesn't it exist

1 (36m 33s):
already, right? That's exactly right. I mean usually people would say that must exist or they thought they were already getting that and whatever they were buying today or at that time. And so I actually didn't mind that people were questioning the ingredients and wondering why it hadn't been done or was it really being done where we really doing what we were saying that was enough motivation for me to double down and say, okay now we I think we can really make a business out of this is long. As we're clear about communicating what is so special about this product. Was that

2 (37m 9s):
hard to find somebody who's going to bottle this? And even before you were making it, you know in mass quantities. You just need to make small amounts to right to see if they would be

1 (37m 19s):
interest. It was terrifying. I mean, you know because you admit him in production quantities, we made thing 500 cases of each flavor. We had four flavors, so 2,000 cases

2 (37m 30s):
and you had to make 500 cases just for the initial run.

1 (37m 34s):
Just to turn the equipment on yeah,

2 (37m 36s):
and you had to fund this yourself presumably your funding this with the proceeds from the sale of

1 (37m 41s):
stirrings. That's right. So, you know, we had to produce a minimum quantity and then we had to go out and Shuffle it door-to-door and the challenging part really so the product was very expensive. It was three dollars a bottle. So it really forced us to think hard about where who would be interested in something like this and obviously with the decline of Soda, there was a little bit of interest in Alternatives and that's that's really how we positioned it

2 (38m 10s):
but you'd have to sell a lot of bottles 299 to break even to be sustainable. I mean were you thinking like, okay. I'm hopefully Target will sell it and put it in the refrigerated case. And I mean were you going to some of your customers that have bought stirrings brand

1 (38m 26s):
we didn't I think we we recognized pretty early on that the great thing about soda and sparkling water. I'm like Telmex, is it everyone sold? So the challenge was actually more to figure out who could we really get to Champion this this product where we ultimately found our people if you will is in the fast casual space the people that were making delicious sandwiches or salads or that now we're looking for a product that had a similar ingredient profile to what they were offering in their other

2 (39m 0s):
food. Got it, right? Okay, so you've got this Duct and it's in some stores and I should be clear like it you had at this point two lines of of beverages you had the sparkling water with fresh fruit, but you also had like a soda with sugar

1 (39m 15s):
right? Exactly.

2 (39m 16s):
Yep. And then and then what I guess at a certain point you say hey, maybe we need to go to like like lunch places like food places where people are just ordering lunch to to try and get our product in front of them. We needed a place to

1 (39m 29s):
tell our story really so we went where people were excited about Brand and it happened to be the small independent for the most part sandwich shops and salad shops. And this was the time of sweet green and Cava and Panera was changing their menu to be more health conscious and we solved the problem for them because often they were a lot of them were trying to tell health and wellness story with a big soda machine and so we could come in often times. We actually even brought our own equipment refrigerated equipment and and we Would actually work with them. I mean we'd sit down and say okay, you're launching a cranberry salad or sandwich this fall.

1 (40m 10s):
We have it a cranberry raspberry. It's delicious. You know, let's story-tell together and that made for a pretty good partnership.

2 (40m 19s):
And this was being made in Massachusetts, like just outside of Austin you had like a facility that would make your drink for you and bottle it and then put a label on

1 (40m 27s):
it. Yeah, it was so we so what I would do is I would bring a truck and the truck would take the batch whatever we made, you know, 500 cases of each and we would bring it to a cold storage facility in Taunton, Massachusetts called a miracle and they would you know, they had all kinds of other fresh items. You know, they were staging vegetables for the Day or Cranberries or whatever, you know, they were huge gigantic warehouse. And so we would talk our little pallets into their huge warehouse and then whenever I needed a sample, I would just drive down there. I would put on a gigantic freezer refrigerator and coat go out and pull product and then I would take it out into the market that food service focus with me.

1 (41m 13s):
And now my small team is really all we did for the first four or five years in our business.

2 (41m 18s):
And and how did you come up with a name

1 (41m 20s):
Spindrift? So Spindrift is the whitewash of a wave when it's windy outside a wave will kind of crashed in the wind will Shear the top of the wave off creating this mist and that windblown mrs. Called Spindrift in my one of my captains when I was working out on the island introduced me to this name when I was probably 14 or 15 and for whatever reason, I don't know why really sort of resonated with me. I just thought it was really interesting. Word and spin and drift were interesting words to so I tucked it away. And so when I was thinking about what I wanted to call this now refreshing sparkling beverage for you know, it suddenly made sense to to kind of recycle it again.

2 (42m 4s):
Now, here's the thing, right you were funding this business with the proceeds from the sale to Diageo. But I mean, what was your limit I look at what point were you going to be? Like I cannot use any more of my money because cause I'm gonna blow it all on this thing. Like were you was there ever a point where you were a little nervous that you were just gonna spend all the cash that you had on this thing. That might fail.

1 (42m 29s):
Yeah sure. I was terrified, you know, I'd come out of this now it was still very early and sort of the rebound out of the recession. So yeah, these were real fears and beverages expensive. You know, I knew that even more so than my prior business this was going to be a capital intensive business. Let me just it was clear right away that tween the coolers and going up against the big soda guys and trying to do something really different in terms of the ingredients. All of that just was going to be challenging. So, you know, we from a family perspective, you know, we invested as much as we could and then we knew we were going to have to kind of make some lifestyle changes and and also think about bringing in outside Capital

2 (43m 16s):
because just with your own money your Runway Away probably wasn't going to be that long, right?

1 (43m 22s):
Yeah, exactly. So what we ended up doing is basically putting mortgages on our house and and but again now you're talking about buying inventory and starting to hire a

2 (43m 34s):
team. Wait, this is nuts you would you were sold a business you made a good amount of cash. And now you're taking a mortgage on your house to fund your next business like you'd already done the crazy risky stuff in your 20s you're doing this again. In your 30s.

1 (43m 50s):
I mean, yeah it I guess the benefit of having gone through it before was that I knew where the risk was or at least I thought I did. So ultimately there's just risk embedded in startups and in beverage and particularly in single-serve beverage space. So I would say we took calculated risks like I would I would bet on launching a market. Couture particular customer and make sure that that was up and running and successful and then I would reinvest it again in launching the next customer

2 (44m 28s):
and then and then round what 2014 or 2015 you guys eventually had kind of a breakthrough because you finally figured out a way to to store the Spindrift on a like on a Shelf with no Refrigeration. Right?

1 (44m 41s):
Exactly. Yep. That's right.

2 (44m 43s):
So how did you figure out how to do that

1 (44m 46s):
at a certain point we were on our own and there was really No, we had no one in the industry. They could help guide us in this area. I don't think I would have gotten into this business had I known how complicated it was and again that the unpredictability of of the ingredients you're starting with. I mean the magic of every time you cut into a grapefruit. You're not totally sure what that great Foods gonna taste. Like is it sweet is it hard? Is it sour we have those same challenges with our product the fundamentals. Are that when you squeeze A lemon or an orange or a grapefruit it is alive. I mean it, you know, you put it in your fridge, you know, as you know last a few days and then it no longer tastes like orange juice or lemon juice.

1 (45m 29s):
So our challenge is how do you preserve that incredible flavor and the answer was to move very fast to refrigerate like crazy and then do it in a predictable way. So it also just required a lot of investment. You know, that was not a small decision to make I'm especially for you know a small business with a small team that you know still with a very unsure future.

2 (45m 55s):
I mean, I have imagined it to like find food scientists who could figure this out. I mean were there people who said to you built? This is just you can't do this not possible or it's not really possible to do this at

1 (46m 6s):
scale. We've only frankly heard that I mean when we have our initial call with one of our bottling facilities, you know, they say, oh geez, you know, I hope this isn't Spindrift is it cuz we've heard about you guys. I mean, you know, it's and the reason is the unpredictability, you know, when we show up with a tanker of fresh squeezed lemon juice, you know, it is it is a problem for these plants because they have to run it right away. It's got Pope, you know, which no one particularly wants to deal with

2 (46m 36s):
wait, why don't they want to deal with

1 (46m 37s):
pulp? So Pope is really fussy. I mean pulp obviously is sticky its bits it can get into these lines and then get sort of clogged or you know, and so on. Okay, so there there wasn't a single carbonated beverage plan in the US that had ever handled a product like this. The closest was something like Orangina, you know in your right and they you know had figured out how to deal deal with Paul. But really none of these guys wanted to be in the business of dealing with, you know, fresh juice and then carbonation really took us and holding them and you know, the Brewing industry has some of this, you know, particularly temperature.

1 (47m 18s):
Tivity, but it took them really just focusing on it and just hiding it it was important and that we were willing to kind of stay with it until we got to a successful

2 (47m 28s):
outcome. And what does it happen? When do you like at? What point do you figure it out? Do you get the grapefruits and the lemons in the soda water? And then you could just put them on a shelf and he doesn't have to refrigerate it.

1 (47m 41s):
The first we made one batch of raspberry lime. It was the first time we move the product over from a bottle. To a can and it was really just on the back of that, you know remaining stable that we decided we were now comfortable enough to roll that out. So it was 2014-15. We finally broke broke

2 (48m 1s):
through. Um, I guess around what 2016 you got into Trader Joe's was that like a total game changer for you in terms of visibility.

1 (48m 11s):
It was a seminal moment for the business at the time. We really didn't have any customers for the sparkling water. The soda was was doing well. In those food service accounts, but the the sparkling water the unsweetened version was really not anywhere and they yeah, they just were incredibly Brave and took on the product and initially just took it in the East and we were lucky enough to then get expanded and they really have just been in a real believer. It really changed our business. We're honestly because we without that belief. I'm not sure that we would have had the conviction to continue to expand further into retail.

2 (48m 48s):
I mean you had been in a position with your previous business turing's where you just saw this like hockey stick sales growth, right like all of a sudden just selling like crazy, but you're still not able to keep up your sometimes worry that you're going to make payroll. Were you in the same kind of situation in 2016.

1 (49m 8s):
So by then we did we really made a decision once the product was stable and there was clearly an audience for the retail version. We really said, To ourselves like are we going to make a run at this and we took the step to bring in some outside Capital we brought on an incredible team and really said we're going to go sort of heads down and really I would say really that was the inflection point. We now are going to try to compete with the big guys and ideally Define or find our own space, you know in this big and in crowded category. All right,

2 (49m 44s):
you've got this product you figured out the technology you're in Trader Joe's and 2017 you make a decision that is kind of crazy you decide to stop selling the because you've got two product lines. You've got the sparkling water and juice and you've got the sodas which actually is more or less the same thing. But with sugar you decide even though that's profitable from what I understand that you decide we're not going to make that anymore. We're just going to make the sparkling water with the squeeze of fruits.

1 (50m 13s):
Yeah. That was that was a really important moment for us and And what we are experiencing even just in our day-to-day lives was just a their concern around around sugar. And so we had a low very low sugar soda, but even that among our team was confusing, you know, you know, people say well I don't drink soda and say well we just actually isn't a soda and so it's sort of the perfect storm. So we made the hard decision to shut down and was about a 5 million dollar business super profitable and just focus our resources on On the sparkling water

2 (50m 50s):
and I mean if it was a profitable business you did this for the sole reason that you thought let's just focus on this thing. We do. Let's just make this a company about you know, sparkling water with a squeeze of fruit.

1 (51m 3s):
Yeah. I think it was the it was the recognition that in, you know, 2016 or 2017. There were there's been a lot of innovation coming into beverage and the risk was for us that if we didn't really stand for one single thing that we were going to go down the path. Path of so many other businesses where you sort of try to do everything pretty well and nothing really really great both businesses or resource-intensive, you know, you have to inventories to supply chains, you know kind of two of everything and so we said look if we're going to really be as successful as we think we can be we just can't do everything twice.

1 (51m 43s):
So I would say though it was purely on the belief that this is a big idea and it To get there we had to do what we call simplified amplify, you know, basically really get behind the business we

2 (51m 55s):
had. So I guess at the same time you decide to drop the sugared soda. You also decide to stop using natural flavors in your drinks. And I when I see natural flavors, I'm assuming it's like essential oils, like essence of cherry or or lemon just like a couple of drops in the drink and then you've got the drink is that would naturally flavor. Hers are so we were at the time

1 (52m 21s):
we had natural flavors in our in our drinks and we started to get people writing in asking what natural flavors were natural flavors is the word that the government asks you to use to kind of describe the whole world of of these Essences that you're you just described. So we we actually reached out to our flavor houses and and ask them. Can you just give us a little bit more information we're being asked by our consumers. Is it really just the lemon? And oils that are being squeezed, you know, they would say let me get back to you. I just need to confirm that myself or they would say we don't just close that and no one would tell us what they were and so that's where you know, we had to go Rogue and really sort of start to investigate further on our own.

1 (53m 9s):
I mean, I just think Lee recall conversation with a food scientist. It was working for flavor house at the time and he said let me go into a closet. Because I'm afraid if I have this conversation at the open that I'm gonna get in trouble. And so here I was you know decade-plus in the business and I was putting an ingredient in that I couldn't totally be sure what it was and it really for us was a

2 (53m 34s):
problem. Okay, but before that point, right you were still making drinks with natural flavors because everybody was just that sounds fine, right but then you started to say well if I don't know what's in it and my suppliers won't Me what's in it? Maybe this is a problem. Like that's what started to go through your head.

1 (53m 52s):
Yeah, we went through we reverse engineered the ingredients. We got in scientists when we spent a lot of money to really understand even what we were buying. I mean, I'm a little embarrassed to say because we just didn't know there really is no standard for a natural flavor there may very well be all of the things you described but there's no Assurance of that and I don't think anyone felt they were doing anything bad with natural flavors. It was more for us a decision that we made as a business that we wanted to stand for what was in the product? And so we made the hard decision to get out of natural flavors entirely.

1 (54m 34s):
That's really the, you know, kind of our position in the market

2 (54m 40s):
your growth from 2015 to just a 20-17 was like eight hundred percent I think. In 2017, you did like 33 million dollars in revenue and this year your projected to more than a hundred million. I mean what explains it is just more visibility more people are just being exposed to it.

1 (55m 1s):
Yeah, I think so. The the growth has been attributable to I think just this incredible team that you know brought people into real ingredients in obviously, we've been very fortunate with the turn of drinks. Two more of a less sweet profile and I think lastly people are really starting to care about ingredients and transparency and what they put in their body. And and so I think we've been lucky to benefit from kind of all of those things happening simultaneously, you need all of them in different

2 (55m 39s):
amounts. They'll you started this company in 2010 you grew up with, you know, your your your mom was at home. Your dad had to work hard to support the family traveled a lot. I have to imagine it's been kind of similar for you for the last nine or ten years trying to get this off the ground. I mean have there been personal sacrifices you had to make to get this business up and running and to make it

1 (56m 6s):
successful. I think, you know anyone that gets into startup space and I guess specifically food and beverage I think sort of knows they're going to be sacrificing Got a big part of it sort of their life outside of work. I mean, it's just you have to be a hundred percent in or you know, it's probably not the right vocation for you. What I try to do is really focus on the business and my family and I don't know any other way to do it. I've tried in the past but I think particularly in a dynamic space like this you really have to be 100% committed or it's probably not it's not going to end up six.

2 (56m 49s):
What keeps you up at night? I mean you're doing a hundred million Revenue. It's super successful. Like do you still get nervous and anxious or you like chilled out and able to kind of relax a little

1 (57m 1s):
bit? No, we still have we feel like we've really are just getting started. You know, if you look at the landscape of sparkling Beverages and there are some incredible Brands out there and we we are we're really kind of the new guy. So that's incredibly motivating for us. There's always risk to these businesses. And so I'm keenly aware of that. I never for a minute take any of this for granted a challenge is how do you maintain everything you love about the business? What got you into it as the business grows? I think the business is that really get sort of lost or the ones that lose their identity.

1 (57m 46s):
And so we're trying to do everything we can to ensure. Doesn't happen.

2 (57m 49s):
How big do you want this company to be I mean what is being a billion-dollar company important to you? Not not

1 (57m 56s):
captured that way. I mean, I think what I'm learning now is kids and kind of the world changing the way it is for me. I think it's important that we see are big enough to survive, you know, kind of through twists and turns I just have incredible respect for brands that have survived, you know decades centuries and And and are part of the fabric of culture. I mean that's that's really interesting and exciting to me. So how do you measure that? I'm not sure but I think we're marching forward and not really thinking about or being distracted by the other stuff today

2 (58m 36s):
bill when you think about your journey and you've had two successful businesses, which not, you know one would be amazing, but very few people can say they've had to how much do you tribute that to to your Intelligence and work ethic and how much do you think that's just because you got lucky

1 (58m 53s):
I think it's a combination. So, you know, I thought a lot about that question and we talked about it even just internally a lot. We are all incredible workers in our commitment level of the company is is insane and is had to be for a long time and what that allowed us to do is see opportunities when they surface, you know, when when the world was moving out of of sweetened Beverages and sugar we were positioned well to be able to see that and take advantage of of those changes. So is that good luck is that you know, why did we why we reposition that way it's not clear to me, but I think we needed we needed a good dose of both of those to get to where we are today.

2 (59m 41s):
That's Bill creelman the founder and CEO of Spindrift. By the way back around 2015 Bill almost had to give up a name Spindrift. There was a legal problem with the trademarks that had to be resolved. And Bill was just days away from changing the name and if Spindrift hadn't worked out the company is more than 100 employees would today be working for a beverage manufacturer called press

1 (1h 0m 6s):
craft.

2 (1h 0m 24s):
And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building. But first a quick message from our sponsor Comcast business proud to serve businesses across the country with fast reliable connectivity and solutions that help them. Go beyond the ordinary learn more at Comcast business.com Comcast business Beyond fast. Want to learn how to make an amazing podcast kind of like this one check out NPR's podcast about the student podcast challenge. It's full of tips and tricks and bits of inspiration. There's new episodes every Sunday. That's NPR's student podcast challenge the podcast listen now.

2 (1h 1m 13s):
Hey, thanks for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and this week story starts with gaurav chavala who grew up in Western India where like almost everywhere else in the country people drink a ton of chai

1 (1h 1m 26s):
people have it for five times per day. Like, you know people get bored. They make chai. They want to relax they get child. They want to

2 (1h 1m 34s):
sleep. And for the non try drinkers out. There. Try is a deliciously Soulful blend of black tea and cinnamon cardamom and ginger often. with some hot

1 (1h 1m 44s):
milk so chai is like, you know ever present in all aspects of

2 (1h 1m 48s):
life, but actually gaurav only started drinking chai when he moved to California after college his roommate used to make it every morning

1 (1h 1m 56s):
and in those cold Berkeley mornings, you know with the fog rolling in I wanted to try something warm and that's how I started, you know getting into China Started Loving It

2 (1h 2m 7s):
loving it but kind of hating it too because chai is so time consuming to make Assuring the tee and the spice is heating the milk and then hovering obsessively over the

1 (1h 2m 18s):
stove. You're making the shy and you just look away at the wrong time. Somebody calls you at the wrong time and the child boils over, you know, the milk goes everywhere. It sticks to the stove. So the stove is a mess to clean.

2 (1h 2m 31s):
Now. You could just go to Starbucks and get a venti chai, right, but as Carville tell you chai made from a concentrate. It's just not the same and because gaurav is an engineer. He started to think about designing his way out of the

1 (1h 2m 46s):
problem. And then I started thinking oh wait on the coffee side. There are so many machines and Brewers. Why are there no chime machine in the

2 (1h 2m 55s):
market gaurav started doing a little

1 (1h 2m 57s):
research and I found out that there are product designers and then they are tea companies and the tea companies have never been product designers and park designers or coffee machine makers they don't care about the Tea market. So that intersection hasn't

2 (1h 3m 12s):
happened. Well, it hadn't happened until gaurav got there. He quit his day job working as an engineer at Salesforce and he set out to make a brewing machine for chai a little like a Keurig or an espresso.

1 (1h 3m 24s):
Then I started working on this. The first thing I did was I took a rice cooker and modified it and I programmed it

2 (1h 3m 30s):
myself and after that first basic prototype actually worked. He kept

1 (1h 3m 34s):
tinkering like I would tell everyone I met that. Hey, I'm working on making a time machine and initially they would not understand whether I'm saying chai machine or time machine. And once they figured out who I was talking or chai like their faces would light up there would be like, oh my God, I'll be your first

2 (1h 3m 48s):
customer and even at that very early stage gaurav was able to get a few Angel Investors interested in this project and he raised enough money to hire more engineers and to find a factory in China to develop the chai machine. And I know I just said all that in a few seconds, but this whole process it took five

1 (1h 4m 8s):
years. It is tough and it's not something that you can just like, you know in the software world. Or you could just make something on a weekend and people can use it and give you feedback you change it. It's very fast here. Every single change takes weeks. It was really

2 (1h 4m 21s):
tough. And while all of that was going on gaurav was also working with a partner to Source the black tea and the spices from India and to get it all packed fresh into these little

1 (1h 4m 32s):
capsules and we have five different kinds of capsules who so one is just plain black Assam tea other ones are with cardamom with Ginger with ginger

2 (1h 4m 40s):
car. So basically the way this all works is you choose. Choose your flavor you feel the back of the machine with water? You put milk in the front. Then you press the button the machine bruise the tea and heats the milk and about three minutes later. You've got a cup of

1 (1h 4m 53s):
chai and you can smell the

2 (1h 4m 55s):
spices gaurav calls his company chime and late last year. He raised $100,000 on Indiegogo and the for us the goal is to

1 (1h 5m 5s):
you know have this kind of machine available everywhere. So wherever you go at home at work and Cafe in hotels like, you know, they should be Be an easy way to get your

2 (1h 5m 15s):
chili, but that's still a ways off right now gaurav, and his team are focused on filling hundreds of orders from Indiegogo. But of course, he already has H. I'm sitting in his own kitchen and he says he'd never go back to the old way of making

1 (1h 5m 29s):
it absolutely not like I would never go back like I hope I have better things to do than to watch me a milk and water by tonight.

2 (1h 5m 37s):
If you want to find out more about chime or here previous episodes had to our podcast page how I built Lestat npr.org and of course if you want to tell us your story go to build dot npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe at Apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcasts. And while you're there, please do give us a review. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or add guy Roz our show is produced this week by Casey Herrmann with music composed by rum team Arab Louis. Thanks also to Candace limb, Julia. Kearney Neva Grand and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is Sequoia Carrillo. I'm Gyros and you've been listening to how I built this.

2 (1h 6m 33s):
This is

1 (1h 6m 34s):
NPR.

2 (1h 6m 38s):
You know, I'm gonna make some chai after this.