3 (50s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm guy Raz. And on the show today, how cat Nori built a better baggy out of silicone and started Stasha a storage brand that wants to get single use plastics out of the kitchen. My wallet is a Ziploc bag. I keep some cash, a few essential credit cards and my driver's license tucked in a Ziploc sandwich bag.

3 (1m 32s):
Every few weeks, the bag gets tattered and I switched to a Newsday block. I started using the Ziploc wallet last summer. When I spent a few days at the beach, it seemed like the most efficient way to keep my cash and cards dry in my swimsuit. And guess what? It worked. Sure everyone laughs. When they see it just the other day, when I pulled it out to pay my barber, he sarcastically asked me if my Ziploc wallet was made by product. Now imagine a world before Ziplocs we'll call it BZ 1968. That was the year Dow chemical introduced the product to grocery stores. All of a sudden sandwiches and carrot sticks and apple slices could be kept separate inside lunch boxes.

3 (2m 18s):
The problem is that we started to use a lot of them. We still do. And ultimately that's not a good thing because plastic is a huge environmental problem. There's too much of it. And it's finding its way into our oceans and into our bodies. A 2019 scientific study found that the average human will ingest as much as 40 pounds of plastic in their lifetime microplastic that floats in the ocean in seafood, in the air in sand it's all around us. Only a tiny sliver of the plastic we use gets recycled less than 10%. According to the EPA, that little recycling symbol on your single use water bottle, it's basically nonsense.

3 (3m 5s):
So over the past two decades, more and more social entrepreneurs trying to figure out how to reduce plastic. One potential solution. Isn't a polymer called silicone. It has properties that act like plastic, but is more sustainable and lasts much, much longer. And category a parent of three who packed a lot of lunches realize that like many of us, she was using a lot of disposable baggies. Kat had a small business that made a home goods out of silicone things like placemats and coasters. So she had some experience with the product, but could she figure out how to turn that silicone into a Ziploc like baggy?

3 (3m 49s):
Well, if you've heard of her brand stash or, you know, the answer is yes, she did figure it out, but it would take a lot of work to convince people to buy the bags. Stasha bags are expensive. One sandwich sized bag might last several years, but for the price of one, you can buy 120 Ziplocs, which is an important part of the story because in 2020 cat actually sold Stasha to SC Johnson. The company that happens to make Ziplocs, it's assigned perhaps that over time, SC Johnson sees a future without single use plastic, but how that acquisition happened.

3 (4m 31s):
Well, if you listen to this show, you know, there is a story behind it and it starts with Kat. She was actually born in Tehran, in Iran, in the mid 1960s, before the Islamic revolution in the mid seventies, her dad decided to move the family to California, to search for new opportunities.

2 (4m 51s):
He had heard that California is like heaven. He said, you know, California is so green and there's so much opportunity for us to have our own business and to start a new life together as a family and you guys can get educated. Like you can all have the best education and not like, wonder what you're going to do after school, if there's work opportunity for you. And that was just something that was really important to him because he was three years old when he lost his mother. And he was brought up by his brother. In fact, when we, when my dad lost his father and his brother, my dad just couldn't stand living there anymore. And being associated to his business where he sort of saw the shadow of his brother every day, but his brother wasn't there anymore.

2 (5m 38s):
And that was such a blow to my dad that he pretty much like picked us up and said, we're packing up our bags and we're going to Califor.

3 (5m 46s):
And he moves you guys to the bay area to Walnut Creek, California. First of all, why did he choose to go there? Did you have relatives in that area?

2 (5m 56s):
So we had an English teacher in Iran whose brother lived in Walnut Creek. And I remember to this day, when he picked us up from the airport and driving over the bay bridge and we were two kids, my brother and I, my mom and dad. And I remember distinctly that the guy kept turning around and looking at us and I kept asking my passport, why is he like looking at us now? Of course, you know, when I was 60 and I learned how to drive, we learned that that's what you do when you're changing lanes. So those were kinds of the other things that I remember is

3 (6m 34s):
That I remember right when we got here, we just didn't want to be apart from each other. And we went to Montgomery wards and we bought blankets and pillows. And even though we had three rooms in the apartment, we all huddled up around the TV with the blankets and the pillows in one room together. The four of us, none of us wanted to use the other rooms. We just wanted to be together. Cause it already felt like who had like left our home. And now we were like going to be in separate rooms. So it was just w it was very lonely when we first got here. And H how did you all adjust to, to life in America?

3 (7m 15s):
Like for like, for example, what does your parents do for a living?

2 (7m 20s):
My parents did from the get-go, they started investing in property, and that was probably one of the best things they ever did. They started buying some real estate. My dad was really both of them. They were such a good team when it came to managing their money and working together to start a business and, and just thinking of how they would support us. We never felt like we lacked anything as kids, even if they felt it, we never felt it.

3 (7m 51s):
All right. So your 10 year old kid in the U S new country, how was your English at the time did you have, I mean, you had to gone to a Catholic school and tear on, so did you already speak English?

2 (8m 6s):
You know, it's really, that's a great question because when I got here, I actually felt like I didn't speak English at all. Barely. And I remember that I used to mix up the word wa and have, and it was so difficult for me when I got here, I was in fourth grade and my parents put me into school. And I remember that I pretty much didn't understand anything that the teacher said. And at one, and I had really poor eyesight and my parents didn't know that because on top of not speaking the language, I didn't want to be called for eyes. So I didn't want to tell them that I couldn't see.

2 (8m 47s):
So it was a pretty miserable move for me. I felt really out of place. And the kids laughed at me all the time. I felt very different. And so I was kind of looking for an identity. And if anything, I always say, I turned into Allie Sheedy when I was in high school from breakfast club.

3 (9m 10s):
Okay. That Alex should be okay. Whereas when she called the basket case and that movie

2 (9m 15s):
Pretty much that, and I was like the goth kid, right. More like in her, in her looks where in her parents, where she was a goth girl that didn't fit in and didn't care to fit in. And really didn't care if you weren't her friend, because only the people that got her were allowed to be her friends. Right.

3 (9m 34s):
I'm trying to cause her character was, she was, she was a misfit. Right. She didn't fit in to what. And certainly, and this is the eighties and you're going to high school. I mean, they was probably, I'm assuming you went, do, did you go to a big public high school initially? Yeah.

2 (9m 47s):
Yeah. I went to north gate and in Walnut Creek and I was really different than everyone around me and they treated me that way. And so, you know how they say, what happens in high school stays with you in high school or something like that? Yeah, well, it definitely stayed with me. It's scarred me for a long time and I refuse to go to school because of it. And I was basically forging my mom's name and signing absence, slips with my best friend and hiding in the closet every day. I used to hear my parents in the house while they were there. And assuming that I was at school, they found out that I wasn't going to school and my mom intervened.

2 (10m 28s):
And she said, what's going on with you? And I said, I don't fit in. And I don't want to be here. I don't want to live this way. And so she said, she talked to her sister and she came to me and she said, I think I found a solution for you where you can see that the world is a much bigger place than this little corner that you think is everything that the world has to offer to.

3 (10m 53s):
Hmm. And I guess her sister, your, your aunt, she lived in Sydney, in Australia and your mom sent you to live with her and go to school there to finish out high school there, which must have been pretty transformational because you came back to California and eventually applied to Berkeley and you got in.

2 (11m 12s):
Yeah. And I got in, I got, wow. Yeah. I wanted to be a lawyer. And so that was like one of the biggest winning points in my life where I thought that my efforts could really change my direction.

3 (11m 26s):
Right. And so you, so you already was graduated and Mugler law school, but actually after you graduated, this is in the late eighties, you ended up getting a job, a sales job for, I guess, a subsidiary of, of IBM or a company that worked for IBM. Yeah. And you were selling mainly to, to businesses presumably, right?

2 (11m 48s):
Yes. I was selling software and hardware actually at that point to other businesses. I mean, the training that I got in, in marketing and sales was amazing. I remember walking into one company into San Francisco with my sales manager and she said, cat, you got to walk into this account with me. And we walked in, she says, watch, they kicked me out every time. And we walk in, they say, hello, Mrs. Ms. Johnson. And she'd say, hello. And she'd say, as you know, I'm Gail Johnson from IBM. And they'd say, yes, we know I'm, you know, where the door is and she would walk again. And she'd say, I just want you to know you should never be afraid of that happening to you.

3 (12m 33s):
So you would, you would walk in and say, introduce yourself. And, and basically try to explain that this, you know, this, this hardware would be, would wouldn't make their business more efficient and you would hopefully get, you know, have a chat with somebody initially.

2 (12m 49s):
Yeah, completely. You know, I was sort of like the entrepreneur in my background as an immigrant was coming out because my parents had had every business under the sun. So I started like starting, I started interviewing the people that own the businesses. Like, why did you start this business? Like, because I was dealing with distributors and folks that had their own businesses of all sizes. And I remember I met this one guy, he was a Persian guy. His name was <inaudible> Naomi. And he was working for this Japanese company. And I was there to try to sell him a system. And I got to know him and he really liked my energy.

2 (13m 29s):
And he said to me, one day he said, Kat, did you ever know that you're actually an entrepreneur and you're working for a corporation and it's funny how in your life, most of the things that happen to you and that you might take a chance on are always right under your nose, but you just don't sort of see them until somebody kind of like in a very simple way tells you that.

3 (13m 54s):
Had you had you, I mean, you were still pretty young. He would probably early twenties at that point. So 25, you know, 25. So presumably you, you hadn't thought of yourself that way

2 (14m 6s):
At all. I was lucky to have a job is what I thought. So the light bulb went on for me that, wow. I was an entrepreneur.

3 (14m 14s):
And, and I guess, I mean, you, you were sort of inspired by that conversation eventually you decided to leave IBM. And I guess it was right around that the same period is like the mid nineties when you also got married, right?

2 (14m 29s):
Yeah. Actually when I left IBM, I did get married right around, right around that time. I would say I was sort of exploring different avenues.

3 (14m 40s):
And what's your husband's name by the way? Shane actually. Okay. So w when you and your husband sheen got married, you kind of, from what I gather had this, this sort of period of time, or you, you want it to start your own thing, but you weren't quite sure. And you, you experimented in a bunch of different businesses first, I guess you, you learned floral design. Did you get into the floral business at all

2 (15m 4s):
For a quick minute? And I discovered that my inventory dies.

3 (15m 8s):
What did you do? Did you, did you have a shop?

2 (15m 10s):
I had a corner spot in front of the orbit room cafe where there's a whole foods now in upper market. Cause we lived in San Francisco at that point and I had a flower stand and we did weddings and catering and all that, you know? So it was a nice little business, but your inventory dying and then also your cash would disappear because you'd have people that were working the shifts, various people, and it had a big turnover of employees. So your cash would somehow like, not be what you thought at the end of the day. So it was a tough thing and I moved on pretty quickly to other venues, right.

2 (15m 50s):
The inventory dying just killed it for me.

3 (15m 52s):
Yeah. It's a flower. It's gonna die. It's gonna die quickly. Yeah.

2 (15m 57s):
But my next thing was something that took some money out of our pocket, which

3 (16m 2s):
Was the next thing. The next day,

2 (16m 4s):
I decided that I wanted to do an antique business because we met a couple in Mexico who had an antique business and they lived in Ohio or something. And they promised that they would send me this beautiful truckload of goods and I could sell them and start my own store.

3 (16m 21s):
So the first step was that, that they, they sent you a truckload of antiques that, that you paid for and you got on consignment. No,

2 (16m 29s):
I paid for it. Lesson to self, never pay for something that you don't know that what you're going to receive at the end of the day.

3 (16m 36s):
And so they said, I just said, just, you know, give us 10,000 or 20,000 or whatever, maybe more. And we'll send you a bunch of antiques and you can sell them, start a business. Yeah.

2 (16m 46s):
It was, I think maybe it was five to $10,000 and I ended up getting stuck with it and they wouldn't take it back.

3 (16m 55s):
And did you try to sell any of it? Did you pursue this in any way? What did you, what did you do?

2 (17m 1s):
I was stuck. I was stuck with the inventory. Nobody wanted that. It was just garbage.

3 (17m 6s):
So did you, at that point abandoned that idea of, of a tick business? Yeah. And also, I think during this time you were, you, you had kids pretty quick succession, right?

2 (17m 20s):
Yeah. And I had three kids, all of them. So they were, they're now 24, 22 and 19. So they're what, two to three years apart from one another.

3 (17m 33s):
Yeah. So you've got kids at home and I guess at a certain point, your husband, he decides to leave his job. He was an engineer to start his own, his own business.

2 (17m 44s):
Yeah. So he started his own manufacturing company in San Leandro. And by

3 (17m 47s):
The way, what was his company? What was company? What were they doing?

2 (17m 51s):
So they manufactured test interface products for the semiconductor industry. And I don't know how to say that in an easier way, but it's at the test in burning industry, making receptacles and IC sockets.

3 (18m 7s):
I don't know what that is, but

2 (18m 8s):
Yeah, I say exactly. And I sold it.

3 (18m 12s):
So he must've been crazy busy.

2 (18m 14s):
So we were all crazy busy cause I was in there with him. Right. I would literally bring my S my two boys I'd drop one off and bring one to the back office and breastfeed them and have them go to sleep and then go do that counting and then do my sales calls and then go change diapers and then go back and pick up the other one and then come home and make dinner. I mean, it was just crazy. I, I actually felt like if I left his company that it would fall apart because I had such a big part in helping. Hm.

3 (18m 46s):
But, but I guess things got so stressful that you did leave. You decided like, like I'm gonna take a year and be at home with the kids because it was too much for, for both of you to kind of try to get this business off the ground and make it work with little kids, I guess.

2 (19m 4s):
Well, surprisingly enough, I let go and they did just fine. And I stayed home with the kids and I kid you, not out of all the things that I had done staying home with the three kids was probably the hardest thing I've ever done in my life.

3 (19m 20s):
Yeah. While you were from, from what I, I read while you were, you know, during this time, this, this year that you took off, you would at nighttime when everybody was asleep and it was quiet, you would, you would just scour the internet for ideas, like something that needed some, some industries, something that needed to be disrupted, you clearly were looking for. The next thing. Is that, was that, do you remember doing that? Yeah.

2 (19m 48s):
Yeah. So at this time I was like hanging out with a bunch of other moms that were really creative and they were taking their ideas to the market and figuring out ways to manufacture them. And I found it really interesting that I knew manufacturing and I knew sales and I love beautiful products. And I definitely had a sense for an eye for design. And I just kind of connected the dots. Like how can I possibly come up with something that can go to market that I can manufacture and sell to the public?

3 (20m 21s):
And you were just looking around just like I was Google.

2 (20m 26s):
I was looking around and I was tagging along with my friends that were doing shows at the San Francisco gift show and that were manufacturing products and had agents and so forth. So I was learning from them and I was looking at different things to do. And my husband came home one day with this little box. That was, it looked like a little Japanese and mini box where it had a hidden compartment. And one of his Japanese customers had given it to him as a gift. And I remember when I would take a nap with my daughter, that she would go and she would take the pajamas after I folded them, put it under her pillow and she'd throw on the, on the floor after I'd just folded it.

2 (21m 7s):
So I thought, well, what if I came up with something that had a hidden compartment that we could hide her pajamas in and we could, we would call it like a PJ pocket and it would look like a Japanese and a mini box that was hidden. And then you flip it up and you put the pajamas in it. And that's how I actually came up with the name modern twist, which was the company that I came up with.

3 (21m 30s):
So around this time, I think it's about 2005. Tell me about how you came up with this idea, what what's the w w what's the origin story of that company?

2 (21m 42s):
So, as I mentioned to you, I created this little PJ pocket hidden product, but I wanted to come up with, I, I had a feeling that people could knock me off pretty easily with a sewn product. So I started searching the internet and, you know, I was starting to think about from my days when I was at my husband's company, where there was so much plastic waste, like they would make parts. And the part would only be like a 10th of the piece. And the rest of it would go on the ground and it would be wasted. And then it would be thrown in the garbage. And that really sat with me. And I kept thinking, how can and it had a translucency to it too.

2 (22m 25s):
And I had a design sense to me, and I thought there are all these plastic things out in the world. How can I come up with something that is more design driven that performs better than plastic. I wanted to take an existing material and rejuvenate it.

3 (22m 46s):
When we come back in just a moment, how cat grows modern twist into a company she's proud of until a trusted advisor threatens to walk away and how that threat leads to her next company. Stasha stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor, DocuSign every day, someone signs something that means everything millions of people use DocuSign to share and sign legal documents from purchasing a car to closing on a first home or adopting a pet into the family. DocuSign has helped facilitate those important moments in their customers' lives.

3 (23m 30s):
Learn how DocuSign e-signature can help be there for the next important moment in your life. Visit docusign.com today. DocuSign as real as it gets,

0 (23m 41s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor, discover real credit questions require real people. Someone who understands your issues and works to resolve them with you. That's why discover offers helpful US-based representatives available 24 7 discover exceptionally common sense.

4 (24m 5s):
The holiday season is here and the NPR shop has something for every NPR fan on your list. T-shirts socks, hats, and yes, gift cards for a limited time, take 20% off your entire order. Visit shop.npr.org. And don't forget to grab something for yourself. That's shop.npr.org.

3 (24m 35s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2005 and Nori has been looking to start her own business for a while. So after doing a bit of research, she decides to launch modern twist a brand that sells tableware products made of silicone.

2 (24m 53s):
So I wanted to produce placemats and table runners and coasters that were for the table for entertaining, that were made out of hand, silk screen, silicone that were beautiful to the touch that were super elegant, and you could throw them in the dishwasher and they would last you forever the same for baby bibs. You know, I wanted your baby to last you three or four kids.

3 (25m 18s):
I remember having a silicone baby, but maybe one of yours when one of my little kids were little, what, what was it about silicone? Cause it is, I mean, there's controversy about silicone. Some people say it's not plastic. I've read tons of articles. And researching this episode, there are lots of environmental limitations to say it is a plastic. The plastics industry calls it a plastic, but there are different views on it. Some people say it's not as bad for the environment because it doesn't create microplastics. Some people say it anyway. First of all, from your point of view, why was silicone better, a better product than plastic?

2 (25m 58s):
It was because it was durable and it would last. And I think that's half the issue about anything that we produced is that it ends up deteriorating and going into our landfills and into our oceans.

3 (26m 12s):
How did you, how, how much money did it take for you to get modern twist off the ground? I mean, cause I'm S there's lots of moving parts. You had to design a product, then you had to manufacture the products and then you had to do the marketing and distribution, et cetera. But let's just talk about the, the different stages that you had to go through. First of all, money, how did you, how much money did you need to get off the ground?

2 (26m 39s):
So I was kind of crazy with that. I would say that I started borrowing money against our credit cards and I started borrowing money against our home. And I probably went into debt for gosh, I would say I probably took out a good hundred thousand dollars.

3 (26m 58s):
And, and with that money, you, what were the first products you were going to get manufactured?

2 (27m 6s):
So I first produced the placemats, the table runners and the coasters and the wine tags, wine tags. I remember that was my first one.

3 (27m 19s):
And how did you get the cause? You know, knowing what I know about, you know, certainly from interviewing people on the show with products like these, you usually start with samples. Yes. How did you find somebody to make you samples? So

2 (27m 36s):
I would stay up all night and I'd look for manufacturers that could produce what I needed. And I found a factory in China that was really good at working with me to experiment to get it right. And I applied to the first, like the biggest show for gift, for the gift industry that sort of like catered to the independent specialty mom and pop retailers.

3 (28m 2s):
This is the New York, the

2 (28m 3s):
New York gift show, which is called now New York now. And

3 (28m 6s):
It was at the Javits center at the Javits

2 (28m 8s):
Center.

3 (28m 10s):
All right. So I'm at the trade show and I'm a buyer for, I don't know, bed, bath and beyond or something. I don't know. I'm just making it up, but I see you. And I say, oh, well, what do you have here to give me your pitch? Tell me what, why should I buy your product? What was your,

2 (28m 23s):
I would basically say, this is one of the most innovative products in the marketplace. And it's a hand silk screen product that's been made with love. We Hansel screen. And we present the work of independent artists on the surface and it's durable, it's heat resistance, and there's nothing else in the market like it. And they would touch it. And it was really the touch that sold the product. I mean, it just feels like there's nothing else like it in the marketplace, super soft and silky.

3 (28m 58s):
All right. So I'm at your booth. I'm like, wow, this is cool. I haven't seen this before. And what, what, tell me, what, what are you selling these table mats are these placemats for?

2 (29m 9s):
And they were really expensive and that was a problem.

3 (29m 13s):
I'm still making the pitch to me. I'm the sales guy for the buyer for a container. I don't know what

2 (29m 21s):
I think at that point when we entered the market, maybe they were, I want to say 1499 each

3 (29m 28s):
Placement. And then I would say, why are they so expensive? I mean, I'm at bed bath and beyond we're all in a country. Like, I don't know, Tom, can, can you help me understand why they're so expensive? Well, what would you say?

2 (29m 40s):
Then I take some water and pour it on the mat. And I take an iron and I put it on the mat and I take some crumbs and I put it on the mat and I'd say, nothing goes through it. It can withstand heat. You can throw in the dishwasher and a last year forever. And they would buy it in, not in high quantities. It was always like really cool high-end stores, right? Like the MoMA's SF MoMA's of the world,

3 (30m 7s):
Even with modern art. These museums obviously have gift shops, very influential gift shops. They, they had a buyer there who bought some of these

2 (30m 17s):
Hit Dombrowski was my first buyer. And she said, you know, I like you and I like your product. And they remained as some of my best friends to this day.

3 (30m 28s):
And so when you walk out of there, did you walk out of that trade show with a lot of stuff? I mean, it's a roll out as a real, as a relative term because you're small business, but do you remember like how, how much money in orders you got from that, from that trade show?

2 (30m 48s):
Probably I would say somewhere between 20 and 50,000 on my first, my first show. And I remember calling my husband right when kit walked away and she came in, she walked into the show at the last 10 minutes of the show. And I said, honey, I think I have something

3 (31m 5s):
The SF MoMA. Yep. And do you remember if I'm focusing on an SF moment? Cause I don't think you sold a big companies at that point. It was like small boutiques, right. And probably the San Francisco museum of modern arts gift shop was the most influential story you sold to very much so that there's visibility and it's a trendsetter. And, and in, in, you know, in those first five, six years, were you even able to get a foot in the door at some of the bigger retailers? Like, would they even answer your, your emails or calls like the bed bath and beyond? I don't know who TJ, who, whoever was wood, was that even something you were trying to do,

2 (31m 47s):
It was more like the Bloomingdale's and the <inaudible> of the world.

3 (31m 52s):
Could you get into those places?

2 (31m 53s):
No, it was very difficult to get in. Did you try? And I got in and when I did get in, it was so minimal and the effort was so much, and the process for shipping to them took like an employee of its own. Right. And I didn't have the manpower at that point. And honestly, the independent designers or the independent retailers did so much more for us because they could explain the product in person. And so their sales volume was so good. I didn't really need to be in those stores.

3 (32m 25s):
Right. And this is really pre e-commerce e-commerce was around, but it wasn't quite what it is today. So you still really depended on those stores. And, and just to put this into context, I'm imagining by like 2010, this is five years in. When you say you were doing really well, that was probably a few million dollars in sales a year. Right? Correct. It wasn't like $20 million in sales, like doing really, cause this is, this is a, probably the margins were low and it's not like, I dunno, Bitcoin. Right? It's like, it's, it's where we're at. Right. It's, it's a silicone products that there's a limited number of people are going to buy it.

3 (33m 7s):
And then it lasts forever. They're not replacing

2 (33m 10s):
Exactly. That was one thing. One of the buyers turned around and said to me, you know, what the problem with your product is? I said, what he says, they last

3 (33m 17s):
Forever. She buy once. She'll buy it

2 (33m 20s):
Once. And you know, we were, I was doing really well. And when I say, when I was, that I was doing really well, is that I didn't have to worry about having a few employees and paying myself anymore and affording a space. And by this time I had brought in a CFO and he was working with me once a week and we would stay up from Thursday.

3 (33m 48s):
Yeah. He would stay

2 (33m 49s):
Up with me from Thursday evening. Everybody knew I had Thursday evenings for like 10, 15 years straight where Mike would come to the house. This is Mike fake, right. This is Mike fake. And he would come to my house and come upstairs, I'd have dinner for him. And he would just start digging in and he would, he was like my, everything, cat, what are you doing with this retailer? Why are you just, you know, focusing on this one, retailer that you're selling this Q2, let's get rid of that skew. And at this point, something else happened after I had met Mike, first of all, Mike cleaned up my books helped me get an SBA loan, helped get our financials, straightened out, got inventory under control and was, I don't even know how I would've done it without him, honestly, all the way through.

2 (34m 42s):
He was absolutely my pillar of strength,

3 (34m 45s):
Sort of an, a consultant. Right. I mean, he was a part-time CFO to help you kind of map out things that you were not able to see or figure out on. I mean, he basically had a perspective that you didn't have.

2 (35m 1s):
Yeah. And he believed in me, I mean, he had all the tools that I didn't have. He, he always joke that I paid him in Persian food and he was my, he knew I was that crazy entrepreneur that sort of like flew by the seat of my pants. And he was that very calm, cool cucumber. He never got excited about anything and he never got overwhelmed by anything. And I really needed that.

3 (35m 28s):
Your company, your company, modern twist would not become profitable for, I think around seven years, if I'm from right. Which is, I don't, I'm not dismissing that. I think that's amazing like it, but it took a while before it actually became profitable a hundred percent. But even over that period of time, you know, up until it became profitable, it doesn't sound like you were nervous that it wasn't going to work out. Or were you, was there ever a point where you thought we kind of can't make it this profitable? I've been in this for seven, eight years and my God, I'm not making any money from this yet.

2 (36m 3s):
I didn't get antsy at all. I was making money, but at that point and everybody was making money. We were doing fine. But what happened at this point is that I met a friend of my mom's at a natural product show named Ahmed right here.

3 (36m 19s):
We know him. He's been on our show founder T yep,

2 (36m 22s):
Exactly. So I met <inaudible> at a natural product show through my mom and my mom was the nutritionist and she's super holistic. And my passion was always so connected to food. And here I was producing a product that had to do with things that were at the table, but they didn't have to do with all this good nutrition that I loved. And I was raised with. And I started hanging out with Amad and, and the organizations he was involved with B corporations, you know, at this point, you know, my mom's whole, you know, holistic, you know, Buddhist side kicked in of, are you just gonna take your care of yourself and your family?

2 (37m 8s):
I mean, this guy, Ahmed is all about community and he's hanging out with all these organizations that are going to change the world. Why can't you sort of like look into producing something that could have real impact? And at one point I'm a turnaround and said to me, I'm just not going to support you anymore. I'll be your advisor. If you don't think of some other way to produce something that actually has the ability to have changed.

3 (37m 36s):
So clearly you wanted to, you, you started to think about ways you could innovate or grow. And you had experience in silicone plastics in silicone products, you, and it sounds like in your mind, you started to think, what else could I do with silicones with Silicon products?

2 (37m 56s):
Yeah. So my aha moment was definitely, as I was trying to make a bag with my, my silicone product and with some fabrics, with some friends of mine at Griffin, Lance, we were

3 (38m 8s):
Trying to make like a handout we were trying to make

2 (38m 10s):
Like, so the silicone into a bag and then put a zipper on it and they were beautiful. But then again, I was going back into the industry that wasn't exciting me anymore, which was the, you know, the high end, you know, design industry. And I love design and I love the function of things, but I wanted something that actually could be consumed by the masses that could actually make a difference and sell in volume. So just

3 (38m 37s):
To be clear, you started by thinking, I'll make a handbag for women or men, whoever want it, but like a fashion handbag,

2 (38m 44s):
Well, more like a makeup bag because it would be small and it would happen

3 (38m 48s):
Zipper. But when did you start to think, you know, this is actually like sandwich bags for lunch, for school lunch.

2 (38m 55s):
When my kids would come back with, you know, all these rappers

3 (38m 60s):
And in their lunchboxes. Yeah. Single

2 (39m 3s):
Use bags. And I'm like, what are we doing? Like, why is this happening in our community? Like, where's all this going, right.

3 (39m 10s):
And you're saying

2 (39m 11s):
45% of all landfill waste is from packaging. And that's usually from single use things. Right?

3 (39m 21s):
So, so the thing about silicone is, from what I understand, I'm not a, I'm not an expert I'm like you or a chemist, but it's basically, it's, it's made from natural materials, a sand and rock, and exactly. And there's different types of silicone, right? Cause there's some silicones that are, that do have chemicals and other things in them to make them work. Right. What's the difference between the kind of silicone that you were making and using and other silicone, if there is there,

2 (39m 53s):
So you can put fillers and byproducts and chemicals and any kind of crappy wine to silicone and make it cheaper. And if, if you're using a platinum form of silicone and it's food grade, you're definitely paying a lot more for the material.

3 (40m 9s):
What is it? What makes it different? What makes a food grade

2 (40m 12s):
It's free of if it's free of latex and dilates and plasticizers.

3 (40m 18s):
So you're making something that was food grade. After three years of experimenting, you finally come up with the, the bag and the bag that you can sell as like a lunch bag. And this was going to be a modern twist product. That was the idea. And you called them stash your bags right away.

2 (40m 37s):
I caught them stash of bags. That's right.

3 (40m 39s):
And had, and had you come up with that name?

2 (40m 41s):
You don't want to know

3 (40m 43s):
Just stash stuff in your bag.

2 (40m 45s):
Yeah. You know, I hang around with a lot of people from the natural products world, they stash a lot of things, you know, and they had a lot of influence and you know, when I was hanging out with them and they loved, we loved the idea of coming up with something whimsical with a very heavy topic of plastic

3 (41m 3s):
Waste. And that was Dasher Dasher. And if somebody came to you, you would say, Hey, you use the blocks. This is going to totally eliminate the need for that because you just buy this and you've got a lifetime Ziploc bag here. Exactly.

2 (41m 21s):
And I was on LinkedIn again. And I, and I saw that people weren't getting that these bit. They're like, what's the difference between like, at this point, but plastic free movement was nowhere yet. And people were asking, well, what's the difference between like, if I use a reusable, you know, resealable bag, and then if I use your bag, so I had to really like, get that across. I'm like, okay, how do I get the function of this thing? Because here I was with a bag that was at that point when we were launching, launching, it was 10 99. So $11 bag, $11,

3 (41m 53s):
The Ziploc, and exactly as long as the Ziploc bags and go to Costco and buy like a Ziploc, a pallet, no, not a pallet, but yeah.

2 (42m 2s):
So they didn't see the value of, you know, you have to give the consumer the value and I'm like, well, you could use it thousands of times that you can cook in it. You can freeze in it and you can use it thousands of times instead of that. And then, and at the end of the day, you would actually end up saving money,

3 (42m 17s):
But you could cook in it. You could actually, what do you mean cook? Eat it. And it was that airtight.

2 (42m 22s):
Yes. It's that heat resistant too. So basically I reached out on LinkedIn and I wanted to see, I had a friend, her name was Laura. Sure. And at that point she was another social entrepreneur and she said, Kat, there's this really cool concept. It's called Suvi. That's in the marketplace,

3 (42m 40s):
Cooking your food,

2 (42m 41s):
Water, cooking your

3 (42m 42s):
Food in a plastic, in a container,

2 (42m 45s):
In a heated like you could put in a pot and then you put a sous vide machine in a pot. Yeah. And then you put your plastic bag and your food inside of that bag. And, and the taste of the food is amazing. And it, because all the nutrients stays in the bag and the taste and the moisture stays in there. So Suvi has been like something that the friendship been doing for a long time. So I reached out, I, I was looking on LinkedIn trying to see who the biggest Soviet player was. So all of a sudden I see on my LinkedIn, that Electrolux has bought a Nova. I have like Electrolux just bought Nova. So I reached out to her Nova and I'm like, I've got your bag for you.

3 (43m 25s):
And Nova is a super food company. Yeah.

2 (43m 29s):
And they were bought by Electrolux. So they were going to ramp up quickly and be the number one. So

3 (43m 34s):
A Nova,

2 (43m 35s):
A N O V a.

3 (43m 37s):
Yeah. By the way, no one, except for people who are super food geeks, are you going to know the company? Right. You gotta be a superfood geek to have a SouVeasy stick, but anyway, keep going.

2 (43m 45s):
Absolutely. So I reached out to them and this was really important because they helped me produce my first set of molds. I meet with them and we get our first biggest order from them.

3 (43m 59s):
How did you have the capital to make the products? Because usually those places pay 60. Sometimes 90 days later, you got to pay for the product. So there's a gap. How were you able to finance that?

2 (44m 13s):
Well, what happened is that a Nova gave us a big order and ANNOVA was already in target and they needed a Soviet bag and I had a Soviet bag for them. So this was a way for me to get in, to target. And I had, I went to target. I already had initial meeting with them and they weren't into my idea at all.

3 (44m 34s):
They weren't into it. Cause your bags are too expensive, probably. Right.

2 (44m 37s):
Honestly, I think the real thing was that they didn't think anybody saw the difference between a reusable plastic bag. You know, who's going to pay for your bags. So I didn't get an order from target directly, but ANNOVA gave me a great order. And, and I made a great deal with Nova where they had to pay for the molds for the productions because we didn't have them.

3 (44m 59s):
Right. And, and, and the bag would be, would be like part of a kit.

2 (45m 3s):
They would put it right next to their Soviet machine entirely

3 (45m 6s):
Again. All right. So you, so you, so basically this deal with the Nova finances, the first molds, and, but it's a tiny market. I mean, you got to hope that people it's, people who are going to buy a <inaudible>, it's a tiny number of people. And then, then you have to hope that they're going to buy the bags. I can't imagine that it took off right away.

2 (45m 30s):
I wasn't interested in that market necessarily. I was interested in the fact that people would get, I had to educate people where the value was for this $11 bag and people weren't getting it from our messaging that was on the packaging. And I didn't know how to message the packaging, right. Which is why I decided to do shark tank

3 (45m 51s):
After the break. How cat gets her first bout of vertigo while standing up to the sharks and her second bout, while sitting down with the buyers at target, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor ignite. When ransomware strikes, you lose access to documents and customer trust, small and mid-sized companies fall victim the most. That's why ignites cloud-based collaboration solutions have ransomware detection and rapid recovery built in rated a leader in data security and governance on G2.

3 (46m 32s):
Ignite works seamlessly with cloud apps and can be deployed in just minutes. Start your free trial today at EEG, N Y T e.com. This message is brought to you by NPR sponsor. Airbnb. If you've ever thought about hosting, you might have a few questions. What's it like, where do I store my stuff is hosting worth it. Now with ASCA Superhost you can get free. One-on-one help from Airbnb's most experienced hosts, whether you're curious how to get started, or just wondering if it's right for you, you can now ask someone who's already hosting, learn more at airbnb.com/ask a super host.

3 (47m 17s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz. So it's 2017 and cat Nori is just starting to get traction with her new company stature, but she realizes not enough people know about the advantages of using silicone bags over single use plastic. So to get the word out, she decides what else to apply to shark tank.

2 (47m 42s):
When I set things to, to shark tank, I didn't look like a small company. I looked like somebody who had some traction. And so when I did the submission, I was very colorful and I had the tools to show them that it was a company worth looking at.

3 (47m 59s):
And when they contacted you and they said, okay, you're on presumably in 2017, you went on, correct. What are you nervous?

2 (48m 9s):
I had vertigo twice in my whole career. One time was when I was on shark tank.

6 (48m 17s):
Next up is an eco-friendly alternative to plastic bags.

2 (48m 23s):
It made me so nervous to be judged by the whole world, like to actually put yourself out there, especially as a woman. And here I was, I had to go stand on my own in front of the whole world. Pretty much to judge me.

7 (48m 37s):
I don't understand the advantage of the product and the product doesn't get me excited. I'm a,

3 (48m 44s):
But, but here's the thing you were going on with a mission. I mean, yes, you want to make money, but like you were going on there. We're saying, look, plastic bags that zip top bags are really bad. People are throwing these away. I'm going to solve this problem. How could, how could you even have imagined anybody would be mean about that?

2 (49m 7s):
And I think you've watched shark tank. Some of the judges are not that nice and they'll shred. And if you don't know your business inside out, they're going to eat you all. You live

8 (49m 17s):
Kat. Why haven't you put more about the environment and the plastic free element?

2 (49m 22s):
I agree. Maybe that's something that we should definitely put on the packaging. If you told me that and you are one of my buyers, I definitely put it up there and this is good for

8 (49m 30s):
No way. This is your vision. You've got to be able to sell this away from you.

2 (49m 34s):
Wait, wait, wait. Well, the one thing I knew was my business and they weren't going to tell me how to do my business. And when it came to them, question me my business and telling me how to do it. I got a little offended and I got a little offensive and it brought my other side out. Can I ask you you're a brand specialist? What would you do? That would say that that is a better option. It's healthier. How would you do it differently?

8 (49m 56s):
Yeah, we can't do that here. We can't. We invented look at, we're asking you questions and you're coming back asking us a question instead, right? You're not saying I get it, or I made this choice because

2 (50m 6s):
I, so I do get it. But I'm just saying that I wanted to see what your point of view was. I don't want, I'm not arguing.

3 (50m 11s):
I did get an offer or I guess two of the sharks were considering Timmy up an offer, but you did get an offer from mark Cuban. He, he made, made you

2 (50m 20s):
An offer. Mark made me an offer

3 (50m 21s):
Absolutely. 20% for $400,000. And, and, and, and did you, in your mind, had you valued your company at that point?

2 (50m 33s):
I think it was something like, I hadn't valued it myself, but I think they were valuing it, like at 2.5 or something like that.

3 (50m 41s):
He made you an offer 20% before a thousand, you came back and said, I'll give you 15% for 40,000. And he accepted it. He was going to become an investor. Absolutely. Okay. So the taping ends, this is the part that a lot of people don't know. It doesn't mean it's a done deal. You still have to negotiate off camera to get that money. And you guys actually never closed the deal. He, in, in, in the end, he did not invest.

2 (51m 9s):
And we spent like 20, $25,000 on the negotiations and I really wanted to make it happen, but I wanted a deal that basically let me still run the company the way I wanted to. And I couldn't get that deal and I had to walk away.

3 (51m 26s):
But what you got out of that was huge visibility and that airs in January of 2018. And did you see a, an immediate impact on sales?

2 (51m 38s):
No. No. Yeah he did, but I mean, it wasn't immediate. It w it kind of trickled through time. Basically it gave us like a leverage. People would see it, one buyer would tell another, you would send it to a buyer. We started utilizing it as a marketing tool. And I had one friend whose brother had seen the show and he said, I don't care what anybody says. You're a complete badass. And I want you to run the company exactly the way you're running it. And here's a half a million dollars without any questions. So I took the money from my friend's brother and I didn't have to take the truck's money.

2 (52m 20s):
Yeah.

3 (52m 21s):
W one of the things I think is really important is, and to help people listening to this, especially PR people listening to this who pitch our show, we get pitched a lot of things. Like my client just raised $20 million. They, they founded their company last year. They just raised $25 million. Can they be on how I built this? And the problem with that pitch is that there's no story. If you re, if you started your business last year, but there's no story to tell and raising $20 million is great. Congratulations. It doesn't mean you're successful. It doesn't mean, let me see what you do with that money, right? You didn't actually raise a whole lot of money, but, but there's a, there's a myth there.

3 (53m 5s):
I think in, in the entrepreneurial world that raising money is like a badge of success

2 (53m 11s):
Guy living in the bay area. There's this big perception that VCs and raising money is like your route to success. And one of the biggest things that I have seen in my own friends, and from what I had studied has always have been that there's no such thing as free money. You can't run your company the way you want. If you take someone else's money. And I wasn't about to let anybody ruin my vision, because I wasn't, I didn't start this company for profit. I started this company so that it would support the change that I wanted to see in the world.

2 (53m 51s):
And if I was going to do that, the VCs were probably going to tell me that's a really great thing, but you can't donate. You can't run it this way. You can't hire that person. You can't grow us slower as fast as you want. I didn't want to grow fast for someone else. I want to do it. The company went explosive because we were authentic and we were transparent. Not because, you know, we were trying to like, you know, sell something to someone because, you know, it was just some gadget that was going to scam someone. Right?

3 (54m 26s):
What, once you had visibility from shark tank, did that help you get into bigger stores? Like target, for example, is that, is that how you got into target?

2 (54m 40s):
We got into target because what happened is that I, through LinkedIn found the brokers that represented larger companies. And I found out who was repping some of the brands that I really admired out there. Companies like swell that had done a really nice job of going to

3 (55m 2s):
Market, been on a show. Yep, sure.

2 (55m 5s):
And had eliminated plastic waste through their bottles. And when I went to target the first round and I got to know, they didn't see the value in 1199 bag because they didn't see that, you know, they couldn't see through the marketing or through the marketplace, the reception and the perception of the value of the product. And it was a category maker. It wasn't a hard container. It wasn't a tossup PL single use plastic bag. So where did it fit? Did it fit in the essentials or did it fit in

3 (55m 48s):
Housewares? And what did you say?

2 (55m 50s):
Well, I found out through people that what you get in essentials is traffic and what you get, and housewares is really, you might get an end cap, but the actual volume in sales is less,

3 (56m 4s):
Is lower. You say, you realize you want to be in the other, other part of the store.

2 (56m 8s):
I want it to be where I could show the volume of sales to target so that I would have, I would have, you know, I would stay.

3 (56m 18s):
But you said, but yeah, but when you say you weren't prepared the first time, what did you do the second time to make the case and to convince them that they should carry this product?

2 (56m 26s):
So the second time I took my head of product development and engineer Paul with me to my target pitch. For the second time we get to Minneapolis and I fly in with an end cap. My team worked on the end cap for three or four months.

3 (56m 45s):
The end cap, I think, is a shell like PR promotional shelf, right?

2 (56m 50s):
It's a promotional shelf that has information about your company and a beautiful discipline.

3 (56m 57s):
So you brought that with you. Like you, you brought it to the,

2 (57m 0s):
On the airplane. My team worked on it for like three or four months. And I ended up standing at my hotel with no end cap that night. Oh,

3 (57m 10s):
We didn't arrive. It didn't arrive.

2 (57m 12s):
Okay. So I go to sleep and keep telling myself, I got this, I got this. It'll be there by the morning. In the middle of the night, I wake up sideways and I can't even move. And the minute I come to stand up, I throw up and I have major vertigo there I was. And I had to not only look good. I had to go do a presentation in the account of my life. And I made tilted my Health's head sideways. And I took a shower and I went downstairs and my brokers and Paul were there and they all like wheeled me in pretty much.

2 (57m 53s):
And I sat, they sat me in a chair before the buyer walked in and I had had a video that we had made. I went to LA and we made a video about what the plastics are doing to our planet and how it's affecting human health, because we're eating the fish that are eating the microbeads. And that our bodies are being consumed with plastic. And by 2050, we would have no fish in our oceans. And this video was so powerful. We all had tears in our eyes. And the buyer said to me, I, I represent a category of essentials where there's a lot of this where I feel like, you know, why isn't there a more innovative solution to what's going on, on our planet with plastic waste.

2 (58m 45s):
And here you are, and I'm going to do everything I can to make sure you succeed. And I was completely stunned. And he said to be, I don't even know what you would be like if you felt good.

3 (58m 58s):
I mean that the video that you presented did you, I mean, that must have been expensive to produce, right? And that was

2 (59m 8s):
$30,000.

3 (59m 10s):
And you had like a production team come up with a video that showed the impact of plastics. That was the pitch you made and okay. So, so you make the case to target and they say, all right, you're we hit

2 (59m 22s):
Them on our mission.

3 (59m 23s):
And so presumably you now had to, to ramp up production because you now are getting this order from target, by the way, at this point, were you patented? Did you have patents to protect the silicone bags? Oh my gosh.

2 (59m 36s):
We spent so much money on patents and that was like, well-worth everything that we did. And anyone that copied us, we went after.

3 (59m 46s):
Cause you, cause there were knockoffs. There were times we were on

2 (59m 49s):
Red. I had a whole team on red point every day that would go on their job was to go on the internet and see who was knocking us off and serve them.

3 (59m 59s):
And I don't know what red point is, is I guess as a day that's

2 (1h 0m 2s):
It's wonderful. If you could see who's knocking you off, like in three seconds and where it's coming from. And,

3 (1h 0m 8s):
But it's still, it's a pain because if you had people knocking you off, you have to file lawsuits. In the meantime you're losing sales,

2 (1h 0m 15s):
But yeah, but you have to do it because if you don't keep some of the big ones back, you're going to get eaten up. But I do have to say on that note, I want to thank every single copier we've ever had out there because it made me run like the devil was chasing me and then you have to thank your competitors.

3 (1h 0m 34s):
You say you've made you run because you wanted to, you got to establish a brand. Essentially once you have a product that can be slightly modified and, and replicated the advantage that you have to be, that you've got to have is a better brand it's brand awareness.

2 (1h 0m 49s):
Being first to market has the biggest advantage you could have with getting a friend of the buyer is being in the market, getting first positioning. It has the biggest advantage of anything. But the other part of that is just keeping everybody away from you so that you can keep doing things differently. And the way you keep everybody away from you is by zigzagging on the road and being a B corporation and being a 1% for the planet and being a one, a woman owned business. Those things were not things people committed to when they were copying me. Right. You know, I was putting my money where my mouth was.

2 (1h 1m 31s):
I wasn't a green-washing company that was trying to make a dime. I existed to make a difference and my team existed to make a difference.

3 (1h 1m 39s):
How did you, I mean, given that there are there, there were in our product set that are also silicone bags with the zip top zip there's a company called zip top. W was it just at a certain point? You can't Sue them because they're also, I mean, they're, they're changing it enough where they're not violating the patent. Yeah.

2 (1h 2m 1s):
I mean, the thing is you also don't want to, and I always told my, my team this, you know, and, and they know I didn't watch the copiers like they did because my job was to drive forward and to drive really fast. And their job was to look in the rear view mirror and to always make sure we took care of our, like nobody else. And that we had a culture in our company that cultivated everything that we stood for. And people like, you know, we had millennials in the office. They're no nonsense. If our office was all about what we wanted to see out in the world. And that just spread like fire, you can't copy that unless you're legit.

3 (1h 2m 43s):
So you, I mean, 2018 and then 2019 are, you know, huge growth here. So I think by the end of 2019, you were maybe doing about $30 million that year in revenue. But that year, a little over three years or under three years after you really founded the company, an announcement went out, SC Johnson, acquire stature, which was amazing after being acquired after just three years. But tell me, tell me why. I mean, what, what, what was the, I mean, obviously you got to pay out and there's money.

3 (1h 3m 24s):
There was that, the reason why it was, it made sense to you to, to sell to SC Johnson.

2 (1h 3m 32s):
And I can't confirm your numbers by the way. So I want to stash her to be in the hands of everyone, if it was going to make real change and guy, it's all about distribution, who has distribution.

3 (1h 3m 45s):
Yeah. SC Johnson's one of the biggest, right? Like companies have itself well to a consumer packaged goods company has describe

2 (1h 3m 54s):
It there a multi-national and what do they manufacture?

3 (1h 3m 57s):
Right. They soap and detergent and household cleaning products, all could kind of things like that.

2 (1h 4m 3s):
And they PR and they manufacturer Ziploc. And of course they have a whole arm of companies that are better for you companies like method and Mrs. Meyers and cult Draya and sun bum. I mean, they have companies that are changing the footprint of the way multinationals do business and the way things are produced. And by the way, just for the record, I didn't get acquired. I brought the acquirers to the table. I saw anybody that would have an arm for massive distribution of Stasha out and I weeded them out.

3 (1h 4m 42s):
And did you specifically look for SC Johnson because there was a product that they had acquired that you thought aligned with you, as you mentioned, method. Was there any, anything about that? Yeah,

2 (1h 4m 53s):
I mean, they have it on it's accessible to everyone that was important to me. You know, that Stasha would be accessible, that it would be affordable, that it would be donated to schools or, you know, all kinds of things that it would be recycled through Terra cycle. Those are programs that they're putting in place that I could have never done. But then I have to tell you, guy COVID happened. And every single day, I thank my stars that the acquisition happened because I have the responsibility of 40 to 50 families in my hand.

3 (1h 5m 28s):
And that could have been potentially a disaster because people weren't packing school lunches,

2 (1h 5m 32s):
People won't go into retail stores. People weren't shopping anymore. Everybody was saving their money.

3 (1h 5m 37s):
I'll tell you what though we're going on a hike. So I had a lot of dry. I had a lot of dried cranberries and my stash bag.

2 (1h 5m 43s):
I did an, I did meet the guy that was going to be our CEO.

3 (1h 5m 47s):
Yeah. Cause you, you decided at that point or you were not going to be the CEO after the acquisition now,

2 (1h 5m 53s):
But I had to meet who was, I had to meet case Salma who's from the Netherlands. And the guy was just the nicest guy and you know, his DNA is all about sustainability.

3 (1h 6m 8s):
Why didn't you want to stay on? Why didn't you insist on staying on as CEO because you are no longer really. You're not really part of the company anymore. You're kind of a brand ambassador, but why didn't you insist on staying on? Did you just not want to do it? I'm not

2 (1h 6m 22s):
Very good at following rules.

3 (1h 6m 25s):
You didn't think, you didn't think you had the right person to work in a big sort of corporate superstructure.

2 (1h 6m 29s):
Yeah. You know, and I have to tell you guy, I mean, my family has been on this, right. I mean, my kids have been on most of my business trips. They've been at all, like a lot of my trade shows. They've packed art, my goods with me. They deserve mommy at some point. And now that they're young adults, I really want to not just be here for my kids. I want to be here for other women. And I want to do things that are, that will have a bigger footprint in the money that I was able to make with my passion, for something that'll change, hopefully the plastic footprint of our society. And I have the ability to do something else that's possibly maybe even bigger.

3 (1h 7m 12s):
So that was it, 2020, the deal closes and, and, and then COVID hits and wow. I mean, in some ways the timing couldn't have been better. Yeah.

2 (1h 7m 25s):
But they're doing great. Yeah. And I love being in touch and they'll always be my family.

3 (1h 7m 32s):
When you think about your journey and you know, all that you've been through and the success you've had, how, how much do you think that has to do with how just, you know, your smarts and your work ethic and, and how much do you think, do you attribute to luck?

2 (1h 7m 50s):
I think as an immigrant and as my mother's daughter work ethic as a given, and I do believe the harder you work, the luckier you get. But I also believe that the universe has a power and an energy of its own. Some of it not in our control. And if we embrace those things, whether we call them luck or things that were unlucky, I think that maybe we just like let go of the things we can't control and think of those things that come to us as luck or things that just happened because we took a chance

3 (1h 8m 32s):
That's cat, Nori, founder, and CEO of modern twist and founder of stature where she still advises as a consultant. Boy, if mark Cuban managed to, to make that $400,000 investment for 15% on shark tank in 2018, would he have done well?

2 (1h 8m 53s):
He would have been clicking his heels

3 (1h 8m 57s):
Shubin you would have been clicking your Ferragamos slippers. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week, we would love it. If you could give us a positive review on whatever podcast platform you use, and don't forget to follow us wherever you listen to podcasts. If you want to write to us our email addresses, H I B t@npr.org. And if you want to follow the show's Twitter account, it's at how I built this or mine at guy Ross or shows Instagram account is at how I built this. And BR and mine is at guide dot bras. This episode was produced by Carrie Thompson with music composed by Ramtin Arablouei, who was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Claire Maura Shima.

3 (1h 9m 41s):
Our production staff includes Casey Herman, JC Howard, Julia Carney, Harrison, BJ Choi, Liz Metzger, Farah safari, and Lynn coats. Our intern is Katherine cipher and Jeff Rogers is our executive producer. I'm guy Ross. And you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor. Kendra Kendra designs builds, manages and modernizes the mission critical technology systems that the world depends on every day, Kendra, the heart of progress.