1 (0s):
Hey, it's guy here. So we have one week left in our annual public radio fundraiser, and we're asking you to show your support for your local public radio station. You've heard me say it all month. So, please just take a moment to give your gift by December 31st. Just go to donate dot npr.org built and thanks. And just a quick heads-up about today show. If you stick around to the very end, you will hear a very special clip from the latest episode of wow in the world our kids podcast. It's our first ever musical Extravaganza. So if you want to know what I sound like when I sing you will soon find out So if you've seen the film The Wolf of Wall Street, you might remember there's a scene where a young shoe designer isn't a boiler room full of these British stock Traders and while he's pitching his company the Traders are just being ruthless.

1 (57s):
They're cracking mean jokes or even throwing things at him and the guy in that scene. He's playing a real person a shoe designer named Steve Madden. We're about to hear the story of how Steve wound up in that room about the price he paid for dealing with those Traders and how in spite of everything he built his shoe company into a massively successful brand. It's an incredible story at first ran in July of 2018. Here you go.

2 (1m 29s):
I'm not one of those entrepreneurs that thought he was going to be super successful. You know, I was just trying to survive and I'm very negative and very pessimistic unlike maybe some of the guys that you've done, you know the shows total. I'm sure they think that you know, they are going to be I'm thinking get me down nothing against at me. I think I'm going out of business every other day.

1 (1m 59s):
From NPR it's how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They go. I'm Gyros and on Today Show how Steve Madden took high-end shoe designs gave them low-end prices and turned his name into a three billion dollar shoe brand. So when I was a kid, if you wanted to wear brand names and you couldn't afford the prices you would go to Mervyn's or Marshals or Ross and you look for things called irregular items.

1 (2m 41s):
Maybe it was a pair of Guess jeans missing a zipper or an Esprit shirt with one arm slightly longer than the other and it was no big deal because you still got the brand and you got it at Marshall's prices, but then starting in the early. these Brands like H&M and Zara started to go Global and it meant that all of a sudden many more people had access to high fashion designs, but at a much lower price and this is the way that Steve Madden not only tapped into but in a lot of ways pioneered, especially when I came to shoes with Steve maddens, you could all of a sudden by a pair of black stilettos for 70 bucks that looked suspiciously like a a $900 pair of Manolo blahniks or a 60 dollar pair of Lego like heels that were a knockoff of thousand dollar Balenciaga has this was the genius of Steve Madden.

1 (3m 39s):
He managed to carve out a very sweet spot between Nine West and Christian Louboutin. Now this approach didn't come without consequences. The world of high fashion is an exclusive club and Steve Madden is largely unwelcome and one reason pedigree. Steve didn't Apprentice at one of the great fashion houses. He didn't start out in Milan or Paris. In fact, Steve didn't even study design and he's also kind of brash and the bit of a loud enough. So Brash in fact that he was willing to break the law to get ahead Steve spent two and a half years in prison for financial crimes.

1 (4m 20s):
It's an experience that completely changed his life and we will get there but long before that. I grew up in Long Island New York use a scrappy middle-class half-irish half-jewish kid.

2 (4m 33s):
I was sort of a big leader type charismatic sort of always pretty similar to the way. I am now Babs, you know small and had a big mouth and a little ambitious and a little obnoxious

1 (4m 47s):
probably the kind of kid who would get in trouble at

2 (4m 50s):
school. Yeah. I always got in trouble. I was always in trouble. I had attention deficit disorder. I didn't know it then ya know. Buddy, nobody knew. Yeah. Yeah, that was the 60s and so they didn't really talk about it then but I couldn't sit still. Yeah, and you - would say I had

1 (5m 5s):
shpilkes Doug, right? Yeah. So school was not your your Forte

2 (5m 11s):
know. The only difference is that I was I was a reader so and I loved history and I used to love to read about the Moguls. You know, that was I was obsessed with summary. I was drawn to this thing about Louis be mayor and Samuel Goldwyn and these great entrepreneurs that I mean at a very young age. It was like drawn to it.

1 (5m 37s):
Yeah. Why why do you think I don't know why I mean, you know, I

2 (5m 39s):
was I guess it was the the intersection of Art and commerce, you know is very interesting to me and still is

1 (5m 48s):
and those guys came from nothing most of

2 (5m 49s):
them. Yeah, and they were all artists but they were businessmen. So is that kind of thing?

1 (5m 53s):
Yeah, your dad was in the textile business was just out of curiosity. What was your Dad entrepreneurial did he have that kind of mind?

2 (6m 1s):
Yes, my dad was but you know, he grew up in the depression and you know, he was very limited filled with fear because he had seen so much poverty. So his he sort of capped his upside if he was

1 (6m 14s):
very was not a risk taker.

2 (6m 16s):
He wasn't a great risk taker but he was a smart man. He was a businessman, but he never really made the big bucks because he was very safe. Which in a way I admire him because he stayed in it's easy to criticize people like that, you know, but he was a great always provided. We weren't the we were right in the middle. I mean, we weren't, you know rich or anything, but we weren't the poorest but it was like, you know people got a ten-speed bike and they got Schwinn.

1 (6m 46s):
I never got a Schwinn and you wanted to be the kind of person who could buy that stuff one

2 (6m 51s):
day. I did. I always did. Yeah. I always wanted to fly first class. Like I'd be riding in coach, you know, I was like get me in the front of this plane, you know kind of thing.

1 (7m 9s):
How'd you how'd you end up working at a shoe store at age?

2 (7m 11s):
Six? I worked in a shoe store. I was in high school, you know, the neighborhood sort of cool shoe store. They old the guy that started the store went to high school with my brother John.

1 (7m 23s):
So it was a job. It wasn't like hey, I want to go work in shoes. It was just a

2 (7m 25s):
job to sort of fell into it. Yeah, but I fell in love with it right away.

1 (7m 30s):
What did you fall in love with

2 (7m 31s):
so it's hard to explain but at that moment in the shoe business, you know, it was a very exciting time because This

1 (7m 37s):
is like the early to mid 70s.

2 (7m 39s):
You see ya like 74 before I even started platform shoes with very big for men. Well, I was a really white time in the shoe brands like rat for yeah, and so it's just very interesting. You know, I was into it. I was into the creative sort of vibe. Yeah of the whole

1 (7m 58s):
thing. What do you remember about working in that store?

2 (8m 2s):
I remember working very hard very motivated even at a young

1 (8m 6s):
age and was that I mean when you were there was were you thinking shoes? This is me. This is my calling or where he was a more like I like selling stuff. I love selling stuff. He

2 (8m 18s):
did I do but I also like creating stuff. Yeah, and I like creating stuff to sell. It's always been sort of a core sort of philosophy of mind. I've never been like, oh that's creative. But you know, nobody wants to buy it. And then on the other hand, you know just to sell without any kind of creativity is boring to me

1 (8m 38s):
too. So you are working at 6:00 to your the store. The store is by the way is called Toulouse solution. Yeah, and what who was the guy who ran

2 (8m 46s):
it? So yeah, there was this great guy. His name is Lance Reuben and I really most of what I know I got from the

1 (8m 53s):
sky you were 16 and he was in his 30 27. Wow. He own that store data.

2 (8m 59s):
Yeah, and the thing about this guy was so interesting. Because he was a young man who was successful and creative and I never saw that usually the people that had that I thought of as business and were like my father. Yeah, you know, they rode the railroad and they were those long coats with the hats like Don Draper. But anyway, Lance came along use this artist and he designed these shoes and also the wholesalers that sold him would be asking him for imput on designs. Well, yeah because he was an up-and-comer, you know, like Young Gun

1 (9m 33s):
so you are a high school student working at the shoe store. But you have plans to go to college right you you were going to go to

2 (9m 39s):
college. Yeah, I went to University of Miami in Florida

1 (9m 43s):
to study what

2 (9m 44s):
study Golf and suntan and students to do. Well, I did good. Yeah. Well, yeah, I mean, I love learning but it was I was on my own and it was too much. How long did you last there? You know, it's a bit of A blur but I think it was about 18

1 (10m 4s):
months and and it wasn't for you.

2 (10m 6s):
It wasn't for me. My dad did me the biggest favor by pulling me out of school when I say pulled me out of school. He refused to pay another 50 cents for me to fool around in college. So I went to

1 (10m 18s):
work. He went back to Long Island. I went back to Long Island back to Ash to a shoe

2 (10m 22s):
store went to work for an in another shoe store

1 (10m 25s):
and shoes because you had experience doing that. That's right

2 (10m 27s):
it I had to experience so it was kind of a famous store and long Island called Jill door hmm, which most people know in New

1 (10m 35s):
York. So you are and there you're also a sales guy just dealing with customers in the

2 (10m 41s):
store. Yeah. I was just a sales guy on the floor.

1 (10m 45s):
So you're out of your serve a College Dropout. You're working at this shoe store selling shoes. And I know what was your dad or your mom were they saying Steve? What are you, you know, you're not gonna work at a shoe store your whole life. Do they say that at all do they conscious leave you alone?

2 (10m 59s):
There are people that said that to me guys my own age, you know making fun of me for working in a shoe store for sure. You know, my father did not make fun of me. My father recognized that good hard work was

1 (11m 12s):
good. So you're working the shoe store and and I guess at a certain point you go to to the City to New York City to yeah, good nose.

2 (11m 22s):
Well, the guy that owned to lose Lance opened up a wholesale company called LJ

1 (11m 26s):
Simone and he calls you out of the blue. Yes, pretty much. Yeah, and he says

2 (11m 31s):
come to work. I'm cell. So that's what I did. It's like a little wholesale company. Yeah. And what happened was I went to work there and we blew it up man. But how did you blow it up? You know, I went to work for them and it was like boom we made of nice. Company out of it

1 (11m 45s):
and what he was sourcing his shoes from Shoe factories and then

2 (11m 48s):
what he was designing the shoes and I was selling them.

1 (11m 50s):
So he would design them they would be made and then you will go from door store store and I

2 (11m 56s):
would sell them and he taught me how to design shoes how yeah, well, you know, there's certain tricks of the trade and knowing what people like and working with different constructions

1 (12m 7s):
and it was just the two of you at the

2 (12m 9s):
beginning that is a few guys involved. But you know, I was one I was at the beginning and it got very sick. Excess who? Are you selling to we sell to Macy's and department stores and we sold to the Bootleggers. I don't know if anybody's from watch. I don't know. You know anybody remember the Bootleggers we sold all over the country.

1 (12m 29s):
And what's that that point where you start to think about maybe doing this for yourself or did you think this is great. I'm going to keep I'm gonna do this is I'm gonna just ride this train,

2 (12m 38s):
you know at some point I thought about doing it for myself. I was very happy there, you know, but at some point I thought You know, I could do this. Yeah, you know, how much

1 (12m 47s):
revenue are they doing? And when you were working for him how much money were they making I would

2 (12m 50s):
say they would doing maybe 40 million a year. Wow. So yeah, it's like big, you know, they were yeah, we may be something like that. Yeah.

1 (12m 59s):
Yeah, and and so what happened? Why did you leave?

2 (13m 3s):
You know, I had taken it as far as I could take it and I just didn't want to have a boss anymore. It was just time, you know, it's ready for me to sort of chart. My own course and you know, it's like

1 (13m 17s):
30 you were thirsty you were there for a

2 (13m 18s):
long time. Yeah, I was actually

1 (13m 20s):
31 and just to just be clear at this point. You are single you're not married. No kids that time right? Yes single and you were probably paid pretty well by Lance. We probably get making a decent living.

2 (13m 32s):
Yeah. I was I made a lot of money with him, you know relative to the town and

1 (13m 36s):
and you weren't worried at all about risking risking all that.

2 (13m 40s):
I'm still worried about it. Keep it then you weren't you were this really good salary? Some were was I'm a worrier, you know, I'm a worrier so yes, but I just wanted to do it on my own. Yeah.

1 (13m 53s):
This was also I mean it's kind of a wild time right? I mean you were drinking heavily you

2 (13m 58s):
were I was started using drugs and drinking. I was pretty much pretty inebriated most of my twenties. You know, they say when alcoholic hits bottom, you know, they keep there's another level of bottom to go. So, yeah, it was pretty bad that how bad it again. Well, you know, I could tell you a lot of stories about it. But basically I couldn't stop and you know, I was embarrassing myself and it was starting to affect my work and I had to stop or die it was that bad. Yeah.

2 (14m 38s):
Drugs and drink. Yes cocaine everything, you know and I would work, you know, it went I worked at work work work and then get stoned at night, you know hammered

1 (14m 52s):
because you were working so hard. It was just like the thing you did you

2 (14m 55s):
just yeah, you thought you deserved it or you could justify it some how but I was a mess. It was a mess. When

1 (15m 7s):
did you how did you how did you get out of that?

2 (15m 10s):
I had some friends. You know that pointed me towards a place where I could get sober.

1 (15m 15s):
Did you go to AA or did you go to a

2 (15m 17s):
clinic? I did I went to hey

1 (15m 19s):
and it helped

2 (15m 20s):
it saved my life. Wow. Yeah.

1 (15m 27s):
So I'm assuming it was after you recover that that you started Steve Madden.

2 (15m 33s):
Yeah, I was sober when I started Steve Madden. I mean it was just a miracle, you know, I started I was got sober I started this company and you know my life completely

1 (15m 43s):
changed and when you started the company did you did you the cash to to do it? So to launch

2 (15m 50s):
it, you know, I scrape together a little money, but basically now No your own money. Yeah,

1 (15m 55s):
and what was what was the idea? What was the first idea the idea was to basically do the same thing design and sell

2 (16m 2s):
yours exactly the same idea. And what was your first shoe my first shoe was a clogged was a backless clogged

1 (16m 10s):
and it made and who did you think would be your customer?

2 (16m 15s):
That's a very good question at the time. You know, I would say it would be my contemporaries, you know, so I was like 32, you know.

1 (16m 24s):
32 year old woman.

2 (16m 25s):
Yeah, I would say because I didn't really think about it. I just wanted to make shoes. You know, it wasn't something that I thought but what happened was I ended up making shoes for the Gen-X customer. Those would be people around 40 today. Yeah, right after I guess that's right after the Baby Boomers

1 (16m 41s):
so they were they were

2 (16m 42s):
teens. Yeah, and I discovered this Market by accident there was there were very ill served. You know, basically we stepped into that at Steve

1 (16m 51s):
Madden. And how many did you make

2 (16m 56s):
so, you know the way it was, you know, we made it we made some shoes and you know, we just got this fabulous reaction, but not from the people. I thought I was going to get a reaction from which will my contemporaries which was from the younger kids that were like the phone was ringing. Like where do you get that shoe and all that stuff? So we knew that something was going on here. So that's the track that we went

1 (17m 21s):
on when you so when you decided to start Steve Did you have an office or you working at a beard? I worked in a shoe factory issue fact, so you found a factory in New York in Brooklyn and and you worked with them and then you made I guess some shoes and then what did you do? Did you go to your former contacts that you had from?

2 (17m 40s):
Yeah, you know Macy's and anybody that carried shoes I sold and then I would go to the National shows and sell them all over the country.

1 (17m 48s):
But in that first in that first year 1990, yeah like you would go to. To shoe stores and they would take 10 pair with your you go with your

2 (17m 59s):
sample case and let your shoes out and people would buy them and that was it. Huh? So what was happening was the market that I was selling to everybody in the shoe business walked away from it the teenagers, you know and stuff like that the young and it was a different generation, you know, and so they had their own thing their own music and their own. I'll and we just tapped into that whole thing.

1 (18m 27s):
And this was a market explain the submarket of the time that was essentially abandoned by most. You know, it

2 (18m 32s):
seems like it they just abandon. I mean Nine West it was a company called Nine West that was dominating the industry because there was Nike and Reebok, but nobody was like making like funky little shoes. It was kind of a throwback to the 70s, you know from that other ear, so I kind of brought that back then I was just in the right place at the right time. I'm

1 (18m 55s):
where they'd support were they designed to be like cool but also affordable and

2 (19m 1s):
expensive. I've always been sort of democratic with my shoes.

1 (19m 5s):
Do you remember how many how much revenue you did in in the first year?

2 (19m 10s):
I probably did. I don't know five hundred

1 (19m 14s):
thousand. So it's pretty good pretty good firstly. Yeah, and you named it Steve Madden because it seemed like the obvious thing to do.

2 (19m 20s):
It seemed like an easy name.

1 (19m 21s):
Yeah. Yeah. Did you ever think about using A French name or like a European sounding?

2 (19m 27s):
You know, it's funny because it was originally the first couple of shoes were called

1 (19m 31s):
soulier. All right, Larry go like the

2 (19m 34s):
yes French word for slipper. And so, you know, there was some dispute about that brand or maybe I just wanted to call it Steve Madden. I can't remember but I switched it pretty quickly because you work there was one guy that called me up. How dare you I bought Suli I don't want Steve Madden who Do You Think You Are Yeah, I always kinda guy still he still in the shoe business that guy and I was torture him when I see him.

1 (19m 60s):
All right, so you've got this pretty good business going and year One. What are you thinking? Are you thinking? Okay. I mean, did you have Ambitions at that point already to make this into something? So

2 (20m 13s):
so where I'm at is I started the business and you know, I'm just not really don't have much money. I'm just sort of working hand-to-mouth and a friend of mine who I grew up with went to work for. Brokerage firm and they were raising money for small company. This is Danny porush Danny porush a poor. Yeah, and you know, we're going to raise you going to get you will raise you 600 Grand and then we'll get you 6 million who's working for a brokerage. Yes, we worked he was a senior guy and

1 (20m 43s):
and he said to you. Hey, you need to

2 (20m 45s):
expand your life really talented. I've known you my whole life. You know, what would you do if you got 600,000? Yeah, you know, yes hundred thousand was like Million to me. Yeah, and then he said, well not only will I get you 600 Grand but I'm going to get you 6 million dollars when I take you public and I laughed at him, you know because I probably had $30,000 in my to my name

1 (21m 8s):
and so of course, you're like what 3332 something like that? Yeah, and you're thinking you can raise me 600,000 bucks. Let's do it. That's right. So so so so Danny help you go

2 (21m 21s):
public and he helped me go public and his firm. Was called Stratton

1 (21m 26s):
Oakmont a very famous name for anybody who's seen The Wolf of Wall Street.

2 (21m 30s):
Yeah. She was pretty good movie. Actually, my name

1 (21m 34s):
is Jordan Belfort the year, I turned 26. I mean 49 million

2 (21m 39s):
dollars of which really pissed me off because it was three shy of a million a week.

1 (21m 44s):
I guess we should explain Stratton Oakmont was just like colleague

2 (21m 46s):
pump-and-dump first. Yeah, they used to call them

1 (21m 48s):
boiler. Right and they would basically sell they would sell really crappy companies. It would just get up get the stock price checked up and they would sell all the shares and make tons of money and people would lose their stress. And so they basically were wanted to do this with Steve Madden, right?

2 (22m 1s):
They wanted to do it Steve.

1 (22m 2s):
So

2 (22m 2s):
dad was the perfect guy for them because because you know, I had a company and do was small and they could do their thing with it. You know, it fit the profile for those of you who don't know me. My name is Steve Madden. Yeah, we know who you are name is on the box. So that's seen with me talking in front of the it was very accurate.

1 (22m 26s):
We should explain the scene for people who haven't seen it you go up in front of all these these like traders in this boiler. I started to what about my

2 (22m 32s):
shoes thinking that they would they really be interested tell them but they really weren't I was just a piece of it was just a piece of paper and a piece of meat that they could sell it or not though. The Mary Lou is actually the same as the Mary Jane, but it's black leather. I want to just to digress for a moment because when people are listening to this budding entrepreneurs, I'm not one of those entrepreneurs that that thought he was going to be super. Successful, you know, I was just trying to survive and I'm very negative and very pessimistic unlike maybe some of the guys that you've done, you know the shows total.

2 (23m 13s):
I'm sure they think that you know, they are going to be nothing can get me down. Nothing really that me I think I'm going out of business every other day.

1 (23m 21s):
So it at that time this is like 93, I guess when we had 92 93, so we went Public public and how did the stock do?

2 (23m 29s):
Well they were totally manipulated the stocks they went out. Out and if you know it was a pump. It was a classic pump and dump and only Steve Madden was a real company. Yeah, so if you kept that stock you would make on that day. Yeah in 1993 and you own 10,000 shares. I haven't really done the math, but I think you would be worth a lot of millions and millions of dollars

1 (23m 53s):
today. So the Stratton sale go to the company goes public strand takes you public. Yeah, all of a sudden it. Is how much money for you?

2 (24m 4s):
I think the public offering was about 7 million bucks. Wow, so and we use it and I took it and then very short period of time from a half a million bucks. I was doing 40 million a year or 50 million

1 (24m 17s):
and and what did that we

2 (24m 18s):
did within 36

1 (24m 20s):
months incredible. So, okay, you get all this cash from from the initial public offering. Yeah, and at that point, I mean, did you ask any questions? I mean These guys were they were totally breaking the law. I mean, yeah at that point they were artificially inflating your stocks. Did you like were you suspicious at all about Danny and about strata? And I mean did you did you think hey yo, what are these guys

2 (24m 49s):
doing? I knew it was too good to be true. Yeah, I knew it so we know I lied to myself and I told myself that it was a gray area, you know the trading in these stocks and the flipping they would sell me the stocks and I would sell them back to them.

1 (25m 8s):
Just Steve Madden stocks know all the other deals that you see they brought you in other

2 (25m 12s):
Deals. They brought me into other deals. So I lied to myself, you know, everybody's doing it, you know like that, but I knew In my heart that it was illegal, and it was wrong.

1 (25m 25s):
Was a part of it thrilling that you are getting away with it.

2 (25m 31s):
Well making that much money is certainly throwing for sure. But I wish that I hadn't done it and but you know more than wishing. I hadn't done it because that's sort of an empty thing to say. I wish that I didn't feel compelled to do it. I wish that I didn't have that feeling that money was everything because it's not it's not everything. So I was greedy and foolish.

1 (26m 2s):
Here's some trying to figure out you are this creative guy.

2 (26m 6s):
You

1 (26m 6s):
create shoes you design shoes and you've got a really successful and growing business. And then on the side you're doing this these weird stock trades that are shady and Slim Shady ultimately illegal. Why would you even do that stuff on the side? You know, we have the creativity

2 (26m 25s):
in the business now because you just you know, You just get caught up just get caught up in this thing,

1 (26m 35s):
but it is certain point. It can't be about money. It has to be about fulfillment and and weren't you fulfilled by just the creation of your shoes and seeing your shoes out in the world.

2 (26m 46s):
Well, that's a very heavy question. How one gets fulfilled. I'm still grappling with that today, you know, so there are moments where I'm very fulfilled, you know, and there are moments when I'm not I was raised to think that money was everything you know money is the center of the universe and if that's what your core belief is, you know, you'll do anything and you will break the law. You know II money's like a drug, you know. And we got in trouble.

1 (27m 28s):
In just a minute has Steve Madden pays and pays hard for his crimes and eventually how he comes back to the company. He started to make it even bigger stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible.

1 (28m 11s):
First two are how I built this 2019 lead sponsor hiscox hiscox, the business insurance experts who understand that each business is as unique as a fingerprint or a barcode and Taylor's intelligent Insurance Solutions to fit every business has very specific needs which may explain their 97% customer service rating get a quote. Or purchase a policy at hiscox.com hiscox business insurance experts. Thanks. Also to Capital One Capital One Knows life doesn't alert you about your credit card. That's why they created, you know, the Capital One assistant that catches things that might look wrong with your credit card, like overtipping duplicate charges or potential fraud and then sends an alert to your phone and helps you fix it.

1 (28m 59s):
It's another way Capital One is watching out for your money when you're not capital. What's in your wallet see capitalone.com for details? We're wrapping up 2019 on pop culture happy hour by looking at everything. We saw and heard this year and choosing just 15 favorite things could be a song a moment a movie anything we think is the best of the best of the Year. Here are pics on pop culture. Happy hour from NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's 2002 and after being implicated in a stock manipulation scheme.

1 (29m 42s):
Steve Madden goes on trial. He's convicted and sentenced to three and a half years in prison. So in the space of just a few years he goes from being one of the most famous and successful shoe designers in America to sitting in a prison cell. What did you think? I mean, do you think I'm finished? My life is

2 (30m 2s):
over. Yeah, pretty much. You know, I thought I thought I was could have my Goose was cooked. But I did have the sense that I could get through it

1 (30m 17s):
were there people who knew you didn't like you who are just feeling like that. He got his comeuppance. Oh sure.

2 (30m 26s):
Yeah. I had made such a success in the shoe business and I was a bit of a rebel. So now people are gonna say, See, that's what happens when you do that.

1 (30m 36s):
Where did you go? We're in Florida. You were sent to Florida. Yeah, minimum-security prison.

2 (30m 40s):
Yeah, what they call a camp. And

1 (30m 42s):
what was your what was your living situation? Like there

2 (30m 45s):
we lived in a Barracks. It was like a military Barracks you like your own room. I lived in a cube lived in a cube and with another guy or two. How did you pass the time? Well, read a lot exercised a lot and I taught some classes when I was there

1 (31m 5s):
did When you got there and you knew that you were going to be there for at least you were there for 31 months, but but 41, I think was your sentence 31 months 31 points. Yeah. Did you ever get to press your think? I don't know how I'm going to stay here for

2 (31m 19s):
30 minutes. Yeah, my first night. I looked up at the ceiling and I said how the heck am I going to do this? How am I going to get through

1 (31m 28s):
this? Did he go by faster than you

2 (31m 30s):
expected. It seemed like 31 years. Wow. Okay. No, but But I quickly ascertained early on that whining and moaning with not do me any good and running around saying I was innocent would not do me any good. So I would try to get through this try to better myself if it sounds corny but exercise and read and learn and you know that kind of thing and so I did.

1 (32m 4s):
When you went to jail, Steve Madden was doing very well right

2 (32m 8s):
when I went to jail it was doing well.

1 (32m 10s):
Were you worried about the brand that the name your name was the brand that

2 (32m 15s):
well your had great people working for me. I was I was really worried about surviving and getting through

1 (32m 21s):
it you personally or the company the

2 (32m 23s):
prison I was really more focused on getting through that experience.

1 (32m 27s):
Did you think that you would Ever go back to Steve Madden. You're the company built. Yeah. Yeah, so you had that Horizon. Yeah, I did over to hmm. Do you think this is a really weird question, but I'm curious to see to hear your take on it. If you could trade the time you were in prison for you know, just continuing on and not not not having that experience. Would you would you do it or do you think that this strangely enough that that time being incarcerated was important for your development as a person?

2 (33m 3s):
Yeah, that's exactly right. I'm a very big believer in you know, Destiny and your path and all that corny stuff. I just believe it viscerally so I'm so grateful for my life after prison. I married a great girl. I had great kids. I don't know that I would have had children had I not gone to prison. Hmm, so I regret some of my choices. Has you know shortcuts that I took or you know, thinking that money was the most important thing. I regret decisions like that, but I don't regret a day in prison was an amazing experience. It was very painful.

2 (33m 44s):
I mean the only thing I can discuss I've tried to describe it to people. Your heart gets broke every day. Yeah, when you're in prison your heart breaks every day. The living in prison part is not as terrible as one might think but you know your hearts breaking because you're not with the people you love that. That's the difficult part of prison.

1 (34m 10s):
It sounds like you became a much more empathetic person when you were there and you saw people who will unlike you who did not grow up like you who came from different backgrounds Who had who kind of ended up there because of circumstances.

2 (34m 26s):
Well, particularly the the African American Experience really touched me and young men dealing drugs getting huge sentences unfair drug laws that Lee were biased against black people so that was you know to see problems in those communities, you know to wit talk to young black man, and it's a very complicated, you know issue. Yeah, you know, I just think I'll give you an example. This is a little thing but you know when I grew up I went to grade school in the 60s, right? We we learned that Robert E Lee was a kindly gentleman he was He was called a hero like he let he defended his homeland of Virginia.

2 (35m 15s):
And that's just that was that's just complete racism, but we didn't realize it. It's the subtle form of racism. So that's the kind of thing that you know, those kind of feelings or stuff that came up in prison. Do you know that kind of thing that I learned and read more about

1 (35m 31s):
it? Okay, so, you know, I think you get out in in 2005 and and do you remember the day that at least

2 (35m 41s):
you know, that's such an interesting question because I don't really wow is a bit of a blur I think of it now. I mean I thought about that day when I was away for so long what it was going to be like and I can't remember it. Now. I really can my wife picked me

1 (35m 60s):
up and I agree. We should mention that while you were in prison you fell in

2 (36m 3s):
love. Yes. Yeah, and she picked me up. He was an employee went. I know that we had sushi and I just I I just can't remember it was so It was such a blur and was so much coming at me, you know when you're locked up after 30 months. You know, everything is like amazing like a slice of pizza is like, oh my God like this is the greatest thing ever.

1 (36m 34s):
So you you're out your back back in in society by you got your freedom back how long did it take you to adjust to having control over your own schedule your day-to-day

2 (36m 48s):
schedule? Well, there's a transition period you go into a halfway house, but I was fortunate because I had a job and I came right back to work. So it was an amazing

1 (36m 57s):
time. And what was your position when you came back to to your

2 (36m 59s):
company the same position I'm in today, which is the founder. Which is the chief cheerleader, we have fabulous people running Steve Madden. I wasn't a great CEO.

1 (37m 14s):
Why weren't you a great

2 (37m 14s):
CEO? You know, I'm just I'm not detail-oriented and my talents are suited in other things, you know.

1 (37m 23s):
Yeah. When did you when did you realize that you are not cut out to be a CEO?

2 (37m 27s):
Well what it's the business is small you can kind of be the CEO. Yeah, you know everybody so, you know everybody you live and breathe it and then you could be a CEO because you touch everything but then a business ghetto once a business gets past a certain point, you know, it's impossible for someone like me to To do that

1 (37m 46s):
job, but when you came back to the company in 2005, I think within four years Steve Madden hit revenue of over half a billion dollars. So so what happened in that time? Like how did the company grow? What was the strategy that allowed you to grow so

2 (38m 6s):
much. So our goal is to you know, make great shoes. And you know, I think that that kind of like one out at the end of the day Day, the marketing was in super fantastic. It was just great shoes great prices Great Value. And you know, I think that we just wore everybody out with that, you know more people were giving us their open-to-buy and we open more stores, you know, and thing and our internet business exploded but the big thing about Steve Madden I have to say and I've said this many times was the people it's the madness that I've hired so many great people it starts with recognizing my own limitations. Students I'm weak at that.

2 (38m 48s):
So let me get somebody that can do that for me. And you know, that's really the story it's people

1 (38m 55s):
so you come you come back to the company and you by the way, you had plenty of money at that point. I mean you could have you could have sold your shares walked away very rich man and just kind of I don't know done something else are focused on yourself. Why did you want to go back to the company?

2 (39m 15s):
Well, actually it's that's an internal that's a grapple with that all the time. So I love the idea of making shoes and the people want to buy and I love seeing my shoes being worn and I just love all of it. And I love making money. Let me be clear about that. I love it. I love the whole thing. What because you don't need

1 (39m 37s):
more of it. So what do you love about it?

2 (39m 39s):
Well, okay. That's a good question. These are great questions, and I want to ask other entrepreneurs rather. People like we so how do you stay motivated? You know, let's say you've got, you know a few dollars in the bank and you know that you the rent is paid and all of that and so what keeps you

1 (39m 57s):
going I once asked I'm Saban similar question, you know, I'm Saban is right the media Mogul. Yes, and you know, he grew up like dirt poor and Alexandria Egypt if he came from literally nothing, right and I said, you know, what what what's the big deal because he was waiting to sell his company to do. Disney for I don't know, you know more than a billion dollars. Yeah, and I said, you know, why won't you take 500 million when they offer that to you? He said it wasn't worth that. You know, I wanted I wanted to be a billionaire and and the point he made was that it wasn't about the actual dollar amount. It was for him. It was a mark. It was like a yeah. It was like a mark.

1 (40m 37s):
He could say, okay. I've reached this point and then I can reach this point and then it's this point and it's it's like a demarcation point of

2 (40m 45s):
success. It's a heavy question. It really is. But of course it's a luxury that people with money have to be able to talk about this stuff. You know, there's somebody out there that will listen to this and you know, they've got to pay their rent next Friday and they'll say we'll listen to this idiot talking about it, you know, and I agree with them, but you

1 (41m 3s):
know, it does get lost. I know human

2 (41m 5s):
motivation right like yeah, the money is the money but but it's something I think about a great deal because I feel so good if I about had a great day at work. Work where I'm inspiring it and an inspired at the same time. It's such an amazing feeling. There's no amount of money that can replicate that. Yeah, so I guess that's what I want, you know Inspire and be

1 (41m 30s):
inspired. Do you do what was the last shoe that you designed to set of

2 (41m 36s):
curiosity? The last shoe I designed was last week last week sneaker with studs.

1 (41m 45s):
You designed a shoe

2 (41m 46s):
last week. Yeah. Yeah. We have a factory in Long Island City just outside the East River in Manhattan, but I'm always fiddling with shoes and thinking about shoes. Of course. I have a great team that does most of the work and I take most of the credit

1 (42m 1s):
now you receive you you don't seem to be a super obsessed over your own personal style you like you The baseball cap thing going on you got but you're not wearing like a designer like Runway outfit every day.

2 (42m 16s):
No. No, I'm right. I look like a garage mechanic has on that Runway. Yeah, I wear t-shirts and jeans. I'm very lucky. That's I don't take that for granted. I'm blessed that I'm the ability to wear a nice clean t-shirt every day.

1 (42m 33s):
Did you ever feel like I don't know like some of these fashion folks kind of were snobby about About you that they don't know they didn't let you into their Club because you weren't from you know, Milan or didn't go to art school or because you wear baseball caps and and you were you know, kind of kicking their butts with with yeah sort of shoes that were fraction the price

2 (42m 54s):
did they say there's a bit of that. There was a bit of that big time. It's not So Much Anymore

1 (43m 1s):
hmm, they used to bug you.

2 (43m 3s):
Yeah, I bugged me bugged me a lot. You know, I or I would go into a high-end. Department store like a Barney's let's say and there wouldn't carry Steve Madden. They wouldn't dare carries the pain but all the people working in the store War Steve Madden, which is drive me crazy. Yeah. Yeah that happened so many times and still to this day. There's a bit of that going on. It's

1 (43m 27s):
frustrating but if you step away from the balcony like me looking at this, I would be like who cares you crush them all like so big deal.

2 (43m 36s):
Well I once was upset because As they put Puff Daddy in the cfda

1 (43m 41s):
to see if he is a club for

2 (43m 42s):
what the FDA had said something for designers that FDA very very Posh and and they put puffy in there and I thought to myself puffy not deserve. What does he

1 (43m 53s):
have? Are you in there? I'm not they want you or even to this day. They won't let you you cannot get into their Cloud allowed

2 (43m 59s):
in the building so, you know and and they would say, well you copy, you know blonde see Agha or whatever it is. Yeah, whatever the you know, and we We definitely are aware of expensive shoes that are out there, you know,

1 (44m 11s):
but I mean that in some ways a lot of these these high-end designers could make that you could make the case that you know, the younger crowd will enter the market by buying Steve Madden shoes and then there's this aspirational

2 (44m 24s):
to buy a Manolo blahniks what I always say, it's a gateway drug of shoes Steve Madden, they're not buying Louboutins and olives without starting with Steve Madden. So Manila should give me tons of love for that. I each much many more people than him. Do you

1 (44m 40s):
think that there will be a point where you are acknowledged by your peers. Is that important to you?

2 (44m 45s):
I'm acknowledged by a lot of people probably too much. Hmm, you know young men coming up really know and identify with the struggle and the grind and what I've done so I think there's a different kind of respect going on. Not what I had thought but another kind of respect and I feel it all the time. You know, I'm walking down the street and people shout out to me and you know it It's the real thing.

1 (45m 14s):
How much of your success do you think is because of your skill and intelligence hard work and how much of it is because of

2 (45m 21s):
luck. I think a lot of it is luck. I do. I think my own sort of philosophy. Is that the window of opportunity opens for you several times in life for one and I think the intelligence comes from knowing when that window is open and you know being Able to jump through that window because you could have all the talent in the world, but sometimes the window is just not

1 (45m 49s):
open. Besides the obviously the stuff that landed you in prison, what are the mistakes that you made early in the business that you would have done differently knowing what you know

2 (46m 3s):
now let me just say that mistakes can be a very good thing. Yeah, you know, so there were some mistakes that we made but we did so many great things and the thing about that is if you start getting gun-shy I stopped being afraid to make a mistake. You'll never have the brilliant ideas. You'll never have the big Ideas. You know, if you just try to hit the safe the safe ones, you know, then you're you're doomed. I feel like yeah, so you need to make mistakes. You need to make mistakes. You need you need to goof because if you're not goofing a few times, it means you're not reaching.

1 (46m 45s):
That's Steve Madden founder of Steve Madden shoes. And by the way, if you want to find out more about Steve story, you got a memoir coming out in a few months. It's called The Cobbler how I disrupted an industry Fell From Grace and came back stronger than ever. And by the way, how many How many pairs of shoes do to you actually own?

2 (47m 6s):
I don't have a lot of

1 (47m 7s):
shoes. What's a fancy is Brandi? What you on

2 (47m 10s):
I own Johnson and Murphy.

1 (47m 12s):
Thus the fanciest brand-new own. I

2 (47m 15s):
do I own Johnson and Murphy shoes. They're the greatest. Yeah, my dad wore them.

1 (47m 34s):
And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from our 2019 lead sponsor campaign monitor the radically easy solution to email marketing 80 percent of retail professionals indicate email marketing as the highest driver of customer retention. Try it for free @ campaign monitor.com.

2 (48m 1s):
Did you get a smart speaker for a gift over the holidays? Well consider it the gift that keeps on giving right because it can help you keep up with the news just say play

1 (48m 10s):
NPR to hear your local NPR station and all your favorite NPR shows as well. Hey, thanks for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and today we're checking back on a story that began about eight years ago in Columbia, South Carolina. Gabby Goodwin was about five at the time and every day. She went through the same routine. My mom would put Pigtails in my hair and for every pigtail that was in my hair, there was plastic Rats on every single one of them and usually she had one of these plastic barrettes in 10 of her pigtails. But me when I was little I would be running around at school and my mom would pick me up and my hair will be a complete mess.

1 (48m 54s):
I would say, you know, Gary what happened to your bows. Like what were you doing that voice? Of course is Gabby's mom Rosalyn who started to get really fed up that her daughter's breads kept coming out of her hair. And so one day Rosalyn actually went on Twitter to complain about it just to blow off some steam. I didn't think anybody would respond. I got all Twitter came back on and probably about an hour and had all of these responses from moms who felt the same way all these moms saying yes, our daughters barrettes are falling out to and we're wasting tons of money replacing them. But Roslin wasn't necessarily looking to solve this problem. She was working full-time as a healthcare lobbyists and she had no interest in starting a business but a couple weeks later as I was styling Gabrielle's Hair.

1 (49m 42s):
I mumbled under my breath somebody needs to make a bow and She jumped out of the seat and said Mommy are we going to make a bow and so every single day after that Gabby would ask Rosalyn winning oppose coming whenever I post coming. When are we going to make my balls planar? My brother's coming. So Roslin figured. Okay, since Gabby is so into it. Maybe we could just do this as a kind of science project will work on a design for a Barrette and see if we can make just one just one bread. So first they drew out a design with two faces so you could see a a pretty decoration no matter which way the buret was turned and each face has teeth and craters to trap and gather the hair.

1 (50m 25s):
So you're basically creating this sandwiching mechanism to make sure the hair. It doesn't slip out of the hair. So rustling looks at this design and she's thinking hey, you know, this isn't half bad. Maybe maybe we can make a prototype. So she gets the number of a couple of Engineers and she calls him up and you could just kind of hear them sigh like oh God And I said ma'am. Listen, you got 15 minutes. She goes to meet with these guys in North Carolina. And at first things do not go. Well, the engineers are looking at this design of a hair clip and they're just not getting it and I said, well, you know what? I'm gonna run them a car. I promise you there's a standard Barret that is falling off Gabrielle's Hair and sure enough at dug in the backseat of my car found a standard bread roll that back end and at that point Roslin used a mannequin to Demonstrate how a standard bread could just fall out of your hair and how her and Gabby's design works a lot better.

1 (51m 24s):
And as soon as I did that the light bulb went off and I said ma'am, we think you're on to something. So these two Engineers agreed to help her make the Prototype they found a manufacturer in China. They made an initial run of 500 bows and in early 2014 Roslin and Gabby put them up for sale on their website we can offer sale and we're like This is actually happening. Like oh my God, we're in business. They sold out of the first 500 pretty quickly. So Roslin and her husband to get a few loans to fulfill more orders. And when we last checked in with Gabby the company had just become profitable and now her bows are in 74 Targets in 22 States.

1 (52m 7s):
Anybody can be a gift for you as long as you have the courage to run a business. You can be 4 years old and have a business. That's Gabrielle Goodwin and her mom Raza. And founders of Gabby bows if you want to learn more about the company or here previous episodes had to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org. And if you want to tell us your story go to build got npr.org. I'm going to close out the show a little differently this week because some of you may know I also co-host a kids and family podcast about science called wow in the world. And if you happen to know a kid between 5 and 12 years old, please play it for them.

1 (52m 48s):
It's an adventure show or me and my co-host Mindy Thomas go back and forth in time inside the human body and into space and every episode is rooted in real science, like from real peer-reviewed scientific journals anyway, This episode is out. And this is a special one. It's our first-ever. Wow in the world musical with four original songs performed by Mindy and me. So I thought I'd play you an excerpt this guy. Roz is my latest greatest musical invention musical invention. What does it do? Well, I could tell you oh or Mindy I I could or I

2 (53m 37s):
could

1 (53m 40s):
or I

2 (53m 40s):
could

1 (53m 44s):
I could show you books and carrots and a laundry list of parts. But where's the fun? Well, it may not be fun, but he'll be informative. So let's start a new adventure and I'm very

2 (53m 54s):
confident. You're

1 (53m 55s):
gonna thank me when we're done. That sounds fine, but we both know how this goes. For science next thing I'm wearing crazy clothes just this once how about we try a new approach before I wind up as a flamingo or an oversized cockroaches. Yeah, that's true that did happen guy Roz. Let me show you my incredible Contraption. You gotta see this thing in action. It turns the whole world into some Come on, Mindy. I know you love to put me in danger things are at strange and then get Stranger Than something always goes home valid point but there is nothing like a feeling of the universe revealing all its Secrets face-to-face true right away machine or pigeon.

1 (55m 0s):
You'll get more than just a smidgen of the Nobody can replace make sure the with your really want to know when you want your brain to grow. No, I do maybe but we've got so much to go through can't you just tell me no, I couldn't bear has been like this that's from the latest episode of our kids science podcast. Wow in the world. You can download the full episode wherever you get your podcasts and thanks for listening.