2 (0s):
Hey, so before we start the show, I want to tell you about today's episode and it's about software a seemingly simple payment system. That was actually so complicated that none of the big tech companies wanted to take it on and the two guys who did were recent transplants from Ireland two brothers both College dropouts. And as you're about to hear both super super smart this episode first ran about two years ago. It is one of my favorites and I say that a lot but it really is I hope you enjoy it. it

1 (34s):
We built the first prototype back in October of 2009 and it was it really was apparent to us that can it wouldn't be easy. Like it was not going to be possible for it to be some sort of well, you know, we code furiously for two months. We launched this thing and then it's Off to the Races like from when we started working on it full-time do when we publicly launched with almost two years. And so yeah going to be hard but it is actually possible.

2 (1m 3s):
From NPR it's how I built this a show of that innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements they built. I've Gyros and on today's show how two brothers from Ireland wrote seven lines of computer code and built it into a 9 billion dollar business. So the holy grail for a venture capitalist is the elusive unicorn. This is what hundreds or thousands of business school graduates working at Venture firms search for every day.

2 (1m 49s):
They sit through pitch after pitch PowerPoint after PowerPoint. Hoping that today will be the day that one of these pitches will be the next mubaru or Airbnb and opportunity. So rare So coveted It's like a unicorn. Well, welcome to today's story because stripe is basically a unicorn with extra whipped cream and cherries on top. This was a company that went from zero to a hundred million dollars in value in a matter of months. And today barely seven years after its founding stripe is valued at more than 9 billion dollars. So now your next question what is stripe well stripe is Thing you buy it's not like Under Armour shirts or Warby Parker glasses, but it is what allows you to buy those things online if you use instacart or lift or Kickstarter or even if you shop online at Target, you're using stripe.

2 (2m 49s):
It's basically the backend technology that allows you to safely enter your credit card details and pay for what you want. And there are two things that make stripe very different from its competitors. The first is it Simplicity it was originally just seven lines of code and the second the Youth of the two brothers who founded it when stripe launched in 2009 Patrick and John Collison were just 23 and 21 years old the Collison Brothers grew up in rural Ireland in County Tipperary where their parents ran a small

1 (3m 24s):
hotel, very small 12 bedrooms when he bought it and and we got a house maybe a mile or two away. And so we grew up surrounded by Farmland the options were to play in the garden and did a lot of that and to play with Lego. We did a lot of that and to read books and I look back at a very fondly.

2 (3m 48s):
So your dad was running this hotel, and we're you guys involved with it at all. Like did you have to go there on the weekends and like change sheets and and mop the floors.

1 (3m 56s):
Well remembered, you know padded I think it was Patrick probably for when they saw her I was too and so You know, there's only you know, a two-year-old can only be so useful in the operations of the of the hotel. I think my favorite memory is the you know, the ballroom floor the highly polished surface. That was awesome as a kid for for kind of getting a you know, kind of a length game in terms of who can slide the farthest but much and all as I'd like to imagine that we were extremely useful in running the hotel. I think we were primarily a hasn't

2 (4m 30s):
how did you guys get into coding had that happen?

1 (4m 33s):
I bought A book when I was 13, and I read it one Saturday and started writing some web pages and really it was all sort of was all downhill from there.

2 (4m 45s):
Yeah, and how about you John? Did you like seeing Patrick and into coding? Did you think hey, I wanna try that too.

1 (4m 52s):
Yeah, that was definitely an influence and I think I had an experience that a lot of people I know who've learned to code had which is it's often an end result that pulls you along and you're making Everything up as you go and you don't really understand, you know, you're copying things from a book or from websites and typing them into a computer to get it to work and it seems like the two big motivations that people often have our websites or for video games and so in my case the initial website, I made was not very good after I built us Patrick taught me a lesson in insecurity, you know, I was probably 14 at the time and I cobbled together this website and there were vulnerabilities and issues and stuff that Patrick then hacked.

1 (5m 33s):
Sighs just to teach me a lesson on

2 (5m 35s):
that. Okay, so Patrick I mention this because you're not going to mention this the in 2005 you won an award. Like the thing is like the young scientist Award of Ireland. You were 15 and 16 or something like that and I'm assuming and maybe you weren't cognizant of this but we're I mean people must have said, oh, they're the Collison boys, you know, there's those two so really smart boys. Were you aware that you guys were were just really smart. I mean did you were you would were you aware that people were aware of the two of you when you were kids?

1 (6m 13s):
I don't think they were when we were kids. I think actually this this kind of science contest is that was really the first time where anyone might have had even the slightest cause yeah to have kind of come across or heard of either of us.

2 (6m 30s):
What did you do? What was your invention? Experiment or submission that when you young scientists of Ireland

1 (6m 36s):
well as we sort of touched on I'd gotten really into programming and particularly become interested in this programming language called lisp and I was kind of fascinated by list because it had been invented in the late 50s like really early into the history of Technology, but it's been kind of Forgotten and ignored the thing. I worked on with a new version of lisp trying to kind of update it making it really straightforward to build that have complicated web application. Ins and things like that and you know, it's funny. It's only kind of looking back and at this wood becomes clear. I mean from a very early stage. I was interested in sort of working on tools or just going to building things that created leverage for others and that basically the whole point of working on this programming language was to provide a tool that would make it easier for others to build things.

1 (7m 23s):
And so I you know, I didn't consciously think about it this way at the time he kind of went starting stripe or whatever but basically all the things that I've worked, I'm kind of somewhat seriously having some Been kind of tools for creation.

2 (7m 37s):
So in 2006 after a Patrick won the young scientist of the Year award he decided to go to the u.s. To MIT for college and two years later John would follow his brother to Cambridge to attend Harvard, but all the while the brothers were always working and conspiring and ways to solve problems. They come across on the internet. For example why it seemed so hard to buy and sell secondhand things in an efficient way. So one afternoon while mowing over some ideas. At their local pub Patrick and John came up with a potential solution backend technology for eBay users to manage inventory and they found two other guys who are working on a similar problem.

2 (8m 18s):
So they joined up with them move to San Francisco and called their company OCTA Matic.

1 (8m 24s):
What automatic did was admitted really easy to kind of manage and to list items for sale on existing platforms things like eBay or you know other good places for for selling some of these items you could use octave mattock to sort of track your inventory and to upload your items and to manage the listing photos. And so basically it was a tool for people who are kind of selling significant amounts of stuff online, you know, and so with software to help those people do that job better and the idea was that kind of that could help us gain kind of one side of the market place such that over time we could come and then build, you know, a better user experience for customers.

2 (9m 4s):
So you guys build this thing and who is the Look face of automatic because I mean obviously you guys are super smart and talented but you know, you were really young right like 18 and 16 years old. So were you guys sort of staying in the background and with the other

1 (9m 21s):
Founders the public face was really the website I know right the the Great Line about how on the internet nobody knows that you're a God, right? Right, right. And you know, we kind of took full advantage of

2 (9m 31s):
that, but the company must have done pretty well, right because I guess just over a year after You had your original idea. It's sold for reportedly for five million dollars. So was this strange to all of a sudden at that age, you know land into that kind of money. I mean, no you didn't get 5 million yourself yet to divide it up and step it still you probably lost hers. And yeah, you still probably walked away with a couple hundred thousand bucks. That was probably more money than you've ever seen in your life

1 (10m 0s):
was certainly more money than we've ever seen in our lives. Yeah. It was enough money that it For did a kind of freedom and really I think just kind of forced to the kind of reflection that you know had we been or had I been kind of unjust the treadmill of you know, you go to college and get your degree and then it's her first job and so on such that, you know, I can certainly imagine that of a different version of my life or my career where I didn't do some of that thinking until I was much older.

2 (10m 27s):
Yeah, so I guess this was like right around the time you were at at Harvard John and Patrick you eventually went back to MIT for a while,

1 (10m 36s):
right? That's exactly right in the fall of

2 (10m 38s):
2009 and I should just preface this by saying both of you with drop out and never return. But in that in that brief moment of time where where John you are Harvard and Patrick you are at MIT. Is that really this around 2009? Is that where the early sort of idea? That would become stripe

1 (10m 58s):
began? That's an interesting question because I'm the one hand strike was the most interesting idea. We had come across during the course of automatic. In that it was the single hardest thing about developing an internet business was just the the business side of it and accepting money side the payment side. Yeah. It's and it seems it seems like a really important problem and we thought there should be something really easy folks from developers instance head up to that people start except starting accepting money, but in the other hand, what did we know right? We were these two college students. Yeah, and so maybe the financial system had it all figured out and we were these these impetuous youngsters with the wrong ideas. And so you're trying to figure out in those early days of starting a company or starting a product.

1 (11m 43s):
Are we wrong or is the world wrong?

2 (11m 45s):
So let me understand try to understand what take us back to 2009. I mean, I remember using Amazon and you know buying stuff from Amazon and for me as a customer, it was seemed fairly frictionless, you know, I just hit, you know, click to buy it in that it would be delivered like couple days later

1 (12m 3s):
that's exactly is and I think that's part of why it didn't get Is that as a customer everything seemed fine? Yeah, and then you talk to anyone who had to run a business and in particular an internet business and they would talk your ear off happily about it. I mean that the kind of the stories they would tell you again oftentimes. They would tell you it was the single hardest thing about getting their business off the ground because but the providers that exist at the time he was often through banks. They were The Gatekeepers they were the people that said, yes, you can have an online business or or no you can't and so is a much more important. Step in in that regards any of those funny when we go to it investors early on for stripe. They would say, you know a seems pretty solid, you know 2009 like, you know, I think we have this internet payments thing down and they would do some asking around and that's when they got

2 (12m 52s):
him, right so you so so if you were starting an internet business in 2009 when this idea came to you what I mean and you you want to accept payments. Let's say you had a business selling. Oh, I don't know, you know homemade peanut Butter that you would ship to people it was great. It was hard. This would have been really hard to set up a way to accept payments through your site.

1 (13m 16s):
I mean, it's hard to imagine that it could have been the case and you know clearly there must be some kind of reasonable answer to this, um, you know, easy-to-use piece of software something and we just weren't finding it but we came to realize is that because of his financial the that sort of technology companies were very hesitant to go in addresses.

2 (13m 34s):
Why why would they be hesitant because you

1 (13m 36s):
deal with Ownerships with financial institutions and Regulation and risk controls and making sure that things are sort of done compliantly and it becomes then very complicated figure out how to offer that service internationally. And so the fact that you had to kind of span these multiple sectors and deal with all these kinds of and constraints with figure out a better way to do payments technology companies startups tended and still tend I mean for understandable reasons to kind of shy away from thing from problems that sort of re you have to solve a lot of hard problems in multiple domain. Yeah and A couple to that was the fact that in PayPal existed. Yeah, and I think for a while back in the early days of PayPal people thought that you know PayPal was going to solve

2 (14m 15s):
this explain for a moment that PayPal thing because I you know, I've used PayPal not very often but I've had you know occasions where somebody asks me to PayPal them and I PayPal them and it seemed pretty easy. So what was the problem? So the

1 (14m 30s):
basic issue with PayPal was that it's designed for consumers not for businesses. And so if you're building an app if you're building the you know a website You're building a new Marketplace something like this PayPal works. Okay for sending yo $20 from Joe to Jane. Yeah, we're works much less. Well is when you want to do this at scale you want to sort of build an automated integration to your website where you're running a business with as PayPal does isn't designed for the business use case. It was built for eBay. We're kind of one-off sending $100 manually from this person to that person. Whereas when you're building a business online where your again integrating this into a website. Enter or into a nap or something like that. You have a quite different set of considerations around how you do this at scale and PayPal had not been designed

2 (15m 13s):
for that. So, okay. So here's what I don't get you guys were obviously super smart and very good at coding. But what made you think that you could solve these big enormous problems like regulation and dealing with banks and developing relationships and credit card companies that you know Google and apple clearly felt that they could not resolve.

1 (15m 37s):
In large part a healthy dose of the naivete of Youth but you know, we didn't just leap into it. We built the first prototype back in October of 2009 and then we basically spent kind of eight or ten months trying to sort of map out. What would actually be required to have this work into this, you know, any material scale what sorts of people would have to hire which sorts of entities we'd have to partner with and you know what that would look like and so we realized well we need to hire Very senior and experienced Partnerships people to make sure that we can get to the first-tier relationships in place with banks and it really was apparent to us that can I wouldn't be easy like it was not going to be possible for it to be some sort of well, you know, we code furiously for two months.

1 (16m 23s):
We launched this thing and then it's Off to the Races like from when we started working on it full-time to when we publicly launched with almost two years. That's how long it took us to kind of orchestrate all those details that sort of you're describing and but I guess Yeah, when we got a sense, first of after again that this kind of Investigation was yeah going to be hard but it is actually possible.

2 (16m 47s):
So you guys had a couple hundred thousand bucks from the sale of okhta mattock. And obviously you had the coding chops and the technology chops, but you did not have any money. How are you able to get money to to you know fuel the Ambitions of this

1 (17m 4s):
company one of the things Silicon Valley does well is it probably has the height, you know Patrick and I now travel to a decent number of other places in stripe has offices around the world and Dublin London Singapore in places like this, but but I think Silicon Valley is probably the best place in terms of the risk tolerance of the investment Capital that's available if we could get people convinced of the opportunity and if we could show people that initial early customer traction and and how much it resonated with the target market. They were actually willing to take a bath despite the fact I mean when you look back on it, there's a vast amount of uncertainty in every other aspect of the execution between would Patrick and I be able to get visas for 19 of the United States to work here to would we be able to hire two, what would the long term, you know Financial partnership structure things like that look like but people are willing to look past all of those things.

1 (17m 59s):
Yeah to the

2 (17m 60s):
opportunity and what I'm what I wonder is when you mean you had an advantage when you when you started meeting with him. Sirs, I'm assuming because you had already started and sold a business and a lot of investors love that. They love to see that experience. But do they ask you where you ask tough questions by potential investors? Like for example, you know, you guys are really young. How are you gonna manage people or you don't have any connections or involvement in the financial industry or about back? And did you get questions like that

1 (18m 30s):
surprisingly? No, I think people are used to that in Silicon Valley. I mean by the time people become famous. Because because the thing they worked on succeeded they tend to be older but I think the mental image we have of people who do successful things is like 10 to 20 years, maybe even more older than the ages at which they tend to have actually done them right and VCS and investors and just people in general in Silicon Valley. I think are sort of unusually sort of attuned this fact and recognize and realize that sort of hey really significant work not only can be done by people in their 20s, but is very commonly done by people. And so, you know, I think that's kind of to their great credit and you know, we really benefited from it.

1 (19m 13s):
The they had this is not to suggest that their investors, you know rushed with enthusiasm to invest in stripe. Most investors said no, but the reason was much more reasons were much more because they just thought it was a bad idea rather than the kind of why people get excited. Yeah. Well a whole host of reasons it was going to be a developer oriented service rather than going and sort of trying to run this big kind of expensive sales and marketing campaign. So I'm really many companies in the same exact. He's already thousands of companies doing something like this as you suggested. There were a lot of Partnerships that we'd have to navigate and get in place and you know, those don't tend to be kind of the Forte of a start-up and it wasn't clear to them back then I think viscerally just Earley the market kind of still wise, you know, we were sort of starting stripe in the wake of the financial crisis and it's kind of hard to remember this or kind of internalize it now but people are actually fairly pessimistic about technology in some ways back then and that was in part because us investors had really kind of tilted quite skeptical on where technology was going.

1 (20m 22s):
And so I think you know, the kind of the bear case on stripe was in part this bear case on technology more broadly. Where well, maybe we've already Ready done all the stuff they're going to do.

2 (20m 34s):
When we come back head John and Patrick stayed bullish on stripe and how they finally got it off the ground stay with us. You're listening to how I built this from

1 (20m 44s):
NPR.

2 (20m 58s):
Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible first to zip recruiter hiring used to be hard juggling multiple job board sifting through stacks of resumes can be overwhelming but now hiring can be easy thanks to zip recruiter where four out of five employers who post a job get a quality candidate within the first day try zip recruiter for free at zip recruiter.com built be uilt. Thanks. Also to LegalZoom LegalZoom can help make sure your small business is set up for Success this year. LegalZoom has helped more than two million Americans incorporate form an LLC and More You could also get advice on contracts lease agreements and other legal questions through legal zooms network of independent attorneys, since they're not a law firm more information is available at legalzoom.com built on a secret military.

2 (21m 56s):
Terry recording a sound so haunting one scientist believed it could change the

1 (22m 2s):
world. My mind was racing as I listened to this and I thought this this is the way join mpr's invisibie Leah for the first

2 (22m 12s):
episode of our new season. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's 2010 Patrick has dropped out of MIT. John has dropped out of Harvard and their parents are not freaking out about this. By the way, the brothers are working full time on stripe and they start to look around for investors. And a lot of investors are saying no, but finally John Patrick catch a lucky break when they managed to get a meeting with a pretty big player in Silicon

1 (22m 48s):
Valley We had a meeting with Peter teal and to the just as in this conversation. We sort of told them structurally what we saw as being all the kind of major flaws in PayPal, you know, we we looking back on it. I said of cringe a little bit as you know, how impolite a guest I must have been again, you know, this is my first time founder of PayPal exactly and co-founded seriously. Laughs. Yeah, right exactly. And so, you know at Great length sort of belabor the point about sort of how they'd kind of bad things. Wrong way, but Peter being such a sort of you know, an inveterate contrarian was quite sympathetic to this case and decided on the spot to make you know, a fairly.

1 (23m 32s):
Yeah material investment of $200,000. So so what did

2 (23m 37s):
Peter tail see and stripe like what was it just easy to use. I mean, what was it the kind of thing where a software developer would like? Oh my God, somebody is finally figured this thing out. I

1 (23m 47s):
think many of the developers were just really glad that someone was finally paying attention to them at all. Now as it happened, we paid obsessive attention to them and we were really building for that audience. But the Baseline that people were working with was very low it was not competitive. I think what changed and wash we were fortunate to be a part of with the fact that now for internet businesses payments is actually part of the strategy that matters. It's part of the product. And so basically I think this used to be a fairly tactical vendor decision for the business where it was just something that needs to be taken care of and there was only downside really you can make a bad choice, but you couldn't make a great choice.

1 (24m 36s):
Whereas now as we've seen with companies like Amazon like lift like instacart they can actually win based on their product experience and that's new.

2 (24m 46s):
So, okay. So for people who are non technical non coders and I I count myself among them explain how this works. Basically your lift and I take a lift and I pay the driver. I just click pay and I've lived or you guys I guess have my credit card. And so you have to communicate with my credit card company to make sure that they are charging me. So then my bank account will be able to pay the credit card company later presumably you also have to pay that credit card company, right? They're taking a cut of your money to that's

1 (25m 22s):
exactly right. So what's happening underneath the hood when you use any business powered by stripe is you know, you probably type in your credit card. You probably only type it in once and then it's saved right with your profile of her anytime use it in future that is securely sent directly to stripe. So it's not you know hissing or is it something stored on other servers and then we're going to business wants to actually, you know, except money and charger credit cards and you know over time it's now more than just credit cards Bank transfers and different International payment methods. And things like this, but the business wants to charge your credit cards. They say hey, I'd like to charge this card $20 and we put money in their bank account and we have handle everything that goes on between that instruction and the money arriving in their bank account.

1 (26m 4s):
It's actually pretty complex. What goes on under the hood. But again, our aim is that people do not start businesses so they could deal with the minutiae of the financial system, right? They start businesses because they have a vision and they have a product that they want to get out there into the world and we want to Get them back to doing that anything that does not get them jumping out of bed in the morning, you know, we should be able to take off their place. Right and that of the technical level is is kind

2 (26m 28s):
of how gas so my understanding is that it was basically seven lines of code, which I guess from a coding standpoint is very simple elegant and a developer could just plug that in to the application or site they were developing and then that was

1 (26m 46s):
it that's pretty much it. We had lots of stories of people integrating pay. Payments in an afternoon or an evening and then launching their business the next day and I just worked consistently as a big break from 100 Prevail

2 (26m 58s):
before and once you started to gain momentum and you launched and I guess you lost you launched publicly in 2011, right? That's right. How did you convince companies to to trust this to work with you? Who was your first big customer client? Well,

1 (27m 16s):
because we are serving high potential companies and startups and Fast growing companies are we grew with our customers and so back in the early in the very earliest days. Yeah, those companies were pretty small but some of them start to, you know, become pretty big like lift and Shopify and so on became customers of strife and of course lift and Shopify have now become, you know have very successful companies and in their own right

2 (27m 40s):
and how did you get them to work with you to just meet meet the people who were working at those companies and you just developed a well as

1 (27m 46s):
well. Yes. We should have got to know those people but I think more More fundamentally and importantly than that we enabled product experiences that they wanted to have. So in lift case, for example, they wanted a not just charge the customers, but they want you to pay their drivers and there was no product that enabled a really good driver payment experience. And so we've kind of co-evolved with them to enable the best and user

2 (28m 9s):
experience and and your Revenue stream was a percentage of every transaction. That was that that was going to and that is the way that you get paid.

1 (28m 20s):
We really wanted kind of clarity in the alignment of interests where we would only make more money when the businesses be served made more

2 (28m 26s):
money and it's like I think it's like two point nine percent or something transaction fee right brought on a transaction. Is that right? That's right. What did anybody try to stop you or make life difficult for you Banks or Regulators? Because you're dealing with intricate Financial regulations. And I mean and big Banks presumably have a big interest in this as could be a revenue stream for them. Like did what They're people who try to or was it just once you started you just the momentum was the wind was behind

1 (28m 56s):
you. Well in this department, we really try to try to approach things differently to I think how technology companies often tend to technology companies. I think often have a sort of go It Alone mentality will build it all in-house will do it all ourselves. We can do things better than ever in the outside world. Whereas we thought that strike would only be possible and it would only be possible to do it. Well if we partnered closely with people who had deep Expertise and experience and industries that we ourselves were less familiar with and so from the very beginning even before we launched we partner closely with banks and now we work with banks and you too many different countries and not just Banks, but sort of other financial institutions besides but we really wanted to build a stripe as sort of a you know, multi-decade thing.

1 (29m 37s):
Yeah, and if we're going to go and to do it that way we really had to do it, right. So

2 (29m 41s):
as you started to really, you know, launch and develop and get more and more attention. Why didn't the competitors come out from the woodwork? Why? Like PayPal or these other transaction company square and stuff say we're just going to do what they do. Did they

1 (29m 57s):
try? Well what we were doing didn't look that important back then it wasn't the case instead of we immediately or what we were doing immediately looked like it was obviously working and obviously of major significance. We were back then in the eyes of others that have working with all these inconsequential little companies and making their lives a bit easier, but Was this mobile payments thing actually going to amount to much in Aggregates were at were there actually that many developers that would be starting the successful companies. I mean again, it kind of gets back to this pessimism around technology that kind of existed in prevailed around 2009/2010 and so on and this is one of the great facts about our industry is that you cannot turn money integrate products as a kind of mechanical operation if it were possible there would be many more great iPhone competitors face.

1 (30m 50s):
Book would have been long since he clipped by Myspace or Yahoo, or Google would be really good to use. Right and the the intricacies of good product of good design of good architecture. Those can't be trivially

2 (31m 4s):
replicated. I mean, I mean essentially your competitive Advantage was was you guys.

1 (31m 11s):
I think it's an amorphous combination for any of these products and I don't mean to single stripe out for any great. Some amorphous combination of sort of the ethos and the culture and the people and sort of the work style and kind of a fingertip sense for the priorities and all these things that are just like very hard to copy. I mean, it's the sort of a Continuum where at one end, you know, you're you're manufacturing steel and at the other end, you're you're manufacturing novels and in steel manufacturing sure you can turn Capital into more. Or better cheaper steel and at the other end of the very hard to know how you turn the money into kind of better writing and software is somewhere in between and I think this is kind of constantly the challenge for people looking to analyze and make predictions in the industry where again Google should have beaten Facebook.

1 (32m 6s):
Yeah. Google had every advantage against Facebook. They had more people more money more distribution more brand recognition more of kind of any of the obvious inputs and yet somehow there was something missing

2 (32m 19s):
when you Give this number last year nine point two billion dollar valuation. Does that mean anything to you? I mean, is it abstract? Do you think man? I'm rich or do you not even doesn't even cross your mind and must at some level

1 (32m 34s):
right? It's been my experience that people pay huge amount of attention to the headline numbers of Silicon Valley companies. And so, you know stripe is a company that's been valued in in fundraising at night, you know, nine point two billion dollars are or what have you there is an assumption baked in that stripe continues to execute very strongly and so it would be a very dangerous mode to slip into to becoming rearward looking and looking at everything that has happened today is because the much more relevant fact is wash we release in 2018 what we release in 28:19 what Stripes Global expansion looks like and and things like that. You don't have a valuable company unless the company continues to execute its very

2 (33m 17s):
Dynamic. It's a very careful way of saying hey, It loses all at any moment.

1 (33m 26s):
What

2 (33m 27s):
how much of the success of this company do tribute to your skill and your you know your intelligence how much to

1 (33m 37s):
luck? I think the question is less about how much can be attributed to my skill intelligence and instead to the skill intelligence of the hundreds of people who've gotten the striped where it is and I guess I would say that skill and intelligence and especially most importantly intense application and hard work. I think all those things are necessary. I think had they not been there had there not been so many people who just came up with so many smart ways of doing things. In the Zen dude in many cases toiled at such length. There's not a chance not a sliver of a chance that we would be here. But I also think that the luck was required to there are again groups of people who are smarter and harder working than us who just didn't have the same Good Fortune.

2 (34m 27s):
You are still both of you guys are still so young. I mean, you know, you're at a point in your life where I

1 (34m 33s):
so every day but every day

2 (34m 35s):
but our Pointer life where lots of people are just starting Out, you know at the same age. So when did you guys know that this was huge? I mean, you know it was going from this idea that you have in Cambridge Massachusetts to raising 2 million to being value to 20 and then a hundred and billion and then today more almost 10 billion died. When did you did you ever have a moment where the two of you sat back and said, wow, look what we built

1 (35m 8s):
them. Really been time for that I have and there's nothing like a young company to every morning remind you that there's so much left to be done so much. That's not yet working the way it should be. I mean, it's really quite visceral you wake up in the morning and there are 20 emails in your inbox that are sort of somehow all related to things that you're doing badly or wrongly. There's never a moment when it feels successful and there's a quote that I kind of often think about from Greg lemond saying of course the the cyclist. Yeah, it never gets easier. You just go faster and I used to kind of cycle quite a bit and there's a lot of sort of painful truth to that.

1 (35m 53s):
Where as you cycle more as you practice more as you get fitter as you get faster as your form gets better sure you start cycling faster your times get better with the experience of being on the bike never gets easier the pain that you feel on the Bike ride that's the same pain that you're going to feel on your 500th bike ride. You'll just be going much faster in the 500 bike ride, and it kind of feels like that in the startup where every day now the problems and challenges are and visceral pain is just as acute as when we were starting out the problems just have a different form. It's this kind of Relentless process of trying to shift what it is that exists and what we've collectively manage to create so far into what we all set out to create in the first place and we still have quite a ways to go there at

2 (36m 55s):
Patrick and John Collison founders of stripe in 2017. John Collison was described as the youngest self-made billionaire on Earth and I know you heard us talking about their valuation as being like 9 or 10 billion. Dollars will remember we did that interview back in 2018 today just two years later stripe is valued at thirty five billion

1 (37m 17s):
dollars.

2 (37m 25s):
And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building. But first a quick message from our sponsor TurboTax TurboTax makes doing your taxes as easy as taking a picture simply snap a picture of your W-2 to get a head start on your taxes. TurboTax. All people are tax people. Hi. I'm a new summer OT and I am the new host of NPR's TED Radio Hour. I am so excited because we are working on Bunch of new amazing episodes were exploring big ideas about reinvention making amends and the psychological effects of climate change our first show drops, March 13, please join me.

2 (38m 9s):
Hey, thanks so much for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and today we're updating a story that we ran about a year ago with Kirby or daily from White Salmon Washington and Kirby and his family spent a lot of time at the beach which means they have all observed. One of the great wonders of marine life the free flying Sun

1 (38m 30s):
umbrella when the wind comes up those things blow down the beach like crazy and you hear about it all the time. You hear about the beach. Is that fly through the air and land on somebody's

2 (38m 42s):
car and those things blow around because they're not always well anchored right in a big gust of wind a metal stake can just fly off the ground and Kirby just wasn't satisfied with the stuff that was on the market.

1 (38m 55s):
Lots of inexpensive tent Stakes that you pound in with a hammer or a rock but there's no really good toolless solution that would hold in all weather conditions and that would work in sand it would work in

2 (39m 7s):
clay and because Kirby he's a professional woodworker. He started to Tinker around with ideas for a better ground anchor and he was inspired by one thing in particular.

1 (39m 17s):
You've probably seen it and it looks like a gigantic wine cork opener

2 (39m 23s):
and in case you haven't seen this giant wine cork opener think pets because people use this Corkscrew thing as kind of an anchor to help keep their dogs tethered outside and Kirby thought a big screw like that could be great for anchoring all kinds of

1 (39m 40s):
Because the screw threads have quite a bit more surface area. It increases the surface area between the soil and the ground anchor

2 (39m 46s):
and more surface area means a firmer hold in the ground. Anyway, Kirby started experimenting with prototypes and looking for a company to make the screw and while he's doing all this he has this huge earth-shattering Epiphany. The internet is amazing Kirby was able to locate the perfect recycled plastic to make the screws and the perfect. Molding company that could make them

1 (40m 11s):
you could screw this into the ground anchor your stuff and the hold is pretty darn

2 (40m 16s):
incredible. And then Kirby did a Kickstarter campaign about four years ago. He raised $45,000 and boom his product was

1 (40m 24s):
launched the crazy thing that kept happening over and over again is we would get a phone call or an email that says I'm going camping on Friday. I have to have these for the weekend and so I don't know how we went from this product that never existed. Something that people have to have for the weekend and they're upset if they're not going to be able to get it.

2 (40m 44s):
Okay, great story so far, right but then one morning about two years ago Kirby gets this email,

1 (40m 51s):
you know, an angry email and it said I ordered your screws from this promotion you did on Facebook and I haven't gotten anything yet. And I thought I don't even know what this is. We're not running a promotion on

2 (41m 4s):
Facebook and you probably know where this is headed scammers were starting to get In to Kirby's business, they were copying his photos and design and advertising cheap knockoffs and way undercutting his prices. So as soon as we

1 (41m 17s):
would report one of these for trademark violations is how we would take them down one would disappear and then two more would pop

2 (41m 25s):
up so Kirby actually did something kind of unusual he sent his own product for free to anyone who had made the mistake of buying a cheap knockoff. Meanwhile some of his loyal customers kept reporting the knockoff sites. And leaving comments warning new customers about the scam.

1 (41m 43s):
We created this kind of international police force probably a 50 or 60 people that would email us every day and say here's another one and

2 (41m 52s):
that helps for a while. But when we last checked in with Kirby, he told us that the counterfeit screws kept showing up online. So in August of last year, he hired a law firm, which is now gone after 85 knockoff companies with more lawsuits on the way as for sales Kirby's doing pretty well. He hopes to do about a million dollars in Revenue this year. His product is called orange screw to hear more about it or hear previous episodes had to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org. And of course if you want to tell us your story go to build npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. And while you're there, please do give us a review.

2 (42m 34s):
You can also write to us at H IB T at npr.org and if you want to follow us on Twitter, it's at At how I built this or add Sky Roz our show was produced this week by Thomas loo with use a composed by routine Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Julia Carney Canada slim me but Grant Jeff Rogers are in turn is rainy toll I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this. This is NPR.