2 (2s):
One evening Krist

4 (4s):
novoselic went over to Bruce's house and started banging on the Windows

2 (9s):
demanding a recording contract. Yeah, I was really taken aback because in Indy culture contracts really weren't used very much. Yeah, so I was intimidated. I did call John and John's true genius was to go to the library and photocopy a generic contract use a little wite-out and and for twenty cents worth of copies. We were able to get a contract with Nirvana that is essentially the reason why we're talking to you today. From NPR it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists stories behind the movements.

2 (54s):
They go I'm guy Roz and on the show today how to rock and roll fans harnessed the raw energy of grunge in Seattle and then sends it out to the world to the iconic record label sub

4 (1m 8s):
pop.

2 (1m 15s):
In 2006 the influential startup investor Paul Graham wrote an essay called the 18 mistakes that kill startups and the steak number one single founder Graham argued that startups with two or more Founders have a better chance at succeeding and you could add to that have a better chance of having an impact as sub pop records did because the raw energy and creative tension between the two co-founders. Hers is what made that label legendary now if you remember or even if you don't in the first few years the 1990s Seattle was the epicenter of American youth culture Seattle bands like Pearl Jam mudhoney Alice in Chains Soundgarden and of course Nirvana seem to own the rock-and-roll Airwaves between 1990 and 1995 and a big part of how the city and its sound exploded out into the world has to do with sub pop.

2 (2m 13s):
Just like Berry Gordy and his Motown label brought the sound of Detroit to radios around the world sub pop and its co-founders Jonathan poneman and Bruce pavitt help turn Seattle into a global brand of music and culture. The Vans sub pop signed would come to define the do-it-yourself rock and roll of the late 80s and early 90s and Bruce and Jonathan managed to do this despite being shunned at least in the early days by the big influential American rock magazines. Now like all the stories we tell on the show sub pop was and is a business and as you will hear for a big part of its first 30 years.

2 (2m 53s):
He pretty badly run business, but that's not really the point. This is rock and roll and even though subpop never became a major Financial Powerhouse, especially compared to the big record labels its impact on American culture. He is hard to overstate. I was supposed to interview Bruce. David and Jonathan Hahnemann live on stage in Seattle, but those plans got shelved for obvious reasons. So we decided to go ahead and do it in the safest possible way me and my garage studio and both Jonathan and Bruce at their homes and for Bruce. It's a pretty isolated home. He lives in the San Juan Islands about a three-hour car and ferry ride from Seattle.

2 (3m 37s):
I'm on Orcas Island. I've been here for over 20 years. So right now I am at the base of a mountain. The middle of the woods and I had a dream 20 years ago that all this was going to go down. So I've been prepping for decades and have you have you have to do it. You're like you're at a place where social distancing was cool before it was cool. Yeah. Absolutely. I am looking at a map of where you live Orcas Island. You actually are closer to Canada that you hiding that you aren't you the United States or maybe like right in between your legs. You could literally get in a kayak and get to Canada about 20. It's wow, if you're in good shape, but yeah and Jonathan, where are you right

4 (4m 17s):
now? I'm a dreary City dweller in Seattle, Washington.

2 (4m 23s):
How you holding up? I know that you know, you were diagnosed with Parkinson's several years ago you doing great. Does that so physical therapy or anything that you do get affected by the situation now,

4 (4m 35s):
actually, I'm all for more lockdown.

2 (4m 40s):
Wow. Why did why is that the

4 (4m 41s):
case well with The Parkinson's from time to time. I have more challenged Mobility but it is what it is, you know as we get older we start falling apart and if this is the way that I'm going to fall apart, I feel blessed because it's nothing much to deal with just a little shaking and loss of coordination here and there but I've always been a bit of a yacht so it's nothing new

2 (5m 12s):
anyway back to the story. Tory starting with Bruce pavitt he was born into a large family in the Chicago suburbs. His dad was an insurance executive and his mom was a school social worker. I was born in 1959 and I remember seeing the Beatles on Ed Sullivan and so forth AM radio was my best friend and I listen to music constantly growing up throughout the sixties and there's an Infamous anecdote that I've been sharing with people when I was 9 years old I sold Christmas cards door-to-door one summer earning a dollar per sale and after a month or so of doing that I had enough money to buy a record player and after I bought the record player I spent all my money on records for probably a couple decades.

2 (5m 59s):
Wow. What was it? What was your first record? I bought two singles one was Sugar Sugar by The Archies and the other was a Revolution by The Beatles. And those are my first two singles and my first album was Sergeant Pepper. That's your first album man. I'm embarrassed. Mine was Rio by Duran Duran. Yeah, but the Sergeant Pepper's well done. Well done. But you know, don't forget. I did also purchase that Archie's 45. All right, so you kind of clear legal like into music as a kid and growing up in the suburbs outside of Chicago. And and did you ever like hang out in Chicago or go to Chicago like as a teenager?

2 (6m 39s):
Absolutely and I used to visit a record store called Wax Trax. Which as it was just one of the greatest record stores in America and that's where I got my schooling as far as Indie music and punk rock went. So I guess when you are around 20, you moved to Olympia Washington to go to Evergreen State College. Yeah, Olympia was just a huge huge influence on me. And I thrived at Evergreen and some of my all-time best friends are from that school. All right. So let's let's pause there a mic turn to to Jonathan Jonathan. In you you grew up in Toledo, Ohio. Yes, and I guess as a kid you were in bands you were like playing a garage bands from you know, you're early teens is that right?

4 (7m 23s):
I played in a couple of garage bands, but I was like Bruce a record collector primarily or do you good musician? No,

2 (7m 36s):
well. Hey, so leave

4 (7m 37s):
you with a single syllable answer like that, but it kind of emphasizes. Just how bad a musician I was and I

2 (7m 48s):
is so great. I was afraid that you were like cowards house. You kind of a troublemaker like you were like kicked out of schools. And then you were like that in and out of high schools and different feel like what were you doing? That was so bad.

4 (7m 60s):
It was learning how to become an adult. Okay. I was having a lot of fun like doing what well one of the schools that I went to was the school code. Cranbrook is located in Bloomfield Hills Michigan and it was a boarding school. There was a town next door called Birmingham Michigan, which is where creem magazine was located.

2 (8m 28s):
Oh, wow, Lester bangs magazine. Exactly. And what did you go seek him

4 (8m 32s):
out? We did go see him out, unsuccessfully. Okay. Yeah, but we would always get free Swag. Yeah, that was nice and then Detroit itself while I was a young teenager and couldn't get into clubs who

2 (8m 48s):
are still so many great

4 (8m 50s):
Rock shows and radio stations in Detroit at that time.

2 (8m 55s):
Yeah, I mean obviously Motown label and then like the rock scene right like MC5 and like what's up, dude. She was most no Stooges. Yeah, of course buttercream music alright to you do eventually graduated high school and I guess You head out to the Seattle area because that's where your girlfriend at the time wanted to go. And what do you got there? What was your plan? Like? What were you thinking of going to college?

4 (9m 25s):
I had thought about going to college I confess to you that I wasn't much of a musician, but that didn't stop me from harboring illusions of eventually becoming a professional musician and What better place to become a professional musician and Seattle, Washington in the late 70s? And and why is that that being sarcastic? Okay, that's okay. Yes

2 (9m 57s):
ice like wait a minute. Yeah, that's not the place to be right now you go to La maybe maybe San Francisco maybe Chicago Detroit. So what did you do? I mean, how did you like make a living and pay your rent?

4 (10m 9s):
Well, one of the places where I worked was a company called yesco where they made foreground music as opposed to background music. That was made Popular by the company music and it's the first place where I had heard of a gentleman named Bruce pavitt. He would later go to work at the same company and I actually knew about Bruce from his column in one of the local

2 (10m 44s):
magazines. So I'll shift back to Bruce for a for a sec to ask you about that Bruce you when you started school Evergreen State College, I guess like you also got into the college radio station or DJing there and you started like printing a like a fanzine called Subterranean pop and this was a what like a magazine that's talked about what I started a show called Subterranean pop at chaos radio now chaos radio with that was a that was a College radio that there Community radio station based on the Evergreen campus right?

2 (11m 26s):
But it was a very unusual station in that it uniquely prioritized independently produced records. So 80% of your show had to be from small Regional independent labels. So spending time at chaos. I got schooled in a lot of music that was happening in small cities around the country. So the zine kind of came out of the chaos independent music library and that Zine then morphed into a mixtape. Then when I moved to Seattle and 83. I started a column called sub pop USA in the rocket magazine.

2 (12m 10s):
I spent a lot of time nerding out on obscure Indie Indie records and I was providing addresses for those records so that people could actually order them. I'm trying to imagine so the zine that you It was like on black and white paper. Was it like photocopied? How did you get a printed? It was a went to an offset printer. My first issue is 500 copies and I wanted color and the only way I figured I could do that was to buy a box of crayons and invite all my friends over and they went in and hand-colored the cover and several of the pages, but I had them distributed by a distributor called systematic that was based in San Francisco.

2 (12m 51s):
And Cisco, but I will tell you I took a huge risk in that after I printed 500 genes up. I put them all in a box. I wrap the box up very artfully. It was almost like an art piece and I ship them to systematic and I said, please distribute my fanzines now, they could have just dumped them in the trash or distributed them and never pay me, but they did get them out there and they sold all the copies and they sent me a check. Then I reinvested in my next issue, but you I guess you are also like making mixtapes and selling them to people right? Absolutely. So I called it a cassette magazine but it's basically a cassette with a tiny booklet in there with some brief descriptions of the bands and contact information.

2 (13m 40s):
And the first one I did subpop 5 was kind of a hit. It sold like 2,000 copies which at that time was kind of amazing and Bruce. I'm curious. Us because you were when you were doing the zine, but you're also doing a bunch of things from from what I read in Seattle like at one point you started a record store called Fallout records. And by the way, did you I mean again like this is the cool thing about the early 80s and it seemed like that was possible like today opening a record store to place like Seattle would be hard right? I mean you need a lot of money and you have to sign a multi-year lease and then be all this it would be almost insurmountable for most people but I guess starting a record store in Seattle.

2 (14m 21s):
And in like 1984 wasn't that challenging we the key was finding a small space with cheap rent and it never would have survived as a record store, but we had the idea of selling skateboards and kids would come in and buy their skateboards. They hear this Punk Rock soundtrack in the back and we wound up selling a lot of Records, but the skateboards kept us alive. I ultimately was an escape. Bored person and the store was not generating that much income. So I did wind up going to work at this company. Yes, go that John had worked out as well which ironically ultimately got bought out by music.

2 (15m 8s):
So I do have business cards. It says that's a Bruce pavitt music and it's currently on eBay for $10,000 and I'm hoping somebody buys it my God. That's a joke. Okay, I was This is very hard. This is the challenge of the quarantine interviews. I can't see your face. I don't I can't tell the jokes without seeing you but we'll navigate that. All right, so you're in Seattle. It's early 80s Jonathan poneman. You're in Seattle. It's the early 80s. Do you remember when the two of you first met and what were the circumstances

4 (15m 42s):
first time that I for one thing? I need to say that I went to Time Travelers record store. Which was in downtown Seattle and I got a copy of Bruce's magazine, but I didn't know anything about Bruce and I first time that I met Bruce pavitt did I recall was when I had interviewed him on the local music radio

2 (16m 10s):
show that you were working at the station that you were working at.

4 (16m 14s):
Yes the KCM

2 (16m 15s):
because he was the guy who was writing sub pop and so he was an interesting person to bring on the

4 (16m 20s):
show now. No, actually he had just released sub pop 100 and I had him on the show and you know, we hit it off.

2 (16m 30s):
So Bruce, I'm looking at a photograph of you as a young man. And I think I think this is accurate around that time the early sort of early the mid-eighties kind of had a shaved head. Is that right? Kind of short shaved crowns. Yeah, there would be like 87. Okay and Jonathan you were like, I mean kind of Shaggy hair a little bit right? Is it my capturing the right?

4 (16m 55s):
Let's call it for what it is. It was a mullet.

2 (17m 0s):
All right a mullet. Yeah. Okay. Yeah a little bit of a mullet going and you're hosting this show if you bring Bruce on because he's released the sub pop 100 which is which includes a bunch of artists including Sonic Youth Rosanna. Thank correct. And and by the way Bruce before I forget at this point were you thinking you know what sub pop? This is what I'm going to do. I'm going to make a rap music label. This is this is actually what I'm going to stick is it sounds like a weapon to his point was kind of amorphous. It was a magazine, but it was a

4 (17m 27s):
cassette

2 (17m 28s):
it wasn't a music label. You still thinking of it as a kind of a magazine on cassette when I did the cassettes. It was a magazine on cassette when I started doing the records that okay. This is the direction. I want to go go in however at that time. It was really a step-by-step situation where it was essentially a hobby. Okay, and when I met John and we started talking the vision of kind of running a real label where you would actually have an office. Us as opposed to a hobby that was run out of an apartment. That's when that happened and that's one kind of like Phase 2 of the subpop project really kicked in is when a John and I joined forces and actually opened the office doors there.

2 (18m 16s):
I want to get back to that. I want to rewind a little bit. Okay. So you you release this record this album the sub pop 100 and this is just you're just taking existing recordings and just compiling them onto one record. Is that is that right? This is essentially yes, okay. How did by the way how did you finance pressing these records? I remembered that it fall out. There was one customer who came in who bought a lot of Records. So I called him up and said can I borrow some money? And he said yes, and I borrowed 5,000 bucks to put it out. It did wind up selling 5,000 copies and those are really good numbers at that time.

2 (18m 58s):
So you made tons of money off that or he made his Money back and more everybody made a little money the artists the investor and myself. So it is a little mini mini business success when you started to think about. Hey, this is really a thing. Maybe I can turn this into a label Seattle like a coat, you know, obviously how you have Jimi Hendrix, right the most significant Seattle artist him and Cobain, right? But Seattle was not Motown. It was a you know, it wasn't Ella it. Did you think? Of maybe hey, maybe we could make Seattle like Motown maybe Seattle could be like that. Were you already thinking that or not really?

2 (19m 39s):
I was actually thinking that later on as things started to develop but right around 86 is when the Seattle scene in my opinion started to coalesce. There was a compilation called Deep six that came out that featured a number of these groups including Soundgarden Green River and so forth and I was going out to clubs and seeing a green over in particular and I was really inspired by what they were doing. I did feel that Seattle had a unique Vibe and that the labels focus should be on Seattle and I think John and I are on the same page there and Bruce the Green River was a local band in Seattle and they would eventually figure really prominently in the whole grunge scene.

2 (20m 23s):
But at the time these you just like go up to them and say hey, I want to record your first album or were they were they kind of looking for

4 (20m 29s):
a way to

2 (20m 30s):
Record and you said yeah, I can do it. Like I can put it on my on my label. Will you have to realize the the scene in Seattle was very insular. A lot of the Bands went to each other shows and so forth. So it was a small scene. I was friends with Mark arm. He used to come in to fall out and buy records. So we went and Mark arms at the lead singer of that was a lead singer of green of Green River Green River and then he wanted and then mudhoney and then mudhoney, correct. So yeah, he was he was a real. The scenesters they say he was very actively involved in local music scene. I enjoyed hanging out with Mark and I called up my dad and borrowed three thousand dollars and got dry as a bone the first Green River record out.

2 (21m 32s):
And one thing led to another Soundgarden started doing shows. I actually grew up with Kim thielen Park Forest, Illinois. So I had known him since he was a kid. Wow. It was basically a group of friends excited about what was going on and trying to make things happen. And so this is like, I guess like eighty seven ish and like Soundgarden is a just it's totally amazing Soundgarden is a small little band in Seattle at this time, Kim. Vile is the lead guitarist and you guys released I think their first single in like July of 87 under the the sub pop label. And by the way did it I mean, does it feel like a new sound you guys like Bruce?

2 (22m 13s):
I mean did you did that music in 1987 feel like it was different than the other music that existed in America at the time. Yes, and I thought the interesting dichotomy was you had a lead singer who had an amazing range and in many ways was like A total rock star but that was juxtaposed with Kim files guitar playing which at times was a tonal and had kind of a more of an alternative Edge to it. So it was a unique marriage and then once they brought in Matt Cameron on drums, I think John and I both knew that they were going to blow up definitely.

2 (23m 15s):
So, okay. So I guess like a couple of things are trying to converge. This is like like 86 to 87. I guess there's Green River and there's Soundgarden and Bruce. You're starting to release their music and meanwhile as I understand it Jonathan, you've kind of been like circling around Soundgarden like wanting to be involved with them somehow. It may be as their manager or like on our recording project. But then you end up teaming up with Bruce to build subpop. How did that

4 (23m 45s):
happen? Well, there was this tavern in downtown Seattle right next to the building where Bruce and I would later. Have our first offices it was called the Oxford, but I went into the Oxford and I saw the members of Soundgarden sitting there talking with Bruce. And so I went oh my God, he's going to sign the band and my dreams of being involved in a music project that was actually going to do something. Would have been shunted aside.

4 (24m 26s):
So at that point Kim thayil he basically said Jonathan you don't have a label Bruce has a label Bruce. You don't have any money. Jonathan's got some money. Why don't you two work together? And so at that point Bruce and invited me on as a partner in The Sound Garden project that by the way

2 (24m 53s):
That you haven't how did you have money

4 (24m 56s):
a little bit left over from my bar mitzvah, which was it actually wasn't even from my bar. Mitzvah. It was from when I was born there were savings bonds and there was a round nine or ten thousand dollars being the ne'er do well that I was my mother stashed it away and my older brother Fred who was The successful sibling he was able to charm my mother into forking over the dough because whenever I would ask her for it, she thought that it was going to go to records or drugs or whatever.

4 (25m 38s):
She thought it was going to go for but I convinced my brother that this guy that was going to start this label with knew what he was doing and that this is going to be a real great thing. I made up a prospectus and everything for a business

2 (25m 56s):
plan. Yeah, and Bruce. What do you remember about this you did? Jonathan's like hey, I've got some cash and you've got a label and what do you think and how do you remember the story? Well, it made sense because I did not have the funding and also John was a music guy and this decision was made in Spring of 87 and when the Green River Per record release party happened in June of 87 by that time. We had a the Soundgarden single pressed. So when we mailed out the Green River EP to radio stations and press and so forth.

2 (26m 37s):
We included the Soundgarden single which was kind of a teaser for their upcoming EP that had to have made an impact because we're what we're essentially saying is this is a scene. This is Seattle and Green River and Aren't both got really good college are place. So that was really when things took off was kind of like in a way June of 87. We did the record release party and we mailed both of those records out and worry. I mean, I'm curious about the business side of this right because if today you were starting a business like a lot of Founders I have on the show. I'll say okay. Well, how did you do an LLC? Did you get a did you go to the business licensing office in your city?

2 (27m 17s):
Did you how did you split up the equity did Bruce did you guys do all this stuff? Did you sit? It down and go through the nuts and bolts of the business because this is rock and roll rock and roll doesn't do business. But this is also a business who well, we did all that that basic is all that so we did not have a business plan. We did not seek investors and try to Hype them on how much he had. Let me just say

4 (27m 40s):
earlier in the conversation that I made a prospectus will be hard for your listeners to recognize what I drew up as a prospective such as was for the Privileged eyes of my brother but Bruce and I basically hit up everybody we do for money at one point or the other and it was a business proposition that was driven by hype. He wanted to be involved with sub pop because of the artists that we were involved with

2 (28m 15s):
and of course we were the music industry,

4 (28m 18s):
but people didn't calculate on spreadsheets. They calculated with their hearts and with yeah there, you know senses Gap they knew that we were on to something.

2 (28m 35s):
Who was doing the business side of sub pop and in the early days because most co-founders I interview, you know one kind of does operations and one does strategy or more the creative side or like how did you guys divide things up Bruce? What do you remember about what you did and what Jonathan did in the early days? Well, I'll frame it this way. I remember one day Jonathan and I walked into a marketing meeting and somebody said, oh here comes the left brain and the right brain. And I think that kind of summed it up. My passion was really doing the art Direction. I also dealt with the day-to-day production. Just getting the records made and John I think really had the vision of of building the company and so a lot of the the strategy of the build-out I think came from John got it.

2 (29m 29s):
Okay, so so you've got this label going and I think that you then you release an album. Mm called Rehab doll by Green River, which I think was going to be your first really big record. If I'm not mistaken. Yes, and then it's about to come out right and then the band's what's up. This is that right? That's correct. They broke up pretty much before right before we opened our offices. So when we opened our office on April 1st, 1988, our big record was by a band that just broke up.

2 (30m 9s):
When we come back just a moment how Bruce and Jonathan recover after Green River breaks up and how they use a generic contract and a bit of white out to sign one of the biggest bands in Rock and Roll History stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsor LinkedIn learning. A lot of things are changing in our professional lives. So LinkedIn learning wants to give you a hand with skills that can help you and your career. They have more than 16,000 courses taught by industry experts learn skills, like how to master working from home entrepreneurship foundations, or how to be resilient leader to name a few.

2 (30m 56s):
So keep learning the skills that you need to rise to any moment and try one month free. At LinkedIn learning-dot-com how I built

4 (31m 4s):
this.

2 (31m 11s):
With civil unrest the pandemic and the economic crisis. You want to know what's happening right when you wake up and that's why there is up first the news you need in about 10 minutes from NPR news. Listen

4 (31m 23s):
every day.

2 (31m 27s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's the spring of 1988 and Bruce pavitt and Jonathan poneman have officially launched their record label sub pop in Seattle, but they've also lost their most important band Green River.

4 (31m 45s):
I remember Bruce telling me

2 (31m 48s):
I've got some good news and some bad

4 (31m 50s):
news. What do you want first? And I said, I'm a bad news first kind of guy Green River has broken up what he says, but the good news is is mudhoney has come in their stead and they're awesome and we've got you know, Mark said it they

2 (32m 10s):
went into the studio and record this great record. So again, the scene was very incestual very Regional but honey ended up becoming and still is to this day the ultimate or the flagship or third the sub pop House Fan. I think that's the best way of putting it. And then we have to add coincidentally a group named Nirvana came up and played a showcase for John and I a little bit after we opened the offices as well.

2 (32m 54s):
So this guy's very magically we open the doors and two new bands. Mudhoney Nirvana basically come in out of nowhere, which we were not really fully expecting. I'm wondering I won't cause I want to get to Nirvana on the bit. Obviously. We're in a scab lot about that, but I'm wondering what How was your financial situation in at the beginning? I mean you had some money but you had to then sell records and make a go of it. And then your made main band is like breaks up. So how close are you guys to collapsing at the

4 (33m 27s):
beginning? Well Bruce and I did two things early on to kept our doors open one is

2 (33m 36s):
we were beholden

4 (33m 37s):
to record Distributors these Hooters would do what Distributors do and if we had hit records they would give us enough so we could get the next record out or repress the successful record, but we were basically living by their schedule and my big brother who is a business person a big brother Fred gave us advice that we thought was outrageous at the I'm which was skip the middle person start selling records directly to the retailers and at the time independent record labels were doing this in the United States.

4 (34m 24s):
We all figured that we needed to have a relationship with a distributor to get a records into the stores, but Bruce and I picked up the phone and we decided to start selling records Zod a little bit cheaper than they were. Being offered by the Distributors,

2 (34m 43s):
who would you sell them to record

4 (34m 45s):
shops record shops all over the country all over the world. Actually the second thing that we did that kept us in business. And this was Bruce's Savvy observation of the record Market most of the things that we put out we would make as limited edition. And so there ended up being a Mania Over our records and now you know you have eBay and there's all sorts of vehicles for finding collectible records, but at the time all of the traffic and inquiry would come back to the label.

4 (35m 28s):
So this helped create and sustain cash flow right

2 (35m 33s):
now what you have to realize if this was a movie this would definitely be a comedy because when we called these First it was not easy to convince them to give us cash on delivery. That was very unusual. And we made a lot of phone calls and we weren't necessarily that successful. However, we had some unique items. We had R sub pop loser t-shirt. We have these limited edition singles, which were very hard to get ahold of so bit by bit especially with the those limited edition singles. We're able to lure some key stores into Supporting us but it was a very tough grind that summer was excruciatingly.

2 (36m 17s):
We're always out of cash almost all of our money went into just getting records manufactured Studio costs and then selling those records and trying to get the cash back in now you have to realize we also were working with Distributors. So it was kind of a two-tier system and we're also doing mail orders. Well, so frankly there was there's a three-tier system there. Bruce wanting first remember hearing the word grunge when it popped into my brain. I wrote some ad copy for the first Green River record and I wrote Ultra loose grunge that destroyed the morals of a generation and I put grunge in all caps in my mind.

2 (37m 2s):
It just meant music that had a grittiness to it as opposed to the Polish of a lot of music on major labels. Certainly the vibe in through. I think the reason the word stock is because the whole vibe of what was going on in Seattle was super resourceful in low-fi guys walking around in jeans with holes in it t-shirts with holes in it pawnshop guitars distorted amplifiers. It just it just worked in my

4 (37m 33s):
mind. That's exactly

2 (37m 35s):
it you Bruce you were the originator of this term you who came up with this bores of Runge. I would say was the first person you use it in add. Be certainly it would probably bandied about by Ahmed crew here and there but it won't that popularized on it. I'm sorry. I'm the grunge. I apologize, but would that suit them did you choke I know but you say you apologize, but would that word come back to haunt you I mean did you come to kind of feel like that word came to mean something that you didn't necessarily intend it to mean because it's now when you say the word grunge like if I went up to, you know, the the former members of Nirvana said, I love the grunge. Sound like they would kind of cringe a little bit don't you

4 (38m 16s):
think? I don't think so. No, they wouldn't no, I think it's like there are few things that I think are going to stand the test of time then the word grunge. I think a lot of these Bands Will long be forgotten but that word grunge and the style and time and the Gestalt, you know, everything that it summons. Yes stay and that's Bruce pavitt.

2 (38m 53s):
Bruce who your customers in 1988. I mean this music was not yet mainstream or big so I can't imagine you had a huge number of potential customers at that point and right. Well just to give you a feel for the record sales five or ten thousand copies of a record was considered very successful at that time. All right, so at some point you get this demo From a band named Nirvana. I guess this isn't maybe 1988. How did you what's the story? How did you come across that that demo had to come out how to cross your desk Bruce

4 (39m 33s):
and I would speak to Studios usually about paying down our bills, but occasionally we would ask the Studio's usually Jack at reciprocal because they were the studio of choice, bye-bye. So

2 (39m 51s):
far, is it Jack endino at

4 (39m 53s):
reciprocal Jack endino it reciprocal in this particular case. I asked if he'd heard anything that was blowing his mind and he mentioned his guy who looked like he could be working at a service station

2 (40m 9s):
and they'll cry over who was the drummer for The already notorious and uniformly worshipped Melvin's. I've been playing drums on this tape, and he Jack said I don't really know what to make of this except that it's amazing. You should hear it. When we first got the tape this kind of throws off the chronology a little bit because I know Bruce was still at your silly music at this it was you

4 (40m 57s):
I came down with that tape.

2 (40m 59s):
Oh, so this is before it is even before you started the record label.

4 (41m 1s):
Yeah, but when we first got this tape there weren't so many people enthusiastic about them

2 (41m 11s):
Bruce. Do you remember that? You remember the first time you heard? The demo from Nirvana I do picture if you will I was still working at music and I do want to say that a lot of the musicians in the Seattle scene. We're also working for the elevator music company music. So imagine the first time I heard Nirvana was at music and I listened to it with Mark arm who also worked there and our response was a little ho-hum the vocals sounded good. But we thought that some of the songwriting was a little busy. It was kind of a slow build with Nirvana and they just kept getting better and better and better.

2 (41m 54s):
Do you remember the first time you met these guys Jonathan do you remember what was your impression of them?

4 (42m 2s):
It was at a coffee shop long long closed Cafe robot and Kurt and his girlfriend Tracy came up there and I was Starstruck, you know, and it was Starstruck. This guy was unknown is unknown. But my reaction to that tape was different than

2 (42m 29s):
cruises for whatever reason and

4 (42m 32s):
Listen to that tape and listen to that tape and I got myself all in a

2 (42m 37s):
lather. All right, so you're so you're Blown Away. You meet him at this Cafe. And what's he like is he quiet was he's shy was he in a

4 (42m 45s):
very quiet very much flattered us flattered the label for its release of screaming life, which was a record that he really

2 (42m 57s):
loved the Soundgarden the sound Chris.

4 (42m 60s):
Yeah, he at the time was living in Olympia and Bruce's reputation and Olympia Bruce's work and history gave some Bona fides to the sub pop

2 (43m 14s):
named Bruce was the guy who started the zine and Olympia was the here that show on the College radio station. So like he was a known people were like Bruce pavitt that guy's a legend.

4 (43m 24s):
Yeah, if I had gone in there and just said hi. I'm John Paul Newman, and I've got even like exactly he says loser. I had the sub pop name and was his

2 (43m 35s):
you and Kurt and his girlfriend. No one else.

4 (43m 37s):
There was no one else until about 45 minutes into the meeting. Yep. And in stumbles in this guy who looks like Jethro

2 (43m 46s):
Bodine. I know who's that is just for Bodine and he

4 (43m 49s):
was the brother in a TV show called The Beverly

2 (43m 53s):
Hillbillies. Oh The Beverly Hillbillies. Yeah. Okay. I got you. Yeah. So this guy looks like Jethro who's this

4 (43m 58s):
guy? This guy is a guy named Chris enough to sell it. Uh,

2 (44m 3s):
oh, yeah. I think we think we heard of him.

4 (44m 4s):
Yeah, and so he kind of came in and he was none too friendly. Oh really? I can't say for sure, but I think he was suspicious of me and my

2 (44m 16s):
motives because you were like the record label man. He was a man.

4 (44m 20s):
Yeah, something like that. I think Chris just didn't like the idea of my meeting with Kurt and Tracy without him. That would be my guest.

2 (44m 30s):
All right, so you meet Kurt and Krishna vassilich he comes in and and has the conversation go with you guys. Are you like hey, so you know, what, do you think? Do you want to work with us? What was it that simple

4 (44m 43s):
well, no. Well I said which was true that all the decisions that we made Bruce and I had to you know, we vote add to both agree to it. And at the time, you know, I wasn't going to say Bruce thinks you guys suck what? It wasn't the truth, but I was prone to making statements like that because it was easiest way to deal with it. But I said is let us know when you're playing and we will come down and we want you know, what was true is that we didn't sign any bands unless we had seen them live.

4 (45m 25s):
Yes,

2 (45m 25s):
so I'm assuming they let you know when they were coming back to play live and and the two of you went. Bruce what was your impression of them? When you finally see Nirvana play Life. Well just a little context here. They did play eight o'clock on a Sunday night and it was there was a doorman a bartender some girlfriends. There might have been 10 people in the room. Well and I wasn't too impressed with the show Kurt seemed very shy very modest on stage to me. The material didn't seem very Developed but I did feel that Kurt had a really good voice and that there are a couple of songs there and I looked at John I said we should do a single with these guys and we felt the strongest track and their set was love Buzz which was a cover by the Shocking Blue a cover song.

2 (46m 19s):
It was a cover song. So I will tell you when we released the single it got a tremendous response. How did you convince Nirvana to work with you? Because Krist novoselic was sounds like he was suspicious and skeptical at the beginning. But but what if they just went along and Kirk was like yeah, I won't work with sub pop.

2 (47m 1s):
Do you know how that happened? So Jonathan one

4 (47m 4s):
evening Krist novoselic went over to Bruce's house and started banging on the Windows demanding a Harding contract Chris is always been but was particularly at that point a intimidating individual not the sort of person that you want showing up your door. I want to get some clarity

2 (47m 24s):
on that on this respect Bruce. So what do you remember about? So, why was he Krishna? Visalus is banging on your window demanding a record contract. Why can you explain what was going on? So I was really taken aback because you have to realize at that time in Indy culture. Contracts really weren't used very much. It was typically a handshake deal where you split the profits that that was the culture and it's one of the reasons why we weren't making contracts because it was just understood. Yeah, I will say that I was intimidated. I did call John and John's true genius was to go to the library and photocopy a generic contract use a little wite-out and for you know, 20 cents worth of copies.

2 (48m 11s):
We were able to get A contract with Nirvana that is essentially the reason why we're talking to you today. And is that was that like a five record deal was there it was where their terms? I mean, it sounds like I don't really want to

4 (48m 25s):
record one record into

2 (48m 27s):
option. That was it. Okay, one record into up and they wanted I think a firm commitment to getting a big advance for their next record. I think that was what was driving the interest in the contract John. Does that sound about right to you? I don't

4 (48m 39s):
remember that but that could

2 (48m 41s):
be that was my Emery very specifically, but I remember the band was in John's little office and there was this ritual of this signing and I just remember thinking Hmm. This could be significant, you know, maybe this is actually a big deal because we'd never actually literally signed a band before. Okay, so you sign them, but then they're saying they want an advance on the next record and the and then presumably they're asking for a significant amount of money. Unnie unnie event I are terms who is significant

4 (49m 16s):
guest is still by today's terms

2 (49m 18s):
would be significant. If I may I remember looking at the contract and feeling very nervous. I remember the amount for this second option being like 12,000 and then the following one being 24,000 or something like that, which I was thinking. How can we possibly promised these guys are going to give them $12,000? Because that's way too much money. Okay. That was my thinking at the time and I think John sinking was we'll figure it out which we did. So a couple of months before you release Nirvana's debut album, which is bleach which we'll talk about in a minute.

2 (50m 1s):
I read that it was kind of hard. I guess at the time to get mainstream attention from the US music press like Rolling Stone and spin and that you actually decide To go to the British magazines like Melody Maker and Annie and and basically kind of pitch them stories and just bypass the US music press entirely but that true the British music press has the most influential music, press in the world now in December of 1988. We released a box set compilation called sub pop 200 and that compilation really helped put us on the map. We sent a copy to John peel over at BBC.

2 (50m 44s):
He's at the legendary s he started playing that and then he wrote a review in the London Observer where he basically compared sub pop with Motown. He literally said sub pop has the most distinctive Regional sound since Tamela moton unquote that was in late January of 89. So right there, you can kind of Iowa just yeah just we should just point out some people may not remember like probably most influential DJ of the 20th century like there's never been anybody like him since absolutely for emerging artists he was the most prominent Global tastemaker so for him to play the music but then pitch it and review it in the London Observer which had like a readership of two million people that was a big deal all right so so I think as a summer of 89 you release Nirvana's debut album bleach And what did it did it like blow up?

2 (52m 3s):
Because I don't remember it. It would did it's like all of a sudden was it just this huge thing or not. Not really not much. Well, I'm gonna have to preface this with a very important and Out and that was the record release party for Bleach was actually are lame Fest showcase at the more theater with you know, seating 1500 people. It's sold out. It was the first show in the history of the more theater that had sold out a local show Nirvana opened we had their record for sale at that show. And that was kind of the official launch so actually sold quite a few records at that show.

2 (52m 45s):
Show the band went on tour and got really good response and it was just it was more of a slow build. Yeah, but it eventually sold up to around 40,000 copies and there was just a lot of word of mouth. So this gets some attention a little bit of attention, but Nirvana are still far from being a household name and Kurt Cobain is far far from being a household name, but it's clear that that that this there's some legs to this band and but by the way, I'm just curious did either of you guys think early on in 1988 or 9 then Nirvana was going to be one of the most influential bands in American rock history. Like was that did that ever cross your mind? I can't imagine it would otherwise you'd be a Seer but did you do any of you have an inclination that maybe they might be

4 (53m 30s):
and why? Why do you think that we're not Sears? Maybe you

2 (53m 34s):
are what did either of you think I don't know this band is going to change Rock and Roll history.

4 (53m 40s):
No way. I don't I mean speaking for myself. I didn't think that way hi. I thought that they were going to be really successful. But our metric for Success was much more modest than even the bands and that's what actually got us into trouble is that Kurt would tell me regularly. We should be selling a million of these and I'd be going you don't understand, you know, and boy did I not know what I was talking

2 (54m 13s):
about? Alright bleach. does pretty well but from what I understand that they they went off after that and side to deal with Geffen they went and they left you guys went with Geffen what why what happened we had a relationship with a producer named Butch Vig and we had sent some artists over to Madison Wisconsin he was an upcoming regionally known producer at the time sure so we sent Nirvana there in 19 90 I believe it was May they were supposed to record their next album and that tape wound up being a demo that got shopped two majors unbeknownst to myself and

4 (54m 57s):
John yeah I remember Bruce and I being in Europe and I remember having a conversation somebody telling me that you know Nirvana is out shopping for a deal and I was like I just remember being far from home and going, you know, our big bands leaving us.

2 (55m 24s):
I want to this is sensitive a sensitive topic because of course Nirvana is a legendary band and they change rock history and I'm sure this is painful even to recall and count this story. But I do want to ask you about this when you found out Bruce that that Nirvana was shopping around looking for a label to sign them. Did you feel hurt did you feel betrayed did you feel like they were selling out what how do you remember feeling? Well that summer the summer of 1990 John had recommended that I go visit Kurt down in Olympia and that he had heard rumors that there may be some major label activity.

2 (56m 9s):
So I went down there and I gifted him two of my favorite records. It's Daniel Johnston Hi, how are you? And a record by a group called The shaggs called philosophy of the world and both of these artists were just they were Outsider artists and my point was we're subpop. We believe in the quirky Outsider. That's where our values are. And if you go to a major the culture is going to be totally different. So I really want you to take that into consideration, but I don't think I really made an Once it was a couple months after that I had heard that they had signed with Geffen and I was experiencing some cognitive dissonance because I literally couldn't believe that was happening and you have to realize at that time.

2 (57m 1s):
It was very rare for a band to go to a major from the Indie system as a culture. Yeah bands in that system really felt aligned with the Indie culture. So there was a Big dividing line there and to be perfectly honest. I was in a State of Shock. I remember walking around. I went to Bumper Shoot and I'll be perfectly honest with you. I was walking around and I started to cry and you have to realize John and I put so much of our heart into the label and we had you know, we were legendary for bouncing checks and barely having enough cash, but we created a Miracle with that first those first few years of keeping that business alive and developing the buzz and the hype and the excitement of Seattle and then our Star Band left us for a major.

2 (57m 57s):
I was crushed when we come back just a moment life after Nirvana and how Bruce and Jonathan's relationship started to fall apart. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsor patreon where creators can build a more sustainable income Source by giving their fans monthly access to exclusive Community premium content and the chance to become active participants in the work. They love checkout patreon.com right now.

2 (58m 45s):
Cell phone footage shows police killing unarmed black people protesters take to the streets rinse and repeat for a decade why

4 (58m 56s):
everyone moves on

2 (58m 57s):
a blunt reminder that we've been here before? I'm code switch from

4 (59m 2s):
NPR.

2 (59m 8s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. So it's the end of 1990 and for sub pop history is basically a repeating itself. Just like in 1988 with Green River the labels biggest band has just walked out on them. Nirvana has signed with another label and to make matters worse Jonathan and Bruce can already sense that the band is

4 (59m 31s):
about to blow up.

2 (59m 34s):
Did you feel Bruce like it sounds like you'd like in a some ways. I think justifiably felt a little betrayed because you put all this energy behind this band and a lot of Hope into this band and then you know, and it's complicated because they probably got an amazing deal and these for these guys were not rich guys, they grew up working class kids and very few people are turn that down one under percent and in retrospect. I totally get it and certainly post never mind whenever free Indie band in the world was like Hey, I Could Be A Millionaire to just completely shifted the culture but at that time in 1990, the departure was had a lot more impact because of the taboo of going to the major.

4 (1h 0m 20s):
I have a little bit of a different take on it than Bruce does and that is there actually were bands that had been already headed towards the majors. But I also remember hurt as I mentioned earlier in this conversation. I remember Kurt saying you should be selling a million of these talking about bleach. Yeah, and you know, he was very confident in his abilities, you know, he was many things. He was a complicated individual, but he had a Bedrock confidence.

4 (1h 1m 4s):
And desire to you know be successful and I don't think monetarily, you know, he like that of course, but I think it was more just having the full

2 (1h 1m 16s):
impact as a narc. Nirvana of course in 1991 releases never mind and that just changes everything is like Annex. I remember that record came out my senior year of high school. It was unlike anything that had come out before it and subsequently like all of these things begin to happen. You've got in the fall of 92 the movie singles.

2 (1h 1m 57s):
You've got Pearl Jam's 10 sound. Ins badmotorfinger Alice in Chains? I mean all of these bands that came to be associated with this term with this genre grunge and none of those bands were I believe we're on the subtype label, even though sub pop was so associated with with that word. And with that sound and did you guys feel Bruce first to you that a part of you feel kind of like Left Behind as all of a sudden this became? Um huge like so fast. Did you kind of feel like wait a minute? We were this little blamable that guy actually was here from the beginning and now we're Left Behind.

2 (1h 2m 40s):
Not really. I think my feeling was that sub pop had done a great job of wiping the scene typing Seattle and we were just all along on a similar ride, you know and Pearl Jam played they're dropping the park show and 2030. Thousand people showed up. I was there on the side of the stage enjoying the show and I just felt Collective energy that was coming out of the city. And at the time it was it was very exciting.

4 (1h 3m 12s):
So yeah people came from all over the country because of what they saw in singles what they heard in the records that sub pop put out and we were instrumental in creating a mythical The Seattle which exists to this day.

2 (1h 3m 33s):
Yeah. I've been to the sub prop just wreck I shop in the in the airport. It's awesome. But I wonder like these major labels were making a lot of money off of these bands and at this point, you know, 90 91 92. I can't imagine sub pop was making the whole lot of money. So the way things played out we had points because of the contract on Nirvana's records, so we went from having no money. Actually having millions of dollars because because when Nirvana signed with yes Jeff and they had to pay you some of that yes, and then our bleach album. I think at this point is sold like two million copies, but I will also say and this historical fact is some sometimes obscured at the same time that smells like Steen Spirit was rolling out.

2 (1h 4m 26s):
And theoretically the money was starting to To come in we were releasing a record by mudhoney called Every Good Boy Deserves fudge that sold a hundred thousand copies and that came out at the same time in any in a parallel universe. That would have been our big hit. So there's more strands to that story. I wonder like even in that movie singles. There's a character played by Matt Dillon and he's in a band called citizen dick. I think that's mainly the band is in Matt Dillon is like Caricature of a guy in a band in Seattle who's like denigrating all the other bands at become successful calling them sellouts and stuff like that.

2 (1h 5m 10s):
Was that real? Was that a real feeling? Like were you guys, you know, will there be people and you're seeing her like, oh, yeah Soundgarden and Nirvana Pearl Jam their

4 (1h 5m 18s):
sellouts maybe but we were friends with these people and I think that we were always psyched when our friends had

2 (1h 5m 30s):
Yes, I will also say the cash situation during that period in the early 90s was was pretty healthy. So we were in this awesome situation of going. Hey, let's work with 700 or combustible Edison or sunny day real estate and I think is music nerds John and I were just more excited about discovering cool new stuff. The last thing I wanted to do was go to big Arenas and see any of those bands because I do not relate. Reena culture at all did you did you I mean as Seattle as like the national media kind of descended on Seattle you know in the early to mid-90s I don't know what would you think about that I mean this is like a sleepy town and the 70s and 80s and John peel it talked about this like authentic Regional sound and all of a sudden like Seattle is the communicate capital of the

4 (1h 6m 26s):
world well

2 (1h 6m 28s):
I think one of the things that made add some pop unique was that we were Shameless in seeking any kind of media and we have this kind of gentlemen's agreement that we would never turn down any interview of any kind by any publication well and so bring it you know we sub pop is a known brand in part due to the fact that we were Relentless and Shameless and seeking media attention that was just what we did other Indie / Punk labels would Try away from that but we didn't and you became like Starbucks or Microsoft and iconic Seattle brand at already by 93 94, you know hipster parents were putting subpop shirts on their kids right like sub pop that black and white logo that was iconic.

2 (1h 7m 22s):
I mean you were a big International brand and I share an anecdote, please John this one's for you. So last month, I bumped into somebody we're having a conversation and I said, yeah, it's involve the sale music saying Founders so pop and the guy goes sub pop. You mean like the hat and I said, yeah like the hat so he had no idea was a record label or anything, but he'd seen those hats everywhere. So the brand is very powerful. Alright 1994. I guess you have an opportunity to do a joint venture with Warner. there's 220 million dollar deal yeah you enter into an agreement with Warner Brothers can you explain first Jonathan can you explain the thinking behind it was this a chance for you guys and it worked really hard was it a chance to take some money off the table at that point

4 (1h 8m 14s):
yeah I think the easiest way to put it is Bruce and I at that point in time we're going on slightly different tracks Bruce was more interested in correct me if I'm wrong here Bruce who is more interested in in building a family and not stepping back from the labels so much but from being in the actual workplace which was getting more and more intense

2 (1h 8m 42s):
why was it getting intense

4 (1h 8m 44s):
because of all of the grunge height right and also we just had continued putting out records and in some ways it was much easier to run the label with no money then it became when we had Money and that was a lesson that I had to learn many times.

2 (1h 9m 4s):
So why the deal with Warner they acquired almost 50% 49 percent of your business for twenty million dollars. Was it an opportunity? Because I would if I'm you I would take that deal. Yes. I worked really hard. Yes, and it's a chance to cash out and to be able to get some Financial Security. Was that what you were thinking? I was I mean, I thought it was an amazing deal the fact that we could get that much cash and again, you have to realize We're both suffering a certain amount of PTSD from constantly being broke for a while. Yeah, and yes, the Nirvana money helped out quite a bit, but we had built up our staff and we are competing with majors and we

4 (1h 9m 44s):
thought it would be a good idea

2 (1h 9m 46s):
to have more cash in the bank Additionally the fact that we sold 49 percent was unprecedented as far as I know and we were able to maintain control. So it was it was an amazing

4 (1h 9m 58s):
deal. as well stated 49% was definitely unheard of at the time similarly the deal was done with Bruce and myself singularly it was not done with sub pop so the money went directly to Bruce and myself

2 (1h 10m 21s):
here's here's the where the story takes another turn which is you do this deal with Warner Brothers Seattle the Seattle scene Just blowing up. There's all this national attention. You guys are now kind of under pressure to sign more acts because that's one of the presumably one of the deals with Warner Brothers. They want they want you guys to bring in more more Talent under the sub pop leibel and in 96 1996 Bruce you leave sub pop now here is the story that I have heard and I want to hear it from both of you individually more or less Bruce you wanted to keep sub pop kind of small and just focused. On Seattle bands and Jonathan you really wanted to go big and the two of you guys started.

2 (1h 11m 6s):
There's a lot of tension between the two of you and you basically became a strange for 7 years, which is nuts because you're here talking to me now Bruce. Can you first kind of address that that story and I'll jump in there and try and speak philosophically here. You know, what I've realized about myself is a personality type is that I really am in my best form when I'm working with another person or a small group of people and that's kind of how I operate and what I read and I loved working with John in those early days because we're always ripping there was a creative process it was very rewarding we had a small staff and that's kind of my comfort zone I am not a corporate type by Nature it's kind of why I got into punk rock in the first place and I realized as the company was built eating out that could have theoretically been the best move for the company you know that's debatable but I felt myself it just felt less and less comfortable for me and a personality such myself is somewhat intuitive and improvisational does very well in the birthing of a company but when it comes to administrative and when things become more depart metallized it's a little bit soul-crushing so there was a shift in culture and essentially I was not Very happy and I think that was kind of the roots of what happened.

2 (1h 12m 35s):
All right. Now I wanted to get into some details here. This is important because obviously the two of you have reconciled and you're talking now, but you were mad you you stopped talking to each other for seven years. So tell me why

4 (1h 12m 48s):
I was never mad at Bruce Bruce.

2 (1h 12m 52s):
Okay. I was very upset for one reason due to potential. Be some misunderstanding what have you but there was a the firing of four employees that I thought were very valuable to the company and I was I was very traumatized by that. I was very I can put into words. But yeah, I couldn't process that and I was very upset and I think that was really what led to our estrangement and you know in the corporate world. Sometimes you gotta Barrett, you know, you got to pull out the hatchet but and Jonathan do you think that narrative sounds right that Bruce wanted to kind of keep it small but you had bigger Ambitions and that's what led to tension.

2 (1h 13m 42s):
You know, I think

4 (1h 13m 43s):
it would be a little bit what's a little bit different is that Bruce keyed into an insight about himself that I share about myself. It's just that he understood and accepted that about him. Self about 10 years earlier than I had a similar recognition, you know sub pop during that time when we had the break. I was already burned out but I felt we had done this deal with Warner and I felt personally that I had made a commitment to see the deal through.

4 (1h 14m 26s):
Yeah with the benefit of hindsight. there are a lot of decisions that I made along the way I've realized that not only for the company were they probably not the best but they weren't even good for I wasn't representing my own core feelings

2 (1h 14m 49s):
this is an important point because this is really where we learn about ourselves and we figure out how to do it better next time which is her super important like I don't think enough Business Leaders us spend the time to reflect on the bad decisions they made and because that's what makes you a better leader right and that's that's what enabled you Jonathan to go on and lead subpop to Greater Heights but what were what was the decision a few decision that you made that in hindsight or bad decisions

4 (1h 15m 19s):
for one thing there was a lot of personalities ego mmm and a lack of a Clarity of mission In the late 90s, I can't lay that at anybody's feet. But my own I candid up contributing a lot of the money reinvesting a lot of the money that I had made from the deal with Warner and reinvesting in a system that in my Heart of heart didn't even really believe in but it definitely took a situation like what happened in 1997 to blows.

4 (1h 15m 59s):
Things wide open and where I feel terrible to this day, is that a lot of the people who got hurt and who I hurt making some of the decisions that I made at that time didn't deserve it.

2 (1h 16m 14s):
I want to I want to ask you but 1997 because you almost went under I think sub pop almost like collapsed just a few years after the deal with Warner because it by this point Bruce had left and you're running it now and I think there was a just a horrible period your dad passed away. and all this crazy stuff is going on what was going on that almost caused subpop to collapse

4 (1h 16m 36s):
we were we were spending too much money we were like a major label only less personable less effective and less well

2 (1h 16m 51s):
run what were you spending money on well there were bands

4 (1h 16m 56s):
who before Nirvana had there explosive success we would have signed for $2,000 right in one particular case I signed one of those bands for a hundred and fifty thousand

2 (1h 17m 11s):
dollars I see so you were basically overpaying because you thought who's going to be the zoo they could be the next Nirvana it was the

4 (1h 17m 20s):
what I had mistakenly thought getting caught up in the Mania yeah it's something that you need to annually in our business keep an eye on you know there's just the cost of staying competitive it's what I knew originally but I had to learn it again and I've had to learn it again a couple of times since is a bands cup to sub pop for the sub pop experience there are labels where they can get more money get more flattery but if they want to the sub pop experience which is community is a loving familial you know we are in the music industry so there are limits to that but if they want the sub pop experience they come to sub pop and that's something yeah it's intangible it's not something that you can play out in dollars and cents

2 (1h 18m 26s):
Bruce you were you were kind of on the sidelines and you were out of the picture and or you completely disengaged or were you kind of following the tumult at sub pop from a distance because this was a rough period mean I think really in the late 90s hip-hop was hanging by a thread if I'm not mistaken like it was close to collapse I was not following it super closely because I was kind of emotionally shut down and just I took an exit so that was yeah I was just in a different space I will tell you I was kind of traumatized John a this is embarrassing to say but I will say this I would come to Seattle and I would be nervous because I thought I might bump into you wow and then I would be really angry and so I had some processing to do and it took me a while to do it and that's just the way life is sometimes you know it's just our own psychological process but what kind of brought me back in was like hey it's labels putting out some good music you know and you know we grow up we change we process and that's just that's life Jonathan went really I think the Turning Point really starts in early 2000s 2001 with The Shins darling my mouth he released their record o inverted world and the to do tutions records and then you do give up by the Postal Service I think to this day either your best-selling or one of your best-selling records ever second guess those two bands if I'm not mistaken that kind of started turn things around for sub pop was that period so the turnaround when you started to have that happen was it just luck or you just lucky to get those fans come to you or always lucky to have the Vance come to us but also I guess like right around this time something happened that that would turn out to be fortuitous a woman who had once an internal guess it's a pop actually came

4 (1h 20m 54s):
back to take on

2 (1h 20m 55s):
like more of a major role in the company making Jasper

4 (1h 20m 58s):
Megan Jasper at the end of the 90s I invited her to come back to subpop as a marketing lead but she quickly ended up becoming the conscience and the soul of the company

2 (1h 21m 16s):
and Megan is today we should mention the CEO of sub pop so she is indeed and by the way do either of you still own parts of sub Pop I do you still own part okay so here's a question for you Bruce how were you able to reconcile with John twitch often I mean here you are the two of you talking about this remarkable partnership and this traumatic breakup and split and the tension and you're talking about it so openly and candidly and it's so so important I think that for people listening to hear this right because Partnerships are complicated but man to get to this point there must have been some hence reconciliation or maybe therapy or what happened how did you reach out to him and say Hey You Wanna Have Lunch like what what what happened well it kind of unfolded over a over a period of time but I think what really shifted things for me were attending these phenomenal anniversary parties which I don't know if you've heard about these but every five years subpop will ya throw a big free show and I remember in 2008 is that the correct year I think that was the 20th Yep 20-year anniversary who is it and I just reconnected with musicians and staff members and few years ago there was the 30th anniversary in West Seattle and I have to say it was just one of the most wonderful days of my life and John and I spent a bit of time just hanging out and chatting adding and it was you know it just life evolves and in the case of sub pop just keeps getting better it just seems like time and and just getting older kind of healed healed that a little bit for you or maybe a lot for you know for sure but just also recognizing and appreciating the work that John and Megan have done with sub pop John is a very tenacious person and his willpower is his will to keep this party going is pretty phenomenal it's a tumultuous business it's a it's a very challenging business to be in in the fact that some pop is still around 30 plus years later as an independent label is is quite amazing it's amazing Bruce when you think about all of your success starting this iconic label and it gave you Financial Security and also kind of you know iconic status.

2 (1h 23m 57s):
How much do you attribute your success to how hard you worked and your intelligence and how much do you think should be to luck? Let's say 50/50 the thing about I think John and I were both Brilliant opportunists, you know and a lot of our success was based on seeing opportunity when other people didn't see it so you could say that that's the luck but you could also say it's the ability to seize an opportunity when it comes forth and that's the difference between making it and not making it Jonathan.

4 (1h 24m 32s):
you know I think any business success is going to have luck involved but the reason we were driven to it in the first place was because of are both being dedicated

2 (1h 24m 47s):
fans of music but I just want to throw something out there that those first three years that we were open more brutal and there was a point in time in August of 1991 where we literally did not have a hundred dollars in the bank okay and that's the week that Smells Like Teen Spirit got shipped out to radio so on the one hand we were very lucky that Nirvana blew up but I also have to hand it to John and I for sticking it through at that point and keeping the lights on Bruce when you think about sub pop today it's a Seattle brand iconic Starbucks and Microsoft subpop that's he had all right I know I'm tired clich?s here but like it is pretty crazy that you wanted this label to be like Motown was to Detroit and it did like you actually achieve that

4 (1h 25m 52s):
do you do you ever come reflect on

2 (1h 25m 53s):
that just thing is crazy yes I do I mean just walking down Capitol Hill and Seattle and seeing the hats and the t-shirts and seeing the store in the airport it's very surreal and the the beautiful thing about it is simp up is a corporate logo that tends to make people actually feel really good when they say yeah because the associated with creativity and community and Outsiders who played the game stayed in the game but have maintained their integrity so it's a very subversive Corporation and that's the pride that I get when I see see the logo is just that it represents such positive feelings and what about you Jonathan I mean what do you think when you think about this thing that you all you

4 (1h 26m 42s):
co-created I've a I have a lot of love for sub pop and it's been a part of me for so long that you know the idea of not being part of some pop not that that's what I'm considering now but if I were to hypothetically consider it would be like considering proceeding with my life without my heart or without my head it's just a part of who I am and it's been a long haul there have been a lot of lessons learned and they haven't always been easy ones in fact more often than not they're painful but it's been my life and it's been a great one and ultimately I'd have it no other way

2 (1h 27m 47s):
that's Jonathan poneman Bruce pavitt cofounders of sub pop records by the way two years ago the label Mark its 30th anniversary with a massive concert in Seattle the mayor even dubbed it sub pop day and even Alaska Airlines got into the ACT they took one of their planes and covered it with giant sub pop sticker are from the past 30 years and thanks so much for listening to the show this week you can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org if you want to tweet at us it's at how I built this or add guy Roz this episode was produced by Phil Harrell and Rachel Falkner with music composed By REM team at our Bluey thanks also to Canada slim Julian Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this