0 (0s):
Hey really quick before we start the show, did you know that how I built this is also a book? Well, it's now out in paperback and available wherever books are sold. So check it out. How I built this, the book now to the show,

2 (18s):
You know, we're, we're a family business, we're all in the family business. And there was this need to separate the business from our family life. And it was becoming harder and harder as the demands of the business grew.

3 (31s):
I personally, I told the children, I said, listen, somebody asks us to make something. We make it, but I do not know how to grow this business strategically anymore. I do not know I need somebody else.

2 (42s):
You know, we, we need some outside intervention here to help us see this business to its potential, but more importantly, really to preserve a lot of our family.

0 (59s):
Welcome to how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built. I'm guy Roz and on the show today as Suki Singh and her family built a multi-million dollar brand by betting that there are two types of people in the world, those who love Indian food and those who just haven't tried it yet, There are some products that in general, you only buy once and enameled Dutch oven, Leatherman knife Vitamix.

0 (1m 40s):
But when it comes to food, in order for a brand to stay viable, it has to be a product you buy a lot. So at least three to four times a year, this is a realization Suki Singh had at about the mid point of creating her brand. Suki is gourmet Indian foods. Her early products were mainly spice, mixes and sauces, and they intrigued customers who bought them at the grocery store. But then they wouldn't use the products right away because you still needed to chop up vegetables and meat and do a bunch of prep in order to use the sauces. And so they often sat in the back of the pantry for weeks or months.

0 (2m 21s):
And for Suki, it meant she wasn't getting enough repeat business. So as she started to investigate the reason behind this, it became clear that she had to make it even easier for people to eat Indian food. And it was that problem that led to the most important innovation in her business, refrigerated and frozen, fully prepared meals that could be heated up in minutes. Food that didn't feel intimidating to make it home today. Suki is gourmet. Indian food is mainly prepared food, but it's also sauces mimosas spice mixes, you name it. And it's now one the biggest Indian food brands in the U S but getting there involved a 30 year journey that started with a single deli in downtown Oakland, California.

0 (3m 11s):
This was shortly after Suki, her husband's surrender and their three kids moved to the U S to start a new life. The kids all grew up to become part of the business and blue actually hear from one of them a little later in building suitcase, there would be many years of disruption and struggled and a fire and earthquake along the way. But today without taking a shred of outside investment Suki is, is doing an estimated $50 million a year in revenue and its products are available in around 7,000 stores across the country. Suki, the founder grew up in Dera, dune India, a city in the foothills of the Himalayas.

0 (3m 52s):
It was a multi-generational family, parents, grandparents, two sisters, and many uncles and aunts coming and going

3 (4m 1s):
Well. I was known as the tomboy of the family. I would always be climbing trees, daring my clothes. And my mother used to say, you know, we need to buy her clothes made of iron because anything at bio, she tears it. So I was a sportsman. I was the best sportsman in my school. And basically I wasn't, wasn't interested in studies. So I grew up with under the shadow of my elder sister, who was very good looking and also was very good at academics. Very good at embroidery stitching all that good for a girl to be. And I wasn't interested in most of those things. I just walk away from them.

0 (4m 41s):
Tell me about, about your parents. I think they were both doctors, is that right?

3 (4m 45s):
Yes. They were both doctors. My mother was a gynecologist and my father was a pathologist.

0 (4m 51s):
And presumably that meant that they were pretty important people. Right. What do you sort of remember about them, you know, and about their work?

3 (4m 59s):
Well, my mother was a very outgoing and I remember her being the one who was a driving force in the family all the time. There were only two lady doctors in there don't at that time. And she was one of them. Now that I come to think of it, it was a small town. So we would go walking to her clinic and we'd have people whispering behind us. Oh, she's so-and-so's daughter. You know?

0 (5m 25s):
I mean, it sounds like your mom was, it was like a role model for a very career driven parent. Was your dad the same way?

3 (5m 32s):
Well, that was not really born to be a doctor. He loved cooking and he loved doing hobbies like fretwork and all that. And so there was a constant friction between the two of them, because she was so concentrated on a career, but she paid a lot of attention to our growing up. And my dad supplied all the rest of it, like cooking. And, you know, he, I remember we were the first in which a vesting house oven was brought because he was going to cook some sponge cakes. And we all sat by him and learned how to make sponge cakes. But that was his real interest was in that. But I hear you again, became a doctor because his father was a doctor

0 (6m 14s):
Suki. You grew up in the Sikh tradition. And did you grow up fairly observant? I mean, there are different sort of levels of, of being an observant Sikh. For example, some Sikhs are completely vegetarian. They won't eat any animal products. Did you grow up with that kind of tradition? Yeah.

3 (6m 31s):
Those are the six that are totally vegetarians are kind of formalized in the fate.

0 (6m 39s):
So for example, alcohol or chicken or butter, things like that, where we're consumed in your house,

3 (6m 45s):
Butter is consumed everywhere all the time. Butter is the cower is one of the reasons why the cow is sacred is that if you have a cow, you have everything that you need to eat. Yeah. So, and you can't eat it. If you can't eat the cow, you just take what she gives you. So, but it is not an issue, but check-in every, yeah, we had chicken drinks. It wasn't looked upon favorably, not because of the fate, but generally

0 (7m 12s):
Just culturally. Yeah. Yeah. I guess you, as a young woman, decided to pursue teaching and you started to train to be a teacher and, and I read it at around age 20, your parents, and you decided that it was time for you to find, maybe find a husband.

3 (7m 30s):
Well, my sister got married at 19 and if, when I reached 20 and I wasn't even engaged yet, it was kind of Albany. She going to get married.

0 (7m 40s):
It's so crazy to think about today, right? Because 20

3 (7m 46s):
Very frankly, I wanted to get mad at myself. I wasn't one of those who, as I said, I wasn't a studious and I wasn't looking forward to having a career. I had very early on decided that I just wanted to be a mother at home with the children and a surrender. My husband used to visit our house all the time. And he was very, very kind. He was very caring. He would take care of the woman folk in his household. And I used to look at it and say, wow, what a great boy he is. And early on, decided that I would love to have a man like having him as a husband,

0 (8m 22s):
You got married in 1967 or maybe 68, 68. And you started a family. And by the way, were you a good cook? I mean, did you, did you like to cook already at that young age?

3 (8m 35s):
Yes. If I saw somebody cooking, something that I liked, I never forgot it. There used to be a maid who my grandmother loved and she would only eat food cooked for by her hand or her own hands. So it was, we had this little mud stores that store, it's a lick the cook. I don't know what you'd call it, but in you call it Chula outside in the veranda. And she was, had an Iran walk on top and she made this eggplant and potato dish. I used to love it. And I remember the recipe even now. So no cooking I was fond of. And then my father pushed us into all this baking and stuff as well. And so we learned how to make fish fingers, how to make rifle, puddings, how to make kidney pies very, very young age.

0 (9m 23s):
So he was, so you were cooking like English food,

3 (9m 26s):
Both Indian and English.

0 (9m 30s):
All right. So it's the early 1970s, I guess you and surrender get married. And at that time he's an officer in the Indian air force and I guess eventually gets posted to London. So you move there and you start to raise a family. And, and I guess you're doing some teaching and, and you're also doing a lot of home cooking. So what do you remember about that time?

3 (9m 54s):
Well, I love cooking, but I don't like spending hours in the kitchen. I have to make my workshop so Serinda would get home and I would get home half an hour before him and quickly put dinner together because I had these sauces made and ready in the fridge.

0 (10m 9s):
So what, what were the sauces? What would you, would you make?

3 (10m 12s):
So this is basically talks a Curry sauce. The beginning, I used to do all this cutting of onions one day and roasting it and putting it there. But then later on, I'd found this dehydrated onions in the local cash and carry, and I started making it with that, which worked very well. I used to make the sauce and keep it. And so I had the sauce always and just put lentils on one side and a Curry on the other and rice on the third stove. And then it used to be ready in half an hour.

0 (10m 41s):
So I guess the two of you eventually returned to India. And from what I understand throughout the seventies, you moved around around India quite a bit. And then I guess it was around like 1982, that you had relatives living in the U S who sponsored you to apply for a green card to, to immigrate, right?

3 (11m 2s):
Yes. We applied for it and we got called to the embassy within months to immigrate. So we didn't want to move at that time. My in-laws were totally against it. They were the elders of the family and it w it was not accepted that you do things against your parents' wishes. So then we just put it on hold and put it on hold. We said, you know, we are not ready. We are not ready when we will be ready, we will get in touch with you.

0 (11m 29s):
So you, you were still in India, not ready to leave yet, but then I guess 1984 was a turning point for you and your family. This was the year when India's prime minister, Indira Gandhi was assassinated by her body guards who happened to be Sikh, ethnically Sikh. And I guess that led to a huge, massive unrest right in the country, and quite a lot of violence directed toward the Sikh minority in India. What do you remember about that time?

3 (11m 59s):
I remember the day that this happened, and then of course, everything was shut down for a whole day. We had news on the TV about her being assassinated and that revenge would be taken on these assassinating. So hoards of people came through the roads and went into all the sick businesses. And so they were just broken into, and, and then we had Royce all over and suddenly overnight, I became a sick from an Indian.

0 (12m 30s):
Th this is it's a, it's a complex story, and we don't have time to go into the details, but it sounds like that event sort of made you scared about

3 (12m 42s):
The future. Yeah. At change the atmosphere around us too, because it just gives something in us that we were suddenly outside as foreign as unknown country. It was horrible. It was just horrible.

0 (12m 57s):
And that was a catalyst. That was that to you was in your mind, it was time to leave with your family. Yeah.

3 (13m 4s):
Well, I thought that if tomorrow, this thing doesn't improve and the kids grow up and they're going to say, if you had this opportunity, why didn't you leave? Yeah. And the droids were a dipping thing, but the main thing why we came to the U S was that the kids were children would have a better education and a better future in the U S so we decided to just take the plunge and move.

0 (13m 26s):
Hmm. So I guess you and surrender at this time are in your late thirties, right. And you eventually settled in the bay area. And from what I've read, you initially started to work with your sister and brother-in-law, they ran an ice cream, like an ice cream business. And what, like, I guess they had like a fleet of trucks that would go out and sell ice cream, like in different neighborhoods.

3 (13m 51s):
Yes. They bought a whole company from the east coast and they already had 20 trucks. That part of it, my brother-in-law managed, we just ran the business to make sure that the trucks went out every day and they were stocked with the right amount of ice cream. Then you were fine. And we knew that the company's making money

0 (14m 10s):
Well. Okay. So you were helping to manage this business. How did you feel about doing that? Doing that job? Was it fulfilling? Was it interesting?

3 (14m 17s):
It was a lot of learning for me. You know, my brother-in-law has, I call him my business guru. He taught me everything. And he also expected a very high degree of like, you know, I got my driver's license and he's, oh, now you have a driver's license. Just go and get the city permit for this truck, this heavy truck. And I just got my license today, but I wasn't going to tell him that I'm not going to do it. I just took the truck and I went and got the license and came back. But, you know, it seems like that he expected me to do. And I just did, because I wasn't going to tell him, I don't know how to do it, which taught me a lot of stuff and gave me a lot of confidence in being able to do stuff on my own.

3 (14m 59s):
So how to balance a checkbook, how to call in salary, how to do banking, because these drivers would come back with change coming out of it here. So we had to roll them all up at night and then do bank deposits every second day, because you couldn't have all that money in the house.

0 (15m 15s):
So I guess at a certain point, you and surrender are basically running this business. But I imagine also thinking that maybe you want it to start something of your own.

3 (15m 26s):
Yes. We had Gabby to my mother-in-law in India. When we leaving, she said, why are you going? You have everything over here. And I said, you know, you'll go see, let's start working for other people over there. I said, no, I'm going there to give people jobs, not to take a job. And something said in jest at that time was something which I really followed over here and said, okay. So, and we were managing the street vending business of ice cream, which was a lot of hard work. And so if you have to work so hard, we should be doing it for ourselves. Not for somebody else. You know, we had the responsibility of everything, the money, the banking, the cleaning, the hiring of drivers, the maintaining of the trucks, which by this time we had 25 ice-cream vehicles going out.

3 (16m 11s):
So we had to keep running around a truck, broke down on the route. We had to go and get it towed back. So there was a lot of work and we did it like our own. So we said, if we have to do so much work, we should be looking to do something for ourselves.

0 (16m 25s):
So I guess in 1988, there was a, a deli in downtown Oakland that went up for sale and you decided to go for it and you knew how to cook, but you thought this could be great opportunity. And the idea was that you would work there, you would run the deli. Yes. And I guess from what I understand the, to buy the deli, you had to take a loan, right? I think you have to borrow like $30,000 from family and friends in order to, to get this deli.

3 (16m 52s):
That is correct.

0 (16m 54s):
And what kind of food did, did the deli serve?

3 (16m 56s):
It was just a regular sandwich place, a breakfast and lunch salads and sandwiches. I used to open the deli at six 30 in the morning, from six 30 to 10 30, we had already done $350. And it was the maximum profit making business because coffee only costs you 10 to 15 cents and you sell it for a buck. And the biggest attraction to us for this deli was the fact, you know, we had come to the United States for the kids and we had decided very early on that one parent would be a tome to see the kids off to school. And one parent would be at home when it gets get back from school. That was a big driving force in us selecting the kind of business we did.

0 (17m 40s):
And it was just you, or did you hire some people to work there with you?

3 (17m 44s):
I had four people working for me.

0 (17m 46s):
And how did it go? I mean, how did it do

3 (17m 50s):
Well, it went very well for the first three months. In fact, then I, you know, looking at how to increase sales, you know, cappuccinos had just come up, espresso machines had just come up. So decided to add espresso machine. We, as I said, the first four or five months for great tell, we had this Primo coffee opened right across the street,

0 (18m 13s):
Like a competitor opened up across the street. That was also selling coffee.

3 (18m 17s):
Yes. Ordinary coffee and breakfast.

0 (18m 20s):
And what did that do for you for your business?

3 (18m 22s):
It didn't add to lunch street, but the morning trade was badly hit, which was our moneymaking tree. We were still profitable, but very little, I mean, you know, it had become stressful because every day counting the money would be like, oh my gosh. Now what do I do to fix this? But you know, this is one of the biggest lessons I learned at the deli was that you not only have to learn the business, you have to learn what to do when things go wrong. What do we do now?

0 (18m 50s):
So some of your businesses being taken away by this coffee shop and then disaster strikes, literally the Loma Prieta earthquake of 1989, a magnitude 6.9 massive earthquake. What, what happened to, to your business? Did it, I mean, presumably that the earthquake affected the businesses around your deli, right? I mean, did customers stop coming

3 (19m 15s):
Because of the companies left the area and they all broke their leases and left and went to Pleasanton where they have a new building,

0 (19m 24s):
The businesses in the area that you had depended on workers, those businesses did not come back to downtown Oakland.

3 (19m 32s):
Nope. So to try to increase sales, I was started making Indian food and serving it.

0 (19m 39s):
And did people respond to it because you had not been serving Indian food? This was just a traditional kind of American style, breakfast, lunch deli.

3 (19m 49s):
That's correct. It did well, you know, I use the sauce that I used to make in London we'd have rice and the Currys we have would make, and we had this rare oven in which I would sometimes put under the chicken and sometimes put the chicken Curry and serve it.

0 (20m 5s):
I wonder, by the way, why didn't you serve Indian food from the beginning? Were you worried that there was no market for it?

3 (20m 13s):
Yes. Number one, number two, you know, you know, there's this notion that, you know, Indian food smells a lot, which it does, you know, your cookery in a room, you will have the smell over there for two days. So, and there was this thing that, oh, if a breakfast trade will suffer because you'll have these smells of Korean people, don't like the smell coming in. This was a general feeling we got and I was advised against doing it. But then I finally took the plunge that time. And I said, what the heck? You know, it can't get worse than it is. Let me try it.

0 (20m 45s):
Did that help turn the business around at all?

3 (20m 48s):
No, it added some to the grossest, but we had fallen far below our break even points. I mean, the deli was owned by my sister and me together. So I had to get some money for us only. So I started doing Indian catering on the weekends, which gave us some good money because there were not too many people doing that kind of a thing. And the restaurants around the area were not very good. So my kids used to be my free labor for that. And we would do catering and that was helping us to survive that period.

0 (21m 21s):
The meantime, I mean, this was a kind of a challenging time, not just in Oakland, but in a lot of cities in the country when crime was quite high, you know, were you ever worried about safety in downtown Oakland?

3 (21m 35s):
Oh yes. Crime kept going up because as the city emptied out because of the earthquake, other people also suffered. And then the final straw was on Christmas Eve. I was just sitting there and a friend had come to pick up some food and we were held up at two o'clock in the afternoon.

0 (21m 53s):
Wow.

3 (21m 55s):
So at that point I told CERN that I said, you know, this is not what my life just let's sell it and get out of this. I can't do anything else also because my whole day is committed over here.

0 (22m 6s):
So you decided in 1992 to sell that the deli, and I think you sold it at a loss, right.

3 (22m 10s):
Something we had bought for 175, we sold for 65 and got out.

0 (22m 15s):
Wow. So you lost half of your money that you put into it. Well, but it sounds like you didn't give up on the idea of, of doing something in food.

3 (22m 25s):
So when I was making the Indian food in the deli and I was using my Curry paste to do it, so I started bottling it in little bottles and putting it on the counter. And people started buying that. And then my sister, she took food cooked with it to work one day. And one of her coworkers said, oh, wow. My husband loves Indian food. I wish I could cook like this for him. So my sister took the sauce for her. And she happened to be the wife of one of the managers at Berkeley bowl. It was one of the two ethnic high level stores in the bay area at that time. So when her husband ate it, he said, tell this woman to bring this stuff to me, I will sell it for her.

0 (23m 7s):
So these were like Curry paste that you were making and, and you could basically use it as a starter to add. You could add meat and vegetables and some water water. Okay. And then you could have a Curry,

3 (23m 19s):
You know, if you go open Indian cookbook and you look at the recipe, it has 14 ingredients on it. And people just shut the book and leave, put it away. It's too difficult to collect all that stuff or to follow those directions because cooking Indian food is very visual and you have to see exactly how much the onions have to be roasted or how long it has to cook on the stove. So this was just, it was a no-brainer like during the use to say, if you can boil water, you can this. And you know, the first orders that are put in they'd had no directions, only net weight and ingredients and the names <em></em> paste. So, but it started 70

0 (23m 56s):
At Berkeley bowl.

3 (23m 57s):
Yep. At Berkeley bowl, every time I'd go back, the shelf used to be empty.

0 (24m 3s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Suki sauces and spices wound up in the cafeteria at Hewlett Packard and how she powered through one of the worst things that can happen to a food business, a fire in the kitchen stay with us. I'm guy Ross. And you're listening to how I built this. Hey, as you know, building a company, a brand is hard, but also super interesting, including the story of burrow.

0 (24m 43s):
Burrow is a new kind of furniture company. It started when its two founders were in business school, having drinks and complaining about their different wildly inconvenient journeys. When it came to getting a new sofa, long trips to warehouses, literally dollying a sofa for blocks to their apartment. They wondered why wasn't there an easier way to get an affordable high quality sofa to your apartment without the ridiculous shipping fees. So they started borough. It's all about easy assembly. You can put together an entire sofa by yourself and you won't need to touch a single tool. And as always shipping is free. Most furniture companies will usually tack on a a hundred dollars shipping fees, right before you check out or even more for big items like a couch, but burrow ships, every single item for free with no minimums.

0 (25m 36s):
Thanks again to burrow for supporting this show. Listeners can get $75 off their first order at borough.com/built that's borough, B U R R O w.com/built for $75 off burrow.com/built. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Ross. So it's the early 1990s and Suki is starting to sell jars of Curry paste at grocery stores around the bay area for help. She recruits her husband and her three children, Bonnie and joke and Daryl beer.

0 (26m 20s):
And when we're doing this interview, <em></em> was actually right there with his mom, talking a lot about what it was like to be part of the family business today he's in his forties. But back when his mom started selling her Curry paste around town, he was like 12 or 13.

2 (26m 36s):
Oh man. You know, it was sort of for the family, you know, it was all hands on deck. We would make Curry paste. Mom. It's sort of trained everyone how to do that. Saturday mornings at the Singh household were times that we would go out, you know, I couldn't drive at the time. I didn't even have a driver's permit. The whole family would, would make, you know, cut chicken and do all of these things. And then my mom would go to a grocery store to do a demo. My dad would go to a grocery, sort of a demo. My sister would drop me off to a store in the morning and I would do a demo. She would go do a demo. Sometimes she would come pick me up and drop me to another store to do a demo. And, and so that's, that's sort of how, you know, life revolve for us is everyone was working, you know, in our free time to see the succeed.

2 (27m 23s):
And you know, I was the youngest one that was the baby in the family. Yeah.

0 (27m 26s):
Cause you were eight. You were eight when you guys moved to the U S right.

2 (27m 29s):
I was eight. And then by the time the business started, I was about 12, 13, and I was never made to feel like there was any stress in the house or there was any shortage of money. Although all of them, you know, all of them really knew it. And everyone was working very hard to make sure that, you know, we could get by

0 (27m 46s):
And just a roll back for a second Suki before wr was going out and doing all these demos. How are you even getting the product into stores or are you just meeting with a bunch of managers like store managers and buyers?

3 (28m 0s):
Yes. I would just call the stores and, you know, 95% of the time they said, just come in. So I would take my little basket tote with a electric stove in it and like the small foreman grills and I'd have the grill there and the stove there and my saucepans and, and Madden to chicken for the tandoori Canno, garbanzo beans. And I would cook rice and take it from the house. So I would serve them a whole Indian meal in twenty-five minutes of the demo. And by the time we had established a business name and called it a quick and easy Indian foods,

0 (28m 37s):
Quick and easy Indian food,

4 (28m 39s):
E Z E

0 (28m 40s):
E Z E.

2 (28m 42s):
That was my brilliant idea of trying to make it memorable. Yeah. And in retrospect, the horrible idea, but at the time it seemed like a, seemed like a stroke of genius.

0 (28m 51s):
And how are you Suki? How would you package it? You would just put it in, in like, what was you put it in

3 (28m 58s):
Bottles all by hand and we put them on and dry them with a hairdryer

0 (29m 2s):
And you would dry each ceiling band with a hairdryer

3 (29m 6s):
Only then it's gone to the lead.

0 (29m 8s):
Wow. And you were putting the labels on by hand

3 (29m 11s):
Everything.

0 (29m 12s):
And how many bottles of this could you make a day

3 (29m 15s):
In the beginning? It was, I think maybe 10 to 15 cases a day I could do.

2 (29m 19s):
Yeah. When one person could do, you know, I would, I would at times do it solo during the summers and so forth. And I think we could get through about 20 cases and a case was 12 bottles.

0 (29m 29s):
Okay. And how much would you sell a bottle for?

3 (29m 32s):
We started with, there'll be about $3 or three 50 a bottle.

2 (29m 38s):
Yeah. It was three 50 a bottle for in the

3 (29m 41s):
Three 50 and bottle. We realized that this was not going to pay for any help. We were just calculating it on free labor.

0 (29m 51s):
Yeah. Cause three 50 a bottle. I mean, even if they all sold out was still going to be hard to make this profitable at that rate. So in order to scale up, it was going to require a different way of thinking about it.

3 (30m 6s):
Yeah. I needed a place by the time I found a commercial kitchen in Emeryville, which is just next to Oakland and it was a Indian food, fresh Indian food manufacturer who was to go around to the health stores in the bay area. So she didn't work in a kitchen Wednesdays. So I approached her and I rented her kitchen. So I would go in in the morning, I would make everything. And then the whole family would come and at five o'clock, whatever time they finished work or college or school, and about seven of us used to pack and clean and label and leave the kitchen at two o'clock at night.

0 (30m 42s):
Wow. And when you would do demos, how did they do, I mean, did people, because this is, I mean, we're talking about like the early to mid nineties, right? Indian food is already, I think at that time, people were familiar with Indian food or, or am I wrong? Were they not?

3 (30m 58s):
No, they were not. It was a, if I stood at a demo and I was demoing the product, people would come by and say, oh, Curry. I don't like that. So I had to convince them as to say, you know, Indian Curry is different from Korea in a Chinese restaurant. Try it. If you don't like it, I've got some lovely mango chutney here for you to change your flavor with. And 30% of the people who would walk into the store would stop at the demo table. But about 80% of the people who taste it would buy it.

0 (31m 28s):
Wow.

3 (31m 28s):
So some good stores like Berkeley bowl, we would go in and I would sell 15 cases of the product in one day. So over the weekend we would get rid of the 200 cases we made during the week.

0 (31m 39s):
So I guess around this time, this was the mid nineties. You got a call from somebody working at Hewlett Packard, from my understanding, they were looking to, they wanted to buy a 10 Dory oven for their cafeteria because they had so many Indian employees at had HP. And they were calling you for some advice. Is that, is that right? What happened?

3 (31m 59s):
She wanted to rent it. So she called me and I said, who told you I have a Tinder? I didn't have a Tinder, but it did. I was my curiosity. And I said, so can I come and see what you're doing? But I had no idea that this thing called cafeterias are there in these huge buildings. And so she said, sure. So I went in and I looked at her and she was roasting the onions and making the sauce for the Curry. And she had to do it because nobody could do it. Right. So I told her, I said, why would you be wasting your time by my Curry paste? And your $10 an hour employee can do the salt Curry for you. So she got very excited and she started buying my things, but I had to increase the line very quickly because it just doing Curry and the nerdy wasn't going to make it for her.

3 (32m 47s):
She needed other items as well, like <em></em> and all that stuff. And I wanted to maximize my sales. So I quickly put together a spice mix for the vegetables and the spice mix for the lentils and started selling her that as well.

0 (33m 3s):
And this was food that they were serving in their cafeteria to their employees.

3 (33m 8s):
Yes. Once a week is when they started doing Indian food.

0 (33m 12s):
So you were sort of, you kind of became like their supplier and their consultant for HP. Just cut. Just sort of like almost accidentally.

3 (33m 20s):
That's correct. So for me, every delivery that I made to them was $500 and it was gone in two weeks. So it was better than any store. I would go and stock up a store, even Berkeley bowl, I would put $300 worth of product on the shelf. And it took like three weeks to sell it. I think, you know, we grew channels in parallel. And in the meantime, our grosses had gone up. I needed a space of my own. I was, I couldn't do this or picking up this 200 cases from California class in the morning and reaching the kitchen and putting everything together. And then everybody coming and cleaning and leaving that night, it was getting too hard to manage.

3 (34m 5s):
So I have started pushing for having my own location. And then again, out of the blue, somebody called me and said, I hear you're looking for a place. I said, yes, but I don't want a 5,000 square foot warehouse. I can't afford it. But he said, no, no, no. I have this place in San Leandro. And it was 1100 square feet for 75 cents a square foot. It just was just too good to be true. And I came back and told my husband, I said, we need to have the space. I can't do the cutting of bottles back and forth. And you know, it was just too time consuming and I couldn't get any further. So he said, well, you're going to get into a rent situation and electricity situation.

3 (34m 46s):
Again, we'll be being, you know, bills every month. I said, but there's no way I can grow without having that. But I said, I'll get to give you the money off the rent. Don't worry about it.

0 (34m 58s):
And I guess one of the things that the new kitchen allowed you to do was to expand the business into a whole new channel, right? Like, I mean, you were selling bottled sauces and stores and, and you had the cafeteria business at HP, but, but then you, you could move into selling meals like entire Indian meals at, at farmer's markets too, right?

3 (35m 18s):
Yes. What I'd heard about was that you did very well at the markets and you've got cache straightaway. So the first day I went there and of course I tried to do it fancy. I had this chicken cooking over there. The smell was wafting all over the market. People started coming in and we sold $375 and came home. And we was, we was so excited. Now we knew that they were about 25 farmer's markets in the bay area that we could expand to. And that was one stream that had started.

0 (35m 46s):
That'd be, what do you remember about that?

2 (35m 48s):
Yeah, so it was a really unique business, too, right? The farmer's markets provided the fuel for everything else in what we were doing. You bought the ingredients on a Monday, you made them during the week, you sent them out on Thursday or Friday and you got paid that week for it. So the whole cycle was compressed and it didn't require a whole lot of money to run that business per se. And it provided fuel for us to use and grow other channels where we're there. The cost of doing business was much more,

3 (36m 18s):
I was growing everything simultaneously. The stores were doing what they were doing. We had the retail already gone to a hundred stores and then the farmer's markets and food services, what we concentrated on.

0 (36m 31s):
Okay. So the business is growing, but, but then you guys have a pretty major setback. You have this new kitchen in San Leandro in the east bay of San Francisco bay area, but in 2000, a fire breaks out and does a lot of damage. So what did that mean for the business? I mean, that, that must've been hugely disruptive.

2 (36m 52s):
Yeah. I mean, that was actually the summer of 2000 and it was pretty devastating to say the least, we had just built this kitchen. It wasn't that old mom had just had her knee surgery. And it was a pretty, it was a pretty massive knee surgery. I mean, she, anyone that knows her knows that she's sort of go, go, go, go, go all the time. And you know, she sleeps like three hours a night. She's going all the time. And that's what this business required from her. And this was the first time that I had seen her debilitating. It was heartbreaking. And yet at the same time, there was so much going on in so much commotion and so much this sort of need to, Hey, what are we going to do?

2 (37m 35s):
Like, how are we going to make this better? How are we going to fix this, that you really didn't have time to sit there and think about how terrible of a thing it was.

3 (37m 42s):
And we had to, I had to find alternative places to work because it was the start of the farmer's market season. And we had all this crew that we had hired to do the markets and their livelihood depended on it. I could have closed the doors for 10 days of 15 days while the insurance kicked in, but their daily food, depending on what they got to go and sell at the markets. So I was very lucky. I had the staff of Indian people who found this restaurant in San Francisco that the cooking space available. So I sent off, off a whole bunch of people over there to start doing the small cells and the nun and a non found another one in Richmond to do Indian bread, like royalties and all.

3 (38m 28s):
So we didn't miss a single farmer's market. We gave them this Moses and the nones and the products we still had.

0 (38m 35s):
How did you get involved in the company? I mean, I knew you were working since you were a kid, but, but you went on to UCLA to study engineering and then you joined the family business pretty soon after. How did, how did it happen?

2 (38m 50s):
Yeah, so, you know, we all never really left the business. Right. And so all throughout high school, you know, we were doing farmer's markets. And then when I would come back for the summer from college, it was farmer's markets, you know, all through the summer as well. So, you know, one of the markets we would do is up in Tahoe area, which was about three hours away from the bay area. And my sister and I would get up at 3:00 AM on a Wednesday and drive out the Tahoe, you know, set up for a market, do a market there, then go to Reno, do another market there and then come back, you know, late that night, back at the house at 11:00 PM or so. And so we never really left the business. And after college, I got a job at a local software company called Macromedia. And even while I was working at Macromedia on the weekends, I was doing farmer's markets for the business.

2 (39m 34s):
And then in 2005, Macromedia had just been acquired by Adobe. And I was starting to feel like I wanted to do more in the family business.

0 (39m 47s):
And I think your sisters were also around this time, bro, getting involved. Full-time

2 (39m 53s):
That's correct. They, you know, it's funny when I told them that I was joining the business, they both sort of had an intervention of sorts. They took me out to dinner and they're like, what are you doing? You know, you've got this career, you're giving this up. And you know, I was like, Hey, this is, this is kind of what I want to do. And you know, let's give it a shot and I've been doing it for a while anyways. And I think that there's something here. And so I joined and six months later, my older sister joined the business. She started running operations.

0 (40m 18s):
This is Bonnie,

2 (40m 19s):
This is Bonnie that's correct. And then six months after that, you know, St Joe's really couldn't resist that the whole family business was together. And, and you know, that she would not, she would not be able to do it. So she quit her job. She was, had a great job over at eBay and was doing very, very well. And she said, Hey, I'll take a pay cut and join the family business. And, and, you know, a year after I joined here, we were all five of us in the business.

3 (40m 45s):
So, you know, nothing gave us more pleasure than they came. And I made sure that they understood that they were not going to get the salaries. They were getting at their respective jobs, but they wanted to do this. I mean, anytime I needed help, I just had to shout and they were there.

0 (41m 1s):
So I think around 2006, he rebranded the name of the company to Suki is gourmet Indian foods. Does that come from the kids? That idea?

3 (41m 10s):
Yes. So we decided to change the name and have it more of a gourmet kind of feeling this thing and made a Suki is Burundian foods.

2 (41m 21s):
And we engage with the branding and packaging from this is the first time that we had actually gotten someone from the outside to help us with our packaging. And, you know, for us, it was actually a very positive experience. We sat in these meetings and, you know, they're presenting us with these, these mock-up boards of this is what your brand story is, and this is what the feel of it is. And while we were always a little skeptical of all of that, this was really great. I mean, this really, for the first time started to make us think about what we were building as a brand and a feeling rather than just a product that we were putting out.

0 (41m 55s):
And, and w I mean, the year you joined, what, what was your product line? I mean, what, what were the things that the brand was making was the, was the Curry paste and the spice mixes. And what else was there anything else that you guys are making at the time?

2 (42m 11s):
She had started making a line of fresh meals that used to go out to the grocery store specifically. And these were individual entrees with rice and lentils and chicken tikka masala. For example, we had then the Curry paste in spice mixes, which were also in retail as well as food service, the bulk packaging, and then at the farmer's markets, whole foods that approached us and they were just expanding. And a big part of their draw was the hot bars they were putting out, you know, just really top quality international cuisine in their hot bars. And they were having a hard time with Indian food. So they approached us and said, Hey, can you guys help us with Indian food? So we made a whole line of, of Indian food for them, for the hot bars as well.

2 (42m 52s):
Right.

0 (42m 52s):
But your main revenue was coming from basically white labeling stuff. Right? Like it wasn't from the brand Suki. That was, sounds like that was a smaller part of your revenue at that point.

2 (43m 3s):
At that point, the farmer's markets were actually, I would say the majority of our business 60% plus, I mean, we were at one point doing about 65 markets a week

3 (43m 12s):
At the end when we stopped doing them. Wow. But also I realized it was seasonal business and we needed something to sustain us through the non season.

0 (43m 23s):
Right. And this was a critical pivot for you, right. When, when you decided to expand into frozen meals. So do you remember what your thinking was like, how you came up with that idea?

3 (43m 33s):
Well, you know, we were doing these demos crazily all over the bay area, and I was doing a demo at whole foods, Palo Alto, when this lady came by and she says, you know, never go out of business. I love your product. It's a great product. And I said, okay, let me ask a few questions. So I said, so how many times do you use my products? He says, well, we eat home three days a week. And I cook Indian food at least once in three weeks. And I told myself, I said, this bottle is going to cook four pounds of Curry for her. And she's not going to come back to buy this for another four months. But then she was checking out her groceries.

3 (44m 15s):
And I was checking out lunch for myself. And I saw the stuff that she'd bought. She had four frozen food entrees, and there's one bottle of Curry paste sticking over there. And I said, so kissing, you're going the wrong direction. You need to have something with the consumer and come back for the weekend again, rather than just as one bottle, which is going to last them. And then maybe even after using it twice, she forgets about it and throws it away that time. I decided we have to do something which is instantly consumable and they come back for more. That's where I started pushing food service and the frozen food and all that, because I knew that we had to grow in areas, which would be there year round.

0 (44m 58s):
Why don't we come back after the break? How Suki learns that frozen foods are not as easy to make as they are to reheat. And why is she in her family almost signed the papers on a $3 million investment, but then decide the night before to pull the plug, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz.

0 (45m 41s):
So it's around 2007, 2008. And Suki is decided to branch out from bottled sauces, into refrigerated and frozen foods. Things like chicken, tikka masala, and lemon rice, and simosas, but that raises the question. How are they going to get the money to support a whole new line of products?

2 (46m 1s):
That's a great question. You know, guy, one of the themes I think of, of our story is had we known what we know now about how much money or how much time, or how much effort a lot of this stuff takes. We probably wouldn't have started, but you know, at the time you don't know what you don't know. You know, you look at it and you go, gosh, we're doing these products, we're doing this, that and the other. And so frozen foods can't be that, that much harder. And it's just, you know, we're already doing fresh, let's just do frozen. And so we looked at a bunch of competitors and, and I was sitting there and I said, gosh, you know, it would be so great. Indian food is so great with non. It would be so awesome if this frozen entree came with non in it.

2 (46m 44s):
So I called up five of my friends and I said, Hey, would you guys pay a buck more on the shelf? If, you know, if you saw a product that had non in it versus one that didn't, and they, you know, unanimously, everyone was like, yes. And I was like, okay, let's do it. And let's put it in the stores and see what happens. And there was, you know, my sisters had joined, I had joined, there was definitely a lot of, you know, fresh blood in the company. There was a lot of excitement. We saw a big path ahead. And so were we, we kind of took a lot of these opportunities and just said, let's do it. And we learned along the way

0 (47m 9s):
For frozen food. I mean, you had a facility where you able to make it there, or are there factories that you work with and that they package it and they, you know, they make it on your behalf?

3 (47m 21s):
No, because it was a USDA facility and we could package meats.

2 (47m 25s):
Yeah. So this facility that we gotten, they were doing frozen for other companies to come pick up. It was like an elderly home. I think that they were doing some meals for,

0 (47m 35s):
So you could package yourself.

3 (47m 37s):
Yes. All we had to invest in was a sealing machine. Everything else, the bracers and coolers, everything was there.

2 (47m 44s):
Yeah. It was a, it was a hand sealer. So we had this, we had this machine that we would just have with a hand crank on it and you would press it down and it would seal two trays at one time. That's what we started with

0 (47m 56s):
Now. Meanwhile, this is absolutely amazing. Somewhere along the line, someone from Costco discovers you guys at a farmer's market. So I guess one of your frozen meals were ready to go. You were actually able to get them placed into some Costcos pretty quickly, which is, which is huge. Right?

2 (48m 15s):
Yeah. Cut. Costco is really just an incredible retailer. I mean, when you think about Costco, I think the image of like a big box warehouse, massive volume, very sterile. I mean, that's, that's like the thought that comes to your mind, but they're actually one of the most thoughtful, you know, amazing partners that we have. And they really think about what they're putting in and they have incredible, they have an incredible ability to target actually down to the entire do the exact store. So sometimes you'll see stuff that's, you know, a specific only to five Costcos in the entire country. And so they saw that there was this growing Indian population and they said, Hey, can you guys put product into these five, six locations where there's a bunch of Indians and we'll see how it goes. And we just expanded from there.

3 (48m 56s):
We've been experimenting with all kinds of stuff at Costco. Costco was a launching pad for anything Costcos. We're really now what farmer's markets used to be for us. But unlike retail stores or food service accounts, they pay you within 15 days. So you have not paid your vendors yet and you get the money from festival. So there are excellent, excellent company to deal with, especially in your growth period.

0 (49m 21s):
How did you, I mean, I know 2006, your revenues around 3 million and you just between 2006 and 2015, I think, you know, every year you were growing and growing, but I'm curious, how did you, because you go into a market or Costco and there are thousands of brands and products there, how did you create brand awareness? I mean, just putting your stuff in a store, it's a great achievement, but it doesn't necessarily guarantee success.

2 (49m 51s):
That's something that we definitely, you know, again, one of those things that you don't know, what you don't know. And I think a lot of food businesses specifically early on, you know, we get really excited when you get into Publix or Safeway or Kroger, one of these big stores. And you realize that, you know, as much of a crowning achievement that is to get on the shelf, really 99% of the work comes afterwards to get it off of the shelf. And that's something that we, you know, we struggled with early on, for sure. We had a really hard time, you know, as we expanded out and we would get into store chains and then get discontinued because the product wasn't moving and we weren't doing a good job. And then we started to get smarter about, you know, where it is that we're putting the product in. And we didn't have money to buy data.

2 (50m 32s):
For example, you know, there's lots of companies that will sell you data where this demographic of person is, and this, this, this, that the other, we would follow the lead. A lot of times of Costco's or of whole foods, where we saw a lot of our hot bar food selling, we would then try to get into those areas with our retail product and, you know, make sure that we are aware, consumers are looking for this type of product

0 (50m 55s):
As you were growing. I gather you, you start to get inquiries from potential investors who wanted to invest in the business. And did you ever take on any outside investment?

3 (51m 5s):
We did have a company come to us and say that they, they saw this future for the company and that they would bring in X number of dollars. And so we were very wary of that because we had never lost money to date. We'd always made money. We'd always been in the black. We did not take any loans other than often on, we took bank loans for fixing the kitchen or something like that, but we did not take any outside investment. So I said project to us, what would be a sales like, and our cost, like in the following year that you brought this money in and when they put it together, they were going to bring in the money, which we would use to pay them and pay ourselves higher salaries.

3 (51m 48s):
So we were nearly signing the papers with them because we felt this need, that we needed more experienced guidance to do what we were doing. But then we have to sign the papers the next morning. And I got everybody home that night to have dinner. And I said, listen, I'm not feeling good about this. I don't want to sign these papers.

2 (52m 5s):
Yeah. We were raising money because we thought, Hey, we need this money to grow. And, and this and that. And when you do all the modeling and the projections, and you know, you kind of realize that if you don't need the money and you look at the projections after you take on investment, it's not that great. You know, the VC model for the most part is if you win, we win. But if you lose, we still kind of win in this process. And it sounds awkward to say it because, you know, people, people work so hard to raise money and it's such a great event for people. But for us at that time, it just something wasn't clicking.

0 (52m 37s):
How much money were you trying to raise by the way, at the time

3 (52m 40s):
3 million is what they were going to bring in. Right?

2 (52m 42s):
Yup.

0 (52m 43s):
And so you had 3 million committed and the neck and you were about to sign the papers and then you decided not to do it. Yeah. Wow.

2 (52m 52s):
I still remember this day. I mean, we're all sitting around the dinner table and we all decided, Hey, let's not do this. We're not going to do it. And, and all of a sudden you could, you could sense it in the room. There was this big sigh of relief, like, okay, we don't have to do this. And then we, you know, we went on and, and we grew the business without it.

0 (53m 7s):
Yeah. I mean, the company is growing, you know, I think, I think by 2015 you hit, you know, like 12 to $13 million in revenue a year, maybe a bit more. Yes. But that same year, 2015, I read that you guys described the business, hitting a wall. What, what that mean?

2 (53m 26s):
You know, for us, the wall meant, you know, we're, we're a family business where we're all in the family business and each person was doing something different. And what would happen is, you know, I would go down or, or some joke or mom and we would come back and have sold a new customer. And now we go to my sister who was operations and say, Hey, we just, you know, this is so-and-so customer wants, you know, 200 pallets of this item, this winter. And, you know, she would freak out and just say, Hey, look, we haven't planned this properly. Like we can't, we can't keep doing it this way. We can't just grow for the sake of growth. And we need to plan things and, and having that family connection, it was harder for us to do those things a little bit.

2 (54m 13s):
And there was this need to separate the business from our family life. And, you know, we realized, Hey, we could, you know, we, we need some outside intervention here to help us see this business to its potential, but more importantly, really to preserve, to preserve a lot of our family.

3 (54m 33s):
I personally, I had, I told the children, I said, listen, somebody asks us to make something. We make it. But I do not know how to grow this business strategically anymore. I do not know I need somebody else. I knew that I was at the end of my knowledge, what to do. I, we needed somebody with more experience who could direct us as what to do.

0 (54m 53s):
And that was the year that you hired your first outside CEO, right?

2 (54m 58s):
It was a, a gentleman by the name of Bob McHenry. He'd run some companies in the past. And he came to us at, at just the right time. Yes.

3 (55m 6s):
Unlike the previous company coming to us and saying, we give you money. And all that dust just felt right. He just said, I know I can take this places. And we haven't looked back since he has done a great job.

0 (55m 19s):
I mean, what do you think that the train point is like? I mean, cause I think today you're, you're still fully prevalent owned or do you have any outside investors

2 (55m 26s):
Mid or full, fully privately owned.

0 (55m 28s):
And so presumably you don't reveal maybe specific revenues, but I think Suki you'd mentioned a few years ago that you, you were a $45 million business

2 (55m 38s):
We're we're north of that

3 (55m 39s):
Much Datto that.

0 (55m 41s):
So what explains in your view, the growth, I mean, obviously there's some smart business decisions, but do you think it just happened organically? I mean, is it just that more and more people kind of began to understand and appreciate Indian food? Was it more visibility? Was it version of all those things?

3 (56m 2s):
Basically, yes. It was a Indian food had come to stay. And like I say, it only two kinds of people in this world, those who love Indian food and those who haven't eaten it yet. And we have seen that response to Indian food growing over the years through COVID we really increased retail. Yeah. It really jumped up the way we were hoping would earlier on. But that's when it really jumped up.

2 (56m 26s):
I feel like, I feel like as long as we've been in this business, you know, everyone's been forecasting that Indian food is really going to be the next hot cuisine. And this is going back as far as like 95. Right. But I really feel like it's there now. I mean, for, for us, when we used to do the demos in the farmer's markets at someplace at seven in the morning and kids are, are one of the best tasters and samplers and things. And so you'd have these kids come up and go like, oh, can I, can I try some most that? Cause we'd always be sampling. You know, that's, that was the, the taste of food is amazing. And so we'd always sample and these kids would come up and their parents would come and say, oh Johnny don't please. No, you're not going to like it. It's going to be too spicy for you. It's going to be too hot for you and this, that and the other. And now you're out and, and moms come up with toddlers in their carts and they'll pick up a sample and they'll give the toddler the sample before they eat it themselves.

2 (57m 13s):
It's a completely different time for Indian food and the awareness. And really people are, they're interested in the story and the background, but first and foremost, they care about taste and Indian food delivers that in spades

0 (57m 27s):
Today. I think your, how many, how many products you have do you sell

2 (57m 31s):
We're we're north of about 50 products

0 (57m 33s):
Today and what is your biggest seller? Is it the frozen foods?

2 (57m 36s):
It's the, the refrigerated chicken tikka masala.

0 (57m 39s):
So where do you see? I mean, we are a privately held company. I mean, do you, is there a world where you might consider selling to a larger company or, you know, what, what are your thoughts on that? I mean, I'm sure it it's come up or it may come up, but what do you think you would do?

3 (57m 57s):
And they came a point in the middle of when we had just set up the San Leandro kitchen, somebody came to us and said, we'll buy the company for so much and we'll give you a job in it. And we got really tempted because their childhood, the children's childhood was going and doing demos and weekends, we didn't give them any holidays. We didn't take any holidays and we didn't have enough money at that time to buy a house. So we got very tempted and we came home and talked to there'll be an inside joke. Bonnie had already got married. And he said, we are planning to sell the business. And that we said, why are you going to sell the business? I said, because we're giving you such a rough life. We want to be able to let you have a childhood, which you're not having at this point.

3 (58m 39s):
And he said, so ABI complaining. You mean to say that when we come into this place, it will belong to somebody else. We don't mind the hard work. This is the place that we get together. And we plantings and do things together. We have no issues of not having time off and we didn't set, but you know, I'm not getting younger. My husband is already retired. The leader has kind of stepped partially away. He still gets involved in the company whenever we need him to. Yeah. So we would sell if the right person came along, I guess.

2 (59m 14s):
Yeah. I mean, I think there's no particular plan to do that. And I think if you were to talk to mom on any given day, she might you a different answer, much like most entrepreneurs. And so I don't know the way that I think about it is, you know, we don't have any plans to sell at the moment. And you know, the business is, is a living, growing, breathing person and it's going to evolve.

0 (59m 37s):
I mean, it is pretty remarkable that Suki, I mean, you were $70,000 in debt, 30 years ago, but it was a long slog to turn this into a very successful business. And how much do you think just what happened to you to this brand and, and, and you guys has to do with just getting lucky and how much you think has to do with how hard you work.

3 (1h 0m 1s):
So all I say, you know, you have to be at the right time at the right place with the right amount of luck. And I think all three contributed to us. And also we had people come into our lives or into the business, which just took us from point a to point B. And you know, there's a saying, which I, a hundred percent believe in. One is one, but one in one is not two. It becomes 11. And the third one becomes 111. And as every family member joined our growth possibilities increased and we were able to do a lot more.

2 (1h 0m 36s):
Yeah. And I, I think, I think about this question, you know, a couple of different ways, you know, one is perspective for mom. If she hadn't taken the right attitude towards the fire and worked through that fire situation, or, you know, done, done so many things where it was a make or break moment for the company that we wouldn't be here today and that's pure hard work, but for me, it's, it's luck. You know, it's being born into a certain family, having a certain mom that would do those types of things. And so it's not an either or, but a both.

3 (1h 1m 6s):
So, you know, 17 years coming into the country, we worked certain there and I worked seven days a week, 14 hours a day. The only time we would get together was a Sunday evening when everybody did their farmer's markets or demos and came back, that was the only meal in the evening that we all shared together. It was sheer hard labor that we did. And the children of course put in just as much from day one. So those were the things which really, I think, supplied the fire and the fuel to the company.

0 (1h 1m 39s):
That's Suki Singh, founder of Suki is gourmet Indian food and her son . And by the way, the company only stopped selling at farmer's markets about three years ago. But members of the family still occasionally host demos at Costco, they say it's still the best way to connect with people who have never tried a good chicken tikka masala. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week, please do follow us on your podcast app. So you always have the latest episode downloaded. If you want to contact us. Our email address is H ivt@npr.org. If you want to follow us on Twitter, our account is at how I built this and is at guy Roz.

0 (1h 2m 21s):
And our Instagram account is at how I built this NPR and mine is at guide dot Roz. This episode was produced by Liz Metzker with music composed by REM teen era bluey. It was edited by Neeva grant with research help from Claremore Ashima. Our production staff includes Casey Herman, JC Howard, Julia Carney, Elaine coats, Carrie Thompson, and Alex Chung. Our intern is Margaret Serino. Jeff Rogers is our executive producer I'm guy Roz, and you've been listening to how I built this.