0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this Early and Ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

1 (9s):
Put a spring in your step with SiriusXM. Shake off the Winter Blues with over 425 channels of ad free music. Plus play by play, sports comedy, exclusive talk, world-class news and popular podcasts. Subscribe to the Streaming Platinum plan to get your first three months for free. Visit siriusxm.ca for details. SiriusXM everything you want to hear lives here.

3 (39s):
Hip hop is always called out The inequalities in America, but even within it, nothing's ever been

4 (44s):
Equal. This season louder than a Riot podcast is tackling sexism, homophobia, and all the unwritten rules that hold the entire culture back. Listen to the Louder than a Riot podcast from MPR R. Music or wherever you get your podcast.

5 (1m 0s):
Cocoa Beach just sounded like a good place for a sunscreen company, right? Yeah. Like Cocoa

0 (1m 5s):
Beach. Cocoa

5 (1m 5s):
Beach. So we got a PO Box in Cocoa Beach, and then we, you know, all the calls were getting transferred up, you know, and then we,

0 (1m 13s):
They were getting transferred up to Grand

5 (1m 15s):
Rapids. To Grand Rapids, yeah.

0 (1m 16s):
Like in the middle of winter.

5 (1m 17s):
Yes. So we would be on the phone. I, you know, nobody ever lied, but we, we did say, you know, if they call and ask how the weather is, just tell 'em it's unbelievable. Even if it's snowing outside or whatever. Cause then you're not lying. It's unbelievable.

0 (1m 35s):
Welcome to how I built this, a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealist, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Raz, and on the show today how Tom Ranks knew that a yellow gorilla on a wood brain background would be the perfect mascot for a sunscreen brand and built sun bum into a 400 million business A few years ago. On this show, we interviewed the founders of Method, the Cleaning Supply brand. And if you heard that story, you might remember that one of the co-founders, Eric Ryan, talked about how they spent most of their seed money on designing a bottle for the liquid dish soap.

0 (2m 23s):
They wanted that bottle to look cool enough to make people leave it on the countertop rather than hiding it under the sink. And even though Eric and his co-founder Adam Lowry, also focused on the quality of what was inside the bottle, they knew that wouldn't really matter if they couldn't capture the attention of a casual shopper. And the way to do that was through better design, a well designed product can have a massive impact on the decisions that consumers make. In fact, this was the exact conclusion reached in a study published in 2013 in the Journal's Psychological Science. The researchers found that brand design is more important than price when the average consumer has to decide between two similar products.

0 (3m 9s):
And this might help explain how a sunscreen brand called Sun Bum came out of nowhere in 2010 to capture a significant share of the suntan lotion market. A market that had been dominated by legacy brands like Coppertone, Neutrogena, and Hawaiian Tropic. More than a year before co-founder Tom ranks launched Sun Bum, he thought about every inch of its design, a now iconic wood grain pattern bottle with a yellow gorilla face staring right at you. That bottle, as you will hear, drew on inspirations as disparate as 1960s surf culture, mid-century modern furniture designers like Charles and Ray Eames, Northern European typography and Japanese streetwear.

0 (3m 57s):
But even before Tom launched that design, he was already deep into the mechanics of branding. He had designed and sold t-shirts, a luxury brand of tequila, even produced a line of Christian videos all made using principles of design thinking. In one of his most iconic contributions to the world of branding, the Taco Bell Chihuahua, as in Yo Kiro Taco Bell, an ad campaign you might remember from the 1990s. At the time, Tom did not get credit or compensation for the Taco Bell Chihuahua. So he sued Taco Bell and ended up in a five year long legal battle, which you will hear about because it is a wild story.

0 (4m 40s):
Anyway, for now, what you need to know about Tom is that he grew up in Long Beach in Southern California. His mom was a teacher and his dad was, as Tom describes it, a Christian fundamentalist minister. Tom's strict Christian upbringing eventually turned him away from organized religion and toward his true passion drawing and painting, he ended up studying art at Hope College right outside Grand Rapids, Michigan. He got married pretty young, and after college he and his wife settled in Grand Rapids where Tom went to work as a salesman at a furniture store.

5 (5m 14s):
Yeah, it was just a big chain store. They were out of Detroit and they were opening one in Grand Rapids. And I, I was one of the first ones to apply and actually open that store in Grand Rapids on 28th Street. So

0 (5m 26s):
You were like a floor sales rep?

5 (5m 28s):
Yeah, it was just a full commission, no salary. You, wow. Yeah, it was really known in Michigan as like the shark infested waters because the sales people wouldn't get off you. So if you don't sell something, you don't get paid. So you could work for weeks and get nothing. Wow. So they did everything they could to sell you and as retail, so it's crazy hours every weekend, which is brutal on my wife for

0 (5m 54s):
Sure. Yeah. All right. So you, you're working at, at this, at the furniture store and you're a young guy and you're in your like mid twenties, so Yep. Did you start to think about what else you might wanna do or were you happy doing that and didn't have like a big plan or anything like that?

5 (6m 12s):
Yeah, I wouldn't say I was happy doing that, but I was being successful. I was supporting my wife. We'd had a kid and she was able to stay at home. So I was feeling good about that. I was just learning how to sell, which was, it would end up be everything. There's a, I think his name's Ogilvy Ogilvy and Mathers, he's like the father of marketing. I, I believe he said something like, you know, in the modern world you could be as creative as you want, but unless you know how to sell, you're just not gonna make it. You know, you have to be able to sell your ideas. So, so I think those years, those five years at Art Van, it was called Art Van Furniture were just hugely, hugely important for my career. Yeah. I ended up becoming sales manager there because I was getting so good at it.

5 (6m 56s):
And, and then people would come to me and ask me, you know, as they had different people on different types of furniture, what to do. And, and I, I give you an example, like if somebody was on a leather sofa, if it was a woman, I would send a guy salesperson over there and he would use words like soft and sexy and smooth as he touched the leather. And if, if there was a man customer on the same leather sofa, a guy would get a woman salesperson to go over and use words like strong and sexy and cool and rugged. And if it was a family, big family jumping around on it, I'd send the, you know, the old timer in and to talk about, you know, what a great investment it is, how it wears like iron and it's easy to clean.

5 (7m 37s):
So just knowing what those customers wanted to feel about what they were purchasing.

0 (7m 43s):
Hmm. So it was almost like a game, like it, right? It sounds like

5 (7m 46s):
It was a total game.

0 (7m 46s):
Yeah. Yeah. We'd

5 (7m 48s):
Say, you know, customer pickup for Johnson Door three customer pickup for Smith Door five, just to get a frenzy going with nobody picking up anything just to, oh,

0 (7m 58s):
You would just get on the loudspeaker and say that the customer pickup door five, even though there was no customer pickup, just to kinda create the impression

5 (8m 6s):
People are buying stuff. Yeah,

0 (8m 7s):
Yeah.

5 (8m 7s):
Exactly. But yeah, anyway, learned a lot. It was a great experience. Yeah.

0 (8m 11s):
I guess while you're there, you start to like, just play around with sketches that you turn into a t-shirt. Tell me what was that all about? How'd that start?

5 (8m 21s):
Yeah, I was at, I was with my wife at Holland State Park, which is a really nice beach there in Holland, which is 45 minutes from Grand Rapids. And there was surfers in the water. Wow. And yeah, they were on long boards and I was just in shock cuz it's, there's no waves really, you know, you know, I would learn later that there actually was ways most of my kids learned to surf on Lake Michigan, but, but these guys were out there and I thought it was funny and I, I commented to my wife about it and I went home and started sketching some cartoons and I made like an old guy sitting on a longboard with a beard and really skinny and cowboys on him and, and it said Surf Michigan, waiting for the big one.

0 (9m 2s):
You thought it was funny being from California.

5 (9m 4s):
Totally. I thought it was funny. It was just kind of a joke. And, and then I ended up deciding to make a t-shirt with it and I made it one t-shirt on a Hanes beefy T-shirt, a big neon letters on the top chest at Surf Michigan. And then it had, and then it had the drawing and then the little caption underneath it waiting for the big one,

0 (9m 21s):
Surf Michigan.

5 (9m 22s):
Yeah. And, you know, without really even knowing what I was doing one day at Art Van Furniture on my break, I called Meyer, which is a chain of about a hundred stores, grocery

0 (9m 33s):
Stores. Right. And

5 (9m 34s):
They're like a, they're like a target Target, yeah. So I called there, asked for their surf wear buyer, and got a hold of an assistant or somebody. And I said, I was a rep from a surf war company, I wanted to show a surf line.

0 (9m 47s):
You said you were

5 (9m 48s):
A rep from a surf brand As a rep for a surf brand. I had one T-shirt. So I, yeah, I got an appointment and then on my day off, I went to that appointment. This is big, huge corporate offices, super impressive. And they told me to wait, you know, over here in the lobby. And there was guys with rolling racks and I think somebody had one of those big huge cell phones at the time. And, and I had one t-shirt in a little suit bag. I was sitting there with my bad corduroy suit and I almost left when they called my name and said to go set up in one of the rooms and so, and wait for the buyer. So I walked into the room, it's this huge room and has this big grid on the wall where you can put all your, your, you know, your sweatshirts and t-shirts and hats and everything.

5 (10m 31s):
You just make, you could show it all together. And so I just put my one t-shirt on the thing, a little wire hanger, hung it up, turned the lights on, and spread the drawings out and waited. And then Vivian Dryer walked in as the buyer and she,

0 (10m 47s):
You still remember her name?

5 (10m 49s):
I still know her, I still talk to her. Wow. Yeah, she changed my life. Yeah. She, yeah, she walks in and looks at me and looks at the wall and sees that one t-shirt sitting there. And I just came clean. I, I had went only one choice just to come clean and I just said, Hey, I work at Art Van Furniture, I'm not a surfer rep. I just was at the beach a few weeks ago and saw this, these guys surfing and thought I was funny and I'm so sorry for wasting your time, but here it is. And she looked at me and said, no, let's take a look. So she looked at the shirt, looked at the drawing, spread 'em out a little bit, smiled and ordered 1800 T-shirts.

0 (11m 33s):
Wow. She ordered 1800 surf Michigan t-shirts.

5 (11m 37s):
Yeah. Which for me at the time was a ton. And at the time, you know, where

0 (11m 41s):
Did you get them printed?

5 (11m 42s):
I got printed a place called Parent Screen Printing, a guy named Carl Perrin in Grand Rapids. I just found him in the phone book and he was cool enough to make me one t-shirt, you know, and,

0 (11m 54s):
And you just bought, he just bought like 1800 Haines t-shirts and then

5 (11m 58s):
Yeah, I did all the art. Took 'em there, printed 'em, and I at the ti you know, you can't do this anymore, but I put 'em in back into the Haines beefy T box and put the right name on 'em and delivered 'em myself, and then went back to work.

0 (12m 12s):
Wow. So you had a bonafide legitimate side hustle going while you were selling furniture?

5 (12m 18s):
I did. I did. I did that for a couple of years.

0 (12m 21s):
And you, you turned into a business, you called it New agenda. That's right. And in the meantime, this is like, this is like the early nineties and an opportunity would come up, which is the basketball team in Ann Arbor at the University of Michigan is about to blow up. This was the era of the fab vibe. They were like freshman starters who were just incredible players. They got a ton of media attention. Some of 'em would go on to have these amazing NBA careers like Jalen Rosen, Juwan Howard, and, and Chris Weber. Right.

5 (12m 53s):
Yeah. Yeah. They were kind of like just changing college sports as well. They were rebels and, and they were cool. And they were, they were wearing black socks and they're the ones that started wearing the really long shorts. Yeah. And I was at Meyer and I was looking for a Michigan shirt, and the only shirts with Michigan with basketball was a, was just said Michigan XXL basketball or Michigan. And with a, like a clip art ball going through a hoop basketball. And, you know, there was nothing cool. And I couldn't believe it. I couldn't figure it out. So I, I, again, on, on a day off, I drove to University of Michigan and talked to the AD and actually got the license from Michigan.

5 (13m 40s):
How

0 (13m 40s):
Did you get a end with the athletic director there? That's a big job. I mean,

5 (13m 43s):
I, I just walked in and at the time, he was the one that ran the licensing that was part of his job. Later it would go to, you know, there's this college licensing companies now that just handled all of the licenses for all the schools, but at the time it was done in house at the school. Wait,

0 (14m 0s):
You, you went there with designs saying, Hey, I could do a better shirts for you guys?

5 (14m 4s):
No, I didn't. I showed 'em nothing. I just asked what it would cost to get a license. I still would have to get the designs approved, but I didn't have to show them anything. I just had to get a license. So I I How

0 (14m 14s):
Much was the license?

5 (14m 16s):
It was nothing for the license. It was just a percentage. Just had to pay them a royalty, which was, I think 10 or 20%. Yeah. It was insane. So I got the license and went back and I came up with a shirt called Slam Dance that I did on my living room floor.

0 (14m 34s):
And what did it look like?

5 (14m 36s):
It was, it just said Big Navy blue letter, it said Slam and then a Michigan m in between it. And then at the bottom it said dance and the University of Michigan written underneath that. But in the middle was a huge m and a guy that kind of looked like Weber swinging from the rim. And I had Carl make it at Peron Screen Printing, and he thought it was cool. And I, on one of my couple of days off, I took it to University of Michigan and

0 (15m 5s):
I guess you what? You just like walked into different stores on campus and, and sold it to them. Like, like the managers just ordered your t-shirts based on that one design.

5 (15m 15s):
So yeah. So I went to Mo Sports Shop in Ann Arbor right on campus. It's a, it was really cool. It's not there any long Rosa institution there for so many years. Showed them, they bought it in an Rick's is the bookstore there and sold it to them. And they sold 10,000 shirts that season.

0 (15m 34s):
10 thou, because you're doing this a few months before March Madness, which when all the, yes. Yeah. I mean, they get to the finals, you sell 10,000 of these shirts to say slam dance.

5 (15m 44s):
Yeah. Yeah. It was huge.

0 (15m 45s):
So that, that clearly was the impetus for you to leave your job selling furniture because you're making serious money selling t-shirts.

5 (15m 53s):
Well, I knew it, I knew it was getting exciting. I started adding some schools, but I wasn't making serious money. Not enough to think that I could Yeah. Support my fam forever. I didn't know if it was a fluke.

0 (16m 4s):
What schools did you go to after Michigan?

5 (16m 7s):
I mean, obviously the ones that were close by. Yeah, Michigan State, Notre Dame, Indiana, Illinois, North Carolina, Georgetown. But I had, I didn't really know business. Yeah. So I was, I had huge inventory and huge fees from Perrin for the printing and you know, I just didn't have any concept of margins of what it really took to have a business. So while by at the end I had 400 and something licenses. Well, I had lots of licenses. I wasn't super profitable.

0 (16m 37s):
And I guess around 92 you meet this guy named Joe Shields. I guess you meet him in, in Grand Rapids. Who, who you would go on to start a new kind of design business with.

5 (16m 48s):
Yeah, I was at, I was at Parents Green Printing and I saw this guy's work that was also being printed there and it was really cool. And what was it? It was these, these characters and I thought it was super cool. I just saw it as art. I was a goofy little doodle cartoonist. Right. This guy's a real cartoonist. So saw some of his designs that he was working on for t-shirts and said, Hey, I know how to get reps and stuff. Why don't we start a, a company ourselves. And then I felt like I wanted to bring something to the table. I was putting, getting the reps together. It was for the line, there was two lines. One was called Mosh, the other one was called Caveman that he drew.

0 (17m 27s):
But these shirts were, were like kind of abstract humans or like cartoon characters, kind of animal animals. And they would say, would it say something on the shirt?

5 (17m 38s):
No, just said mosh. It was just a, it was just a stylized version of these people dancing on the front of shirts in different position. It just said mosh on the top. Right. Which was kind of cool cause the mosh pits and all that.

0 (17m 48s):
But who and who would wear those shirts?

5 (17m 50s):
Well, nobody, nobody, nobody would wear those shirts. Guy actually, nobody would buy, no, I don't think one, I don't think one person wore those shirts. But while we were getting ready to do 'em, I saw a article in a magazine that had Madonna, this is like a 94 with a her Chiquita of her chihuahua. It

0 (18m 14s):
Was a photo of her holding her chihuahua. It

5 (18m 16s):
Was a photo of her holding this new dog that she just got called Chiquita and, and at the time, right, I, because I'd been looking at, okay, what's going on in the, in the t-shirt world? And when a lion gets popular, it's popular by the cool people, the, the college-aged kids, the high schoolers. Right. They start buying it and then, and then their younger brothers see them wearing it, and then they wanna buy it. So then it gets a little younger. And so then that's the first sign you're, it's gonna be trending, starting to trend down on the cool factor. And then when the dads start buying it, and then the dads are wearing it, then those cool kids stop wearing it. And so then they're gonna be looking for something new. So yeah, I saw that kind of happening and I saw Madonna and Jaqui and I was like, took that to Joe and we called it Psycho Chihuahua.

0 (19m 1s):
You took that picture of Madonna on the Chihuahua and you said, let's do something with a chihuahua.

5 (19m 6s):
Yeah, let's do something with a chihuahua. Let's do one more line. So not just those two lines that we were gonna do. Let's do this chihuahua line, because I think, and here's why he loved it, he drew this really badass little small shaking chihuahua and we put words on it. So it was psycho chihuahua, you know, 1923 or something. And then these Mexican colors,

0 (19m 28s):
It was supposed to be funny, like, look at this little psycho chihuahua. Yeah, that's fierce, but not really dangerous.

5 (19m 34s):
Yeah, exactly. That's what it was. So it said things like, on the backs of the shirt, they said things like, you know, I don't roll over and I don't play dead or bite me or fetch this. Or Big dogs suck.

0 (19m 44s):
Big dogs suck.

5 (19m 45s):
And so we sent the, we, we made some shirts, Paron, and we sent them out. I got found some reps, they said they would, they liked them, they would take 'em and try to sell 'em in. And if it's sold, they would take the line. If it didn't, they wouldn't. And these couple of rep groups took it out to see what it, see what the temperature was. And called me back and said, everybody wants psycho chihuahua.

0 (20m 4s):
Everybody wants psycho chihuahua. And how, like, do you remember how many orders you guys got? This is like 94, 95. I mean, you

5 (20m 11s):
Know, we're selling tens of thousands of shirts. Right. We weren't being getting rich by any means, but we had something we had, we could feel the pulse. So we were going, I was going with a new agenda to a show, a trade show called the Super Show, which is no longer around, but it used to be the biggest trade show in the world, at least for apparel. And I got a booth space and psychologist was blowing up.

0 (20m 37s):
Explain that to me. You're standing at a booth. Yep. When you say blowing up, everybody passing by was like, oh my God, I have to have this psycho chihuahua dog

5 (20m 46s):
T-shirt. I know it sounds stupid. And no, not everybody guy, but, but enough people compared to the other booths. Right. By blowing up most booths, you're kind of looking for people to talk to. Our booth had people there, we were doing interviews, we couldn't write the orders fast enough.

0 (21m 6s):
All on the strength of the psycho chihuahua t-shirt. Totally. Th this is, I mean, it wasn't like you were like, yeah we have, we've we've got like nuclear fusion. We've achieved it here at this booth. It was, it was psycho chihuahua and, and it was just, that was the thing that people were like, oh my God, this is so cool.

5 (21m 26s):
It was fresh. It was so fresh. And we thought, we thought we had discovered gold. Yeah. We thought it was, yeah. Fusion.

0 (21m 33s):
So I guess you guys decide around that time to see if you could license this product. And I guess you, there was a convention that was like a licensing convention where you bring a product to see if anyone wanted to license it.

5 (21m 45s):
Yeah. That was part of the timing, right? I knew we had to make as much money as quickly as we could. Yeah. So there's a show called the Licensing Show at the Javits in New York. In

0 (21m 55s):
New York,

5 (21m 56s):
Yeah. You show your stuff and if I had a lunch pale company and I wanted to put Power Rangers or Teenage Mutant Ninja Engine Turtles or Baywatch or Snoopy on my lunch pales or my sleeping bags or my mugs or whatever kind of company I have, I go there and I see all of the licensable properties that people own companies own and it, and I make a deal with them. So that's where the, that show was, we got a booth, I got us a really great placement next to the first Jurassic Park and Rug Rats.

0 (22m 28s):
And what happened, was it similar to the previous trade show? Was there a lot of buzz around this? This little dog?

5 (22m 33s):
There was, yeah. People had started to see it around a little bit. I forget all of the people that came, but Minolta came by. They were making the camera. Yeah, they were making a little small camera. They were interested in licensing it for their small camera. So they'd have a little mascot for it. Hmm.

0 (22m 50s):
The psycho Chihuahua Minolta dog.

5 (22m 53s):
Yeah. I mean it never went past the trade show, but we, but we talked for quite a while at the trade show about it. And just other companies, you know, they're just looking for who is the demographic? Who's our demographic. Our demographic was young, high school, college boys, you know? Yeah. I don't remember who else other than the big one. You know Taco Bell came by Taco

0 (23m 14s):
Bell. Yeah. So Taco Bell comes to your booth to senior reps from Taco Bell and they were like, this is awesome. We love it. Like right away.

5 (23m 21s):
Yeah. Ed El Farro was the main guy, I don't remember who he was. He's like in charge of brand at Taco Bell in California. And they were actually there looking for a mascot. They were looking for something to license. They had been looking forward and working on it with different ad agencies for a while and had sent Ed there. And so they were just looking for ideas. And when they stumbled upon our booth and we had a great conversation, we got obviously super excited about the possibility of that. We sent them home with some t-shirts and all the information and all the stuff that we had and we spent some time with them talking about it. We flew to to

0 (23m 56s):
Irvine.

5 (23m 57s):
Irvine and we knew we were over our heads a little bit with this thing. So we got a agent, Arlene Scanlan,

0 (24m 4s):
Just like a, a creative, like a licensing agent?

5 (24m 7s):
Yeah. She was a licensing agent. She had worked, like she'd gotten the deals for like Pink Panther and Owen's Corning and Snoopy.

0 (24m 13s):
That's like a talent agent for people like you.

5 (24m 15s):
Exactly. So she could represent us and, and strike the deals and Yeah. Make sure we're doing everything right because, you know, just as we were just talking to him, even on the phone and, and through email we knew it was getting, we needed some help as far as what this was gonna cost, what the fees would be. They were asking about the fees and all that. And we worked with 'em for 18 months. We were on the calendar of when it was gonna happen. They were planning on testing it.

0 (24m 38s):
What kind of designs were you working on?

5 (24m 41s):
We were doing their tray liners. We designed their uniforms, we designed their hats, we designed their posters. We wrote the commercials. I wrote the commercials. Joe's storyboard at the commercials

0 (24m 50s):
And, but it wasn't a cartoon chihuahua, right? You moved to like a real chihuahua.

5 (24m 54s):
Yeah. Early on when we just, you know, probably like second day when Joe and I were thinking about it, we realized that if this was gonna be for tv, it can't be a cartoon anymore. It has to be a real chihuahua. Especially as we started storyboarding it, we had to take it and just turn it into a real dog, kind of like Garfield could turn into a real cat. So that's what we did.

0 (25m 15s):
All right. So you're working with Taco Bell and this is exciting. This is a big deal. I mean, I mean for a tiny little shop like you guys to have a massive brand like Taco Bell say Yeah, do our campaign. I mean that must have been super exciting.

5 (25m 31s):
It was the most exciting. It was creatively, it was just, it was over the moon. Yeah. Designing the toys that, that they would give away. The little dogs were just Yeah, we were just, it was, yeah, it was getting good.

0 (25m 42s):
So anyone who was was like conscious in the late nineties, well know what this is going, which is the famous Taco Bell Chihuahua ad, which is amazing. I mean it was an incredible, you were working on this thing and you're working on what, what is gonna about to become, you didn't know an iconic concept and they stopped taking your calls one day.

5 (26m 3s):
Yeah.

0 (26m 4s):
They just stopped answering your calls in 1997.

5 (26m 8s):
Yeah, they did. We were just rolling so well along with everything and like I said, everything was slated to go and all of a sudden Ed stopped calling us back

0 (26m 19s):
Like nothing happened. He wasn't like, no blowout fight. They just,

5 (26m 23s):
No, they just nothing. They just just ghosted you. Completely ghosted us. And we were getting nervous.

0 (26m 29s):
I mean, yeah,

5 (26m 31s):
Yeah. We just thought they weren't gonna go with it. We just thought they were gonna, we just thought they've had another idea. Cuz we knew they were working with some other agencies on some different ideas too. Yeah. And so we thought, so

0 (26m 40s):
You just figured, okay, that's it. We're,

5 (26m 42s):
That's it. But, but it would've been cool if they had called us, come on, what happened? You know, we were your best buddy and now you won't even say goodbye.

0 (26m 49s):
And so presumably I guess you guys just figure, well I guess we just move on.

5 (26m 55s):
Yeah, sadly, sadly we didn't know what else to do, but move on. But yeah, we were, it took the window out of our sails for sure. Cuz we told everybody about, our families knew everybody was asking about it. We were, we were high fiving daily.

0 (27m 9s):
Yeah. Yeah. All right. Then about three months later, all of a sudden a commercial, an ad campaign comes out with a chihuahua and at the end the chihuahua says, yo kiro Taco Bell. Yeah. And what do you remember when you saw that ad? What do you remember thinking? Yeah,

5 (27m 25s):
They, they tested that ad in the Northeast, which has happened to be where I was in Michigan. And I just lost it, you know, because it was the commercial that I'd written. You know, the first three commercials were, are commercials that we had storyboarded and shared and sent. So it wasn't a, it was the, it was everything was the same. Wow. And it was just like a knife to the chest.

0 (27m 54s):
When we come back in just a moment, how the psycho Chihuahua episode turns into a five year legal drama and how Tom eventually moves on to a brand new mascot, the sun bum gorilla. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

Squarespace (28m 20s):
I've talked to hundreds of founders on how I built this and I've heard time and time again how important it is to have a strong web presence in order to really grow a business. Squarespace is an all in one platform for building a brand and engaging customers online. Squarespace lets you easily create a dynamic website and sell anything your products and services and even content you create. Squarespace makes it really easy to get started with best in class website templates for all types of businesses that can be customized to fit your specific needs. Squarespace also provides the tools you need to run your business smoothly, including inventory management, a simple checkout process, and secure payments. Whatever you sell, Squarespace has merchandising features to make your products look their best online. And every Squarespace website and online store comes with a suite of integrated features and useful guides that help maximize prominence among search results. Check out squarespace.com/built for a free trial. And when you are ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

Burrow (29m 26s):
Once a company knows what they do best, where do they go from there? Well if you're Burrow the furniture company known for reinventing everything you thought you knew about furniture, you go outside. That's right. Burrow's new outdoor collection just launched with a strong chip resistant, galvanized steel frame and easy to clean fabric. Burrow's outdoor collection is built for everyday use and to withstand the elements, the modern sleek look and quick drying plush foam cushions bring the comfort and style of indoors outside and the easy to remove cushions make for easy storage when you need to put it away. It's also customizable. Choose from 19 different configurations and purchase individual pieces or bundles to fit your seating needs. And as always, get free shipping on every order. Right now how I Built this, listeners can get 15% off the new outdoor collection during Burrow's spring sale, as well as up to 30% off their award-winning seating at burrow.com/built. That's Burrow b u r r o w.com/built for up to 30% off burrow.com/built.

5 (30m 36s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So it's 1998 and the bottom has just dropped out of Tom's world.

0 (30m 46s):
He and his partner Joe are shocked to discover that Taco Bell has basically stolen their mascot for a national ad campaign, which by the way is going to become huge. So Tom and Joe are furious and they file a lawsuit against Taco Bell citing breach of contract.

5 (31m 4s):
Taco Bell had like the best law firm in New York, I forget the name of it. And they had Sidley and Austin and Chicago Big one and LA in-house and Grand they had. So

0 (31m 15s):
It's intimidating,

5 (31m 16s):
Super intimidating.

0 (31m 17s):
This would take five years of your life. We'll just start by saying that actually longer, but, but five years until a final decision was made. But in 99 you at a US district court in Michigan, they did grant summary judgment to Taco Bell. Yes. And so essentially, basically denying your claim. Correct. And that could have been the end of the story, but you decided to keep fighting to appeal that. Yeah. Now it was kind of a crazy risk that you were taking, right? Because I'm sure that it was really stressful on you and your family and probably hard to focus on your business while you're fighting this lawsuit.

5 (31m 53s):
Yeah, it was the chihuahua in me I guess you could say. Right. It was fighting for the little guy and the big guys just were taking advantage and I'm pretty relentless when it comes to that kind of stuff. So

0 (32m 6s):
How were you focusing Tom? How were you and Joe continuing to do your work, your business?

5 (32m 12s):
Well we kind of, it kind of pulled us apart a little

0 (32m 14s):
Bit. Yeah,

5 (32m 15s):
It was stressful and we had done all this work and I don't know if we blamed each other. I don't think we did. But it was just, you know, it was kind of over because now Taco Bell owns this little chihuahua so even our shirts stopped selling because everybody wanted the Taco Bell Chihuahua shirts, you know, we were just a knockoff. So sales of that dropped off. So we really didn't have anything to work together. So he did his thing. We had offices right next to each other, so, so we saw each other all the time and consoled each other all the time. We were still friends but we stopped working together.

0 (32m 44s):
Meantime, everyone around you in Grand Rapids knows you're in this lawsuit. Yes. And w was that what people would talk to you about every time you saw them? Didn't that just get tiring cuz you knew that you'd go to school pickup or the whatever, like the grocery store you'd like, oh Tom, I heard that Taco Bell thing. How's that going?

5 (32m 59s):
Yeah, it was super distracting. I was the guy suing Taco Bell and everybody had known before or everybody my friends had known that we were doing it. So when the commercials started airing, when the Super Bowl ad ran and all that, people from all over from in California, everywhere were calling congratulating me for the campaign. Thought it was amazing. Congrats. So we got everything, all the congrats in the mail and phone calls all the time. It's so exciting. I was like, yeah, that's not us. They took it.

0 (33m 28s):
I can't, I, I don't know what I would do. I would be so mad and stressed and anxious and, and then like just people talking to me about it all the time. I would just hate that. I'd hate it and hate the Taco Bell wasn't settling this, I'd hate it, you know? Yeah,

5 (33m 43s):
Yeah. They never, they never, if they would've, we met with Sidley and Austin, their lawyers in Chicago. We drove down there with our lawyer and if they would've offered us, they're gonna hate to hear this right now, but if they would've offered us 200,000, we'd have taken it if they would've because we just wanted to get paid for our work. That's it. You know what I mean? Yeah. We wouldn't, we wouldn't have needed to anybody even say it was our,

0 (34m 5s):
They wouldn't even settle for

5 (34m 6s):
That. They didn't offer us one dime. And if they would've over those five years, we would've taken in a heartbeat because it was beating us up so bad. And like you say, it was hard to concentrate on anything else and we didn't think we could win. We didn't think we could make it to trial cuz it was co gonna cost so much.

0 (34m 24s):
I mean, that's a cliche to say this is the ultimate David Goliath story.

5 (34m 27s):
Oh yeah, totally.

0 (34m 28s):
Alright, so meantime you're fighting this. Yeah. But around this time, this is like 2001, you start something entirely new, which was a departure from what you had been doing. I guess you start a venture to make like Christian oriented films. Can, can you tell me about that? Because I know when you grew up your dad was a minister, but from what I understand you kind of rejected it, like all that stuff when you were young and then maybe you went to church again a little bit after you had a family. Yeah. Just tell me about it.

5 (35m 1s):
Sure. My wife liked going every Sunday and we had little kids and she wanted them to go to church too. And it was okay. I just didn't listen. But then this guy came along Rob Bell and he was like a guest speaker. He was young, fresh, he like, felt like he swore even if he didn't, it felt like he was swearing up there and listened to the same kind of music that I listened to and moved referenced movies that I liked. And he was a real dude. He was a real guy that I would like to hang around that actually believed in God. I was somehow making it work. And we decided to go to his church when he opened a church. So he, he opened this little church in this warehouse with not that many people and he was just so good man.

5 (35m 44s):
He just had it, his sermons were just insane and they were so relevant. And then one day he had a couple other friends all get together cuz he wanted to talk about getting his cassette ministry cleaned up. So, you know, they record the sermons that he wanted to get his message out to more people and thought he could sell his cassettes or, or make them available somehow through the church. And, and we were just saying, okay, yeah that sounds great, do that. And I kind of, you know, there was no light coming through a window but just hit me like, you can do this Tom, why don't you step up and do it.

0 (36m 19s):
Alright. So you start working on this, this new product basically, which is gonna be these kind of Christian inspirational videos. Was the idea from, from this video business to, I mean, how is it gonna make money? Was it, did you see a path there to build a big business?

5 (36m 36s):
No, I in fact made it a nonprofit business. Oh wow. It was originally gonna be, you know, the brand of Christianity, if you will. Cause that's what I've kind of gotten good at, is making brands over the years, the brand of Christianity was just horrible. Like the only message, it wasn't beautiful, it was kind of ugly. All the protestors and, you know, people killing abortion, clinic doctors and things like that on the news and just the perception of Christianity was really not that good. And so I thought maybe we could actually try to change the brand a little bit by this thing. So made it a nonprofit and started to try to think about how to make this thing happen.

0 (37m 14s):
Alright. But meantime, you're, you're not done with, with Taco Bell because as we, as we said earlier, you and Joe decide to appeal that case and Yes. And this goes to, this is a, a federal court and, and now you have to focus on the trial and what do you remember like getting cross-examined? What was, do you remember just being nervous, you know, about testifying and all that stuff?

5 (37m 40s):
Yeah, I was on the stand I think for three days. It was a three and a half week federal trial. The first time they offered us something was at the trial. It was just before it started, they had lots of lawyers on their side and we had our little three lawyers on our side. And yeah,

0 (37m 54s):
Judge

5 (37m 54s):
Came out, everybody rose the jury was in, and, and they went up and said they'd like to see everybody in chambers. And so the judge had asked us all to come in and Taco Bell, I don't remember the number, but because I was dazed, but they offered us a few million dollars to settle right there. Wow. Five years after everything they had been putting us through. And I just looked at Joe and he looked at me and g gave me a little nod and then I looked at the, looked at our lawyers and they were like, oh, please, oh, please do not say yes please. We've worked five years to get to this moment to take these guys on. Yeah. Don't say yes. And I, I looked at him and said, no, let's go.

5 (38m 34s):
And we walked back in and three and a half week trial, it was hair, it was super hairy. I was, you know, it was crazy. Cross-examined and, but they, they really, they didn't have anything. And I think it helped us being in Grand Rapids. I think our lawyers were so good and their lawyers were super slick.

0 (38m 51s):
So you testify at this trial Yeah. And eventually you're brought back in to hear the judgment. Yeah. Tell me what happened.

5 (39m 1s):
Well, we got notice that the verdict was in, so we all went back to the courthouse and judge came in, jury came in, we all were standing there holding hands and, and they read guilty on all counts. Wow.

0 (39m 19s):
Did you cry? Did you collapse? Did you

5 (39m 22s):
Oh dude, yeah. Just probably cried. Like, probably just the emotion of it being over and of having taken these guys on and beaten them, it was just overwhelming.

0 (39m 33s):
Wow. Yeah.

5 (39m 35s):
And awarded us what we asked for, which was the contract. You know, we'd, at one point we'd given them the contract. They had asked obviously what kind of price they, we were gonna want on it. Yeah. And Arlene Scanlan had given them the terms of everything, which was a piece of the profits from the toys, a piece of the advertising budget, a piece of all these things. And so the claim was just a, a implied contract claim. So it was, you know, we were asking for that contract and the jury agreed that we deserved that contract. Yeah. So, yeah, we all cried, we hugged, you know, the people in the audience that were there on our side were obviously ecstatic. And Taco Bell side just dropped their heads, packed their bags, and we just looked at 'em, scowled at 'em, and they walked out.

0 (40m 17s):
The jury awarded you guys 30.1 million plus another 12 million in interest. And did Taco Bell pay that right away? I mean,

5 (40m 27s):
No, they appealed right away and then, and then a few months later they settled.

0 (40m 32s):
And were you, I mean you had up until this point not necessarily been, I mean you were making a decent living, but you weren't rich. No. But, but when that Taco Bell money came in, like you were in pretty great shape financially for your, I mean, now you could really kind of, I guess breathe a, a, a sigh of relief a little bit, right?

5 (40m 52s):
Yeah, it, for sure I could breathe a sigh of relief, but it wasn't as much money as everybody thought. You know, everybody thought I had 40 million under my mattress because No, I got, you know, the 33% of the lawyers plus hard costs, 25% of my agent, me and Joe split the rest. Tax government took rest and taxes, you know, it was not, it was not as

0 (41m 11s):
Much. So in the end you might have five, 6 million bucks. Yeah. Right. Yeah.

5 (41m 15s):
You're, you're right on the money. But that was still absolutely gigantic for a family like mine.

0 (41m 21s):
Yeah. You know, meanwhile, while you were working on the Christian videos with, with this nonprofit, I guess you met this guy who would wind up helping you with, with that project. And then who would, would become your next business partner? His name is Renee tti. Who, who is Renee tti or who is he?

5 (41m 40s):
Renee worked at an agency, a little design agency. There was a couple of doors down from the little office that we had. He had just gotten here from Copenhagen. He grew up in Copenhagen and he was just amazing brand designer. And he was, they were expensive. It was like $200 an hour, which was a lot for a nonprofit. Yeah. But you know, as I realized I couldn't afford to keep using an agency and I was gonna hire somebody and he said, I'll do it. And I said, I can only pay X amount, which was half of what he was getting. Hmm. And I was like, why would you, he, and he was, he was basically, he grew up an atheist, you know what I mean? He, he hated the church. He hated, he didn't even believe any of it. And, and I was like, why would you wanna come and work do this?

5 (42m 24s):
And he said, because I have never looked for God or looked for spirituality or anything because there was no on-ramp for me, a person like me. Wow. And Renee helped open my eyes to what needed to be said to create those on-ramps.

0 (42m 37s):
I guess you, I mean this reminds me of the story with Joe, right? This is a guy you meet in the, in the t-shirt printing shop, and then you start something with him. Renee is a guy, you meet a couple doors down and starts working with you guys in these films and clearly you see talent, a lot of talent in him. And the two of you decide to basically join forces and build a branding agency together. Yes. In 2007 you called it Rinks. Conneti,

5 (42m 60s):
Yeah.

0 (43m 1s):
Yes. And you were gonna do branding work for whoever, but how, how did you even get those accounts?

5 (43m 8s):
Well, when we did rinks, conneti, the word was kind of getting a, a little bit around about us as the brand side of things. His word of mouth. He had a lot of talent on the design world that he had brought with him from Copenhagen. So the accounts that we worked on that we got initially were the rock and republic, the DA on tequila. And the idea is we'll make, we know how to make brands, we'll make a brand for you and you pay the fees for us to do that. And you gave us a piece of your company,

0 (43m 41s):
Right? So somebody would come to you and say, Hey, I want to do this or I want to do that. And I guess one of those things was somebody came to you, maybe it was a friend of yours who came to you wanting to make tequila, high end tequila.

5 (43m 55s):
Yeah. He was my best friend growing up. He was also a pastor's kid and we kind of saved each other's life by sneaking out and going out to clubs together. And my childhood was great because of Brent.

0 (44m 7s):
His name's Brent, his

5 (44m 8s):
Name's Brent Hawking. Yeah. And he ended up being a mortgage guy and just crushing into the mortgage businesses and just one of the best in the country. But we was just getting tired of it and, and wanted to start a tequila company. He wanted to get into the, into the spirits business.

0 (44m 23s):
And what else do two children of of ministry do?

5 (44m 26s):
Right.

0 (44m 26s):
Start a tequila brand.

5 (44m 28s):
Right.

0 (44m 28s):
It's the natural path.

5 (44m 29s):
It is. So he, he wanted to do that. He knew what I did. He knew about me and Renee doing this thing and, and some, and some of our

0 (44m 37s):
Work. I mean the, the whole point of this was to take this liquid and turn it into a brand. And so you guys were doing, your job was to make the bottle and to make the logo and to make the the style this thing. Yes. That was what you were charged to do. Correct. Did he know about tequila? Like was he experienced, was he a distiller?

5 (44m 58s):
He, he wasn't, but man, he fit the bill. You know, it's all about feeling when you build a brand, right. Every beva buy things because the way they make them feel. Right. You buy a Louis Vuitton cuz you think it makes you feel rich, you buy an old surf fan cuz you think it looks cool. You buy athletic shoe, Nike because you think you look more athletic or whatever the type might be. I know there's other things, but everything you do is based on how this product or brand makes you feel about yourself or think other people feel about you. So when it came to tequila and looking at the tequila business, when Brent called me, it was pretty easy if you're, if you're ordering tequila at a bar or whiskey at a bar, just straight up tequila on the rocks, you're trying to be a badass a little bit.

5 (45m 41s):
Yeah. You're, you know, you're not, you're not ordering a cosmopolitan. And so he fit, he fit that bill. He was, he had just such a great aesthetic. He was, but he was big guy, tough. He's great in the clubs, he knew lots of people. He was a great businessman.

0 (45m 59s):
And so he could basically source tequila. Like that wasn't hard. Like he knew he could get it distilled from like a white label distiller to his specifications. Correct.

5 (46m 10s):
He found a plant, a place where they make the tequila down in Helico somewhere, which is where they make all the tequila down that state in Mexico. And, and he, he got that and then just needed a brand behind it.

0 (46m 23s):
Did you have a name for it?

5 (46m 25s):
Yeah, they, they were from Leon, so, which means lion. So we called it Da Leone brand actually came up with that name

0 (46m 33s):
Da Leon Tequila

5 (46m 34s):
Daon Tequila. Right. And had bill Wall, you know, make a cork bill Wal, it was like a jewelry to the stars, all the, all the skull and cross bone and all that stuff for rock stars. He was the guy that made 'em all. And he had a shop in Malibu and Renee mostly designed this cork that had skulls and snakes on it. And they cast it out of a ball of sterling silver. And he carved it for us. And it looked, it looked badass, it looked like something. And I think the cheapest bottle was $125 a bottle all the way up to $850 a bottle.

0 (47m 8s):
Wow. And you guys, as part of the sort of agreement, you also got a piece of the company? Yes. So you were incentivized to make this work because it was your company now?

5 (47m 18s):
Yeah, I mean it wasn't my company, it was Brent's company. But yeah, I was totally incentivized because that would be the bigger, the larger payoff. Right. So that's what rinks Canadian did. We just kind of, we got paid for making brands, but then you had these little chips you were putting down on this roulette wheel and if one of them hit, you got a bigger hit.

0 (47m 34s):
Alright, so, so we've talked about t-shirts, surf Michigan and Psycho Chihuahua and Christian videos and a tequila brand. I mean a very wide range of things that you were kind of building. And then in the midst of all this, while you're launching De Leone tequila, somebody else comes to you with a concept for, or an idea for sunscreen.

5 (47m 58s):
Yeah. That's around 2009. Yeah.

0 (48m 1s):
Who, who approached you? What, what was the story?

5 (48m 3s):
It was a friend from my school that my kids went to in Michigan and he wanted to get, be in the sunscreen business. Him and a couple of his friends. And so asked me to come and take a look at what they were dealing and see if I had any suggestions or see if I thought there was a hole in the market and see if I was interested in making it for him.

0 (48m 23s):
And they figured out how to finance this or that's Yeah, they were, they

5 (48m 27s):
Were working out. The guy was super rich so he could handle the money part of it.

0 (48m 31s):
So they come to you and they say, Hey, we wanna do, and they had no name, they had no concept at all. It was just like, they just knew where they could make sunscreen?

5 (48m 39s):
No, they were trying to do sunscreen. They had some different names out there doing it, and it was failing and they were losing money. So they, they wanted me to come and look at it and see what they were doing wrong, basically.

0 (48m 49s):
What did you think when you got there?

5 (48m 51s):
They were doing it wrong.

0 (48m 53s):
Yeah. What was it called?

5 (48m 54s):
They had three, they had race face, which was for nascar. For NASCAR people. They had game face, which was for colleges, which would never approve it. And then they had Sun bum actually that was, they had a little carabineer on it and a little clip Art hammock guy on the cover of the

0 (49m 14s):
Bottle. And what, what about their concept appealed to you?

5 (49m 18s):
Nothing.

0 (49m 19s):
It

5 (49m 19s):
Was nothing. Nothing. It was, it was, I told him he was, it was never gonna make it. None of them were gonna make it. They were horrible. Like, like nascar people don't use expensive sunscreen. They had to be licensing with colleges. I knew colleges, but it was just horrible. It was just horrible design, horrible ideas. And they, they didn't know what they were doing

0 (49m 39s):
Given that the branding was so terrible. And you already had a bunch of different accounts you were working on or brands you were building, what appealed to you about this idea of working in sunscreen?

5 (49m 49s):
It was local, so that made it easy. We didn't have to travel as much, and I knew the surf world, I knew the beach world and I liked it. And, you know, I just didn't say yes right away. I looked at the industry, I looked at what was happening in the space and I saw just a gigantic hole that you could drive through. It was a, a Playtex had just bought Hawaiian Tropic a couple years earlier. So it was just all these big players. There was no authentic sunscreen brand. Only thing that was out there was stuff that my kids didn't want in the car or on their towel. It looked like their mom left something in their car behind if, yeah, if it was, you know, there was nothing that fit their world. And I knew I could create that and I knew, like I said, there was a space for it.

0 (50m 32s):
What was the first thing you did? You said ditch these NASCAR and college brands and focus on sun bomb.

5 (50m 38s):
No, I said ditch it all. And then we started our process and

0 (50m 41s):
It's, tell me how you did it there.

5 (50m 43s):
It's a three month process, so it's, yeah, the first month is research, looking at the industry, looking at the holes, looking at how to do it. Second is ideation, just creative thinking together, Renee and I. And then the third month is laying down the design work. And so that's, that's how it began.

0 (51m 2s):
All right. So tell me what you, you started to think about building this brand and what it was gonna be.

5 (51m 8s):
At first it was just, we were, we designed it, Renee and I's office was in Grand Rapids and we were walking to some subway for lunch and we passed a contemporary museum of art. And there was a Ames lounge chair in Ottoman sitting there. I looked at, I saw the wood grain and I saw the curves and I was like, wood, like quid grain. That's, that's good. And Renee liked it as well. So we kind of developed a little wood grain pattern and we realized nothing in, in the market was wood grain. And we liked it. It felt good, it felt natural. You were thinking wood grain bottle,

0 (51m 38s):
Wood grain, bottle,

5 (51m 40s):
Bottle. And, and it would be, you know, there was every color in the rainbow already there, and you kind of wanna own the block. And then my son, Drake's Billabong thrift store T-shirt was yellow and brown. I brought that in one day. And we liked those colors. Yellow was, is a good color. It got brighter over the years, but, but yellow is the first color I sees, you know, that's why caution tape is yellow. It's, it's great for brands. We hated the name Sun Bum. But then when I came up with Trust the Bum, you know, for a tagline for it, and then protect your lazy ass, it kind of all started to come together. And then the name didn't matter. And then, and then the other thing about when you're naming a brand, which it's good when the brand is in the name.

5 (52m 22s):
Yeah. So there was no sun, you know, you need sunscreen on a sunny day on, you're going out in the sun. And there was no brand out there with the word sun in it. And so that made it really good. Cause you're already saying half the name. It's like, if your drain is clogged, Draino is the perfect name. Or if you need home products, home Depot is good. Or Office products, office Depot. And if Office Depot is taken, office Max, you're already saying the name. Yeah. So it's good. And I mean, I went to a haircut place called Cafeteria and they play on Quaff in cafeteria, and nobody knew what they did there, and they went outta business. So yeah. So Sun Bum kind of grew on us and then we started figuring out how, how the rest of it would look and how to mash it up.

0 (53m 7s):
So you had of course, a lot of experience previous iterations with characters, obviously Psycho Chihuahua. Yeah. And, and did you, did you think about like, we need a character, like a mascot for this as well?

5 (53m 23s):
Yeah. As crazy as that sounds like such an, an obvious idea. It just wasn't. Hmm. But realizing the strength of a character, realizing the Budweiser frogs, the Eminem guys. The Energizer Bunny. Yeah. They live forever. Mickey Mouse. Right. They don't get old, they don't get DUIs like founders or celebrities or Right. They can just keep, they're good. They can, they keep going. Yeah. So, and then figuring out, you know, initially we were drawing, you know, surf characters and guys with look like hippies and, and then we kind of landed on animal and then it went to monkeys and then ape.

0 (53m 60s):
How come monkey? Well,

5 (54m 2s):
Everybody likes monkeys. Hey. Yeah. And then, you know, as part of the mashup, you need everybody to like it. I think if Surfers would've made this brand, they would've had two cross surfboards and called it Woodies. And it'd still be in surf shops today. And that would, or maybe it wouldn't be, but

0 (54m 17s):
It would be a wooden bottle. We called Woodies

5 (54m 19s):
Woodies and Cross Surfboards. That's it. But, but to do what we did and to do what you need to do to be like a global brand, you gotta have a wider demographic than just a niche.

0 (54m 33s):
When we come back in just a moment, why Tom and Renee decide to place their new sunscreen brand in Cocoa Beach, Florida, even though it's not really based in Cocoa Beach or Florida. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz, and you're listening to How I Built This.

Justworks (54m 59s):
Hey, small business leaders on how I built this. We hear all about how founders have built their companies from the ground up. Today's sponsor just works, makes it easier for you to start, run and grow a business. Let me tell you how Justworks can help your business. Whether you're looking for help with payroll benefits, HR tools or compliance. Justworks has you covered. And Justworks makes it simple to hire and manage remote employees across all 50 states. It's cloud-based platform enables managers and employees alike to quickly and securely access benefits, payroll and other HR functionality from anywhere, anytime. Justworks also believes that it's your right as a customer to have a phenomenal service experience every time. Whether you have a question about setting up benefits, paychecks, or anything else, their team of experts is standing by 24 7 ready to guide you. Take a look at Justworks transparent pricing by visiting justworks.com/pricing. That's justworks.com/pricing for details.

Headspace (56m 0s):
The last few years have taught us how important mental health is to our overall state of wellbeing. The stress of it all has definitely affected me, but I figured out a few ways to ground myself. And one of the tools I use is Headspace. Headspace helps improve your mental health through guided meditations, mindfulness practices, breathing and calming exercises, and so much more. These programs can help reduce anxiety, boost your mood, and help you sleep better. I really appreciate how easy it's been to fit Headspace into my life. Wherever I am, I can use my spare time to do a program, even when I only have a few minutes. Headspace has helped me and more than a hundred million people worldwide. They can help you too. Listen up, you do not want to miss this. I've arranged something special for a limited time. All of you can try Headspace free for 30 days by going to headspace.com/built 30. You won't find this offer anywhere else. You must use MyLink h e a d s p a c e.com/built 30 to unlock all of Headspace free for 30 days. This is not something they normally do. headspace.com/built 30.

5 (57m 15s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this.

0 (57m 17s):
So it's around 2009 and Tom and his partner Renee are working on the packaging for Sun Bum, the colors, the fonts, the facial features for their gorilla mascot. And for inspiration they print out a series of creative panels and hang them on the wall, kind of like storyboards. And each panel has a different theme.

5 (57m 38s):
The first panel would be hippies, van life, skinny, long hair tattoos. Yeah. That hole freedom feeling that you think when you think surf counterculture, you know, the beach culture. So was that the second one was seeing this furniture right, the Scandinavian mid-century modern furniture design that that led the way for the wood grains and the curves in the bottles. And then, you know, Renee was from Copenhagen, so he was really up on Northern European typography and layout. So super clean negative space on, you know, every, even the ingredients, just the way they're laid out. Everything was considered and spaced, all the Baja fonts and, and those types of things.

5 (58m 22s):
Next page would be Japanese and New York Street where lines like supreme bathing ape, undefeated. And then the last page was collectible vinyls. Renee had a lot of kid robot stuff up on our shelves and the graffiti world and brought that into this somehow. So that, looking at all of those pieces, I think Sunny, who's the logo, the gorilla logo that was led a lot from Japanese street art.

0 (58m 49s):
You know, Tom, this, this reminds me a little bit of something that you mentioned to me before this interview started called the Elvis principle that you, you mentioned. Yeah. What, what's, what's the Elvis principle that you, what is it and, and how do you use it to develop a brand?

5 (59m 4s):
The Elvis principle is kind of similar to the mashup that I talked about, except this is more on the personality. I was watching an Elvis special or something about him and, and I then I got really intrigued with him and he, he came out, when he came out on the scene in the fifties, he, he was, you know, rock and roll. He was dangerous, he's sexy, shaking his hips like crazy, right? And then he got banned, right? He was, he was just too, yeah, he was too sexual. Yeah. He could have had to film him above the waist. Right. And so then he came out with a gospel album and the parents that had been, you gotta burn the records or you can't go to an Elvis concert, which is, which made people want to go to the concert more.

5 (59m 48s):
Once he did the gospel albums and did so showed that side, they were like, oh, he's a good boy. It's okay to listen to Elvis. He's a good boy. And so it's this juxtaposition of edge sex, good, kind, humble, like mashing all of that together. It's kind of what people want. It's that combo is what's, what's a really interesting personality for brands, for people. So I was very conscious of that in, in using that when I did ads and all that stuff, I was kind of making that personality type.

0 (1h 0m 21s):
So you, you start to work on this mascot, right? Yeah. And it, it's a simple, I mean there, I think a lot of people can picture it. This is basically an oval, a yellow oval with a brown line through it for the mouth and an X for the nose and like sunglasses and a little sort of, it's a very simple design to Rene design that or you or

5 (1h 0m 41s):
Abs. Absolutely. Like I was sketching stuff and he was sketching some stuff and a couple times he thought he had it and was, you know, fired up and looking for a high five. And I hated it. And, but he, he was the designer, not me. I was just kind of creative directing it. And then one weekend he called me, I was at our cottage on Lake Michigan with my family and he called me and he just said, I got it. And, but he had, he'd said that before a couple of times, right? Yeah. And he, but I could hear it in his voice. I got it. And I walked into the office on Monday and he, you know, sat me down and prepped me and then he pulled it up on his screen and it was exactly what you see today. It was perfect. It was just magic.

0 (1h 1m 19s):
How did you know it was perfect when you saw it? Because

5 (1h 1m 22s):
I loved it. I just, as soon as I saw it, I loved it. I knew how strong it was. I knew how powerful that logo mark was. You know, that's the other thing, you know, if you take Sunny the logo, the A logo and you put it next to all the other big brands out there, right? Forget about the copper tones and banana boats. Those are just names. But if you put it next to, you know, the Nike Swoosh, the Adidas mark, you put it next to the Disney mark, you put it next to the Ford logo, you put it next to the Apple logo, and then you put this badass ape and sunglasses staring at you stone faced. I knew it would be a great sticker. I knew it would be a great everything. And we, we knew we were gonna graffiti mark of the shit out of this thing.

5 (1h 2m 4s):
So we, you

0 (1h 2m 5s):
Could literally take just the image of that ape and not even put sun bum on it. And the idea was people would know that was sun bum.

5 (1h 2m 13s):
Correct. And you could put it on anything and make them think about, not sun bum necessarily, but think of sunscreen. So we put it on footballs and frisbees and paddle ball sets and towels and hats. No word sun bum on it. It just was that we did ads, we did billboards, we, and it just had the Aon there and people didn't know it. We stickered the crap out of every surf town in California and then we decided to take it to the January 10th Surf expo.

0 (1h 2m 44s):
This is the Surf expo in, in Orlando?

5 (1h 2m 46s):
Yeah. So that would be the first show. So all the surf shops in the country come and high end hotels that are on the beaches and stuff come to buy products. And

0 (1h 2m 55s):
What happens at that trade show? Do you get a lot of orders?

5 (1h 2m 57s):
It was not so much the orders, it was just the buzz. I mean it was the skaters that were there cause all the skate brands were there as well. And all the surf brands were there. So the skaters were coming by and taking the stickers. And I'd walk over to the skate vert ramp and see our stickers on the ramp itself. On the ramp. The people were sticking and they were, and the kids were coming by asking if we had more stickers of just the sunny, just the character. Just

0 (1h 3m 20s):
The monkey, just the ape.

5 (1h 3m 21s):
Yeah. Yeah. And

0 (1h 3m 21s):
Then it's an APR or a monkey. I'm sorry. It's

5 (1h 3m 23s):
An ape. Monkeys have tails. So

0 (1h 3m 25s):
Yeah, let's say ape. I'm sorry. Oh, that's okay. Pay some respect to Sunny. Okay. It's okay. So the sticker, but the sticker, you just had like thousands of stickers available. People could just take 'em and Yeah, the idea was you wanted to them to put them on the back of their skateboards. Yeah. And maybe on their surfboards.

5 (1h 3m 38s):
Yeah, exactly. And so they were doing that. And then women that owned boutiques up in Nantucket and Martha's Vineyard and all that were trying it and smelling it and buying it. And some high-end hotels came by and they were buying it. Wow. So immediately it was this just like, okay, this is not normal, this wide of a demographic. It's really hard to get that. And I knew we had it that first day of that show.

0 (1h 4m 5s):
It was basically validating your assumption here that this wood appeal to people, this yellow ape and this colors and this wood grain. But it was at the end of the day, suntan lotion. Right. And so people had to feel like it was better, a better product.

5 (1h 4m 19s):
Correct. And we did have a better product because we, we were making it for us, you know? And that's basically what you do, you should do all the time is not make it for other people. You make it for yourself. And so it had to be safe, it had to be clean, it had to be great. Everybody had to like it. It couldn't just have my kids like it, I needed my wife to like it, my wife's friends to like it. I needed my kids surf friends to like it. I needed that wide demographic.

0 (1h 4m 45s):
I guess at that trade show, when you saw the enthusiasm for it, you and Renee decide to shut down your brand agency and to put all your effort into Sun Bum and to basically become employees to join it.

5 (1h 4m 58s):
Yeah, they, the guy that in the company asked me if I would take over and, but actually for me to take charge. Yes. Cause he would come work for him. And so I went to Renee and talked to him about it. And we had a, a long talk about it. It was a tough decision, right. Because all of a sudden I was gonna be the boss and not as much partners anymore.

0 (1h 5m 18s):
And you saw the potential in it,

5 (1h 5m 20s):
Just saw the huge potential and there was really good money behind it to be able to do it the right way. And so we closed down Rinks Conneti and took over Sun bum.

0 (1h 5m 30s):
And the founding partners were sort of silent partners. Yeah, they were, they were happy with the direction you were taking it in. They were like, go for it. Yep. You do your thing. Yep. So now you are, you're sun bomb. I mean you're, you're not rings TTI anymore and, and you are running this business and, and you had a, it was a small team at first just I think four or five people and based in Grand Rapids,

5 (1h 5m 51s):
Based in Grand Rapids at one of Bob the owner's offices that he let us use. And just three or four of us. And, but then just had to figure out the whole thing because I was just planning on, Renee and I were just planning on, you know, making the brand for them and saying, here you go, good luck. Like we had done before, but with this one, all of a sudden we had to take it on

0 (1h 6m 9s):
One. One of the interesting things that came across was that it never said Grand Rapids, Michigan on the bottle it said, I think Cocoa Beach, Florida.

5 (1h 6m 16s):
Yeah. Cocoa Beach was the, you know, there was a direct flight to Orlando and Daytona was up the beach a little bit, but Cocoa Beach just sounded like a good place for a sunscreen company, right? Yeah. Like Cocoa

0 (1h 6m 28s):
Beach. Cocoa Beach.

5 (1h 6m 29s):
It sounded like internationally, I kind of want a sunscreen that's made in Cocoa Beach, kind of cocoa butter, all that.

0 (1h 6m 35s):
Oh my gosh. Yeah. If you're going to back to Tokyo after your trip to Hawaii, you're like, yeah, this doesn't mean Cocoa Beach, Florida

5 (1h 6m 41s):
Coco Beach. Exactly. And that sound good. So we like that. So we got a PO Box, cocoa Beach and then we, you know, all the calls were getting transferred up, you know, and then we Yeah,

0 (1h 6m 52s):
We had You mean the customer service calls?

5 (1h 6m 54s):
Yeah, customer service calls.

0 (1h 6m 55s):
They were getting transferred up to Grand Rapids.

5 (1h 6m 56s):
To Grand Rapids. Yeah.

0 (1h 6m 57s):
Like in the middle of winter.

5 (1h 6m 59s):
Yes. So we'd be on the phone. I, you know, nobody ever lied. But we, we did say, you know, if they call and ask how the weather is, you know, just tell 'em it's unbelievable. Even if it's snowing outside or whatever, cuz then you're not lying. It's unbelievable. Right. And they'll think you mean unbelievably good, but it's unbelievably bad. And if they, if they pushed it on anything or waves or any of that, just say we're up at the Great Lakes office actually. Yeah. So we were that and then we really quickly got a house down in Cocoa Beach and made it a legitimate office and that was our first office and we hired some people to work there and then slow eventually we thought we'd all be moving down there.

0 (1h 7m 35s):
So would you go back and forth between all the time? Oh

5 (1h 7m 39s):
Yeah. I mean it was a Florida brand through and through. It was made in Florida. Our first real office was in Florida and our reps were in Florida, our first stores and everybody were in that took a chance on us. Were in Florida.

0 (1h 7m 50s):
Yeah, I mean it's, it's hard for me to just to realize that only launch in 2010 because it today feels like such a dominant sunscreen brand. Like you see an airport stores, you see it at Target everywhere. But to get to that point, right. What got it to, like, how did you create the awareness around it?

5 (1h 8m 8s):
It was hard. When I was at that first surf expo, I was looking for reps. We didn't have any reps at the time and everybody was saying, you need to get this guy named Michael Luer. If you can get Michael Lucera, he can take it. He's done it before. And so while there was other people that wanted to potentially take the line, I got ahold of him, he on the phone and sent him some product. He wanted to test the product in the water. He was a surfer and he, he'd he'd done Vans and a bunch of other big brands,

0 (1h 8m 34s):
Right? He was, he was a

5 (1h 8m 35s):
Sales guy. He was a sales, he was an independent sales rep. So he'd done it for a lot of other brands. But then he's single-handedly you ask how he did it, it started with him without Michael er we're, we, we wouldn't have made it. He was relentless. He was hopping fences, he was stickering every off-ramp with stickers and every sign and every,

0 (1h 8m 53s):
I've seen pictures of sun bum stickers on like, the nozzle for like gas tanks. Like when you felt your car, that's him. Like everything.

5 (1h 8m 59s):
That's him man. Yeah, he would, he, we had all size stickers and so everybody, I mean radio stations were getting calls. What's the ape? What's this ape we keep seeing around And they, nobody really knew until, until they did. But he was amazing and we had great displays.

0 (1h 9m 12s):
Yeah. Would you send the display, like, cuz you, you had like these plastic apes and like Yeah. A whole, like sometimes there'd be like a life size cutout of a, of an ape or would you send it to every store that sold the product?

5 (1h 9m 26s):
I mean a lot of it from the beginning was you had to buy the whole thing. We weren't, we didn't let you cherry pick. Michael helped us with that. No cherry picking, which means you can't just buy two bottles and put it on your shelf with all the other bottles. Cuz we knew that wasn't gonna do it. We knew we needed it to seem bigger than it was. So we, we went to Ikea and got these big bookcases that they had on sale for like 50 bucks or something, these tall bookcases. And we redid the hole so they would fit our sunscreen bottles perfectly and stickered the side of 'em and put the ape on top. And that's what we showed at the trade show. So if, if somebody looked at it, they'd say, how much for this? You'd say you have to buy the whole thing. Which included the, the footballs, the Frisbees, the t-shirts, the sunscreen, the guy on top the, and you got the display.

5 (1h 10m 9s):
So if you wanted to carry sun bum, you had to carry this whole big display. But then that's what everybody looked at. That's what drew everybody to it. Cause it seemed like something and not just two bottles of sunscreen on the bottom shelf.

0 (1h 10m 23s):
So this really, I mean this the growth of this business really. So year one, a hundred thousand dollars. And so was it like doubling or tripling or quadrupling by year two? Year

5 (1h 10m 34s):
Two we did 1.1 million. Wow. So yeah. So that was a, that was a nice jump. But it was in the right, it was in the right stores. Right. It was the best surf shops, it was the best hotels, it was Casa Deez, the Breakers, some of those people early took it, Richard Branson and Joan, the end of the first year they, they saw it and bought it for to be their exclusive sunscreen on Necker Island. Wow. And we used that like crazy. It's exclusive on Necker Island and then the Four Seasons and the Standard and then all those just started falling one at a time. And then you're, then you're rolling

0 (1h 11m 7s):
A few years into Sun. I know that the original owners got out of it and sold it to you and, and you guys left Michigan, right? Like you moved the company to California in 2014, right?

5 (1h 11m 20s):
That's

0 (1h 11m 20s):
Right. And then in 2019, which is 10 years after it was started really nine years after it's launch, some of 'em was, was purchased by SE Johnson and reportedly for 400 million. Amazing, incredible exit after just, you know, nine years that, from what I understand, that was, that was the plan all along, right? Like, like the tequila brand and, and the other brands that you worked on to to basically build it and then eventually to sell it.

5 (1h 11m 49s):
Yeah, that was the idea. And I've, I'd made mistakes before with this cuz I was basically running it, I was the CEO and I'd heard about that Harvard business model that says, you know, creatives usually start companies and then they, and they're really good at creative, that's why they make companies and Right. And then they start hiring people and doing the PNLs and managing people and all the stuff they suck at. And by year three the curve starts going down and by year five the company's over. And I knew that track. And so about, it was about year three or four when I got called from Adam Francis, who was a guy at Australia whose ex-pro surfer went to Harvard. His wife Tegan was a lawyer and they had done a lot of good businesses and, and he was getting ready to start a sunscreen business.

5 (1h 12m 35s):
And he saw a sun bomb in Hawaii and said, you know, I can't beat these guys. I gotta try to join them. So he called me, I knew who I was talking to, I was talking to my next ceo. So I said, will you be my, our ceo? And I got out of his way.

0 (1h 12m 53s):
You think that you did not have the skills, your skills were better suited for branding rather than managing a company?

5 (1h 13m 1s):
I don't think. I know. Yeah. You know, I was, even Michigan when we took over the company three years later trying to get financing, man, the banks, they were like clamoring to help us until they saw my books and then they were like, I'm sorry Tom, we can't help you. And I didn't know enough about margins and scalability and production and all that kind of stuff. I'd never really built anything to that scale. And you know, it's hard to give up the CEO role. Most founders don't. But I had, I knew I had to do it.

0 (1h 13m 31s):
I think at a certain point Sunbelt was doing, you know, 70 million annual sales, I mean significant company growing. You know, you could have kept it going and built a billion dollar brand. So why did you decide to sell in 2019?

5 (1h 13m 48s):
Yeah, I mean I think it is a billion dollar brand now, but we decided because, you know, just like I had taken it and we had taken it as far as we could in Michigan and, and then came to California and we always thought we'd go international. We had all the trademarks and we were trying to go international, but sunscreen's a drug. So it's regulated because it says it's gonna protect you against getting a disease, which is what makes it a drug. So, so it's got the FDA's in every country and there's so many regulations and they're all different rules and regulations of what ingredients and what you can do and can't do. So we were hitting that wall and we wanted to go international. We were being asked from day one to go international. So we realized to keep growing we would need a partner that had boots on the ground, manufacturing, facilities, offices in all these countries that could handle that and landed on SC Johnson.

0 (1h 14m 40s):
You know, it's interesting because you also, this is one, one of the first interviews you've ever done in your life. Yes. Probably the first really intensive interview you've ever done.

5 (1h 14m 50s):
Yeah. Other than the depositions for the Taco Bell trial, which were more intense than this, trust me. Yeah. But yeah, but I've not, I've not done this before.

0 (1h 14m 59s):
And you're basically, you don't even exist online barely. Right, right. Like it's really hard to find anything about you and yeah. And you'd been through this very public trial around Taco Bell. And why did you not wanna be in the public eye at all?

5 (1h 15m 16s):
I grew up so probably insecure. Hmm. Poor, maybe not feeling accepted. Kinda like the furniture store, right? The furniture store, you know, it was a hard place to work and, and I kind of felt like maybe even my wife's parents were, were like, why'd you marry this guy? I'm not saying they thought that, but like you were dating all these really rich guys and then you married this artist guy and he's like, works at this furniture store. And I just didn't want to ever make anybody feel that way. So I was very conscious about bragging and I just didn't like braggers or about being out in front of something. And this quite frankly, the, I didn't think I could help in a lot of the circumstances.

5 (1h 15m 59s):
You know, I wasn't, I wasn't the brands that I was creating necessarily. I wasn't the big surfer. I wasn't the big tough guy for tequila. I wasn't the big Christian Guy. You know, there were people like that that were better than me at it. I suppose if I would've done like a brand of t-shirts for tall, skinny guys, I probably could've gotten out in front of it or something. Or a picky eater food brand. If I would've done that, I could've probably been that guy.

0 (1h 16m 25s):
Wait, it sounds like what, what you were saying was you didn't wanna be out in front because you weren't the tequila guy, you weren't the surfer guy, you weren't the Christian Guy. And that it sounds like reading between the lines, what you're saying is like in your mind you felt like consumers maybe would expect that the brand would come from a person like that. And so maybe that's why you didn't wanna be out in front.

5 (1h 16m 48s):
Yeah, and, and when I, you know, had the Taco Bell lawsuit, I went from being this creative guy to the guy that sued Taco Bell. So any interview, the only thing you could find at the time was Taco Bell lawsuit. So I was the, that's what people wanted to talk about and that would hurt the brand that I was trying to promote and not help, help it. I didn't want to flex. Yeah. I let other people, let other people flex I flexed by doing the work. And I felt really good about that.

0 (1h 17m 19s):
Tom, when you think about all that you've done, I mean, you're 60, you've got a new venture, you're right, you're working on, I I think you're probably gonna work till you drop dead. Just knowing you from this conversation, how, how much of what's happened to you and, and this success do you think is because of all the work you put in and all the sweat and how much do you think has to do with some of the just the lucky breaks?

5 (1h 17m 44s):
I think it's a combo, obviously probably everybody says that. I think there were so many lucky breaks, right? Vivian Dryer back at Meyer, you know, giving me those, that order for 1800 t-shirts, like all the people that I met, all the stores that said yes, all the buyers. It's really the lucky breaks of people taking a chance on me and believing in wanting to take the ride with me. But I also, it's also a ton of work. It's also doing it more, you know, like Kobe said, you just practice, you gotta practice more. So practicing more than anybody else makes you better than anybody at it. And I've practiced a lot because I love it because it's kind of my art, it's kind of my paintings, you know, these brands are kind of my painting.

5 (1h 18m 30s):
So it's my, the extension of what I was doing my whole life. So I just absolutely love, love it. It's art to me. So yeah, it's both.

0 (1h 18m 41s):
That's Tom Rinks co-founder of Sun Bum In the Mind behind many other brands, including one that just launched in Target this month. It's called Made by Dentists. And it's a line of oral care products, which was in fact founded by two dentists, two sisters actually from Ireland.

5 (1h 18m 60s):
And they, they were killing it in Ireland, but they tried to come to America and, and it wasn't working. Yeah. And then they thought maybe I could help 'em. So I told 'em I would if I could just blow it up and start it from

0 (1h 19m 13s):
Scratch. Just like Sun. Yeah,

5 (1h 19m 15s):
Yeah. I mean the products were great cause they, they're dentists, they're so authentic and they're so passionate and they're, and they're, you know, again, you're, you went back to that question, you know, why aren't I, why aren't I in front of this brand, right? Because I don't, I'm not a dentist.

0 (1h 19m 29s):
Not a dentist. But Tom did do all of the design work for the new brand of toothbrushes and toothpaste. And one place you really got to be creative was made by dentist line of toothpaste for kids with flavors like alien blood and eyeball juice. Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you wanna contact our team, our email address is ibt id.wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at How I built This and mine is at Guy Ross and on Instagram or at How I built this. And I'm at Guy dot Ross. This episode was produced by Casey Herman with music, composed by Rameen Arab.

0 (1h 20m 9s):
Bluey was edited by Niva Grant with research help from Katherine Cipher and Susanna Brown. Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Kira Wakim, Alex Chung, Harry Thompson, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Sam Paulson, Chris Masini, and Carla Esteve. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This. Hey Prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and add free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon Music app today. Or you can listen early in Add Free with Wondery Plus and Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear wondery shop.com.

0 (1h 20m 55s):
Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.

10 (1h 21m 5s):
A cassette player, really what year is this? I know if it ain't broke, don't fix it, but just because it works doesn't mean it's working for you. Same with insurance. Your driving history can get better with time, so shopping around could get you a better rate. Ca Insurance will review your policy, even if it's with another provider to help you find the right coverage. How's that for music to your ears? Ca Insurance Company making things.