3 (3s):
I had created the sunscreen swipes and apparently the swipes were you should so I would go around to stores during that period and the swipes were always gone. They were just wiped off the shelf, but the problem was I knew that my sales couldn't be great if there were no products on the shelf. And so I go into as many stores as I could with swipes in my bag and literally like stock the shelves like I I give them product which is crazy, right? Robin PRC, it's how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists stories behind the movements.

3 (47s):
They go. I'm guy Roz and on the show today how Holly Fagor decided that sunscreen should be used every day and in every time of year and how that idea grew into the multimillion-dollar brand supergroup.

1 (1m 7s):
There's a concept in business known as product Market fit. It was popularized by the well-known Silicon Valley venture capitalists and rackleff and the idea is pretty simple. You have a product if there's a market fit people will buy it. If not, they won't sometimes there's no product Market fit because the product solves a problem that no one really has for example Cheetos lip balm. Did someone really think there was a market for Cheetos? Bomb at other times. There's no product Market fit because the idea comes to early before people are ready like pets.com which fizzled out in 2001 but a decade later chewy.com which basically does the same thing took off and is now valued at more than 10 billion dollars, but not having an exact product Market fit doesn't necessarily mean your idea is doomed to fail think about Airbnb or Left there was no market for those ideas.

1 (2m 8s):
At first it took those companies a lot of time to convince consumers that it wasn't weird sleeping in a random person's house or popping in their car air B&B and lift had to create the market for what they offered and it's kind of the same story for Holly thagard and supergroup the vast majority of people think of sunscreen is something you use at the beach or you slather on small children before they go Outdoors, but Holly wanted to

3 (2m 35s):
As

1 (2m 35s):
people that they needed to use sunscreen every day all the time year round like getting dressed or brushing your teeth or taking vitamins. Her whole plan was to work with Educators to create awareness around skin cancer something thousands of people are diagnosed with in the us alone every single day and Holly's business model would be based on selling giant sunscreen dispensers kind of like those hand sanitizer dispensers to schools, but as as you will hear that whole business model was doomed from the start and not just because there was no product Market fit so Holly had to Pivot and completely rethink her idea of how to get people to use sunscreen everyday and in the process had a basically build out a market for her product and although her mission is still very much a work in progress super group is now one of the top-rated sunscreens on the market the company did about 40 million dollars in Revenue in I was 18 and became profitable last year and so far even seems to be navigating the economic uncertainty of the pandemic and as I often say when introducing the story of a Founder nothing about Holly's early life in Baton Rouge Louisiana hinted at the career.

1 (3m 52s):
She would ultimately choose except for one important thing

3 (3m 56s):
both her parents were entrepreneurs her dad ran a

1 (3m 59s):
Machinery business and her mom was an accomplished Portrait Painter. Yes, she and my maternal Grandmother, even her mother they were both

3 (4m 7s):
amazing artist and I watched my mother's career go from when I was younger. She created a custom handbag brand that Neiman Marcus like could not keep in stock all hand-painted and monogrammed and and she went on ultimately to paint portraits senators and judges and wow. She's very talented. I feel fortunate to have to have her as a mother because I have Fortress now of my children and I didn't

1 (4m 35s):
To pay for them. Yeah, it's so

3 (4m 37s):
cool. And so as I guess as a kit like as a little

1 (4m 41s):
girl, you took up the harp, is that is it right? What how old were you

3 (4m 45s):
I did, you know, but I'd even back up a little bit to that as I started on the piano and I played the piano for several years gosh, I started and I think second grade and by the time I got to fifth grade, I saw this bright shiny gold harp that I didn't didn't see anywhere other than my grandmother's living room and and I thought gosh if I could switch gears and play the harp it would you know, there's not a lot of competition you could be

1 (5m 12s):
the best harpist because they're bright.

3 (5m 14s):
They're probably weren't that many around you. Yeah and everything sounds beautiful on the harp. When even when you mess up, it's pretty yeah, by the way is it is a you know a

1 (5m 24s):
fifth grader 6th grader. How did you carry the harp to it? Was it on

3 (5m 28s):
Wheels? It has a dolly and you learned how to handle it. It's not so much that it's heavy as that. It has so many moving. In Parts, but you are not

1 (5m 37s):
bringing the harp on to the school bus. No no

3 (5m 40s):
and in fact, I played at home and then for the talent shows, of course I'd show up but it wasn't really until high school that I began getting really excited about the harp because I saw it more as a business and the idea of creating a business around Holly. The harpist was exciting to me. Wow wait, so you as you sort

1 (6m 3s):
of got better at the harp you thought Hey, this could be my business like the you were thinking this in high school.

3 (6m 9s):
I was I was actually already working on the weekends and every Sunday for brunch at the local Country Club, like in the

1 (6m 17s):
dining room. You would just do be in the corner playing the harp. Yeah, be Holly the

3 (6m 20s):
harpist vi the Harvest and I could kind of set my price because there wasn't a lot of competition. So I really started out playing for like a hundred dollars an hour, which was a lot when you're in ninth grade. Wow.

1 (6m 34s):
Alright, so you are Holly the harpist playing harp em for money, which is awesome and and you decide to go to school at Louisiana State University, which is not not too far from from where you live, I guess and what did you did you study music

3 (6m 49s):
there? Yes, I did. So I was never really that great of a student. I spent those first two years in college studying music. I totally did not fit in with anyone in the music school. I realized how serious the Additions were in college and I was more interested in doing what I was already doing which was performing and playing and I was at the time, you know, still getting jobs and in New Orleans at the Museum of Art and I played a little backup for a wreath of Franklin when she came through

1 (7m 23s):
and what what what? Wow, what did you

3 (7m 26s):
what did you play with a reason Franklin Amazing

1 (7m 29s):
Grace? Wow, that's a mean if there ever is a song to play with Aretha

3 (7m 33s):
Franklin you run the harp man. That's amazing. And look that makes me sound like I was this Great Harvest but like I was so winging it. I had no idea but I knew I couldn't say no and I had no business. I've literally had to break down every measure and I was that reading music type student, you know, but you keep in mind like I enjoyed the business of Holly the harp is way more than I enjoyed playing the harp. So if you I mean if you didn't

1 (7m 58s):
enjoy playing the harp that much what like what did you decide that you want to do professionally?

3 (8m 4s):
So I It had also grown up because I think I'm such an organized person and I love pencils and supplies and things I grew up thinking that being a teacher would be really fun. And I often even when my little brother would get home from school and you know, keep in mind he was 7 years younger than I was I would sort of start a new session in his room and get worksheets for him and pass out my sheets. And and so I thought

1 (8m 29s):
well, maybe I should maybe I should be a teacher and and I guess that's what you did. I read that you You went on to to study education and got your first teaching job. I think in Baton Rouge that said right

3 (8m 43s):
it was said there was a private Episcopal School in Baton Rouge. That was actually I later Learned was quite difficult to get a job there as a first year out of college and how was it it was fantastic. So I had a wonderful year. I poured my heart into doing everything that I had learned in college. Also kind of looking back now. I think I poured my heart into out doing every other teacher in the school and kept my eye on trying to impress the board that had given me the opportunity to be there. But I loved every second of it. And in fact, I still talk to those 17 students many of them today.

3 (9m 26s):
But from what I've read you only you

1 (9m 28s):
only a teacher for a year. I mean you have this and you know promising career what why aren't you a teacher today? What?

3 (9m 35s):
Happened. Yeah, so, you know the end of the school year came when contracts are placed in the teachers boxes and I didn't receive one and and the school said they were not offering me a return contract and I later learned as a first-year teacher you're considered provisional and they said, you know, this was due to problems and concerns that were were brought up from my other peer teachers and not really fitting in. Well, what did that mean? Exactly Iris, I didn't know either I did a lot of exploration at that moment that I was

1 (10m 13s):
devastated. Yeah. I had

3 (10m 16s):
gone to college to be a third grade school teacher and and here my career was seemingly ending very

1 (10m 23s):
quickly and and you never got any more specific feedback. Like what was it that you did or not do or I

3 (10m 32s):
did I did and I learned, you know, I was Sort of breaking rules. I wasn't eating lunch with the other teachers. I wasn't hanging out in the Teachers Lounge talking and connecting and and I if I was you know being completely honest with myself, I did feel a little claustrophobic within the four walls of a classroom and they were in a way right? I did constantly look for ways to sort of leave campus early or you know, I'd say I had a harp

1 (11m 1s):
job and and

3 (11m 2s):
double booked myself and you know it Or what that wasn't in the cards for me and yeah, but you know after a couple of months of exploring these these things I just decided I'm going to move on. Yeah,

1 (11m 16s):
it is amazing though. That setbacks can actually be a blessing that you don't you don't realize the time right like a huge like had you had this amazing year and they renewed your contract and you stayed there you might not have ever done what you

3 (11m 32s):
did. Absolutely. I'm so grateful that that played out like it did because I don't think I would have been pushed to go and change directions. I would have kept that cushy job and you know, that that's not what was in the cards for my life's work.

1 (11m 51s):
So so what did you end up doing next? Well

3 (11m 55s):
at the time my brother was starting college at SMU and Dallas and I had plenty of time on my hands. So I went to help him move in the dorms and all I could do is look around. And at all the beautiful homes in the Highland Park and how they all really needed Holly the harpist and their lives. So you

1 (12m 13s):
decided to stay in Dallas after helping him move in

3 (12m 17s):
I did. Well, I knew that if I were going to propose a move to my parents that I needed to have a job lined up, so I actually during that brief weekend visit. I walked over to the Dallas Country Club and knocked on the door of the general managers office and introduced myself and told him all about My music and and that I was hoping that they might look to have some new entertainment in their in their dining room and I went back convince my parents that I could make a living performing and move my harp to Dallas found an apartment and literally did the kind of back of the napkin math. Like how many hours a week? Do I need to play the harp to pay for

1 (12m 59s):
the rent? This is like 1996. I think yes, so you're like in your 20s? To 23 years old living in Dallas playing the harp and that's step becomes your business. Holly the Harvest Holly the Harvest. Yeah.

3 (13m 14s):
So I went from Dallas Country Club to The Petroleum Club to Brook Hollow Golf Club, and and did this made the same introduction and this is really when I realized that building this business of Holly the harpist was when I lost all track of time and creating like Direct Mail pieces and and looking Into the book of lists. I often would read this CEOs and write letters to their home. You know, I'm from the south. So writing letters is always been a big part of my upbringing and but I got a really good response from from just the jobs that I had and spent the next 10 years of my life actually performing and that's how I paid the rent

1 (13m 57s):
you are the harpist of choice or one of them, I guess in Dallas and probably making a decent

3 (14m 2s):
living I was doing really well my rate. Gone up to I had $1000 minimum for any party. Which often if it's a party was only an hour. That's a great. That's a

1 (14m 14s):
great great money. That's a goal or that's like a part senior partner at a law firm in New

3 (14m 19s):
York. Right? I just wasn't feeling the

1 (14m 21s):
hours. Oh, yeah. Yeah.

3 (14m 25s):
And what about your

1 (14m 27s):
personal life? Were you married or you single at the

3 (14m 30s):
time? You know, I was just dating in Dallas and until my late 20s. Did I not meet my now husband and his very best closest friend in college. I performed I played the heart for many rehearsal dinners and weddings for their family and Mary Montgomery his the person I worked that would engage me for these said you've got to meet my son's best friend. And then so that's how I met Ty and we continue dating as I performed in played until I

1 (15m 3s):
guess we were engaged when we were about One and so this is like but 2004 she got engaged around then see thousand more like to I think it's into okay,

3 (15m 14s):
but when Ty and I started talking about a family and being married and everything, you know for forming on Mother's Day and Christmas and Thanksgiving and continuing on that path just felt like it was time to retire. It's exhausting playing evenings and that's not a rule great life or having a family. Emily and

1 (15m 36s):
sure so you're kind of done with a harp side of your life, you're newly married and I guess you suddenly happens in 2005, which is a friend of yours is diagnosed with skin cancer. Yes. And first of all, this is I didn't know this but this is like one of the most diagnosed form of cancer, you know. When your friend was diagnosed, what was the prognosis?

3 (16m 0s):
Oh and he's fine now, but you know, I started thinking. King and a good college friend of mine was going through her residency in dermatology at the time and I was talking with her about my friends skin cancer and and you know, she said Holly it's not about the beach.

1 (16m 16s):
It's about that

3 (16m 18s):
every single day cumulative exposure that ultimately and usually much later in life become skin cancer, but for your friend who has blond hair and blue eyes and you know, it happened at a much younger age

1 (16m 32s):
said by going to the beach tonight using some lotion suntan lotion, right? Sunblock, whatever. It's just about being outside every day and over time some people develop skin cancer. And and by the way, most people who do develop skin cancer it is it's generally highly curable if it's cut, you know, relatively early. It's like a yes it sound early. So you hear this and and what and then you thinking

3 (16m 56s):
well my initial thought was this could have just as easily have been me. I have blond hair and blue eyes and I remember gosh my spring break and Middle School years. I remember going to Florida and lying on the roof of this house we rented and I got so blistering sun burns that I was sick and swollen and it ruined my entire week. Yeah, but then I also immediately thought about my 17 kids that I taught that year in the

1 (17m 22s):
classroom

3 (17m 24s):
and never once did I see a

1 (17m 26s):
tube of sunscreen on the school campus

3 (17m 28s):
despite the fact that the children were on the playground in the middle of the day and often even staying and in sports in the eye. Afternoon, no one was wearing sunscreen

1 (17m 38s):
and to be clear with the vast majority of us are not wearing sunscreen all the time, right? This is just not part of our it's not like it's like brushing your teeth. Most people don't just don't do this. This is 2005 and you start to think what like, hey, maybe maybe I can figure out a way to get people to wear sunscreen all the time. Not just at the beach. Was that what you were thinking like

3 (18m 2s):
immediately? Yes, so I found this study. By Memorial Sloan-Kettering that was talking about how most people knew sunscreen prevent skin cancer, but I think it was six seventy percent. Don't wear it. Just like you said every single day and the number one reason was because it didn't feel good on the skin and I think just being a child of two entrepreneurs and always thinking about creating and building and researching and this just was really interesting. I also think that I have always been a product person which I think kind of goes back. Back to with being with my mother and and often, you know, critiquing other are and talking about skin tones and colors and the comp the composition of things being so important.

3 (18m 48s):
Yeah to the success of that. And so I was thinking why don't schools offer sunscreen, why don't children have access to sunscreen in schools. And for me, I just took it to this extreme of like gosh we wouldn't send the kids on the playground without a fence around the Playground. Yeah, but we're sending them out on the playground with a carcinogen above them.

1 (19m 11s):
So the original idea you had was let me figure out how to get sunscreen into schools. Like like, you know, we've got like hand sanitizer dispensers. Yes, like you would have those around schools. And that would that would essentially be your your

3 (19m 25s):
business. Yes, and in part. I also knew the importance of Education around this and you know, I was a teacher and you know, it's not really a it wasn't a Image of SPF products in the country that were causing the epidemic it was a lack of Education around the importance of wearing SPF every single day.

1 (19m 45s):
So was your this 2005 was your idea to find an existing sunscreen brand and then just get schools to put that into there like into the hallways was that or did you already has from the beginning think I'm going to make a

3 (19m 59s):
sunscreen. Well, so the first step was to what is on what is out there and I really wanted to look. I did not grow up wearing sunscreen every single day. So I was thinking what is that product that I should have been wearing? And so I looked on the market and you know, like you said in 2005

1 (20m 16s):
SPF was an incredibly

3 (20m 18s):
sleepy category and it was owned by the mass channels of distribution like Walgreens and Target and Walmart. And what I found was that SPF was being promoted and marketed as an incredibly seasonal thing and you you couldn't actually even find SPF outside of May June or July and when I did find it, I looked at the ingredients and found that 90% of what was on the market was just full of very controversial ingredients.

1 (20m 49s):
What what's an example of that?

3 (20m 52s):
Well, so one of those that was often spotlighted was the ingredient oxybenzone which was being found in breast cancer tissue and what I also found is that every single chemical formula. Country relied on oxybenzone for its efficacy,

1 (21m 10s):
even the organic

3 (21m 11s):
brands. Well, so there were two types of formulas. There were the chemical formulas which are those that absorb easily into the skin and they're great for athletes and then there's mineral formulas

1 (21m 22s):
and the mineral foremost just to be clear. There's ones that are like really white under skin like like the zinc's yeah sort of sticks and stuff feel real thick and pasty on this gun. Yeah sure and essential you couldn't rub in the natural ones into your skin and your Thinking hey, why why isn't there a natural one that we couldn't do

3 (21m 39s):
that? Yes, I felt like there was such an opportunity to do both chemical formulas, which there are advantages to in a clean and healthy way and mineral formulas. I felt neither than upgrade to because they didn't need to feel so thick and pasty because if there were options for people to wear sunscreen every single day that were beautiful and luxurious and felt great then that would be that

1 (22m 4s):
first. Closer to stopping skin cancer. All right. I'm thinking if I'm you I'm it's 2005-2006 and I'm starting to kind of you know, sounds like over kind of falling this idea and thinking there might be something there and you're obviously learning as much as you can about sunscreen, but when I've read the backs of like comparative brands that I think are pretty

3 (22m 27s):
great. I don't understand any of the

1 (22m 29s):
words. Were you really weren't you like looking at the backs of sunscreen bottles and like what is Is this and what it like did you even know what those things were?

3 (22m 38s):
No, it's a lot of research a lot of exploring. I found that there was a national sunscreen Symposium and I reached out to every chemist that was speaking at that event and I just picked everybody's brain and just became obsessed with learning

1 (22m 52s):
you called them or you email them and sit and ask them what you said? I'm Holly and I'm doing a son starting a sunscreen brand. Like what was your pitch to them? Why would they give you the time

3 (23m 3s):
well fortunately for me the All the response was very kind to me and they taught me so much about ingredient dexon. Most of those chemists were not up for the challenge of the challenge that I gave was. I'm interested in creating an SPF product that does not have oxybenzone does not rely on parabens propylene glycol a handful of other ingredients that I just wasn't that fond of and most of what I heard was can't be

1 (23m 30s):
done. It can't be done. They were saying you can't make a sunscreen. Green that is non chemical that can be rubbed into

3 (23m 38s):
skin. They were saying that you can't make a sunscreen that will test to a high efficacious SPF number without the use of oxybenzone and without the preservative system of paraben, which is what keeps your product healthy and clean. It couldn't be done. So parabens were

1 (23m 57s):
needed. Why is sun sign. I have no idea that sunscreen was so complex.

3 (24m 3s):
Well, I think that what is so complicated? Is not necessarily having an efficacious sunscreen that's limiting yourself to a certain set of ingredients and then making it aesthetically so pleasing that it would make Gyros want to pick it up and put it on his skin every single day. Got it because now

1 (24m 21s):
if you ask me like if you if you saw me on the beach in the summertime, you would think I was a zebra because I just have giant white stripes all over my face

3 (24m 29s):
because I'm fine. I don't care but you can't

1 (24m 31s):
do that every day, right you can get away with it the beach or if you're through Years old. I remember like slathering on white zinc stuff on my kids face, but you can't you're saying you wanted to do something that you could use every day and you can't you can't look at the zebra

3 (24m 45s):
everyday. Well in the reason for that is that in my research. I learned that there's UVA rays and there's UVB rays and UVB rays cause that burning on your skin that changes the color of your skin, but UVA rays are not only aging but they penetrate deeper into the skin than UVB and their In All Seasons, no matter what the weather is even on a cloudy day and their skin cancer

1 (25m 11s):
causing to you clearly are starting to develop an expertise on sunscreen, but with like you're not picking so you're not being like cookies to bake. You can't do this alone. You actually have to go and find somebody willing to make you a product that doesn't have the ingredients that you don't want it to have but that does what you want it to

3 (25m 33s):
do correct. That is Is the joke around our family is you had

1 (25m 37s):
to do sunscreen Holly because it's very difficult to formulate. And so where do you go I

3 (25m 43s):
started with the first chemist that said that's interesting. That's an interesting idea. I didn't realize that oxybenzone was so controversial and he was willing to completely pro bono start working on a formula to see if we could rise to the challenge of creating something that felt great on the skin and was healthy and

1 (26m 3s):
ingredient choices and wait Who was this lab? And where

3 (26m 6s):
were they and how'd you get in touch with them? Yeah, so through those conversations with chemists from the national sunscreen Symposium is who I found that the first chemist it was in California and I'm in Texas and I think you know in a good way. A lot of chemists are a little nerdy and up for challenging things like that. And and I just got lucky too I think but how did you

1 (26m 31s):
convince this chemist to make your Prototype, I mean putting on my hat as like a you know, entrepreneur hat right and that's not enough. Right? Right. I mean you just call you can't just call somebody that's at this Mission I want to do it and then the person says okay, I'm gonna devote all this time in my lab to working on building a prototype for you. Like it had to have been harder than that. Maybe maybe it wasn't. I don't know.

3 (26m 56s):
You know, I think telling my story my intention for this magic formula that

1 (27m 1s):
we were going to create was to put it in every school

3 (27m 3s):
across America. And so I you know sold that story of gosh, we're going to we're going to create this and every child and the country's going to be wearing this game-changing SPF. And that is when in the process of creating an SPF product takes a while. And once I had that kind of off and running with the right chemist who I felt was up for the challenge. I then sort of pivoted my time and attention to how are we going to do this in a beautiful? Way, that's fun and playful and yeah, you know more of the the marketing's and education side of the business. And did you

1 (27m 42s):
fly out to work with the chemist or will you just dealing with the person on the phone or is the or the email or like how does that work?

3 (27m 50s):
We had a lot of phone calls about what I felt like, you know, the characteristics of the texture that feel and then they started mailing FedEx. We did mailing samples and then I give feedback on the samples and I just kind of pass them around in my Only and asked what they thought of this group or that group and you already knew your hair colored goop I did not I just actually called it goop because I didn't know the word lab sample. I think

1 (28m 17s):
yeah, it was another goodie industry or glop or whatever is yeah this goopy. Yeah.

3 (28m 22s):
And in the meantime, what were you doing? I mean you're living

1 (28m 25s):
in Dallas still at the

3 (28m 26s):
time. Mmm. What were you what were you doing? I was completely obsessed with this project. I pulled my sister who's an excellent writer. Writer into helping me create an educational curriculum, you know, I mean changing consumer behaviors, like one of the most difficult things to do, right, but I looked at campaigns like Lady Bird Johnson's don't be a litterbug when she was first lady. She started that don't be a litterbug campaign sure and it wasn't necessarily the children that were throwing the Diet Cokes out the window, but it was their parents. Hmm. And so I thought this is really interesting because through a very playful way. She's got the Kids telling their parents not to be a litterbug which is going to ultimately change, you know, the parents behavior.

3 (29m 13s):
And so I thought if I could create this first Formula and make it a fun and playful way that appealed to young children to then sort of bug the adults in their life. There was something

1 (29m 27s):
there so you've got this this product that's being developed and what are they making it with? I mean if all these Scientists were saying. Hey, you gotta use oxybenzone. That's the most effective way to protect your skin from UV rays and there's no other way to do it what I mean what? Yeah, actually what I learned with oxybenzone is not the only way it's the most inexpensive way and began going back to most SPF was a mass product and mass products are you know as inexpensive as possible

3 (30m 3s):
it turned out that there As a counterpart Ava been Zone that could

1 (30m 8s):
help achieve the efficacy needed but it just costs a little bit more Ava then Zone Ava Benson and that's still today. We what we use in our chemical for and where does it come from? It's a raw ingredient that you buy from the people that make I mean, there's different brand names like parcel and that makes that so you managed to work with this lab entirely remotely like they you never had to go and present to them or anything. They just they just don't have the money to go and promote. You know, I I was bootstrapping this with my new husband and we were thinking about having a baby and he was thinking actually about going out on his own at the time.

1 (30m 49s):
He has a background in he was practiced law out of law school and he

3 (30m 54s):
has a real entrepreneurial

1 (30m 56s):
Spirit as well. And so we were both bootstrapping them all of the costs. All right, so you're going back and forth and and Finally settle on what you think is right and how do you know like how did you know that they finally got it like the smell of it and the feel of it was it? Just just you were just using your own your own judgement your own

3 (31m 19s):
Instinct, you know, it was probably the 15th or 20th iteration on a formula that we had tweaked many times over those two years that finally felt amazing on the skin and it tested because right it has to to be efficacious and and it was then that I literally said this is super and the name immediately occurred to me that I had I had also in that moment named named the

1 (31m 47s):
brand super gup-c forgive and was it SPF 50 15 or 30 or

3 (31m 54s):
what? Yeah, it was a 50 to

1 (31m 56s):
55. Okay, which is

3 (31m 57s):
exactly what we were aiming

1 (31m 59s):
for and so you get the final you get the one that works and would you like slather it on and go outside and just stand outside in the sun?

3 (32m 6s):
I started wearing it every single day because I had to know over the long term if that was something that was actually a pleasant experience. Right? And in fact, I've always believed in no animal testing or anything. So I often laughed and made my husband the guinea pig and say hey, can you put some of this in your eyes and make sure it doesn't burn and had you by that point

1 (32m 30s):
formed like an LLC and then all the formal stuff that people do to start a business.

3 (32m 36s):
Yeah long the way I definitely relied on my husband. He had I mentioned a background in law and he helped me with registering the trademark and forming an LLC kind of just put a few of the things that weren't too costly and place to start creating this

1 (32m 56s):
business. So you've got the formula you've got the name and now it's time to go to the schools and I'm assuming you know, you kind of rip out rip out your old Playbook where when you contacted the

3 (33m 8s):
CEOs of companies to play the horror for

1 (33m 11s):
you called all these scientists. I'm assuming you start calling School administrators. You're right. I whipped out my playbook and started talking to the heads of

3 (33m 18s):
schools and school boards and I very quickly learned that as an over-the-counter drug sunscreen is actually prohibited in schools across America.

1 (33m 28s):
So you just spent two years building this prototype only to discover that you have no Market no marketplace, right? Wow, your whole business model is down the tubes exactly when we come back in just a moment how Holly eventually pivots out of schools and into retail and along the way hires a publicist that she cannot afford and makes a connection at Sephora, but she cannot afford to lose. Stay with us. I'm die rise and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsors who help support this show.

1 (34m 8s):
First to E. Trade Trading isn't for everyone. But E-Trade is whether it's saving for a rainy day or your retirement E-Trade has you covered they can help you check financial goals off your list and with a team of professionals giving you support when you need it. You can be confident that your money is working hard for you get more than just trading with each right to get started visit. At etrailer.com podcast for information E-Trade Securities LLC member finra SI PC. Thanks. Also to American Express. They're proud to support small business owners through this unprecedented time and whatever comes next to help your small business.

1 (34m 50s):
Get back to business visit stand for small.com. That's the powerful backing of American Express. This week on it's been a minute. I talked out the news with my Aunt Betty. I'm more concerned about the

3 (35m 7s):
black man that I love they need anything in the world because I just don't want to get that

1 (35m 12s):
call also parenting in the age of black lives matter and the history of police reform. Listen And subscribe to it's been a minute from NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it was 2007 and Holly staggered had a big problem. She built a sunscreen company supergroup with the goal of getting SPF in the schools. But at the time most public schools did not allow students to use sunscreen without a prescription or a doctor's note. So Holly thought well, maybe I should try the private schools where the rules aren't as strict.

1 (35m 52s):
And she actually made a bit of Headway. I did I launched five private schools all in Dallas Dallas area.

3 (35m 59s):
No Dallas in Louisiana Baton Rouge where I'm from and Dallas.

1 (36m 4s):
So, how did you approach the school's did you did you just get like a directory or go online and just type I

3 (36m 10s):
did. I think I looked in the private school directories by City And I would call and ask for a meeting. I've all you know that dating back to sitting under my father's. Desk reading and listening to Zig Ziglar tapes, which is what I did but throughout my childhood and Zig Ziglar would use like that like that guy who told

1 (36m 30s):
told you I'd like motivational speaker on sale like for sales,

3 (36m 33s):
right? Yeah. He was a sales and marketing genius. I who like he's had these

1 (36m 38s):
tapes in the 70s and 80s. Maybe he's alright. Yes,

3 (36m 41s):
exactly. I learned from Zig so many things that I still referenced today, you know, you have to have so many NOS before a yes and attitude is everything being optimistic. Second thinking positively and I mean I spent weekend sitting under my father's desk listening and absorbing these neatly organized tapes that he would bring home from having been president of the sales and marketing club and that really shaped how I approach things because you know those conversations with those schools. I just I just kept going kept going if one said no, I'd go to another one and so school

1 (37m 15s):
would say no no interest in you say, okay. Well, thank you very much and you move on I'd move on but I'd still keep them

3 (37m 21s):
informed. Mmmmm dive everything I was doing because you know, I also learned from those tapes. That know is just tell me more right and so, you know, I hear no and I realized that maybe they're just going to say no for another month and then they'll eventually say yes,

1 (37m 37s):
so it's 2007. You've got this formula you're in a couple of private schools, but that's not enough presumably to really sustain a business. Right? And and how are you dealing with finances? I mean you had to get the product made from that. In that lab was making the product for you, even for those five schools.

3 (37m 55s):
Yes. They were making it in large pumps and we were really just coming up with every which way we could financially pay for it. And how was it? Well, yeah, I know rmx was maxed out to the limit which was like $30,000. It wasn't a huge number but it was always it was always about that. And I also convince the people that were making this product that they needed to also I didn't have a warehouse or anything. So I convince them to to Warehouse it for me and then let me pay as I pulled from the warehouse and then of course, you know, I could also go play the harp and you know any time I started to get concerned about cash. I'd take a harp job and use that to pay for the product.

3 (38m 37s):
It was pretty messy. Actually. We didn't keep real good track

1 (38m 41s):
of the financials at that point

3 (38m 43s):
because we were just still kind of testing this whole model and and you're right that that soon became after one year of being in the school that year. Ming Lee became hard to scale

1 (38m 55s):
and did you I mean, I'm assuming you were not be around packaging these into small bottles but The Branding and the logo this is just like or were you like

3 (39m 4s):
not yet. They were still in 24 ounce containers. They did have our logo which I'd created in Photoshop and I sort of self taught how to make a label and how to make a barcode and and the logo that you even

1 (39m 21s):
have to this day you you created that and

3 (39m 22s):
photoshop's I did and actually the logo today. We just had a Refresh on our brand about four months ago actually and tweaked a little bit here and there with my handwriting. I'm I'm also obsessed with handwriting and and so we digitally used my handwriting to tweak the original logo.

1 (39m 46s):
So you've got the product and you are trying to you know mount a campaign and to get people to know more about this. But it doesn't sound like you're really making a lot of traction the school's thing wasn't doesn't sound like it was really working. So, what did you how are you going to build this out into something

3 (40m 2s):
bigger? Well, so I started just looking at what retail look would look like and what is the world of prestige children's retail and how do Brands go into what I thought were some of the best storytellers like FAO Schwarz in New York or the now-defunct. Eagle was a very popular very highly curated store of just the best of the best things from San Francisco to New York and started to down this path of going to trade shows and showing my line to buyers of little Prestige mom-and-pop and resellers that could help support my vision and tell the story and they're in their location across the country.

1 (40m 45s):
Your husband was a lawyer so he had some income but we're you'd like getting help from friends and family at this point. Pointed I mean because still like right you can't run it the business on are and what are you asking people for help?

3 (40m 59s):
Yeah. I said my husband was not practicing law anymore. He was actually going out on his own in real estate investing and so we were definitely depleting all of our savings and it really wasn't until I think Thanksgiving of gosh 2008 ish that we asked my dad for. For $25,000. I think

1 (41m 24s):
so he kind of saved you

3 (41m 27s):
he did it was that, you know, every entrepreneur has the Thanksgiving dinner story and I had another trade show. I wanted to go to in Vegas and I asked you know my dad at the dinner table. I think like if he'd be willing to give us 25 thousand dollars and that really forced this conversation of how are you planning to scale this because I think at this point we were like literally making 45,000 and sales. I want to say a year and how are you going to scale this Holly? Because even if you double tripled your trade show at this trade show that you want to go to you know, that's still not much money

1 (42m 11s):
in. Did you need the money for that trade show to make product to bring to that trade show?

3 (42m 17s):
No, I needed the money for to actually pay for the the trade show itself to like pay for the booth. Yeah, and I had at that point also received a phone call from the skincare buyer at Sephora.

1 (42m 34s):
So wait while all this other stuff is going on Sephora, which is like a huge beauty company like retail company. They also reach out to you. Like how do the buyer even know about the product?

3 (42m 46s):
Well, she was a new mom and she had been shopping at giggle, which was that Teague retailer that I landed at one of my other trade shows and she purchased it for her child and also took it to the Sephora corporate office and they started passing it around and having this conversation. Apparently what they shared with me was that they felt most skincare today and this was you know, 2008-9 was really highly clinical and built on Doctor driven Brands and not fun and playful and they thought there was something thing really interesting about a brand that was very serious in technology, but doing it in a very fun and

1 (43m 27s):
playful spirit. So, all right. So Sephora calls you out of the blue, by the way, I think at this time you had your phone number on the on the bottle right here. Yes personal cell number

3 (43m 39s):
well, and that was so that if anybody wanted to talk about super group, they would reach me directly and and she said we like what you're doing and and we don't think that you're ready for a meeting, but we thought maybe we could Helpful, and you know Sephora is known to really nurture Indie Brands and and brands with strong founder visions. And she said, you know, I thought I would reach out and just share a few things that might be a good idea for you before if you're interested in the sand and then maybe you can get in touch when you feel that you've grown up a little bit. And by the way, what was her name Kim Holt

1 (44m 14s):
and what did Kim suggest you do? She says you need

3 (44m 16s):
press. She said you need if you want to get into

1 (44m 20s):
Sephora, you got to start with getting some more press. Yes. So in

3 (44m 24s):
2008, you know, this is before Instagram and influencer marketing and it was all really about those press placements that you'd get in the magazine that showed your product. They were very product driven and that's what sold product and Sephora so I had none of that.

1 (44m 41s):
So what did you do?

3 (44m 43s):
Well, so that 25,000 that my dad the next day Our home after Thanksgiving and he left to check on the counter and he said to me holly go get your elephant and that was his way of saying stop messing with all these small little retailers and and go get a big account. And so I went to Vegas we put that Booth together, but what I found when I got to Vegas was was just like I could have cried. I had really fought to be in the natural and organic. And very thoughtfully curated selections of the show.

3 (45m 23s):
But what I found was I was smack-dab in the middle of all of the granola and very homegrown Brands and all of the very cool modern beautifully aesthetic Brands were up on the second floor. Hmm and the lady in the booth right next to me had a brand called happy green be and she spent the whole show all five days knitting and and the shows So slow that I spent most of my time in her Booth learning to knit.

1 (45m 53s):
I thought this was going to be going to tell me about how you found a publicist. Did you find them at that?

3 (45m 56s):
So well kind of the last day when everyone was breaking apart their booths and everything I was you know walking around and someone came up to me and said gosh you've really gotten to be good buddies with Roxanne and I said, oh I know, you know, we had to wait too much time to talk on during the show not enough sales and they said well, I would imagine she could really help you and and I was Like what do you mean and she said you know who that is Holly its Roxanne Quimby. The founder of Burt's Bees do tie rocks

1 (46m 25s):
and Quimby who has been on our show we've had on our show. She's amazing you so you did you

3 (46m 30s):
go up to her. Yeah, so I went right back over there and I was like Roxanne. How could you not tell me that you are the fountain you were Roxanne Quimby the founder of Burt's Bees. She's

1 (46m 38s):
super low-key Super Lucky and she said Holly

3 (46m 41s):
I wanted to hear your story and your vision without you knowing

1 (46m 46s):
that So what then what I mean, do you like exchange numbers emails you go for

3 (46m 51s):
coffee. What do you do? What do you do? No, it's the last day the show. She said very quickly. How can I help you? I want to help I like what you're doing. And I said, I need a PR firm in New York and I can't get one to save my

1 (47m 4s):
life

3 (47m 5s):
and and an hour later Nancy Berman was calling me while I was in a cab to the airport and she Nancy is the founder of Berman Communications, which was known as the It's Beauty PR firm in New York. And she said I just got off the phone with Roxanne Quimby and she says I need to fly to Texas to meet you.

1 (47m 26s):
She says I got to fly to Texas to meet you you doing 45 thousand bucks a year in sales and this this is like a big shot PR person and you're like great. Let's do it.

3 (47m 39s):
No, actually I immediately kicked into well, she needs to know there's competition because I know this is going to cost me an arm and a leg and so I I said, well actually I'm going to be in New York next week interviewing several other PR firms and I'd love to schedule you in

1 (47m 55s):
well, which was totally made up on the Fly nice. So, okay. So then you like you fly to New York.

3 (48m 3s):
So well, then I grab my sister my brother my husband, you know, the company was still just me. So I had to put people in the room to look like we were doing something bigger than we were and I did in fact get

1 (48m 14s):
several other PR meetings with quite a

3 (48m 17s):
few of her. Predators based on being able to call and saying I'm coming to New York to sit down with Nancy Berman next week and I'd like to also I hear I should also be talking with

1 (48m 26s):
your firm. Huh? So Nancy presumably you end up working with Nancy.

3 (48m 31s):
She did she rolled out the red carpet and I was very impressed with we were all very impressed with her pitch but given that

1 (48m 39s):
you only have 45,000 revenue for the year, which is not

3 (48m 42s):
profit. How much did Nancy

1 (48m 44s):
Congress do you didn't have

3 (48m 46s):
to bring around? Well, that was the hard part. Because when it got to be the last page of her proposal was where we started talking about money and knowing that the world of PR wasn't going to talk about SPF outside of the summer months. She pitched me on a six-month contract that would go from January to June and she felt in that time. We could in January hit the long leads to make sure we were in the April May books and she would charge us $12,000 a month. But only six months out of the twelve so

1 (49m 20s):
$72,000 and you thought

3 (49m 24s):
I think I might have said have you been listening to everything that I've been talking about because I'm trying to DC's analyze a category and it's never going to happen. If I'm only talking to the beauty editors and my I think you know, everybody's going oh my gosh. She's trying to like convince now Nancy to take a 12-month retainer and I always credit my husband for this because that sounds crazy to pay. Uncivil retainer when we weren't even making in Revenue, but he was adamant about you've got to do this Holly. This is your path to Sephora and that's your elephant and we will figure out how to pay for this. So you were going to pay basically

1 (50m 0s):
YouTube you decide we're going to get the best publicist because we this is our one. This is our moon shot here. It's going to cost us two years of our Revenue to get this publicist and you basically take the plunge

3 (50m 13s):
and I think she came down to about eight thousand a month because it was the 12 months retainer right when

1 (50m 21s):
you signed on with her where did where was she able to place stories about super

3 (50m 27s):
group in all the beauty magazines? So a little more and you know, just the traditional press and did that move the needle that you get did you start to

1 (50m 35s):
get a lot of a lot of people inquiring

3 (50m 38s):
we did and we also got that helps a lot with the launch in Barneys New York, which Nancy set up an interview with the beauty. Fire of Barney's and she actually was a skin cancer survivor. So she really appreciate very fair skinned. Her name is Bettina O'Neill and she bought into the idea of building a skincare brand with a foundation in SPF and

1 (51m 4s):
Barney's certainly at that time was really important to really influential place to be.

3 (51m 9s):
Yeah, we launched in Shell in there Apothecary and you know, there are things that came from that that were super inspiring along the way like like being asked to I know we got a call once from Elon musk's team to put super goof into all of his roadsters that were taking

1 (51m 26s):
a press tour down the PCH or something and I thought you know gosh if

3 (51m 31s):
super goof makes sense because the Roadster was a convertible, you know could be in every cup holder. Yeah a lot of it a lot of cool people would see it. I think that's the year that we also were asked to join the Ted conference in Long Beach and put our products into the hands of all the attendees. That's and by the way, they don't pay you for that. You could donate that that was a hundred percent donation and Ike had to create a custom box because I wanted my story to be on the box because I knew that if it weren't nobody would know what the meaning behind the product was. So really kind of went out on a limb there.

1 (52m 7s):
Yeah, and at what point do you feel comfortable to reach back out to Sephora and say hey look, you know, we've been we've gotten in a couple magazines and we're going a little bit more publicity because I must I mean, you're still not really profitable at this point.

3 (52m 21s):
No, no, we're not. This was a couple of years after that press and growing and my Revenue went from 45 to I know a hundred and fifty-two I think 600 so we were, you know, we were increasing and growing the business. It was by no means profitable and I don't think I was even keeping quite good

1 (52m 42s):
track of the finances like that.

3 (52m 45s):
I just knew I had to keep going and was actually in 2010 when I felt like I was ready to talk again to

1 (52m 54s):
Sephora you call the same person who originally called you hmm I

3 (52m 58s):
called her and left her a voicemail and told her that I was going to be in San Francisco the following week for I gave her a five or six day range because I wanted to make sure that she could find a minute for me on her calendar and she didn't call me back

1 (53m 17s):
and so how did you get her

3 (53m 19s):
attention well so I felt obligated to go to San Francisco because I said on her voicemail that I was going to be there on other business and I did I was afraid that she might eventually call during that week and then if I weren't in San Francisco she'd be calling me out yeah and I didn't even have a hotel reserved when I got on the plane to go there I just knew that I had to be there and I cried the whole way there and found a shoebox of a hotel in Union Square that I remember like going in and it didn't even have Windows in the bathroom is down the hall and I was so upset because we didn't have a lot of money and this was a expensive you know thing for me to go do when I didn't really have anything to

1 (54m 5s):
do there does she call you back

3 (54m 8s):
so I went to bed that night and at 11:30 myself and lit up and it said Sephora on it and that's how I had programmed her name into my phone was as Sephora wow and I don't know why she was up late at the office that night but she said I think you might be in San Francisco and she said well we would love to meet with you are you available tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. amazing she go to go

1 (54m 33s):
to Sephora headquarters and and did you have a bunch of product with you like samples

3 (54m 38s):
oh I was so prepared I had foam boards with each of my products the pricing you know and I had product with me And they just said tell me about what you're trying to do here and I walked them through my story from teacher to to where we are today and why I needed their help and and why I felt like they could help put a megaphone to this message

1 (55m 2s):
and do they say, all right. We're in we were old we'll work with you.

3 (55m 5s):
They did not they just K. They just said we enjoyed meeting you. I thought the meeting went really well lasted, you know a good hour and a half and and I felt pretty good about that. Potential and they said they would be in

1 (55m 19s):
touch and that was it. Yeah, and I got to go home early. She could go back in the plane. I'm assuming on the way back. You were not crying.

3 (55m 27s):
Well, actually I the next morning woke up and you know, my father growing up had this thing about doing things in twos and he always said to me the best time to accomplish something is after you've accomplished something you're on a high feel optimistic you feel good about yourself and so whenever I had to Something well, he would say that's awesome. Holly. That's so great. I'm great great to hear it. Now. What are you going to

1 (55m 52s):
do?

3 (55m 54s):
And so I felt like that next morning. I had to figure out what the answer to like. I felt really good. You're right. I wasn't crying but I felt like I had to

1 (56m 2s):
know what was next. Yeah. I mean you must have been feeling pretty confident because I think like

3 (56m 8s):
maybe even the same

1 (56m 9s):
day you you decided to reach out to the buyer of Nordstrom to right?

3 (56m 14s):
Yeah. So I've said that I was In San Francisco talking with Sephora about a spring 2011

1 (56m 22s):
launch which was not totally true. Really? Yeah. No, I you

3 (56m 26s):
were kind of laughing laughing hoping

1 (56m 28s):
again willing it to be true. Yes.

3 (56m 31s):
Okay, and I would love to come through Orange County on the way back to Texas and share with her more about my brand

1 (56m 40s):
and wish Ian. She

3 (56m 42s):
sounded really interested in optimistic again. She didn't give me any answers, you know Johnny on the spot. But she sounded interested and and I felt good about flying home and and then doing the follow-up that was needed to land both of these accounts. And I feel like that was a real important for me was when I think about where I saw our brand I felt like so the Sephora demographic the customer was young and they're playing with makeup. They needed to understand how important it was to First protect their skin. And for the Nordstrom Customer, I felt like that was the mom mom with three kids in tow and a stroller and she really needed to be instrumental in teaching young children.

3 (57m 24s):
These healthy habits. So I felt like the two Brands were the ideal launch pad for me and in the country together, but how do you get into them? What

1 (57m 34s):
convinces Sephora finally call you and say? Okay, we'll do it. And and then of course, you know, what kind of shelf space are going to get and how long

3 (57m 40s):
so what was the deal they offered you? Yeah, so well and to back up a little bit I got home and for several weeks. you know I sent my follow-up email my you know exactly as I should have posts a meeting but I didn't hear from either of them oh well nothing not even like a great to meet no not nothing and like the silent treatment for six Weir's the rest of that year actually and so that's when my husband and I were kind of tapped out on the money side and and we went to my brother who after graduating SMU moved to New York started a business the sand has been super successful building it to several hundred people with his partners and we asked him if he would be interested in investing and he agreed and he agreed he said you know Holly I'm think if he were here today on the podcast he'd probably say you know I was betting on the jockey not the horse and he put in initially $750,000

1 (58m 41s):
wow so you're assuming that that in March of 2011 your you're going to do Nationwide launch somewhere but you don't have any commitments, I guess from Sephora or Nordstrom. So when when do they call or when the Sephora call

3 (58m 57s):
January 26th? And I know the date because it's my brother's

1 (59m 1s):
birthday and they called you in the 26th called me on the 26th and it was actually the as 11

3 (59m 6s):
well and she called and said Holly, it's Kim and I'm super excited to share that we are going to prepare for a summer launch in all. Stores and the big end

1 (59m 18s):
cap for the 12 weeks of summer. So good news because the for is going to launch but only 12 weeks and only in the

3 (59m 26s):
summer which kind of undermines your whole narrative

1 (59m 28s):
because you don't you're not selling a summer product exactly. So would you say I said,

3 (59m 34s):
you know as flattering as this is and I'm super excited and want this badly. I need to scale my size down to whatever size makes sense that you can assure me 12

1 (59m 45s):
months of distribution you're talking about this. Is it the bottle the size of the space on the Shelf? So on the Shelf?

3 (59m 51s):
Yes, I don't and in cap is that big fancy thing at the end of the aisle where you have five shelves and a killer product sure. I didn't expect that. They would hold that for a 12-month period so I convinced them and this is how I really knew that Sephora was the right partner for me they listened and they said, you know, let us take this back and think about how we could do this and I assure you months of distribution, which I also didn't know that that's kind of crazy really retailers don't want with any guaranteed one year of distribution,

1 (1h 0m 25s):
right and how much shelf space do they offer you

3 (1h 0m 28s):
so they later called and said they were excited to share that they were going to open a new wall and Sephora called skincare favorites and they could have secured six inches of space and to pick my two favorite products and is that is a pretty good like as

1 (1h 0m 45s):
I'm thinking six inches my God is nothing. Big store but is that is that what are you happy with that? I was

3 (1h 0m 50s):
ecstatic the sounded like a dream. It sounded like something that I could manage again. I didn't have a team. I didn't have a marketing team. I didn't have people in the stores to help sell it. I felt like that was positioning Us in the skincare category, which is how I've always seen our brand as not a sunscreen brand. We are true skin care but all about protection and that's our thing. So I was just

1 (1h 1m 12s):
thrilled so summer of 2011 you debut at Sephora.

3 (1h 1m 17s):
Yes, and I had nurtured the Nordstrom relationship along the way and keeping in touch and and we launched in 47 stores. So I had full distribution and Sephora and 47 Nordstrom's and a lot of work to do right because you still even

1 (1h 1m 34s):
live here in Sephora or Nordstrom. It doesn't mean people are going to go to your product and buy it. You got to tell you got explain. You gotta get them to buy it. So how did you do that?

3 (1h 1m 41s):
Exactly? Well because of that 12 months a distribution. I think that really shaped how I Thought about product I said, I've always thought about innovation in SPF. And how do I create products that are game changing that you will reach for in those shoulder seasons and I had created the sunscreen swipes that were a way to reapply your SPF in a towelette and they were at the time pretty new to the world and I didn't really realize it at the time because I didn't know what success meant at Sephora but I would go around to stores during that period and the swipes were always gone. They were just wiped out of the off the shelf.

3 (1h 2m 21s):
Hmm.

1 (1h 2m 23s):
Yeah. Well what explained that

3 (1h 2m 25s):
apparently, you know, the swipes were a huge hit and the world love them. And the problem was I knew that my sales couldn't be great if there were no products on the shelf. And so I started what I like later coined and within my family as reverse stealing, but I didn't know how to get product to the shelves and I knew I couldn't get make the numbers if there weren't product. So I'd go into as many stores. I could with swipes in my bag and literally like stock the shelves like I give them product

1 (1h 2m 55s):
which is why crazy right? Wow. I love that story. By the way. I've

3 (1h 2m 59s):
never told that story. It just popped in my head,

1 (1h 3m 2s):
which is so crazy. But like I literally remember going into stores and pushing products onto the store shelves. All right. So you are you're now, you know in these Brands by the way had was their immediate or fairly quick impact on your Revenue. I mean you've gone from what

3 (1h 3m 21s):
a hundred fifty went to like

1 (1h 3m 22s):
600 a year and that year 2011. Wow, so that was and then what about 2012 we kept doubling we've been doubling

3 (1h 3m 30s):
and sometimes more than that

1 (1h 3m 32s):
since so 2012. You pass a million dollars in sales. Yes. What did it now start to become easier to raise money outside because it up. This point was just family is your dad your brother you and your husband now is to scale. I'm imagining you wanted to go out and raise more money because it costs money. You got to make the product. He had to make the bottles and distributions expensive or did you did you say, you know what? We're just we're not going to raise money. We're going to sell fun this thing.

3 (1h 3m 58s):
No, no, and I've always known, you know, when you have this Vision to change the way the world thinks about sunscreen scaling is super important. And also I'm dealing with a category where we actually have to convince people. 'well why they need to wear SPF and then why supergroup so, you know, I often say like imagine I was having lunch with the founders of MZ Wallace, which is a handbag Brands and I said, you know, imagine if you had to convince women everywhere to carry a bag with them everywhere with their water bottle in their wallet and their person their phone and they're umbrella. Yeah, you don't you just have to sell them on your bags, but for me, I've always looked at it. Like I have to convince first people the why it's so important that they protect their Can and then secondary to that is why supergroup so yes, it's been very expensive from a marketing perspective and I was still not profitable at that point.

3 (1h 4m 51s):
So raising money was something that was just a necessary thing that we had to do. Yeah, and so I guess you were

1 (1h 4m 58s):
eventually able to raise like like two million dollars from from a combination of friends and family and even some some private investors and people in the medical field and I should mention

3 (1h 5m 8s):
tennis star Maria. Sharapova, how did that happen? Yeah, so that was just a phone call from her agent that said I'm Maria sharapova's agent and I'm like Googling Maria Sharapova and Susie, what's the word sunscreen? And she said she found her product at Sephora and it's the only product she can compete in. Wow, and it doesn't burn her eyes. And so she's interested. If you guys are there have ever thought about making an investment and actually this was a just about the same time as our friends and family was still open and I thought the first thing I need to do is get to LA to meet her because of course if we're going to have an investor come into the brand she's becoming part of our family.

3 (1h 5m 50s):
And so I want to make sure it

1 (1h 5m 51s):
also be a brand ambassador spokesperson presumably.

3 (1h 5m 55s):
Yeah, so we flew out there and spent a Day visiting with she and her agent and you know, honestly put the deal together really quickly.

1 (1h 6m 5s):
Wow. Holly as you grew and today I think that the latest public numbers of them are that you did like 40 million in Revenue in 2018 and maybe more in 2019 and assuming but at a certain point you decide to open up a New York office you are based in San Antonio You've Got a New York office you hired a president to room or less to run the company and from what I understand like this was sort of a request from your investors are like, hey, Holly, you're great. You're really good at what you do but like you need an operations person, that's not yours. Strength was that is that true? Is that how it went down?

3 (1h 6m 40s):
Yeah, you know, so we had our series a followed our friends and family and one of the former partners that tsg John Kenny was going off on his own to create what is now cult capital and he asked to lead our series a round and he said Holly what is it you want to do

1 (1h 6m 59s):
for this next phase of Super Goo

3 (1h 7m 2s):
and I said John I want to build a team I want Help. I want a presence in New York City and we decided together that it was time to go on

1 (1h 7m 13s):
that search for a brand

3 (1h 7m 15s):
president who could be the perfect integrator for my vision and she's been now with us for four years. And this

1 (1h 7m 23s):
is a man of Baldwin, right? Yes, and

3 (1h 7m 28s):
having had Amanda to help was a real turning point for me in realizing the time to put our foot on the gas and The team that we needed to take this and make the magic

1 (1h 7m 40s):
of supergroup happen. So let's talk about this moment now no one is going in the Sephora representing. Most Sephora's are closed. If not, all the Nordstrom's are closed and who knows when they're going to open up some a open but I mean I have to assume that you know, you've got direct to Consumer you can you can buy supergroup online, but I've got to assume that like probably 99.9% of businesses. You've taken a hit in recent weeks.

3 (1h 8m 7s):
X yeah, you know, I mean, I think definitely we had to set reset but I think what's been really neat is we're having real breakout conversations. Mmm. In fact this week we launched Sephora Canada and I trained over Zoom 350 of the cast members in

1 (1h 8m 27s):
Canada. Oh, wow.

3 (1h 8m 29s):
Well, we're still there and you mentioned direct-to-consumer is still very very strong. We in fact relaunched our super group.com platform. A and this time has given us all a minute to to really focus on these things and how business in general is being impacted by what's going on.

1 (1h 8m 47s):
Are you I mean, obviously we've done a lot of companies that are cash intensive companies and that don't have 90 180 days of cash sitting around they might have 45 days casting around and a lot of those businesses won't be able to make it even with you know investors and so on. To assume that your business a little bit different for one thing. You're making a product that is relatively shelf stable and it's not as cash intensive or am I

3 (1h 9m 16s):
wrong? Well, fortunately 2019 for supergroup was our year to get to profitability and double-digit profitability this year. So having Amanda brand president and a husband and a brother that's all very strong and finance we have, you know remodeled the entire year, too. remain profitable and and continue pushing and even spending money do you do you think that what's happened to you and

1 (1h 9m 46s):
and the success of the company is because you of your skill and work ethic or do you think more of it has to do with luck I think it's a little bit of

3 (1h 9m 55s):
both guy you know if I think back was that was it skill that positioned me next to Roxanne Quimby in Vegas no but it was very strategic in that I was telling my story to everybody that would listen and same is true with my launch at Sephora because gosh I was lucky the skincare buyer that your happened to be pregnant and shopping and giggle but you know I put my number on the carton and and so anybody could reach me and that was that was strategic the

1 (1h 10m 29s):
summon we you mentioned earlier I asked you that this again I'm what do you think how do you think being a musician playing the harp helped you be an

3 (1h 10m 39s):
entrepreneur I think being a musician is really helped me in and just learning those how to break it down and you know you can be overwhelmed if you open the picture opening as piece of sheet music and there's his notes everywhere and staff and it can look very jumbled The like how in the world am I ever going to learn this whole song but what you learn and music is to break it down and learn the first measure learn the right hand and the left and then put the right in the left together. And then once you've mastered that go onto the second measure and if you continue to break it down like that you eventually have a have a beautiful song and I think also though for for me because I started performing at such a young age it gave me so much confidence and if you think about, you know playing Here Comes the Bride to a church that's full of people that are everyone's dead silent and you are the music you're the only thing that anyone's listening to and this is this Brides biggest day of her life.

3 (1h 11m 36s):
It really gives you the confidence to think you can do anything and that helps me and has over the years as we've been fundraising and you've got to be completely confident to walk into any scenario and and Pitch your brand and sell them on a valuation that you believe in and I think the music really is what what gave me that

1 (1h 12m 3s):
as Holly staggered founder of super group by the way Holly is come full circle with her original idea of getting sunscreen into schools since she got her start a bunch of states have changed their laws and now allow kids to use sunscreen in schools without a prescription so super goo has started a program where they give it out for free and this past school year they donated 3000 pumps of supergroup schools across the country

3 (1h 12m 31s):
And thanks so much for listening to the show this

1 (1h 12m 32s):
week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts and if you want to write us, it's h IB T at npr.org if you want to tweet at us. It's at how I built this or add guy Roz. This episode was produced by James Della who see with music composed By REM teen Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Canada slim Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this. This is NPR. As protests sweep the nation the subject of policing is once again being hotly

3 (1h 13m 7s):
debated this week on through line how police forces developed in the North and the South in the 19th century and expanded their power in the 20th century

1 (1h 13m 17s):
through line from NPR the podcast where we go back in time

3 (1h 13m 21s):
to understand the present.