1 (0s):
Hey really quick before we bring you a brand new episode of How I built this we are now doing twice weekly live video conversations with Founders and entrepreneurs around the theme of building resilience in a time of Crisis. So come bring your questions and learn how other businesses are working through the challenges this Wednesday, April 15th. Join. Me and Gary and kit Erickson of Clif Bar and on Friday, April 17th. I'll have a claimed thinker Simon sinek author of start with why on the show. So you can join the conversation live at facebook.com slash how I built this they happen Wednesdays and Fridays at 12 noon Eastern again. That's facebook.com slash how I built this and you don't need a Facebook account to watch.

1 (45s):
Okay, and now on to a brand-new episode of the show and just a warning there's a little salty language in this episode. So if you're listening with kids just be mindful. You went to your executive team and you present this plan and within a year, they all laughed. Basically your entire top level. Execs are gone. Yeah, I remember like the last one where we thought it couldn't get any worse and I get the text from someone and it's always like the worst ex-muslims is hey, can you talk and then so the last person quits and we're just like Oh God.

1 (1m 26s):
What are we gonna do

2 (1m 32s):
from NPR? Yes how I built this show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They go. I'm guy Roz. And on Today Show how three friends from college opened a salad Shack in Washington DC and grew that into sweet green and chain of salad restaurants that wants to transform the way we think about fast food. Okay. So first before I get into today's episode, how are you doing? How are you feeling? Because on my end. I think I'm probably going through what you're going through which is a mixture of anxiety and hope and as far as this show is concerned as corny as it may sound A Renewed sense of mission because as I've said before how I built this is not really a show just about business.

2 (2m 30s):
I've never thought about it that way it's a show about The in possibility isn't just about all of the good things that can happen. It's about the possibility for things to go downhill possibility encompasses failure and loss but also rebirth and Triumph and creativity and a path forward which is why this show isn't something I just host. I'm actually a fan of these stories. I love them. They're like rocket fuel for days when I'm feeling down or unmotivated like kind of like these days, right? Which brings me to To today's story because it really is about possibility and all it entails sweet green started out as a classic problem looking for a solution.

2 (3m 14s):
The problem was bad food options three undergraduates at Georgetown University in Washington DC where sick of bad cafeteria food Jonathan demon Nicholas, Jame and Nathaniel Rue wanted fresh healthy. Vibrant salads not iceberg lettuce with some Gloppy Ranch. They wanted things like avocado and arugula and red cabbage and fresh kale and believe it or not. These things were not easy to find at restaurants and Washington DC in 2007. So Jonathan Nicholas and Nathaniel decided to solve the problem themselves a better lunch option for them and for their fellow students at Georgetown with some seed money, they raised from friends and family.

2 (3m 59s):
They fixed up a run-down Shack near campus. They launched a takeout salad restaurant. a few months later and almost didn't make it out of year one when the cold winter weather slowed business to a trickle but nearly 15 years on none of these three founders could have imagined that sweet green would become one of the leading fast-casual salad restaurants in America with more than a hundred locations and last year investors valued sweet green at more than a billion dollars a billion dollars for salad, but actually what's probably Interesting about the sweet green story is a major pivot the founders took in 2018 when they decided to slow down the expansion of the restaurants, but we'll get there.

2 (4m 44s):
The thing is when I spoke to Jonathan and Nicholas back in early March, none of us knew that just days later the entire world was about to change in a most profound way. So at the end of this episode, I'll reach back out to them for an update about how things are going right now. Now but for the moment, let's dive into that first conversation with Jonathan demon and Nicholas Jame. So Nicholas tummy you you grew up born and raised in New York City was

3 (5m 14s):
born and raised in New York City. My parents had come to the u.s. A few years before I was born and my father was French and my mother was Swiss Lebanese and so grew up in a very what I would say strict French household. Oh, yeah and french-speaking so is actually my first

1 (5m 28s):
language and they ran a restaurant in New York. It's called La Caravelle it was

3 (5m 34s):
The caravel and it was one of those very old-school fine-dining French restaurants of a former generation. Typical ladies who launch you know, Jackie O would go there for lunch a couple times a week and it was a really Chic old-school New York environment and where you'd sit down for a three-hour

1 (5m 50s):
lunch. And what do you what do you remember as a kid? I mean, would you would you be in there all the time, you know, most of my

3 (5m 57s):
childhood actually remember being either there in the restaurant or in the kitchen there or in the office and if I wanted to see my parents and wanted to spend Quality time with them I was quite often at the office with them. And you know Looking Back Now is an adult with a business. I commend my parents because they did a great job balancing and they'd come home sometimes for dinner and then they'd run back to the restaurant fur at night, but there wasn't one weekend where they didn't work. I think my dad didn't take a day off for I would say probably a decade at least and I'd watch him get up at five in the morning every day. And you know, he'd go do everything himself flower market Monday morning 5 a.m. Fish Market Meat Market. He wanted to go actually see the product meet the Is an actually, you know, bring it back to the restaurant. He was very Hands-On and and then when the restaurant opened he was there greeting every single customer there wasn't one guest that walked into that restaurant that was in greeted by my parents.

1 (6m 45s):
So when you was time for you go to college you went to Georgetown and was it your I mean, did you have a sense already then that you wanted to what you want to do? Like did you think I'll go study Finance or economics? I'll go to a bank and I'll come back to New York and working on Wall Street or something like that growing

3 (7m 1s):
up in that environment and watching my parents run that business. Yes, I always loved the idea of being an entrepreneur and so even in high school, you know, I became pretty obsessive with the idea of just being an entrepreneur and trying to learn as much as I could in high school. I fought really hard to start the entrepreneurship club. And so there's a group of students that would get together every weekend just dissect businesses talk about

1 (7m 19s):
entrepreneurs who were that you were that kid. I was nice good guys. Wow. All right, so I want to just just hit the pause button for a sec and bring in Jonathan demon because you grew up in where you going in LA

2 (7m 34s):
In

1 (7m 34s):
Los Angeles and your family were Iranian Jews. They left Iran During the Revolution and came to La like a lot of Iranian Jews and non-jews. Yeah. So my parents left During the Revolution and Ron 1979 and they both had to leave suddenly, you know, we're

2 (7m 51s):
relatively well-off in Iran and then one day their life

1 (7m 54s):
changed and they had to leave almost everything and kind of come to America and start over. Yeah. I kind of lived, you know, like my Early Childhood was very much. Always that that worried that what we had was not permanent and that you could lose it at any moment. And what did your I mean when your parents came to LA and sort of start over what do they do? It was at work? Yeah. So so my dad worked with his two brothers and he did what he was doing in Iran, which was he was a importer of textiles and then he would sell textiles and so my early memories was were going to see my dad at his office and he had a warehouse and I remember Like my dream was to like be able to ride the forklift that would carry like the rolls of fabric and that's what he did.

1 (8m 39s):
He sold roles, you know, he would design Fabric and sell rolls of fabric to Brands and manufacturers to make garments out of and similar to Nick I think starting a business was always almost an expectation everyone everyone. I looked around he a doctor or an engineer know it was every time I've interviewed. Some iranian-american they say oh my parents want me to be a doctor an engineer. He wasn't that they talked about me being an entrepreneur, but that's all we saw is. I saw my dad work with his two brothers. So I'll most of their friends were entrepreneurs and not not a lot of people had big businesses, but they worked for themselves. We didn't know a lot of people that had jobs and from a very young age. That's what I wanted to do.

1 (9m 20s):
So you go to Georgetown for college as well. I mean, did you guys even know each other from from day one? Were you like best friends or it was what's the story? What do you remember Jonathan? Yeah, so Because the first person I met when I got to Georgetown, so I remember very vividly, you know, you card all your stuff into the dorm and I see Nick and his mom Rita right next door to me and he was the first person that greeted me when I walked into my dorm.

3 (9m 45s):
Yeah. It's funny growing up in New York. I had actually never oddly enough never been to La didn't really have any friends from LA. And so I met this kid and I'm like, well he seems different is from Allah is running at Lakers t-shirt and he's got a different energy about him. And you know, I knew we'd be friends but first person I met Did George Town

1 (9m 60s):
and were you friends right away or did you kind of have your own groups of friends? We were friends, but we were it was really interesting now consider what we do together. We were friends that shared really this thing that we shared the most was a love for food. So like from the very beginning it was we were food friends, you know in college you kind of have these like functional friends you have food you go friends you go see concerts with friends you go to movies with Nick and I were food friends. Well, I understand it from about Nick because he grew up around food. He grew up around restaurants. But what was your thing? Look where that come from? Just love always loved food. Some people eat to live and others live to eat. I just like loved the experience of food the sharing of food everything about it. I just has always been something I've loved so you guys were your friends and you meet this other guy Nate and did you also become friends with him pretty quickly.

1 (10m 50s):
Yeah Nate Nate and I became very close friends immediately. He Nate with Nate's also from Los Angeles, right and so Nate and I just saw Each other and immediately bonded, you know, I remember seeing him an accounting class you sitting in front of me and he was wearing an LA Dodgers cap, and I was wearing like a Lakers t-shirt and we looked at each other and were like we're going to be friends and we just bonded over being from LA and loving music and we became Fast Friends Nate and I ended up being roommates for two out of the four years of college. Well, alright, so you guys are all Georgetown. This is in the early 2000s and it comes time to graduate. How did the idea of Eight in before you start switch over how the idea of working together even begin would use.

1 (11m 34s):
Would you talk about it in college? Like hey, maybe we should like do something together after college. Were you having those conversations? I think the three of us all had this entrepreneurial itch and

2 (11m 44s):
you know, all of our parents were immigrants. All of our parents are entrepreneurs, Nick talked about starting the entrepreneurs club and called in high school. I also started the entrepreneur I just found

1 (11m 53s):
this out. He was also that kid. I was also that

2 (11m 55s):
kid. I found I just found this out this week. I also started young entrepreneurs Club in High school and so we kind of like we were the three kids that knew we wanted to start a business and we didn't know what that business was going to be. We just knew we wanted to do something and maybe do something together. How did you have like doing a salad based like lunch place out of that? How do they even come

3 (12m 16s):
about? So at the time at Georgetown there was one class called entrepreneurship. It wasn't a major. It wasn't a minor that was this one course taught by Professor named will finnerty and the three of us actually took the class separately John. I think I was I was your ta Angelina. Mighty a that's why I love it so much I stayed on as a TA and they talk about how to write a business plan how to concept a business you one of the things he talked about in the class was some of the best businesses are

2 (12m 40s):
started by people. Just trying to solve a problem they have in their lives

3 (12m 43s):
and so at the same time we were having that conversation the food on campus was really bad the cafeteria especially and as a freshman you actually you're forced to buy meal plan. They force your parents. There's a minimum you have to buy it. It's really bad. You can go there for you know random lunch, but I have every meal that was really

2 (12m 58s):
tough and we were sick of eating. I'm the closest thing. We had to healthy food was maybe Chipotle or Subway? Yeah. It was just that constant complaint that we had a problem in our own life. And then we heard all of our friends complain about it. And so when we were just the original idea was we wish this was here at Georgetown while we were here you wish what was there? We wish that there was a healthy place to eat that was affordable and convenient and delicious. Right? And we just want we thought it was gonna be really easy. We thought we could open a restaurant in two months and we didn't really know exactly Clear what the cuisine would be and so the first location was across the street from where we lived and on the corner was this old burger shop. That was now closed.

2 (13m 38s):
It used to be called The Little Tavern the whole time we were at school. It was empty. It was Tiny. It was 500 square feet and it had a For Lease sign on it and we looked at that or like that's perfect. That's where we should do it, but it was the fact that it was so small had to keep it really simple. Yeah, and it was that constraint. That was

1 (13m 57s):
we're going to do one thing and we're going to do it. Well, all right, so There's a 500 square foot restaurant that's available for lease. It's empty. You guys are seniors in college your 2122. Maybe you all of a sudden you're saying. Hey, you know what? Let's see if we can get that place and open up our salad restaurant and we move forward like when your parents were saying to you in the fall of your senior year. Hey, Nick, you know, hey Jonathan, you're gonna graduate in May. What are you gonna do? Because that's what every senior in college. Like that's a question I get asked. In the fall of that year we were saying we're going to open up a restaurant. Is that where you saying that

3 (14m 33s):
already? It wasn't real at that point yet and just to paint a bit of the picture at first. I didn't tell my parents because obviously they were in the business and they probably warned me against it, but the way we actually got started, you know, we wrote the business plan, which our first version of a business plan was, like two pages. It was like one page of financials a photo of some chair for design reference and kind of like a menu concept and so to John's Point once we saw that little Hut we said this is where it's got a start and we somehow found out. Landlord was called the number in the window. First

1 (15m 1s):
of all, it took us almost two months to get a meeting because we called her name is Marcy and we called her. She wouldn't take a seriously she thought we were kids doing the school project. You were calling are saying what saying? Hey we have this idea for this restaurant on the corner. Can we come have a

3 (15m 19s):
meeting? And once she finally, you know, John called her every day for 30 days. I'll never forget and she finally called back and said I'll take a meeting if you stop calling me got his yeah, and that's when she said you know what go back. And not a real business plan and show me something real and maybe we can

1 (15m 32s):
talk. All right, so you got to Marcy with a business plan

2 (15m 35s):
A Better Business Plan presumably what a couple days later or a week or so later. I had you improve that business plan. Well, she asked us to do a few things. She asks us to really build out a full business plan which meant building out some Financial projections, which meant building out the team that was going to help execute this whether that be the architect the engineer, she's like who she's like, you know how to build a restaurant.

1 (15m 58s):
She's like you need an architect you need an

2 (15m 59s):
Are you need a kitchen designer you need to think about all of these things? Yeah, but I remember we went and stood on the corner and counted people and we stood in front of the subway. We stood in front of the Chipotle. We sit in front of the dean of Deluca and then we sit in front of our corner and we would just count how many people are walking by how many people are at the University how many salads do we have to sell a day? And it was that was all happening before winter break. Yeah, and that's when we were going to like make a call is this what we were going to do or not and that that location is It's on M Street in Georgetown. Right? I think just important to point out. This is at the very very end of the retail District of M Street or at least at that time. It was like most people really didn't go far beyond M and Wisconsin at that

3 (16m 44s):
point. I mean, there's no argument. It was on paper a bad piece of real estate. Yeah, and that's why I think she gave us a chance because that piece of real estate had sat there empty for five years and she said, you know, what? Why not what have I got to tell you? What was the rent going to be? The rent was 3,000 bucks a

1 (16m 58s):
month and What were the terms how long do you have to sign a deal for two years five years? So she agrees to do this deal with you. And then what then what do you

3 (17m 8s):
do then it was time to raise money. We had this business plan that was more buttoned up. We had a landlord those willing to give us the space and we'd found an architect someone that she knew so she felt confident in you know us actually building this and I guess you just saw something in us and we had gotten to know her and she said, you know, these kids might actually get this thing

1 (17m 26s):
open and how much money did you think you needed to raise to get this out of the ground? And we thought we needed a hundred thousand dollars. Okay hundred thousand that was going to cover the deposit and the rebuild and you know, your first couple months of Just Produce sourcing and and by the way in terms of the architect and the what did it look like inside

3 (17m 45s):
it was a concrete box. Yeah. It

1 (17m 47s):
was a concrete box. It was we really didn't know anything, you know, we never nickname and I had never worked in a restaurant and he had some experience working in a restaurant but clearly never built a restaurant and so this A switch, you know in my head you see that front line that like that line that we make ourselves on today in my head. I figured we could just go buy one of those and plop it in and didn't really think about the fact that it needed power water like a bathroom all of the things that make a restaurant there was no bathroom there. There's no bathroom in there was no stairs the plumbing. There's no Plumbing. Okay was

3 (18m 22s):
no sewage and electricity is electricity there. You should not have opened a restaurant in this space

1 (18m 27s):
and also is literally a concrete literally

3 (18m 29s):
we a concrete Shack that but you know, we always say thank God we knew nothing because today or even a couple years and we would have never even agreed to go to our site like that. It was so bad. Yeah, but it ended up being the perfect place to start sweet

1 (18m 40s):
green. Alright, so the you get the architect and what did you have to put in plumbing and electricity? Yes. I remember when I remember when we got the first bid back from the architect who just did like a projection of how much this was going to cost and we thought a hundred thousand was pretty conservative. Like that's a lot of money we get it back and it's like three

2 (18m 59s):
Earn

1 (18m 60s):
$50,000 and I just read just remember looking at each other like oh shit. This isn't gonna work.

2 (19m 7s):
So I mean I obviously

1 (19m 8s):
mean you you did decide to go forward with it. And where did you go to raise the money

3 (19m 15s):
we started raising money from you know, anyone that will listen to us. It was friends in school old teachers old bosses. We teach put in some of our savings but really not much. It was really this process of selling this business plan.

1 (19m 28s):
And what was the like was Or a minimum amount you're asking people to give you if someone's like I'll give you 2,000 bucks. We took 2,000 bucks. You take it we did we did take it. So take a look. And we asked we asked everyone we could and it was really hard. I mean, I think we're raising money peace is something that

2 (19m 46s):
you know, as you come with no experience, you know people are

1 (19m 48s):
looking at like, okay. So what have you done before and Everyone likes knows the fact that 99% of restaurants fail in their first year,

2 (19m 56s):
but you just needed a few people to say. Yes. And once you found a few people to say, yes, they knew a few friends. That would then say yes, we probably spoke to 250 people and we got at the end. We got 50 people to say. Yes. And and how much did you guys raise we ended up raising almost 300,000 and it did cost about $350,000. So we were short fifty thousand dollars or so, which means we had the contractor $50,000 at the end which means the contractor under a piece of owned a piece of our company at the end. Well and what What about the food? Like did you start coming up with recipes of salads to serve the food was

1 (20m 35s):
really the fun part because that's where

3 (20m 37s):
what was going to make it special was going to actually get people excited to eat this and you know fast forward second semester. We had raised some money. We find these signed the lease. We made our first batch of sweet green t-shirts that we all were every single day. So it felt real and it was time to figure out the product and I remember it started just with us, you know, we saw a produce truck drive by and we just called the phone number on the produce truck and got this produce up to come to our dorm room with samples. And that's how we started to figure out the menu and what we wanted to

1 (21m 3s):
serve. Well, what was the produce truck Kini program? You probably see those all around it and Atlantic

3 (21m 8s):
they are still our partner today and I'll never forget Joanna who was our rep showed up at my dorm room and she's like is this the right address? She came with a pro couple cases of arugula and I said, yeah just put it in the refrigerator and she saw a bunch of college kids partying and she must have thought we were

1 (21m 22s):
crazy. So this is a produce distributor, you know your 22 and you have zero experience. It's in business and restaurants and where they skeptical they met you actually they were really good partners from the beginning. There's something I think that when you're 21 years old trying to start a business. I feel like people were kind of rooting for us and we always went in very honestly and said, we don't know anything. We've never done this before. Can you help us? They wanted to see us be successful because we were in approaching it the same way other restaurants were like from the very beginning we went in and we asked for local and organic food. And they're like wow, that's that's different why you know, what's going on here?

1 (22m 4s):
Yeah, and so I really think that people people wanted to help us from the very beginning and then in terms of the menu, how do you come up with that?

3 (22m 14s):
You know again, we were all big Foodies and we understood that we wanted them menu to be food that you could eat every day. That would make you feel good and food that people get excited about and so we started doing these tastings in our dorm room and we'd invite ten to Fifteen friends at a time to come try it and give us their feedback. And that's how the first menu was

2 (22m 31s):
born and in terms of like coming up with the first menus because it's obvious you can make your own salad. However, you want right is just a bunch of greens and you can

1 (22m 41s):
vegetables you can add stuff to it. But you

2 (22m 43s):
have recommended combinations that you can go in and what was the first like so the first the first menu and part of why we called it sweet green was the first menu was salads wraps and frozen yogurt. It was really important for us for it not to just be the make your own but to have these Chef crafted combinations and I remember the first one of the very first things we made was the Guacamole green. Yeah. What was that

3 (23m 8s):
salad? So that's salad with the whole idea was taking the flavors and ingredients that go into guacamole and deconstructing them into a salad. So a bowl, that's more vegetal that's more plant-based but you still get that experience of crunching into the tortilla chips and the avocado and the dressing and it becomes really critical is like

2 (23m 25s):
on a real gorilla or

3 (23m 26s):
yeah, it was mixed greens and

2 (23m 28s):
arugula got okay. And and then it's time to because I'm assuming you sign the lease in the spring of 2007. Right and you needed to build this thing out. So our plan was to open in April April of 2007 April 2007. When did you sign the lease and like and like January January February we signed cases. But again, we had no idea what we were doing. We thought building a restaurant we didn't understand that you have to get permits. We don't understand to build an

3 (23m 56s):
ADA sized bathroom inside that you have to like have a storage room.

2 (23m 59s):
Take all these things time. It takes it takes a lot of time and what we didn't realize back to this being a concrete box in order to get electricity and water and sewage to the space. We had to rip up the street. So the permitting was a complete Nightmare and beyond that we didn't have enough space in the restaurant we found out to do everything we wanted to do we have enough storage space. Yeah. And so what we figured out what to do was right behind us was a

1 (24m 28s):
parking lot. Yeah, so we Went to them and we said can we rent two parking spaces and we'll build a storage unit within the two parking spaces and we'll put all our Refrigeration RX refrigeration and all our Dry Goods in these two parking spaces. And then we would get would get a cart or idea was we're gonna get a cart and we're going to roll down the parking lot for the food. So you have like your refrigerator and just stand alone refrigerator on two parking spots. Correct, which would solve any built a room Builder Russia, but like we drywall To parking spot and he agreed to this. Yes. So this is this is where you had your storage facilities are wait how physically how far was it?

3 (25m 7s):
Like it was like, you know, 30 feet up the block down a hallway. So it was the it's like role of cart everyday couple times a day a

1 (25m 14s):
couple times a back and forth. Yeah. Wow, and I like you were still your this is like your final semester of college, assuming you've kind of had a lighter load of classes, but you were still having to go to class, right?

3 (25m 26s):
Yeah. We were running in between classes and construction site. And it was and we both lived across the street. So it was actually pretty convenient but it was this funny trying to finish our classes and finish out, you know, second semester of our last year, but then also starting this thing that was going to be you know, yeah and funny enough out of all the restaurants we've opened at of all the leases we've signed this first one was almost when we were least worried about we the most confidence in this one because we were a because we didn't know anything we had nothing to be worried about yet and B, we were building it for ourselves. We were the customer right is a confidence there.

1 (25m 56s):
I mean, I mean it must have been so exciting. I mean presumably Friends are like those guys are building this restaurant was there like buzz around

3 (26m 3s):
it there was buzzed and you know, we had a ton of friends and people that were supportive and really believed in it. And at the same time, you know, you get those looks from people like oh so that's going to be your real job. You know, I'm going to go work at Goldman Sachs or somewhere else and you're going to go run of 500 the three of you are going to run a 500 square foot salad shop and I think people thought it was cute and cool, but ultimately didn't think it was gonna be our full-time

1 (26m 25s):
job. Yeah, and so we graduate or building the restaurant. And it was a really weird time because all of a sudden all your friends leave. Yeah, everyone leaves DC everyone graduates. Everyone goes home or goes goes on vacation and going on to their jobs and we were just there. Yeah, and the three of us were living together then like actually living together and building this thing and I remember my brother came and lived with us to help us and he helped us with construction and we were all doing everything. Yeah. We're just on site every day doing whatever we could. All right summer of 2007 you building this thing out. It's hot. It's Washington DC in the summer.

1 (27m 6s):
And finally you're ready to open. I think it opens on August 1st. 2007 August 1st, 2007. And you the three of you are the only employees or did you hire said a few other employees? We're going to help you. We're going to make help make this out. So so back up a little bit. So a few days before Opening Our focus is just get the restaurant ready right the menu the construction get it ready and we were really excited for this big opening party. We start hiring employees. Okay, and we're like, let's just go get George young kids to be employees sure, which we thought was a great idea. So kids show up they show up to our apartment for training and we decided we're gonna have a big opening party. And so we invited lots of friends family.

1 (27m 46s):
We have this big party. Okay, so we're all hustling to get this restaurant ready in time for the opening and it was the day before we were supposed to open and we're running back and forth from that restaurant getting ready. And we had left the door open or unlocked of our office of our office / apartment, which was across the street. Okay, and we had left the door unlocked. We come back and someone had robbed the apartment and one of the things they had taken was Nick's laptop. Wow, which had everything on it? It had all of the recipes all the training everything we were going to do to run this restaurant was all of a sudden gone and this is the days before the cloud.

1 (28m 28s):
So there's nothing backed up. Up in the cloud. This is like on your hard drive on your computer. So we're just like, holy shit. Wow, we gonna do.

3 (28m 38s):
Yeah. It was one of those stay up all night and figure it out moments and you know, like John said, we'd invited all these people from around the country all of our families from New York and la la we're coming to DC for the opening of this thing. We had worked on all year and we knew we just had to figure it out. And so we stayed up all night looking through emails and look at trying to piece together, you know, everything we'd created and Somehow figured it out. You know, we actually remember the party started at 7 p.m. On the day before opening and we were still in there at 7:30 p.m. Like finalizing the recipes and we just got it done and all of our families pitched in. I remember Nate's dad was in the back making dressing and chopping onions. Your brother was running around buying stuff for us. It was kind of an all hands on deck

1 (29m 18s):
moment. So alright, so August 1st the restaurant opens and what was their line outside

3 (29m 24s):
there was a lion and we did we sold a lot of salads what we thought was a lot of salads on

1 (29m 29s):
the first day we I sold just over a hundred salads and then you're off to the races. Like was it kind of I mean, so we have been come back

3 (29m 37s):
and we opened August 1st, which is a few weeks before students come back. And so August, you know chugs along we're doing well we have, you know, growing a little bit every day and we're like, okay, we got this we know how to do this and we were bracing for this week. When all the students came back we knew that was going to be when our business really was going to be tested and I remember I think it was August 29th or August 30th or something. All the students had come back and this idea. You have hiring students to be our employees sounded like a great idea but once classes start and once all their friends are back it actually was a horrible idea because I'll never forget first day of classes. Every single employee called out. No one showed. Wow, so we had this this day imagine opening day one month in first day of classes the three of us in the restaurant and I think Nate Nate had just had surgery on his knee and you had stepped out for a moment.

3 (30m 25s):
So there's this moment on that first day of classes where I found myself alone I rest Want by myself with a line out the

1 (30m 32s):
door, by the way, I'm not assuming you're not profitable yet or was a cash flow like good enough to keep things going where you were where you could see like, okay this thread a thousand dollars that we raised. We're going to be fine for a while

3 (30m 47s):
the first couple months. We actually got to cash flow profitability pretty quickly. And then the first winter came and that's when things got really dicey and really challenged us to think about our

1 (30m 56s):
business up until the winter things were fine. People are

3 (30m 59s):
biased Adams came back. The line was out the door every day. We hired more employees non-student, please September was a great month October was a great month and then kids left on break. Yeah and the weather started to turn and our business really

1 (31m 12s):
changed and Alec how significantly it dropped by about seven almost 70%

3 (31m 19s):
Yeah after Thanksgiving, you know, there's there's finals and then I think around December 10th or 15 that one ones comes kids start to empty out, you know becomes a bit of a ghost town There's residents there, but So much of our business was the students. We were these seniors that's opened this business right out of college and so much of our customers were the

1 (31m 36s):
students and today almost half of our food is warm food at the time. It was all cold salads with zero seating. Yeah and very much student-driven. So as soon as the winter hit it just our business

2 (31m 49s):
just disappeared.

1 (31m 51s):
Were you working at the store every day double

3 (31m 53s):
shifts every day, you know, I think we in that winter realized we couldn't even afford to have as many employees. Thought we'd never manager and it came down to Counting pennies, you know, there were moments in that 1st December that first winter that we truly thought the business wouldn't survive. It forced us to think about how the business needed to evolve right for different customers in different weather patterns how the our restaurant itself needs to be different with seats are men you needed to evolve but there were some days in that 1st December we almost ran out of

1 (32m 20s):
money. So I mean I have to assume that what happened was the weather turned and see people start coming back. Is that what happened? Yeah, pretty much we got killed in that

2 (32m 30s):
winter, but we learned how to run our very lean

1 (32m 34s):
restaurant and build an operation. That

2 (32m 36s):
was very very lean and so could survive off of

1 (32m 39s):
making a few hundred dollars a day. And as soon as the weather started to get better in that time, we started to learn how to

2 (32m 44s):
Market we realized that there was this huge connection between Fitness and eating healthy. And so it was partnering with a lot of the Run clubs in the yoga studios. And anything that was you to handle that. Would you partner with them we hosted a run close. We would do like coupons and samples after yoga classes. You would show up at like yoga places and around EC. Yeah, and we would give them a little like, you know old school paper coupons and just like little

1 (33m 11s):
buy one get one campaign simple, like classical

2 (33m 14s):
promo stuff that worked that started to work. It was we realized very early on that. It was just like trial was so important. Especially For A New Concept. We just had to get the people to try it and then they would get hooked. So I think it was by the summer of 2008. You guys you guys had pretty much bounce back and not only that you were even thinking about opening a second restaurant. Is that is it right? Yeah, you know when we first when we started

1 (33m 39s):
the first restaurant, it was really just one. Let's do one restaurant for ourselves. But after we started doing all the research and kind of peeling the onion back on the industry, we realize that this problem that we were having in our lives was a major major problem. There is no healthy place to eat and the fast food brand of Our Generation was or the generation before Us was McDonald's and it just didn't make sense that there was no brand to replace that and so very quickly out about a year and we started to think about all right, this can be bigger. So this early 2009 but just as an aside, I mean you are from Allah and Nicholas you are from New York. Obviously, we're students in DC and students at Georgetown.

1 (34m 21s):
So I'm assuming that's why you started there. But I mean, was there any advantage to starting in Washington DC because it's not really certainly that time certainly not known as An entrepreneurial City and he had AOL and but right yeah, we were so lucky that we started there. We got to make a lot of mistakes and the sweet green of that. We started in DC would not have been successful in New York or La we needed a lot and just crushed my have been crushed by the competition but it gave us we were there. We were DC only brand for over five years. Yeah, and it led us really Tinker with the model and almost get ready for going to these other cities. We got a lot of attention.

2 (34m 59s):
Can we

1 (34m 60s):
were kind of like a big fish in a small pond? Yeah, so I mean

3 (35m 3s):
fast forward a year. Georgetown is doing gangbusters is crushing it and line out the door every day. We figured out the model, you know the weather hit and we started to build our second sweet green. We raised about 750 grand for it and started to look for a space that was bigger with seats. We were going to maybe evolve the menu a bit and we actually opened it right at the largest farmers market in DC The Dupont Circle farmers market. So that was why we picked that site and you know, we'd started to get much deeper into the you know, the Armor Community, but the problem was that it was on the wrong side of the street.

1 (35m 34s):
So all the traffic and all the business was actually across the street.

3 (35m 37s):
So we opened this beautiful newly evolved sweet green with seats and this new menu and we thought it was going to do incredibly thought it was going to beat Georgetown by fifty percent, you know sales-wise and we open our doors they want and it's crickets.

2 (35m 54s):
When we come back how the Crickets went away and the crowd started to show up and later on how a major decision to Pivot popped it almost all of sweet greens leadership team to walk out the door stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR.

1 (36m 26s):
Support for this podcast and the following message come from the American Jewish World Service working together for more than 30 years to build a more just and Equitable World. Learn more at a jws dot-org. Thanks. Also to better help online counseling by licensed professional counselors specializing in isolation depression stress and anxiety visit better help.com built to learn more and get 10% off your first

2 (36m 55s):
month. Covid-19 has upended our lives shaken us from all sense of security when it comes to pandemics. We just are in this cycle of panic and complacency will see if this one puts an end to that. I'm a new summer Rody. How can we protect ourselves against future Global outbreaks that's on the TED Radio Hour from NPR subscribe or listen now. Hey, welcome back to how I built this guy rise. So it's the spring of 2009 and a brand-new sweet green has just opened in Dupont Circle in Washington DC. It's a great neighborhood.

2 (37m 36s):
Lots of little shops. Lots of people there's even a famous farmers market with farmers who could provide them with fresh food, but there's one major problem that new store is on the wrong side of the street the quiet empty side.

3 (37m 52s):
So we look across the street to see all these customers but none of them are on our side of the street. This is when it really hit us that we had to figure out how to connect with those customers and get them to come try our product. Right and so Nate at the time was a some DJing on the side and so went to Guitar Center bought a big speaker and a flip table put it out front and started his blasting music and try to create this energy around our store and would be sampling food outside and playing music and we invite all of our friends to come and it started to work. And on Sundays when the farmers market was, you know, there are thousands of people walking around that farmers market they would start to come over to speak right now. And so it started to work and we start to build this community around music and connecting people to the brand through

2 (38m 33s):
music in a short want to mention this Ramon. We're not going to We're not gonna have time to sort of get into the details of this part of the story because it could almost be its own episode. Basically. I mean you you eventually built like these sort of music events into a huge like full-fledged Annual Festival called The Sweet Life festival. I remember it because I used to live in Washington DC. Yeah, and I'm assuming you this was sort of like a part like a marketing thing for sweet green, but I mean it got huge like you got huge bands to play like like Phoenix and The Strokes and Vampire Weekend and Kendrick Lamar mean and and mounting a music festival is a is expensive.

2 (39m 14s):
I mean, just just pay the band. So how did you and respect? I don't know what we were doing. It makes zero. Anshel

1 (39m 20s):
sense the risk.

2 (39m 22s):
We took the first year, especially the fact that there was not much of a

1 (39m 26s):
business Foundation just in case it didn't work was kind of crazy, but it kind of felt similar to that first restaurant where we just knew that it was going to be

3 (39m 35s):
successful. You know, what are the ideas behind three green was that we felt like anytime you did find healthy food. It had kind of a branding problem. It was never the coolest experience with the coolest brand and we were so dead set on creating a brand that stood for more than just the food or the Action, we saw all these other brands out there that we connected with emotionally and stood for, you know, all these other emotions and we wanted sweet green to be a brand that people just wanted to be a part of and so music was one of those ways that we made that connection and to John's point. It wasn't on paper as a horrible idea, but it just felt right and it just worked it really separated our brand from the rest of these other fast-casual brands, but the cover of the Washington City paper, I'll never forget it the morning after The Strokes played.

3 (40m 17s):
We got the full cover with a photo with a headline that said Why did a salad company hire The Strokes question mark exactly what the hell are they doing? All right, so you pull this Festival off

1 (40m 26s):
and then this becomes a thing meantime, you guys are three of you. I mean you've got now really have to focus I have to assume on raising money. I know you got a very significant investment 22 million dollars Steve case founder of AOL. He's been on the show. He puts in a big investment into sweet green by that point when you raise that money was a pretty easy for you guys, too. Money not quite and it came from someone on Steve's team a guy named Evan Morgan and Evan Morgan reached out to us. We're sitting down. He's like I have this great idea. Let me franchise your business. And and you said we laughed in his face.

1 (41m 6s):
I said, no, we're not. Yeah, cuz why we're control freaks. Yeah. It's never been part of what we wanted

3 (41m 12s):
to do because you just can't control what we do and what we do

1 (41m 15s):
from a supply chain and scratch cooking perspective. We were just always scared of franchising our business and I've never done it. Okay, but he's looking at you and he's saying you guys are like 27 28 years old like franchises thing. Trust me. You're going to make so much money. It's a pretty convincing

3 (41m 31s):
argument. Yeah and Evans credit. He the reason he wanted a franchise because he saw you know, he bought into what we were doing. He believed that there needed to food option needed to exist a brand to own this next generation of leaders. And so through Evan. We got to know Steve and ultimately raise our First Institutional round from Revolution

1 (41m 49s):
and and Steve case can be an intimidating guy. I mean, he's a billionaire restart, AOL like he you know, he's in the room with you and he's like, okay, here's the money and this is my expectations. And I mean you had to been intimidated by that those conversations maybe you know him now a few years later, but then you know, yeah, I think we were you know, you have to remember this was 2013. So it's six years into our business. So

3 (42m 15s):
it we for six years. It was almost felt

1 (42m 17s):
like we were bootstrapping the business getting to this point. Just doing it with the three of us. We were always very scared of institutional Capital. We were scared of raising money from like VCR private Equity because that that's what it felt. Like I felt like we were going to maybe lose our soul or it was good. We're gonna say stop organic. Yeah exactly Monsanto Gail your whatever he was those fears of like we've always had this thing where we said from the beginning is how do we get bigger and get better have the food get better and we were very scared that bringing in All was going to force us to take shortcuts. It was going to force us to grow too fast. It was forces to lose control and in Steve and in all of our partners that we've brought on since then they know that What Makes Us special is that we're so protective of our culture and our product Steve understood that and he was more a partner in helping us accelerate that then trying to help but make us cut Corners.

1 (43m 16s):
So 22 million dollars in the bank meant that you You could really scale it up. Right assumably. That's why you were able to go to Philly and Boston and New York pretty soon

3 (43m 26s):
after yeah, and a lot of it was around growth and expansion to New Markets. A lot of it was you know Capital to actually build a real team to think about

1 (43m 33s):
scale. Yeah, and what Steve what that Capital allowed us to do was not plan for the next year but plan for the next three or five years and to build a team to start investing in technology and to really invest in our brand and platform in a way that created a sustainable Hannibal business when you really started to expand and grow. Yeah, I like in a Costco and you know half of the produce is organic. I walk into every store now sells organic this organic that and I start to wonder how is it really organic and sustainable? Is it really or is it just a different form of agribusiness? Like you guys were committed to local and organic and you want, you know these restaurants all over the country.

1 (44m 20s):
How are you going to do that? How are you going to and even today? How are you going to make it so it wasn't an aggregate an organic agribusiness

3 (44m 29s):
early on we realized as we started to scale the supply chain that things like local and organic were both really important to us. But even more importantly was this idea of like full transparency and being fully traceable. We wanted to make sure that we were showing our customers and giving them all the information and you know, I'll never forget. I think it was secret number four in Logan Circle was the first restaurant where we Up the source board the localist that lists every ingredient what farm they come from and at the time people asked us why we're putting that up. They thought we were crazy. They said No One's Gonna want to know that in fast food? No one needs to know where your chickpeas come from or where your lettuce is from they'll just trust it or customers were used to having a curtain between them and their food. Yeah, and we wanted to open that curtain and actually at the time we started also designing our restaurants to be fully open kitchen.

3 (45m 13s):
So really this idea of building transparency into our model from our supply chain to our physical experience to how we talked about our food. Ooh, and it really defined this next chapter for us of how we started to scale the supply chain and think about how we invest in our Farmers how we invest in making this a reality. All right. So you

1 (45m 31s):
you start to expand and I think by 2015 your you hit 40 locations, by the way, just in terms of I mean even with all this Capital coming in from Steve and from other investors, I have to assume that finding locations in those cities was still hard because you're even You got a lot of money Starbucks has a lot more and chipotle has a lot more and they want that location. They'll they can outbid

3 (45m 57s):
you, you know, as we started as the brand started to grow and we started get more press actually finding real estate was got a little easier people wanted you people want another they wanted like the Cool Young new brand with started to become a little challenging as as we started to go to cities like New York where rents were much higher. It starts really question the economic model I can we afford those rents how well will Sweet green do there and those are questions. We just didn't really know the answer to and opening our first Secret in New York was probably one of the most pivotal moments in our growth because New York is a completely different model, you know, we've learned so much around just the volume and scale and its really challenged our model in New York has been incredibly successful for us and we're so very fortunate there but it is it's taught us more about our business than almost any other Market.

1 (46m 43s):
I mean, there's a million choices in New York, right and there's so many Concepts that you see in New York from All over the world that seem great and then they just they somehow they died from some of you were so scared to go to New York because the competition and the level of Brands and how people show up there. We didn't think we were ready and it was a very opportunistic situation that led us to New York where one of our friends was helping develop The Nomad hotel and there was this one space next door that they wanted to bring something that was more of a fast food restaurant. Aunt but elevated fast food and they called us and they said hey, can you help us find someone

3 (47m 25s):
and we started thinking we were in about to

1 (47m 27s):
introduce him to a bunch of other

2 (47m 28s):
companies. And then I remember we looked at each other and were like, maybe this is our opportunity to go to New York

1 (47m 35s):
like this. It seems like this could be it but it also leading up to that. We rethought

2 (47m 41s):
sweet green. We redid the brand we read the menu where you introduce technology into the experience it that like challenge of going to this play. That we were so scared of Technology like a nap and yeah, you're not only introducing our app.

1 (47m 54s):
And and by the way when you were I know you guys were roommates and DC in 2014-2015. Were you still roommates? We still live in the same place.

3 (48m 4s):
Yes up until the last couple years. We either lived with each other or on the same street all three of you. Yeah, John and Nate shared a house in DC and in New York for a bit and then I always lived across the street with my brother normally, but

2 (48m 17s):
you all have your own places now, we're now we're All married and have our own place. I got you. Okay. All right fine.

1 (48m 23s):
All right, but did you think maybe you should have a compound for you all and your family. We're going to work our way back. Yeah, I

2 (48m 29s):
got you. So, um, I mean that this is the other thing like did you ever have any blowout fights? I mean, it's very unusual even in a weighted that we in the same room that we're all sitting in the founders of

1 (48m 41s):
offers. We had them and

2 (48m 42s):
you know, the founders and Method and a lot of Founders co-founders had went to

1 (48m 46s):
therapist and prefer coaches and people

2 (48m 49s):
to work. Three things which makes a lot of sense. Did you guys ever have like a coach or a therapist come and work with you or help you work through, you know,

3 (48m 57s):
we've definitely had coaches and folks that have helped us along the way and the other thing we realized early on was this is just a lot more fun with partners with people that are in in battle with you through the good times and bad and we always look at solo Founders and think how do you do this? This is so

2 (49m 11s):
hard honors your friends. Yeah. We're friends first no matter what the disagreement maybe at work. We remember that like there's that Foundation of love and trust and we always just remember we have the same vision. We really do have

1 (49m 27s):
shared like a shared value system in terms of

2 (49m 30s):
how we operate and make decisions.

3 (49m 33s):
And so any disagreements are

2 (49m 35s):
there usually the stupid things. I remember some of the biggest disagreements were about who should play Sweet Life festival. I don't know. It's one of our I think the greatest blessings in our life is that we really

3 (49m 46s):
we get along really well. I mean, it's the question the three of us get the most house Does this work and how are you still friends? And actually today we still sit in one office at one desk and like John said there's a lot of trust and we know that every single day one of us will be wrong about something and one of us will be right about something and we just know that over time it corrects itself and we trust each other.

1 (50m 4s):
All right. So 2016 you move to LA you move the headquarters to La there are obvious reasons why it's the California Agriculture Capital the United States and you want to be close to but what was your thinking what y all ha so it was a few reasons. The company was growing at that point. We had want to say like 50 or 40 or 50 restaurants. We had about 35 people working in our Support Center at the what we call the Treehouse but we started to think about the real long-term future of sweet green and it was a few things that we that one is what you talked about was being closer to our Farmers. Okay. The second was from a just the brand and conversation standpoint.

1 (50m 46s):
Well, it was cool being the The Outsider in DC we To be in the center of action where it went where people were talking about health and wellness and then the third was from like a talent perspective it started to get challenging recruiting people in our world to DC. And so we realized it was probably this point we had while the company was still relatively small to move to LA. But we wanted to bring the whole team with us. Mmm and gave everyone a really nice like offer to come move with us. And what was amazing, you know that I'm so proud of of that time is every single person came with us. Us all 35 people the time moved across the country and it was such an incredible cultural like bonding moment for all of us to pick up and start over in a new city together.

1 (51m 30s):
So here's here's what I'm interested in right, you know, the adage small business small problems big business big problems and just expanding isn't always a great idea. I mean Howard Schultz when he took went back to Starbucks in 2008 closed like 900 locations because they expanded too quickly Chipotle expanded too quickly. This was your strategy. This was your plan. When you moved to LA in 2016. It was let's build up more stores and more stores and more stores. Did you start to think about maybe this wasn't actually the way we should think about our business. Yeah, so we started to see the industry shift, you know, when we started sweet green people used to tell us, you know, you're lucky you're in food because it's the one thing that Amazon will never touch which is funny now because you know, yeah Donald's Whole Foods in there.

1 (52m 19s):
Sure, trying to tackle food, but it was it was the industry that was not hadn't been disrupted the way media had or travel hat or you name it? But clearly that was very clearly changing. What were you saying? You were starting to see delivery take off you're starting to see, you know online ordering take off. You're just starting to see how data could be used differently and operating a restaurant and you started to realize that just opening brick-and-mortar restaurants was not going to be

3 (52m 49s):
Book just

1 (52m 50s):
the nightmare for us was always thinking about Blockbuster. I heard that

3 (52m 55s):
was the way that we would also say that we would always say let's not get Block. Let's not get

1 (52m 59s):
blocked because Blockbuster obviously you in the 1980s. They

2 (53m 2s):
were they were they were

1 (53m 4s):
everything right and it was it was about going and get your videotape. But and they, you know, the story goes that they had an opportunity to buy Netflix and they didn't but what happened with Blockbusters, they didn't evolve and we kind of saw that

2 (53m 16s):
happening in our world. We saw that Restaurants were very much at risk to this disruption, even though we were ahead from a technology perspective. There was more we could do and there was so much more we had to do to stay in front of the

1 (53m 30s):
custom wasn't enough to just make a cool restaurant with great salads. No,

3 (53m 34s):
no. No, I think that was the thing that we noticed the most is that the customer was changing and how they defined convenience was changing. I mean, once we going first opened the our customers told us, wow, how convenient that I have a place now that I can walk two blocks away get wait in line for only 15 minutes and get Healthy Bowl fast forward five years. They're like, you know, I have to walk two blocks and wait 15 minutes to get a healthy bowl. And so this definition of convenience was it was a moving Target. And so we saw that our customers were demanding more and there's this experience have to become more frictionless.

2 (54m 5s):
Yeah. We just knew that the experience had to evolve in the world is changing. The question is always how fast

1 (54m 11s):
when does what you do become stale and we were always like we just have this constant fear of being disrupted and so So what we always have tried to do is disrupt ourselves. So someone else does not disrupt us. So here's where a pretty significant pivot takes place. Essentially. I from what I've read 2018 you decide we've got a really pivot or maybe or two thousand seven thousand Seventeen and the pivot just to make it really clear because we're talking about technology and what sort of more specifically what is the pivot mean? I mean, what does sweet cream 3.0 look like from a First perspective I go into the restaurant.

1 (54m 52s):
I order a salad. What how does that

3 (54m 54s):
change? So there's a few parts, you know, I think we've learned over the years that it still takes a certain amount of time to build these physical restaurants. And we're at a point where sometimes change is happening quicker than we can build these things. So we've learned how to build our restaurants with enough modularity and flexibility to think about future channels. So one of the biggest differences when we build sweet greens today is around capacity really thinking about delivery or Outpost or online. Ordering pickups Outpost Outpost is our newest channel that we've launched this past year year and a half and it's basically a pickup shelf system that's installed into offices or locations outside of

1 (55m 30s):
sweet green know you can order it. It goes. It's like an Amazon Locker exactly. So Partnerships with Office Buildings hospitals universities and you can pre-order your food. It's waiting for you on a shelf and the beauty is it's completely free for the customer. So you're not paying any sort of delivery fee and you have the convenience of delivery and you don't have to build a shop for it so you can Like a Central Kitchen in a city where the salads are made and then just deliver. I mean, we don't think the going and eating in-store experience is ever going away but people are craving convenience in addition to and there are certain occasions where people may want delivery or may want something direct to their office and brands have to evolve to that consumers expectation. All right, you have this idea in this plan and you had to raise money to make it happen because you're going to get to make a big technology investment and bring in like data engineers.

1 (56m 19s):
And so like if there's an article I think about you in ink and it was like this, you know, sweet green is a food company that's becoming a technology company or something like that and you went to your executive team and you present this plan and within a year, they all laughed with the exception of like the Chief Financial Officer, you all your senior leaders your president and the other Executives who had come with a lot of experience from the food industry. They

2 (56m 45s):
left presumably because they didn't buy into this idea, I think Like a

1 (56m 49s):
year ago snotlout that long ago we're talking about it was two years

2 (56m 53s):
ago two years ago. You basically your entire top level execs are gone. Yeah. It was one of the most challenging times in our history. They didn't see the world changing as fast as we did and what we saw required a lot more risk and a lot more time versus the path that we were wrong and probably slower gravity loads slower growth up front. It was the The Vision that we establish was. Let's slow down to speed up. We're going to slow down build a new model and then we're going to speed up and I think there was a lot of people here at their that we're less open to the change and it became it was a very challenging year for all of us.

2 (57m 35s):
It was way more risk and you have to

3 (57m 37s):
realize just to paint the picture, you know, 2015 and 16 or two of our best years ever and we could have very easily it would have been way easier to stay on that

2 (57m 44s):
path in the short-term. Keep going just

3 (57m 46s):
keep going and and then go public and maybe cash out and then maybe Something crashes, but the three of us always wanted to build three green to be around for fifty or a hundred years and we knew that if we didn't build it the right way that we were going to hit a wall at some

2 (57m 58s):
point. We could see around the corner that we were going off a cliff it felt like we were being blocked bustard. Okay now to be fair in

1 (58m 6s):
10 years from now or 20 years from now, you may be proven to be Geniuses with foresight and your model will be studied Business Schools. There's always a also possibility that maybe you're wrong because you're right in the middle of this pivot, right? And so I'm thinking I'm on your executive team and I have got 20 30 years of experience in the industry. I'm going to say guys the model. Is there The Playbook is there. Let's open up more restaurants. We're doing well. We're going to make more money. We open up open up open up we go public we're gonna be fine. I mean you even had this is public. I'm not I'm not talking a school here. You've had board members like Gary hirschberg who left the board because he was saying the same thing and I think you know at that time certainly and even now still Because the concept hasn't been proven.

1 (58m 51s):
They might have a point. Yeah, that's exactly right. We just saw things differently. We really saw things differently and that to Nix point. We want to build something for generations and we knew we had to not only change now but build a culture of being able to continually change and we felt like we were we were becoming one of those restaurants that just copy paste it and that's never what we wanted to build what we wanted to build with something that Constantly evolved when you went through this light when you announce this to the senior staff and then basically, you know, they start to leave which are situations where you actually saying the people, please don't just give us a chance stay or were you like?

1 (59m 32s):
Okay go little bit of both each one with its own situation. But I remember like the last one where we thought it couldn't get any worse. And I remember being in Boston. I was a Nick Nick and I and our assistant at the time JY and we're in the Boston airport after visiting all the stores in Boston and I get the you know, you get the From someone and it's always like the worst Texans is hey, can you talk big of the phone? And it's like, you know, Nick looks at my face. He's like another one and I'm like, yeah and then so the last person quits and then like 10 people. It was like eight people I think and then our flight is canceled and we're sitting in the Boston airport and we're just like, oh God.

1 (1h 0m 13s):
What are we gonna do? I mean, I'll be honest with you if my whole team from how I built this. Left over the course of six or eight months. I would start to doubt my own judgment. I would say what am I doing wrong on the one hand? I think that's a natural human response on the other hand takes a lot of resilience to withstand that and to forge ahead. But you know while the whole leadership team left not the whole team

2 (1h 0m 39s):
left and there were so many people that stayed with us

1 (1h 0m 44s):
and are still here with us and stepped up

2 (1h 0m 47s):
and it also gave us the opportunity.

1 (1h 0m 49s):
To bring in fresh blood with this, you know with this vision in mind and

2 (1h 0m 53s):
so at the time it was so painful but looking back it was such a blessing

1 (1h 0m 58s):
and to your point. We had

2 (1h 0m 59s):
all those thoughts, you know, we'd

3 (1h 1m 0s):
ask ourselves like hope so, what are we doing? You know, the first person leaves are like, okay fine the second the third by V R6, you know, the three of us are looking at each other saying like or what are we doing the right thing here and again back to the point of like having two co-founders having them here just like the three of us together reassuring each other if we were any of us doing this by ourselves. I'm not Sure, we would have done the same

2 (1h 1m 20s):
thing. Yeah, and and today you're still convinced that this emphasis on Tech and other ways of getting sweet green to customers is the right way to go a hundred percent. Yeah more sure than ever and but we'll see but you'll see right because it hasn't it's gonna take time. So they have you had we're

3 (1h 1m 36s):
not going to get it. All right, they're going to be and there are parts of this that we are wrong and we learn and we iterate and you know, we open new versions of Sweet green that have parts of it that don't work and that's part of the journey is the failures that that was very

2 (1h 1m 46s):
much part of it was going from a place of We have this one thing that works. Let's just keep doing it to Let's create a culture of where it's safe to fail and okay to try things and some will work and some won't and outpost for

1 (1h 2m 2s):
example is one of those things that was a little

2 (1h 2m 4s):
trial that now has almost a thousand Outpost in less than a year. We want a culture and a company that continues to innovate and evolve and not that just does the

1 (1h 2m 16s):
same thing because of the companies that we look around the world the ones that admire are not doing the same thing that they were 10 years ago or 20 years ago. They're continuing to evolve. How big do you want this to be? I mean, do you want this to be a Starbucks? I think is the biggest food chain of the world after McDonald's maybe Subway. I don't know. I mean, do you want to be that big do you want people, you know going to Sweet greens all around the world can even do that. I mean, we want to have a really big impact. We want to create a global iconic enduring brand that changes people. Relationship with food and changes and has an impact on a sustainable impact on the future of food.

1 (1h 2m 56s):
But what I like to think about a lot is what if every McDonald's was a sweet green how would agriculture be different how would the environment be different? How would the health People's Health be different and that's what gets me really excited and whatever number of restaurants that is like, let's just keep going and what we've always said is go as far as you can see once you get there you'll be able to see further. How much do you think the success of this business has to do with your your intelligence and skill and how much is because of luck in your view Nicholas?

3 (1h 3m 28s):
You know, I think luck plays a big part in any success and I think there's good luck and there's bad luck and we've had multitudes of both. I believe it's what you do with that. Look how you either double down on the good luck and use that as momentum or try to fight off the bad luck and not let it sink you and so much of our success has been about the grit, you know, the decisions you make every day the work that goes in You know, I credit our partnership a lot to how we've gotten through this together. But so much of it is what you do with that look and how you actually capitalize on it

1 (1h 3m 57s):
Jonathan. When you reflect on the whole Arc of these last 13 and a half years. I mean, it's so much luck buying into this the fact that I walked into Georgetown and met Nick the first day the fact that the opportunity to go to Georgetown in the first place. There's so many things that were lucky breaks for us, but to next point it was and then using that momentum when we were lucky and also having the resilience for all of those times that we almost failed because in this 13 years, it's just like being able to survive to live another day to get another chance for a lucky

2 (1h 4m 34s):
shot. That's Jonathan demon and Nicholas Jamaica Founders along with Nathaniel root of sweet cream. Now, normally this would be the end of the show, but of course we are not living in normal times,

1 (1h 4m 48s):
so

2 (1h 4m 49s):
A few days ago about a month after we recorded this interview. I called up Nick and Jonathan to ask them about how their business is going right now since the pandemic hit

1 (1h 4m 59s):
first of all before we start. Where are you right now Nicholas, where are you? So I'm sitting in the guest bedroom

3 (1h 5m 5s):
of my home in Venice, which is become my makeshift

1 (1h 5m 8s):
office in California and Jonathan. Were you

2 (1h 5m 12s):
I'm also at home. I'm at my home in West Hollywood Los Angeles also in a guest bedroom turned make Shift office where I'm spending all of my time

1 (1h 5m 22s):
now, yeah, so obviously so much has changed since our interview just a few weeks ago. Tell me the situation with sweet green. I mean have you have to imagine you've had to First at the very least furlough employees or and shut down stores? What what's going

2 (1h 5m 37s):
on? So we've had to shift the way we operate all of our restaurants. So all of our dining rooms have been closed all of our front lines have been closed and we've shifted to a digital only operation. So we take orders via pickup, which is done contact list as well as contact list delivery on our app and through a few marketplaces because of the where our restaurants are physically located our businesses, especially just we're being Impacted in a very very dramatic

1 (1h 6m 11s):
way. So in our interview that we did a couple weeks ago. One of the really most fascinating things about that interview was your your sword discussion about your pivot this idea of people could pick up their salads and lockers and Order digitally and to be a whole kind of new ecosystem around it can that I mean right now in the current environment can that still work in that still

2 (1h 6m 36s):
operate? So as the whole world move to work from home our Outpost business completely disappeared overnight. It was a large part of our business and the fastest growing part of our business and so it is so it would literally overnight disappeared but we were able to do was redirect all of our Outpost capability and Logistics towards the people on the front line. So specifically we were able to redirect and set up Outpost at over 100 hospitals around the country. We started by funding them ourselves. then just recently we partnered with Jose Andres and is world's World Central Kitchen wow to raise additional funds for that so far we funded over a hundred thousand meals for these hospitals and we're just getting

1 (1h 7m 21s):
started here and your and those are you're giving those away and you're not yeah we're

2 (1h 7m 25s):
giving the food away we're giving the bowls completely free to people on the front line when we announced it we got 10,000 hospitals reached out for to be part of the program so the just the response was overwhelming and it I think you just made us realize that these during these times while you want to save your business and you know that's important it's first take care of your own people but then figure out how you can use your company for the greater good of the community yeah

3 (1h 7m 55s):
and I think you know for 13 years we've been talking about why we started sweet green and our cultures and values and how we show up every day and to be honest they haven't really been tested to an extreme till this moment right and we've had some challenging moments The thirteen years and we've always been super proud of how we've used those values. But to be honest, it hasn't been since this past month that we really taken stock and said this is when they really get

1 (1h 8m 16s):
tested and Jonathan. I know that you and Nick and your third co founder Nathaniel recently met face-to-face socially distance. What was that conversation? Like, what did you guys talk

2 (1h 8m 28s):
about? You know we sat around and we told ourselves we can't think about rebuilding our business The Way We Were building it before. And honestly, it felt like we were sitting back in our dorm room at Georgetown and we literally took a whiteboard out and the question was if we were starting sweet green today,

3 (1h 8m 48s):
what would we build?

2 (1h 8m 49s):
Let's go do that right now instead of just going back to our old plans or we need to be proactive around this and start to plan for this the rebound and and The New Normal and so we know we've always believed that with crisis comes opportunity and this is a crisis like none of us. Ever imagined or any of us have ever experienced but with this will come opportunity. And so we've really tried to think about how we can use this time to invest in the business and to come out stronger than we went into it John Nick. Thanks for the update guys, and we're wishing you a lot of luck and sending you good energy and we hope that sweet green will get through this and and stronger than ever and that go have a salad, you know pretty soon.

2 (1h 9m 41s):
Thank you guy. And thanks to all of you for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. You can also write to us, uh, maybe T and npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this our show is produced this week by Casey Herrmann with music composed by R Mt. Narrow Bluey. Thanks also to Julia Carney Candace limb Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. Our intern is rainy toll I'm guy Roz and even listening to how I built this

1 (1h 10m 20s):
this is

3 (1h 10m 21s):
NPR.