0 (0s):
Hey Prime members. You can listen to how I built this early and ad free on Amazon Music. Download the app today.

Life Kit - NPR (9s):
New Year's is here, and with it brings the possibility of change as one behavioral scientist put it. Fresh starts are really powerful. So as you head into 2023, life Kit is a great resource to help you plan your life and tackle changes both big and small. Listen to the Life Kit podcast from npr.

3 (29s):
I can remember the beauty editor from Vogue came up to me and said, what is this? And who are you? Yeah. And I was like, I'm Maureen Kelly, and this is Tart. And she's like, okay, so you're not a celebrity makeup artist of this, and you're not an Hess, you're a nobody. I was like, okay. Enough with everybody telling me,

2 (46s):
Mama, nobody,

0 (54s):
Welcome to how I built this. A show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealist, and the stories behind the movements they built. I'm Guy Ross, and on the show today how one woman conquered the cosmetics industry without experience, connections, funding, or even a way to sell her homegrown products, turning her company Tart Cosmetics into a billion dollar brand. One of the reasons I love stories about cosmetics so much isn't because I have a natural interest in them. To be honest, I don't. But over the years, I've become really interested in business stories about cosmetics for one simple reason.

0 (1m 38s):
And the reason is there are so many lessons to be learned about business in cosmetics, how to market, how to sell, how to manufacture, how to bootstrap, how to grow slowly and intentionally. I could go on and on. And today's story is a great example of this thesis because even if you've never heard of Tart Cosmetics, this episode is a masterclass in things like getting your foot in the door and how to come up with a product that gets people's attention, and most importantly, had a weather crisis. For those of you who may or may not know, Tark Cosmetics is among the bestselling makeup brands in the United States. They make everything from concealers and mascara's to lipsticks and skin creams.

0 (2m 23s):
And the company was founded by a woman without any experience or connections in the industry. Maureen Kelly was actually pursuing a career in clinical psychology. In fact, when she founded Tart in 1999, Maureen was still a PhD student at Columbia University. She had already completed most of her coursework, but it was through studying psychology that Maureen got intrigued by consumer behavior, and that's where she started to think about maybe starting a business. And it was her husband, mark, who really encouraged her to go for it. Maureen had always been interested in makeup and makeup. She soon discovered was something she could dip her toe into without a lot of startup cash.

0 (3m 5s):
And the key, at least for Maureen, was coming up with a product so unique it could get the attention of the influential boutiques and retailers in New York City. But within two years of launching Tart a life-changing tragedy, almost derailed the whole company, which we'll get to for now. What you need to know about Maureen Kelly is that she grew up in a middle class home in Rockland County in New York. Her dad was a judge, and her mom, who was an Irish immigrant, was involved in local politics.

3 (3m 36s):
My mom growing up in Ireland, it definitely shaped who she was and I think as a result shaped us, especially the girls because, you know, she wasn't allowed to play any sports or do boy things like girls and boys had very different rules in Ireland. And so she said, you know, when she had girls, she would make sure that they could do everything, you know, and that they could be anything they wanted. And so that's kind of what she always, you know, said to my sisters and I, there's three girls and two boys, and she was like, you guys can do anything. You can be anything. And you know, she was just always talking about girl power, girl power, you know? And I feel like that's such a big thing for me now. And you know, I just, I guess I didn't think about the fact that my mom shaped that, you know, because of the fact that she couldn't have that.

0 (4m 23s):
How, how, what were you, how would you describe yourself as a student in high school?

3 (4m 28s):
I would say that I did well in the classes I was interested in and not well in the classes that I was not interested in. I am told that I have a d d I was never diagnosed as that. I think back in my time that like wasn't such a big thing. So I think that that kind of makes sense, right? With, you know, a d d, you have that hyper-focus right. On stuff that you're interested in. So I feel like I was like classic with that.

0 (4m 53s):
You went to a a state university in York? I did. And, and Binghamton. Right. And and when you got there, what'd you think you wanted to do?

3 (5m 2s):
I didn't know. I'll be honest, my sister went there first. So my, my one sister went to Georgetown, my other sister went to Cornell and then my older sister went to Binghamton and they visited her and classic met a boy at a party and was like, okay, I'm just gonna go there. And of course I got there and I was like, Hey, it's me. And he was like, who are you? I don't even know who you are. Yeah, I don't even remember you. And of course I was crushed, but it was a very good early lesson. And then, yeah, and then I was up in Binghamton where it was really, really cold for a couple years, but I finished college quick. I actually did college in two and a half years. And so I graduated and my sister was early older, sister was already living in the city, gonna law school

0 (5m 42s):
In New York.

3 (5m 44s):
I was like, okay, Veronica, I'm not moving home. I'm moving in with you and I'll just sleep on your futon. And I did. So I moved to New York City and crashed on her futon. I got a bartending job and I applied to grad school.

0 (5m 57s):
This is in the early nineties, I think. Right? 92, 93 time period.

3 (6m 0s):
Yes, yes. I was really interested in psychology. Something that's like always fascinated me and still does, you know, it just, you know, like why people think the way they do and what motivates them. Yeah. You know, and then consumer psychology obviously is fascinating. So I went for my master's degree in that while I bartended.

0 (6m 20s):
And, and while you were working on this degree, you started to have doubts about whether you wanted to pursue it?

3 (6m 26s):
I did. You know, I love psychology, but I just wasn't sure, you know, part of our job, you know, or requirements as a graduate student was counseling the undergrads at Columbia. And so I would be sitting, you know, counseling them, listening, you know, doing sessions with them one-on-one. And I would find myself, you know, drifting off thinking I've had different things and you know, that's the exact wrong thing to be doing when you're sitting with a therapist or a counselor. And I'd be thinking, then I, you know, click myself back in and, you know, give some advice or feedback and, you know, reiterate what they were saying.

3 (7m 7s):
So they reco, you know, recognize that I was listening to them, but I was thinking, gosh, I do not wanna do this with my life. I don't wanna do this, but I'm really far down this path. So like,

0 (7m 20s):
So maybe this is what I should do

3 (7m 22s):
What you have to do. And I think that happens to a lot of people. You get really far down a path, you know, and you just feel like I'm trapped. And I did feel like that. I felt like that. And I talked to my parents and they were like, Maureen, you're all over the place. You have to just finish this. This is just get your pH, just get your PhD, finish your dissertation, and then you can decide what you wanna do.

0 (7m 44s):
Hmm. And, and meanwhile, while you, while you were a grad student in New York, you, you met the guy who you would eventually marry. And I think in 1998, mark Luen, who, who would've a huge impact on your career and your decisions. How, how did you, how'd the two of you meet?

3 (8m 2s):
I met him in a bar on the Upper East Side. He was, he was a rugby playing investment banker. And he had just come from like a, a rugby game, I think at like the New York Athletic Club. And he and his friends just came into the bar and started talking to my friends and I, and we

0 (8m 21s):
Were kind of, he was roughly your age, sort of late twenties?

3 (8m 23s):
Yes. Yes. A couple years older at the time, but yes, roughly my age.

0 (8m 27s):
And he was, he was working in the ci in the, in the city. He was in finance.

3 (8m 31s):
He was, he was in finance at the World Trade Center and he just, one of those guys that lights up a room could talk to like CEOs and janitors alike, you know, just made everybody feel like really special. Just a really warm guy. He was 6, 6 3, 230 pounds. A funny, just very kind. Just a really, really kind person.

0 (8m 53s):
And did you guys eventually move in, in together?

3 (8m 56s):
We did. We moved in together when I was living with my sister. We had moved out of that, that studio apartment when she was gonna law school. And we got like a two bedroom, five floor walkup on the upper East side, but there was like some kind of an animal in the wall that died, started smelling really bad. So I was like, okay, peace out. I'm moving across town with Mark. And she was like, what? And she was like, I'm telling mom and dad. I was like, don't you dare. And she told my parents and they were not happy with

0 (9m 22s):
Me. They weren't happy that you were moving in with him cuz you guys were very,

3 (9m 25s):
At that age We weren't married yet. No. My parents are very traditional, so I was like, I'll just stay in a diff a different, you know, bedroom. Of course my parents believed that. Yeah. And then we actually wound up moving down to Stuyvesant Town. It's this like really cool rent controlled development.

0 (9m 42s):
Yeah. Massive, massive,

3 (9m 43s):
Massive

0 (9m 44s):
Building. Massive, yes. Yeah. And, and so, alright, so you have this boyfriend Mark. Yes. And you are, but for, you know, many years, several years you were doing this degree, he was working as an investment banker and Yes. And it was clear to you that you guys would eventually get married at some point?

3 (10m 2s):
It was clear to me, but you know, I was young for sure. He was a couple, three years older than me, but he even, he proposed and we got married and yeah. So he was really, really, really supportive of me. And he just, I just, you know, he said, you always talked about doing something on your own. You've always wanted to start your own company and you've been, you know, for lack of a better word, K kind of afraid, you know? Yeah. Because

0 (10m 31s):
I think But you didn't know what, you didn't know specifically what that

3 (10m 34s):
I didn't know exactly, but like in my heart, I really wanted to start a makeup company, but I knew that my parents wouldn't think that that was like reputable enough, you know, since I was a little girl, you know, I'd always like play with my mom's makeup and, you know, she was beautiful and I would, you know, make my own like, you know, cheek stain and like the bathtub with like shaving cream and like, you know, cough syrup or like chalk or whatever he had. And I would take like lipstick and put it on my sisters and like their haja dolls and it was something I always loved. Right. And my mom used to like, you know, make us to do these egg weight masks and homemade candles and face masks and things like that.

3 (11m 13s):
And soaps, my sisters and I had like, you know, acne, a pimple. She would like, you know, mix like turmeric or an alovera and like, you know,

0 (11m 22s):
Like home remedies. Yeah, yeah.

3 (11m 24s):
And so it was just something that I always did and loved. But to her, that wasn't like a job, you know,

0 (11m 30s):
You were, you liked cosmetics, you like make, I guess I even read that like you would give friend, like you'd make lip gloss for friends.

3 (11m 37s):
I did

0 (11m 37s):
For like holiday presents

3 (11m 39s):
I did. And I was

0 (11m 39s):
How do you make, how do you make lip gloss? It's like, like petroleum jelly and, and I don't know what, what do you, how do you make

3 (11m 46s):
It? Yeah, we don't actually put petrol on him in any of our lip products cuz it's a byproduct

0 (11m 50s):
Of, but how would you make it for friends? Would you I

3 (11m 52s):
Would use beeswax back then. Oh,

0 (11m 54s):
I gotcha. Okay. Yes. You'd melt beeswax into like the little container

3 (11m 58s):
With Yes. Into like little

0 (11m 59s):
Jars. Some, some like, like, I don't know, extracts of different or

3 (12m 5s):
Exactly. And then I'd put vanilla in to make it taste good. So, and my friends would love it, you know, and it was never anything like, oh I'm gonna start a business doing this. But it was just something that I, you know, that I always love and I always did. And it's funny, my best friend said, you know, that was in my PhD program at Columbia. She said, I remember you Maureen. She said, I remember having like a Steeler eyeshadow palette and you like prying the eyeshadow pan from the paper compact. And her saying like, what are you doing? Like, and me saying like, I just wanna see how this is made. And she was like, wait, we have neuroscience to do, like stop it. Like stop playing around. You know? So it was just always something I was like really interested in.

0 (12m 47s):
But, but you had this interest in makeup and cosmetics cuz you liked wearing it. I mean you liked, I mean you liked trying different brands out you liked.

3 (12m 56s):
I did. And I felt like, you know, when I'd go to the makeup counter and I'd get my makeup done in New York, I would look great like so many of us do. But I'd get home and I'd be really frustrated because I'd flip over the box and it would be filled with synthetic like ingredients. I could literally not even pronounced, cuz remember this is 1999, right? I mean everything was like formulated with like all the bad stuff. And so I was like, I don't know, I just, I wasn't a business person and I'd never created like a business plan in my life or had never done an Excel spreadsheet. But, you know, I had this like vision board that I was like slowly and surely creating of like all of these like cutouts and tear outs from like magazines and things like that.

3 (13m 38s):
And I just wanted to create this like makeup line Sure. Of like makeup that was like filled without the bad stuff. Like the parabens or petrolatum or, you know, make it cruelty free because you know, my mom grew up in Ireland on a farm. And so we had rabbits and dogs and snakes and all the things I can imagine like testing on animals. I wanted it to be mostly vegan and then, you know, filled with like lots of good for you ingredients. But that was really hard.

0 (14m 7s):
But there, I mean there's a difference between having a a, an idea and saying, God, what if we could make a makeup brand that did this and this and cool packaging and Yeah. And, and I wanna do that. There's a difference between saying that and actually the leap to do that is quite large. Right. And there's a lot that has to happen.

3 (14m 25s):
There is

0 (14m 26s):
Including like understanding the, the landscape and, and understanding how, how to make makeup and where it gets manufactured and how to finance it. What, what did you do? How did you first start to learn about the industry? What, I mean, there are lots of things you had to know Yeah. Before you could actually hit the button. So where did you start?

3 (14m 44s):
Well, I opened the yellow pages to find suppliers and I just started making calls, call after call. And guess what, nobody called me back. Shocker.

0 (14m 54s):
These are companies that, that make cosmetics or that actually make the packaging or both. Or

3 (15m 0s):
They make the cosmetics. Yeah. And I just started calling these labs and no one was calling me back because I was a nobody. Remember there was no social media back then? No. Facebook, no. Yeah, TikTok, no Instagram. And so then what did I do? I just got in my car and I drove across toward Washington Bridge and I started going to the suppliers, the, the labs and sitting in the waiting room.

0 (15m 23s):
Yep. Are there labs in in New Jersey or New York?

3 (15m 27s):
Oh yeah, for sure. Yeah. Florida, New Jersey. New York. You know Italy of course. Like all over the, all over the world, but absolutely there are in, in New York,

0 (15m 38s):
New Jersey. And how did you get a foot in the door to any of them? How did you get a meeting to find out? I mean, you were, you're, you were a a nobody, I

3 (15m 45s):
Mean not, I was a nobody exactly. As so many people told me that I was a nobody. You

0 (15m 49s):
Had no experience. You had no, you weren't even in business. Yes. So how did you even get a, like what were, what was your ask was your ask, Hey, I wanna find out more about this, or I have an idea to make a product line

3 (16m 1s):
Or Yeah, at that point I just said I am starting a company because then I feel like you have to commit to those people. Of course. Like behind the scenes in my apartment. Yeah. I was like, oh my gosh, what am I doing? This is a crazy idea. But with the labs, I would say, you know, to the receptionist, I'm Maureen Kelly, I left a message for your head chemist, you know, I haven't heard back. So, you know, I was in the area at another meeting and so I figured I would pop by, you know, just kind of Yep. Smoking and joking a little bit I guess. And so, yeah, eventually, and most of them were like, most of them were like, they're not available for a meeting. But you know, a couple of them came out and I had meetings with them and I shared my vision

0 (16m 46s):
And what would you ask?

3 (16m 47s):
I just said, I'm starting a company, a makeup company that is familiar with parabens and I want it to be cruelty free. I want it to be infused with, you know, all of these good for you ingredients and keep out the bad

0 (17m 0s):
Stuff. And you said you wanted to make what, like a concealer and blush and eye shadow mascara and lipstick

3 (17m 6s):
And Exactly. And they laughed at me. They laughed at me cuz they said, listen, if customers wanted that, the big guys would've done it. Lauder or L'Oreal would've done it. Customers don't care about parabens being in products. Cuz remember this, only parabens only came out of things like a handful of years ago. Customers don't care about cruelty free. This is 1999. Right. So, you know, no thanks. But I did find one chemist who thought I was crazy, but he was like, I don't agree with you, but you know, we kind of take on one charity case like, you know, every year or so. And you know what, I'll do it for you. And I was

0 (17m 42s):
Like, where was this chemist based

3 (17m 43s):
In New Jersey?

0 (17m 45s):
Yep. And, and this is, and this is a, a manufacturing facility that made cosmetics for a bunch of different brands.

3 (17m 51s):
They did for big brands actually. So, you know, they're very established and so they could take a risk on like a small little thing might like me, I was like a pet project, you know.

0 (18m 0s):
Alright. So you, you meet this and by the way, what, what's, do you remember the name of this guy? This scientist? Russ.

3 (18m 8s):
Russ,

0 (18m 8s):
Yes. Okay. And, and Russ says, yeah, okay, I can, I can probably make something for you. And was it that gonna be expensive to do or was it how, like how much was it gonna cost you to have him make just a prototype of, of a few, you know, products? It

3 (18m 24s):
Wasn't crazy expensive because he knew that I didn't have a lot of money. That was the other thing. So either you're a celebrity or you're like an heiress making a makeup line. Yeah. And so he knew I didn't have a ton of money and so it wasn't crazy expensive. The other thing is I couldn't afford to have them usually, you know, now when we have makeup made, they put it in the package, they pack it out, they put it in the box, everything. And like I wasn't having them do any of that.

0 (18m 53s):
You had to get it like loose Yes. In bags or whatever. And then you would, and by the way, I'm, cuz he was gonna do this, this cheek stand,

3 (19m 1s):
This kind of bright and then pressed eyeshadow. And I also did a press blush.

0 (19m 7s):
So, so just, I'm just like thinking logistically the, the cheek stand. I can, cuz it's like a gel. So I can see how you would package that. But he was gonna give you like,

3 (19m 16s):
Like literally pans of eyeshadow and pans of blush. And then I got the packaging separately and then I had pizza and wine parties cuz I couldn't afford the lab to, you know, press the, the tins the makeup in the actual packaging. And so my friends and my family like basically did it till their fingers, like had blisters on it

0 (19m 41s):
When, and so it wasn't gonna be that expensive for you to do that. You could, you basically, with your income you could. I did. You could get this made and how, how much?

3 (19m 49s):
No, mark and I had $20,000 in savings. Right. And, and then I put the rest on credit cards.

0 (19m 55s):
Yeah. Do you remember like while they, they this lab said, okay, yeah, we'll make this for you. And were you, were you going back and forth to sort of help them fine tune it?

3 (20m 6s):
Oh yeah, for sure. Yeah, absolutely. I was like, okay, this isn't soft enough. It's not silky enough. You know, just, I, I love this color. I don't love that color. So yeah, just giving them lots of feedback is just a non makeup artist, regular, regular girl.

0 (20m 22s):
All right. So you're, you're kind of working on this, this prototype and, and meantime, I mean it's one thing to, you know, to say, hey, to go to a lab and say, hey, here are the ingredients I want you to use and I want these three things. And then it's another thing to create a brand out of it, right? Yes. So let's talk about, about that side. What the name tart was that the name you came up with from the beginning?

3 (20m 46s):
I had a, a different name. It was called Plume. And then I second guessed myself and I switched to Tart, which, you know, tart is like a, hel is a treat. It's like something yummy. Yeah. And I just felt like I wanted this line to be like a healthy treat for your skin. Yeah. I will say it became a little problematic later on.

0 (21m 7s):
Well, yeah. I'm curious cuz your mom was from Ireland and in Ireland and in the UK that word means something very

3 (21m 13s):
Different. Yes. Oh my goodness. I definitely didn't think it through.

0 (21m 15s):
What did your mom say when you said it's called Tart

3 (21m 18s):
Cosmetics? Well, my mom went on T A R t.com and you can imagine what was on there. It was not good. She like screamed I think. And then I was told eventually that I would never be able to launch in France and England specifically because of the name. And luckily we're a top brand in both now. But yeah, you know, I, I just, I didn't think of it that way.

0 (21m 42s):
Yeah. And and you spelled it with an e t a R t e personally cuz it was, was that a domain name that you could get?

3 (21m 48s):
Yes, exactly. Well no, actually I had tart cosmetics.com. This is how Not Savvy I was as a business person back then. T a r t e.com was taken by a guy like Scott Tardy, his name was. And many years later he sold it to me, which was very, very kind of him. But I didn't launch the website for actually for years. Right. If you think back then I feel like.com sales, like

0 (22m 14s):
Yeah. Weren't, it wasn't really a thing.

3 (22m 16s):
Big thing. Yeah. But you know, you were asking me about like my first product and my cheek stain was, you know, was definitely it. And you know, when I was asking him to put in all of these like ingredients, they definitely thought it was crazy.

0 (22m 31s):
And once that you got the, the order from this lab, right. And you've got thousands of pieces of, of makeup. I keep calling 'em pieces, I don't know if

3 (22m 41s):
That's right.

0 (22m 41s):
Yeah, for sure. Basically

3 (22m 42s):
Compacts or pieces. Yeah, exactly.

0 (22m 44s):
And then you, you had to package them. Where, by the way, where did you get the packaging

3 (22m 49s):
From? So I got the packaging from a pack a, a packaging company that I found and talked them into doing this amazing lavender fabric packaging. No one in the industry had ever done it. We were the first ever, I look back, I wish I patented that, but I was not business

0 (23m 8s):
Savvy Fabric. Like a, like a, I'm thinking of for example, like a, I don't know, a lipstick case. Yes. Or mascara. Like mascara comes in a, a brush. Yeah. So the right, the the, the tube was fabric,

3 (23m 21s):
Like outside of it, the fabric. So like our lights camera Lash is mascara to this day, has the fabric around the outside of it. And no one had done that.

0 (23m 29s):
And was your name brand on there too? Yes. Printed on there.

3 (23m 33s):
Tart. Tart was on there.

0 (23m 34s):
And did you design the logo?

3 (23m 36s):
It was Century Gothic font from the computer. And it still is the same font to this day. Yeah. All these years

0 (23m 44s):
Later. Yeah. And that was, it. It it just said tart on

3 (23m 46s):
It. It was super simple. Yeah. Yeah.

0 (23m 49s):
And alright, so you are, you've got now probably 50 foot, 40, $50,000 worth of product in that apartment that you paid for.

3 (23m 59s):
Yes. And you can't move. Yeah. I mean it's boxes everywhere. I mean, I remember my friend came over, she was pregnant, she had to turn sideways to like Yeah. Get to the

0 (24m 9s):
Bathroom. And and what did Mark and Mark was supportive of all

3 (24m 12s):
This? He was, I mean he was like, this is so crazy. But you know, he was such a good guy. He was definitely supportive of it. And you know, you can't be half pregnant. We were, I was already like too far down the path. Yeah. So then I felt like, woo, I'm a legit, I have a company here. But I also realized, okay, I have to be able to sell it somewhere so you

0 (24m 29s):
Can sell it. Yes, yes. Yeah. I mean, I mean this is like today. I guess you could start at like a farmer's market or there

3 (24m 35s):
Are tons of

0 (24m 36s):
Boutiques that you could go to online. What was your game plan? Did you think you would go to like small, little independent boutiques and see if they would carry it?

3 (24m 44s):
No. So Sephora wasn't even in the United States yet at

0 (24m 48s):
That point. But I mean like mom and pop boutiques, that's what I'm talking about. Yeah, yeah, for sure. Was that what you

3 (24m 51s):
Were thinking? For sure. I was thinking, you know, I was in New York so I thought like, I'm gonna try and get it into Beals or Barneys or, or burglars. Wow. Like the three bees in my mind. Yeah,

0 (25m 1s):
That's a, the, those are pretty, I mean Right. And those are sort of iconic stores. Yes. Benal, Bergdorf Goodman and Barneys, which isn't, I don't think

3 (25m 12s):
Is there anymore besides Bigelow. Yeah. There was not too many like small boutiques in, in New York City, you know, at the time.

0 (25m 19s):
So how were you going to get into those stores? I mean the, I have to assume that by and large they, the buyers there have relationships with, you know, going way back with other Right. For

3 (25m 33s):
Sure.

0 (25m 33s):
Yeah. Brands.

3 (25m 34s):
So I just started calling and leaving messages and I was so excited in the beginning guy, I said, you know, I have this brand tart, it's amazing, it's high Performance Naturals. It's different than anything you've ever tried. And you know, I left my first message for each of them and then, you know, they didn't call me back, but that was okay. You know, it was just a message. So then I was like, okay, well I'll wait. You know, it's like how long is too long? You know, not long enough And how looked desperate. And so then I called a couple days later, I left another message, you know, and I would call and then hang up because I would be hoping that I'd be able to catch one of them. But yeah, you know what you realize is buyer, these merchandisers and buyers never pick up their phones ever.

3 (26m 14s):
Yep. So that was just never gonna happen. I've learned that since then.

0 (26m 19s):
So you'd leave voicemails? Yes.

3 (26m 20s):
I kept leaving voicemails and I was getting more and more desperate

0 (26m 24s):
Because nobody was calling you back.

3 (26m 26s):
No. Cuz remember I was a nobody

0 (26m 28s):
And you had put down tens of thousands of dollars on your credit card and you had all this product

3 (26m 35s):
And I was gonna go outta business before I started.

0 (26m 38s):
Wow.

3 (26m 39s):
And full panic. Full panic is now kicked in. And I called, I called and left a message for the Beals buyer saying, this is my final message. You know, I just had to leave you one more because I grew up shopping in Beals with my mom, which is completely not true. And I kind of felt bad leaving this white lie. You know, there's a Catholic guilt. But I just wanted to leave you one last message because it was my favorite store shopping, growing up with my mom. We're about to sign tomorrow with Bergdorf Goodman. You

0 (27m 9s):
You basically made it up.

3 (27m 11s):
I made it up, yes. I made it up.

0 (27m 15s):
When we come back in just a moment, how Maureen's relentless determination plus that little white lie paid off. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and you're listening to How I Built This.

Miro (27m 36s):
Hey, I've got a quick request for all of you. We're looking for guest suggestions on how I built this community mural board and we'd love to hear from you. It's easy. Just head over to miro.com/built. That's m i r o.com/built. Miro is actually sponsoring this episode, which if you haven't heard of it, it's the most incredible visual collaboration tool. Now at first glance, it might seem like just a simple digital whiteboard, but Miro is much, much more than that. It's an infinite board where your team can build on each other's ideas and create something great together from anywhere. While you're leaving us feedback, feel free to play around with Miro. You can pick from thousands of templates to get started, like a quick brainstorm icebreaker or a flowchart. Our team loves Miros mind map for thinking about future episodes. We also use Miros Swim lane diagram to cut out any confusion on who needs to do what. By mapping out processes, roles, and timelines, it just builds consistency when we all have this one source of truth. I really look forward to seeing how you'll add to our board. Go to miro.com/built to leave your thoughts with sticky notes, comments, reactions and more. That's Miro spelled M I R o.com/b U I L T miro.com/built.

Squarespace (29m 2s):
I talk with so many business leaders who use Squarespace as their all in one platform for building their brand and engaging customers online. Squarespace lets you easily create a dynamic website and sell anything your products and services and even content you create. Squarespace makes it really easy to get started with best in class website templates for all types of businesses that can be customized to fit your specific needs. Squarespace also provides you the tools you need to run your business smoothly, including inventory management, a simple checkout process and secure payments. Whatever you sell, Squarespace has merchandising features to make your products look their best online. And using squarespace's in-depth analytics tools, you can learn where your site visits and sales are coming from. To analyze which channels are most effective, check out squarespace.com/built for a free trial. And when you're ready to launch, use offer code built to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain.

3 (30m 9s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this. I'm Guy Raz. So it's the start of the new millennium and Maureen is grinding away cold calling luxury retailers, running a business from home and desperately pitching anyone in the industry about her makeup. But then that little white lie wrapped in Catholic guilt pays off the buyer at Beals calls back. She said, I'll give you 15 minutes on, you know, like next week come in and show me your stuff. And so I panicked

0 (30m 42s):
Like that day. Like that week or next week

3 (30m 44s):
Or, yeah, exactly. And so I went in, I showed her my product cuz I knew if I could just get it in front of her, she would see that it was different. And I had all of this special fabric packaging and I had my cheek stain. Right guy.

0 (30m 56s):
But how did you prepare for that? I mean that's high stakes there, right? Because Beals is was like on Fifth Avenue, I'm pretty sure. And it was like so luxurious and and influential and like you had to make that work. Yes. Weren't you nervous?

3 (31m 12s):
I was really nervous. I was super, super nervous. Yeah. I went in, I met her, I showed her the products and she said I love it. I think it's really different. Wow. But, but we have a press breakfast next week and all the editors are coming. I'll give you a tiny like booth in the corner. If the editors respond to it, I'll give you a counter. But if they don't then sorry. No, I was like, oh my gosh.

0 (31m 39s):
Wow. So it's basically you saying that the press is coming next week to see a bunch of new products that they were considering. Right. And she would allow you to present there and if they liked your stuff or they, you know, she would, she'd put you in the store. Yeah,

3 (31m 54s):
She would allow me to have a little corner booth basically at this breakfast.

0 (31m 58s):
Did she ask you any questions? Like Yeah, where are you selling? And she didn't stuff available.

3 (32m 2s):
No she

0 (32m 3s):
Didn't. You just purely looked at your That was it. So you just, she just assumed that you had this new brand and Yes. That I didn't you anything else? So what's your background? What, what? Like, nope. Have you worked for Revlon or did I stay Lauder? Nothing.

3 (32m 15s):
Nope. Nope. And so my fate hung in the balance with this press breakfast. So I was, so this is where I was really nervous cuz I knew this was it. So,

0 (32m 24s):
And these were journalists from where? Like Cosmo,

3 (32m 26s):
Cosmo, l, allure, all of the big guys. Which, and they were everything back then, right? They made you or broke you. Yes. And so I went out, I went to Ann Taylor and I got myself a suit, which let's be honest, I was getting a suit for this was the complete wrong thing, but I didn't know. No, I tucked the tags in the back cuz I knew I was gonna have to return it

0 (32m 45s):
Cuz it was expensive. Yeah, yeah. And Taylor really wasn't the not to disparage and Taylor not really the look of tart

3 (32m 53s):
Cosmetics. No, no. And assumed, what was I thinking? A skirt suit. Yeah. I mean I was so, I not cool at all. And so I was there at my counter and all of these beauty editors were fabulous. They all had champagne in their hands. Yeah. Gorgeous. Walking around with their champagne, looking at the different products. And I can remember the beauty editor from Vogue, Sarah Brown came up to me and said, what is this and who are you? And I was like, I'm Maureen Kelly and this is Tart. And she's like, okay, so you're not a celebrity makeup artist. This, and you're not an Heiss, you're a nobody. I was like, okay. Enough with everybody telling me, oh mom. And nobody, of course I didn't say that to her, but I was like, great, you're right.

3 (33m 34s):
But this is amazing and it's so different and here's why. And she's like, okay, well I'm gonna shoot it, come to my office in two days. And I was like, oh my God. Oh my God. Oh my god. You know, trying to play it. Cool. And then, you know, five minutes later the beauty editor from L Magazine came up and was like, what is this? And who are you? I love it. It's really different. She picked up the cheek stain, tell me about it. And she's like, I wanna shoot it next week. I want it in my next issue.

0 (34m 1s):
Can I ask you about the cheek stand? Yes. What? So I, I'm, forgive me cuz I don't wear makeup. Of

3 (34m 7s):
Course, of course. Usually

0 (34m 10s):
I have in the past I was a, a TV reporter. I know you were four years ago. So I to learn how to, to use makeup, but very rarely wear, wear it these days unless

3 (34m 20s):
Gotta get you some shake.

0 (34m 22s):
Alright. Okay. I'm, I'm in. I could use it. Anyway, I, I'm trying to understand that this thing about cheek stain, it was something that you put out there and they were like, wow, what is this thing called cheek? Because I would see cheek stain and I would say jarring. I don't wanna, I, I would think weird. I don't wanna stain my cheese.

3 (34m 42s):
Exactly. And

0 (34m 44s):
That I don't wanna put stain on my cheese. This is

3 (34m 46s):
Weird. Totally. And it looked like that because it looked like a jar, like this jar of like the cranberry sauce, like that gross like you get from the can it's dark. Yeah. But it comes out really pretty and natural. And it just gives you this like beautiful flush.

0 (34m 58s):
Like a, like a, like a reddish light. Yeah. Sort of like a Renoir painting.

3 (35m 3s):
Exactly. Exactly. Like that guy.

0 (35m 5s):
But it was, I mean obviously this is a product that's become massively successful for you today, which we're gonna get to later. But this was basically, I guess you could kind of describe it, and again, I'm describing this for people who are not familiar with makeup. So forgive me Maureen, because I'm of course a complete idiot. But it's sort of like a giant lipstick tube for your cheeks.

3 (35m 24s):
That's exactly right. And it's

0 (35m 26s):
Gel. And it's gel. Okay.

3 (35m 27s):
And so you just like dab it on and then you blend it with your fingers and you go, which is really cool. So these editors were kind of looking at that and they were looking at the fabric packaging, which they also photographed and it had double-ended eyeliners. And they said like, wow, like this is all brand new and really different. And I think that's the thing that saved me, because I hadn't worked at Lauder, I hadn't worked at L'Oreal or Lancome. I didn't go into this feeling like, wow, well this sells and that cell so I have to do that. Right. I didn't launch with a mascara. And a mascara is typically a brand's number one selling product. I didn't have that for five years. And definitely a guy, people told me, you're a bad business person, you have to have a mascara.

3 (36m 10s):
Just throw one out there. Even if it's not like something that you love, love, love. And I said, why would I do that? Like if I don't find one that's different from everything on the market and formulated without the bad stuff, I'm just not gonna do it.

0 (36m 21s):
So they saw this thing and they're like, wow, this is different. Yes. This is really interesting.

3 (36m 24s):
And I was trying to play it cool.

0 (36m 26s):
You were trying to play it cool and, but clearly you were in I was,

3 (36m 30s):
I mean that was, that was it. That was gonna get you in. Once I got in these magazines, guy it, we catapulted. I mean of course the beauty, the beauty buyer at Beal said, okay, you've got a counter. That's it. And you can have an event next month. And I was like, what do you, what do you mean an event? Like what does that entail? Oh my gosh. But she did say you have to make x amount of dollars a month to be able to stay in Beals. It wasn't just like you're in,

0 (36m 53s):
I mean you, you had tens of thousands of dollars a product, but I'm assuming Bendle didn't buy you out, right?

3 (36m 60s):
No, no,

0 (37m 1s):
Definitely not. When you say their first order was a lot and we're not talking about a million dollars.

3 (37m 4s):
No,

0 (37m 4s):
No. Definitely a hundred thousand dollars. We're talking about 20, $30,000.

3 (37m 7s):
Yes, exactly. Yeah, exactly.

0 (37m 10s):
And and you had the, and you had the product ready to go.

3 (37m 13s):
I had the products ready to go and then, you know, we had our first event at bundles and you know, we had our counter, we had our first event. It was

0 (37m 23s):
Exciting. And you just stood there talking about the product to whoever stop by your counter.

3 (37m 29s):
Yeah, well I mean, you know, I didn't know what to expect. So I got my brothers and sisters to help me. I bought my brother a purple tie and I had him bartend. I brought in like $8 champagne and put like sweet tarts in a glass. And I called them tarini. And so we were doing tarini and makeovers. Wow,

0 (37m 46s):
That's so smart. You had Oh, cause it's tart cosmetics and you put sweet tarts in a glass and call them and you serve tarini

3 (37m 53s):
Cheap and cheerful. I didn't, you know. Yeah. And I, I kept the, the bottle under the counter knowing that of course they would be expecting like Luv Cleco or something like that. But, and my sisters and I pulled like potential customers off Fifth Avenue off the street, just telling these women that we were serving like Tarini and doing touchups. Like after work of course they were gonna pop in and if they're getting a drink and getting a touchup, why not? And was really kind of like grill of marketing, you know, before I even knew what that was. That's

0 (38m 18s):
Brilliant. A tarini. I'd never thought about that. I'm not saying I'm gonna go run out and put Sweet Tarts in a martini glass and pour champagne over it. But it's a great idea when you're marketing tart cosmetics.

3 (38m 30s):
Yes, definitely. And then, you know what I was like, okay, I've gotta like keep getting press so I couldn't, we had no budget so I couldn't afford, you know, $15 messenger. So I would put on a baseball hat and I would drop the press packages myself to, you know, in New York City to like the Conde NAS building or like the Hearst Buildings. Those are the ones that had like all of the big, you know, magazines. Cuz you know, I just, I wanted to get in all those magazines cuz it's how it was the influencers of the day. Yeah. But I would be like, oh my gosh, I hope, you know, I don't hope, I hope I don't see any editors. Like, oh my goodness, like these women that I saw at the Beals breakfast.

3 (39m 12s):
Meanwhile these women would never have like, recognized me from like a hole in the wall. I'd be, I would be going in for the backside of the building. Right. But then I, I now am getting appointments with, at these, you know, at once it ran in l and was it ran in Vogue, all of the magazines were calling saying, you know, I wanna like see your products, like, you know, come in, tell me about it. And so then I would like take the baseball hat off, get dressed up and go in through the front door.

0 (39m 42s):
Yeah.

3 (39m 43s):
And it was, it was, you know, really pretty exciting.

0 (39m 46s):
And you would go, you would go in yourself? I would go in with a package of a bunch of stuff and deliver, hand deliver it. Because if it was sent, sent through the mail, maybe it might get to them. But if it's hand delivered

3 (39m 58s):
Exactly. You know, they're getting

0 (39m 60s):
It. It feels like, Hey, a messenger sent this to

3 (40m 2s):
You.

0 (40m 3s):
Exactly. Open it up.

3 (40m 4s):
Exactly. Yeah. And then the phone line started ringing. I mean I had to put fake names on the phone lines. Like I'd have my friends and and family like say like, hi, this is, you know, Jen from operations, blah, blah blah. Like makeup, phone lines. So it seemed like we were an actual company. And then they just started ringing as these, it started to like hit the magazines.

0 (40m 27s):
Still doing this out of your apartment?

3 (40m 29s):
Still doing it outta my apartment

0 (40m 31s):
And, and working with this lab in New Jersey.

3 (40m 34s):
And I started to get offer calls from like, Sephora and QVC and I just said like, absolutely not. I can't, you know, we're, we're, we're not ready, ready yet for that. I felt like, you know, I didn't wanna overpromise and under-deliver cuz I just feel like once you burn a bridge, you don't get a second chance.

0 (40m 53s):
And and were you thinking maybe I should find some investors or, or not really?

3 (40m 58s):
No, not really. You know, I never started it to like grow it, to sell it. Yeah. And I, I feel like it was a very different time then. And I, I just, I just started it because I, it was a passion of mine and I I loved it.

0 (41m 13s):
And it was just you really? Or, or did you, were you able to hire somebody to

3 (41m 17s):
Help you? It was me and then I had a couple of interns actually one of, of which is one of whom is still with me. Wow. She's my head of creative. Yes. I have still have some of the women that have been with me all of these years, which is pretty incredible.

0 (41m 34s):
All right. So you are now trying to figure out, you know, strategic rethinking right? As you're, you're getting more and more demand. Yes. But still in, in Bends

3 (41m 43s):
And I'm meeting my vendors at a coffee shop. Yeah. You know, a couple blocks away because they couldn't come to my office.

0 (41m 49s):
Right, because you didn't have an office. Exactly. And being in New York was a huge advantage because that's the center of the fashion world in the US and maybe even in the world. It really was. And you're also in New York on September 11th? Yes, 2001.

3 (42m 6s):
I was,

0 (42m 8s):
And Mark worked there. He worked in the World Trade Center. He

3 (42m 12s):
Did? Yeah. So Yeah, my world came to a halt for sure on that day. You know, mark called me in the morning and I didn't know anything was happening, but he called me and said like, Hey Moe, I just want you to know everything's fine. And I said, wait, what do you mean what's going on? And he said, you know, a plane hit the first tower, but I'm okay. And they're just tell, you know, I could hear them t tucking over the loudspeaker. And he said, they're telling us to go back to our desks. And Mark had been there for the first Trade Center incident.

0 (42m 49s):
That was the, the That was one in, in 1993.

3 (42m 53s):
Yes. Yeah. So I was like, okay, are you sure everything's okay? And he was like, yeah, I'm completely fine. I gotta go. They're telling us to go back to our desks. I was like, all right, I love you. And he's like, I love you too. And then that was the last time I spoke to him. I flipped on the TV and I was like, okay, well he said he's fine, but let me just see what's going on here. So I flipped on the TV and you know, I don't know, like, maybe I can't remember now. I just blacked out a lot at that time, to be honest, five or 10 minutes later I watched as a plane crashed into that tower. And I just remember, you know, like just collapsing into my knees and really watching his, he was killed as the second tower fell.

3 (43m 40s):
But then, you know, I just, I mean I just was destroyed obviously. And, but then like somewhere in the back of my brain, I felt like, no, he's gonna be okay. He's fine. Yeah. Yeah. He got out like, I don't know how I could have thought he got out, but I felt like he got out. So I like waited for him to come running through the door. And some of his rugby playing, like investment banking friends did come to my door. Like their clothes were tattered and covered in ashes and like bleeding, wanting to know if Mark had made it out and had run like the like 50 or 60 or blocks like home. Like they did, you know what I mean? It was, you know, their shirts were torn off. I mean, it was horrific, but he didn't, and I, I was like, well, I gotta wait here because, you know, all the phone lines were knocked out.

3 (44m 25s):
Yeah. You, you couldn't get a signal like nothing. So I was like, well, I can't, I'm not gonna leave. I've gotta wait. Cuz he's, he's gonna come through the door any minute he's gonna come through the door Any second. Yeah. He, he didn't, he didn't come through the door, so, yeah.

0 (44m 43s):
Wow.

3 (44m 47s):
Yeah, So I then drove to a lot of the hospitals in the city and that was horrible because I thought, well maybe he'll be at a hospital. And that was so sad because there was all the nurses and the doctors waiting outside front, like tons of them with wheelchairs. Just like a ghost town. You could just drive in New York cuz you know, no one was on the street. I mean, it was just ashes, just a mile thick. But they were just like waiting for people to come, you know? But there was nobody to help, so, yeah. And I just, yeah, I don't know.

3 (45m 27s):
That was it. I mean, I woke up in the morning and I looked out the window and I just honestly couldn't understand how it wasn't all a dream, you know,

0 (45m 43s):
I can't imagine what, just what that was like for you and, and your family and his family and my God, in, in the middle of a, a tragedy that touched thousands and thousands and thousands of people. Right. All the families of the people who, who didn't make it. And you were, that was it. I mean, you were, you were on your own. Yeah. You were about 28, 29. Yeah,

3 (46m 16s):
Something like that. I just turned 30 and I just thought like how I'm a 30 year old widow and I've, I'd been with him for a decade and I'm lost the love of my life. You know, this is, this is it. I don't even wanna go on honestly is how I felt, but, and the city was locked down, you know, it was terrible. I mean, it had like that ash cloud for months and months and, you know, over time people just slowly got back to living. But I just felt like my life was over.

0 (46m 47s):
Did you, did you think that, that you were not gonna be able to continue with this business idea after that happened?

3 (46m 55s):
Oh yeah, for sure. I mean, I didn't wanna continue with anything after that happened, period. But, you know, my family and my friends, I mean, didn't leave me alone for one second. I mean, someone stayed with me every single night and every single day. And you know, they just said, you know, mark wouldn't want you, you know, mark was the one that encouraged you to do this, so, yeah. Yeah. Like, he would be really sad and disappointed if you let this all go, which I kind of thought was like a little bit mean at the time because, but then it fueled me, you know? Yeah.

3 (47m 34s):
Because I, and I just became like a walking zombie and I kept Tark going in his memory, basically a year after it started.

0 (47m 42s):
Hmm. How, how long did you, I I read about a, a brief thing that you mentioned about his memorial service, which was you, you said it was more of a celebration really, because he was that kind of person that, that he would've preferred people to kind of make jokes about him and remember finding things about him. Yes.

3 (48m 0s):
Yeah. I mean, he was just larger than life, you know, I didn't wanna have a funeral for him. I wanted it to be, You know, a memorial. I mean, everyone was just telling amazing stories about him and, you know, drinking and laughing and crying. Obviously it was the New York Athletic Club and, you know, all of his teammates. And I would say I almost said office mates, but no, they're all gone. I mean, I would open up our wedding album and literally every single person in it was gone. You know, it was just, wow. I mean, almost every single person in their office, like, if they weren't there, maybe that day they made it. But that was, that was really it. It was just, you know, decimated.

3 (48m 41s):
But I mean, he was just such an amazing guy, like the most incredible person in the world. And

0 (48m 47s):
What company does he work for or firm?

3 (48m 50s):
He worked for Keith, Keith Rutten Woods. And they were amazing after, I mean, they really were, they're such a good company to like, you know, I didn't have kids, unfortunately, I wish I did. But, you know, my best friend was pregnant with Mark's best friend from the firm. She was a, a weak pregnant with his baby, her husband. She was a week pregnant. And they were just so good to all of the, you know, all of the, the widows and then the surviving children and families. So I became her kind of, Brent was his name. So like, I was with her and, you know, when she had her C-section, and I mean, it was, it was, it was a tough, you know, I went with her to spread his ashes on Seal Beach in California.

3 (49m 39s):
And

0 (49m 43s):
How, how long did it, was it before you were able to say, all right, I am, I gotta get back to this, this thing that I started,

3 (49m 53s):
I don't even know. I can't even remember, honestly, I've blacked out so much of that time. Yeah. That it's weird. It's just like gone from my mind. You

0 (50m 2s):
Were like, like, like numb. Yeah. Just kind of, I was unconnected to the world around you.

3 (50m 8s):
Right. And you know, as I started to kind of try to go back to work a little bit, you know, people would say like, oh Maureen, you should, you know, you should, you should, you, you have to answer this email or you have to do this. It would be like, good for you. Remember the office was in our apartment, so I would work during the day a little bit. And when everybody left, like the interns and I had one or two employees at that point, I would just like collapse in the bed that Mark and I shared. Yeah. At night. So, yeah. And I kept it in that apartment for many years, which looking back, that probably wasn't the healthiest thing that I could have done many years.

0 (50m 47s):
How were you, just for your own mental health, how were you coping? I mean, were you, did you have someone talk to a therapist or family? I mean,

3 (50m 59s):
I went on like multi-hour walks every day I would walk. Our office was on the lower East side, and so I would just like walk on the East River all the way down to South Street Seaport. And sometimes I would do it at night and my family was like, you can't do that at night. That's really dangerous. So yeah, I mean, not that, not the healthiest, but, and then, you know, at the time my office, like the girls would go for walks with me, which was really nice. So,

0 (51m 29s):
Yeah, I mean, and, and people who experience grief like that, you know, they talk about it coming and going. There are times where it's really intense and, and times where you can manage. Yes. Did that last a long time?

3 (51m 45s):
It lasted a long time. Yeah, it did. I mean, we were together for a decade, so, and then nine 11, remember such a, you know, so like, it's just every year, you know, I mean, it, that part is tough. It comes back in the worst kind of way, you know, because that's not how I wanted to remember Mark, like by that, the bad stuff. I wanna remember all of the good stuff

0 (52m 13s):
When we come back in just a moment. How Maureen grapples with grief and figures out a way forward for tart and for herself. Stay with us. I'm Guy Raz and your listing to how I built this.

ZipRecruiter (52m 36s):
If you're a business owner, this is a busy time of year because you've got new 2023 goals, and that means finding the right people to accomplish them. But new goals also means new challenges like finding qualified candidates and adjusting to candidates preferences in this new world of work. Thankfully, ZipRecruiter is here to help with its powerful matching technology. You'll quickly find the best candidates for your job. And right now you can try ZipRecruiter for free at ziprecruiter.com/built. If you see a candidate who'd be a perfect fit, ZipRecruiter makes it easy to send them a personal invite so they're more likely to apply. Let ZipRecruiter help you find the best people for all of your roles. Four out of five employers who post on ZipRecruiter, get a quality candidate within the first day. See for yourself. Go to this exclusive web address to try ZipRecruiter for free. Ziprecruiter.com/built. Again, that's ziprecruiter.com/b U I L t. ZipRecruiter. The smartest way to hire

Visible Wireless (53m 40s):
this episode is brought to you in part by Visible. Visible offers their best rate all on one line, not four lines, not three, not even two. Just a one line wireless plan with unlimited data for $30 a month. Taxes and fees included, all powered by Verizon. Switch today@visible.com and get $20 off your first month when you use Code Built 20 that's built two zero a special offer for how I built this. Listeners offer ends March 31st. New activation and offer code required for data management practices. Learn more@visible.com. Additional terms apply.

0 (54m 23s):
Hey, welcome back to How I Built This. I'm Guy Raz. So by 2002, Maureen is picking up the pieces of Tart while learning to manage her grief. And pretty soon she moves the company out of her apartment and into an office. Her main client is still the luxury retail store, Bendels, but then the cosmetic chain, Sephora comes knocking.

3 (54m 45s):
When I met with them for the first time, I thought it was just meeting with like one or two people and they brought like David Tano, who at the time was like the head and it was like 10 people. So I was like, oh my gosh. I was feeling very overwhelmed and it was just me. And they said, okay, you know, this brand is amazing. We've read about it everywhere. We've seen it in Bends, we wanna launch it, we wanna launch it in, you know, all of our stores. And I was like, thank you so much. That's so flattering, but I can't launch it in all of your stores, but I could launch it in like three stores. Yeah, he laughed at me and he was like, I can't launch it in three stores. That's crazy. How about, you know, how about like, fine, we'll meet somewhere in the middle.

3 (55m 27s):
Like how about a hundred stores? I was like, I can't launch it in a hundred stores. Maybe I could like do five stores. I think I settled with like 15 stores. So we started the.com first and then, and then, you know, we rolled out to four months later to, to stores 15 stores.

0 (55m 44s):
Alright, so you get picked up by Sephora, but but still in a sort of a small scale. And I guess, you know, you're still kind of, you're growing small. I mean you're, you're still cash flow that is financing the business, right? You're not, were you taking out loans?

3 (56m 2s):
I wasn't taking out loans. Now I'm using my, my nine 11 fund, which is really tough because, you know, I knew that this was what Mark wanted for me, but it also felt like, oh my gosh, if I make a mistake and screw this up in any way, shape, or form, I have like, not only failed myself, but I failed Mark. So

0 (56m 27s):
Yeah,

3 (56m 28s):
It was just like,

0 (56m 30s):
So hi. I mean, it is amazing. I mean his legacy really is Yes. Wrapped up in this company. It

3 (56m 36s):
Really is in every way. Yeah.

0 (56m 38s):
So after his, his his death, obviously the, his company, as you said, helped out the, the surviving family members. So you had some money that you could use to, to finance tart

3 (56m 53s):
Yes. To continue to finance it over the years, because I remember our head of, you know, like I, I hired someone from Pricewaterhouse Cooper to do like, you know, all the finance stuff, the accounting. And I, I hired her while we were still in the apartment and she didn't know we were in an apartment. So she left, you know, pwc, I don't know if it was Big six at the time, or you know what you called it back

0 (57m 15s):
Then you, oh, you hired her full-time Yes. To be your finance person.

3 (57m 18s):
And when she came to the apartment and walked in, she was like, oh my gosh, what is this? Like what have I done? I already quit my job. But when we started in the new office, you know, she reminded me it was 1250 a month, like $1,250 and there were some months that like tart couldn't pay it. And that like, I would have to lend the money.

0 (57m 39s):
Because you didn't have enough revenue coming in from tart.

3 (57m 41s):
Exactly, yeah.

0 (57m 43s):
And, and she was your first hire, your first formal hire?

3 (57m 46s):
She was my second formal hire. My first formal hire was an intern that, you know, had been interning with me and I brought her on full-time.

0 (57m 56s):
And your second hire was this woman who with a finance background and

3 (57m 60s):
She's, she's still with me and she's still the head of finance.

0 (58m 3s):
Wow. And why was that the, the second hire? Why was, why, why was the finance job in your view the most important? Because

3 (58m 11s):
I'm not a finance person and yeah. I wanted to make sure that all of my hires were people that were strong at things that I'm not good at.

0 (58m 21s):
Yeah. I

3 (58m 22s):
Think if you surround yourself with people that are smarter than you and stronger than you and things that you can't do and you'll be successful.

0 (58m 30s):
So you've got this office, it's a four of you. And, and so on a day-to-day basis, what, tell me a little bit about what you were all doing. Like were you, were you just sort of managing your existing buyers, like calling them? Were you trying to get into new stores? Were you calling the lab? Were you going to the lab? Were you coming up with ways to, were you calling editors? All those things.

3 (58m 55s):
I was wearing all of those hats. I have never worked so hard in my life. I felt like I was pushing a boulder up like a mountain every single day. Yeah. And then just like crashing in bed at night, kind of depressed, you know,

0 (59m 9s):
Dep depressed. Well

3 (59m 11s):
Just cuz Mark and Yeah. Yeah. So, but like obviously happy that the company is growing and, and doing well. So like I didn't have time to think at all during the day. It was so busy. Nonstop. Yeah. Just cuz we were growing and not, didn't have a lot of resources. And then at night, you know, your mind would, everything would get quiet and your mind would, you know, would just start to start to slow down and like think a little bit.

0 (59m 38s):
You got remarried in I think 2004. I did. And, and to, to the husband that you're married to today?

3 (59m 48s):
Yes.

0 (59m 49s):
What's his name?

3 (59m 50s):
His name is Scott.

0 (59m 51s):
Scott. Okay. Yeah.

3 (59m 53s):
I feel like he and Mark would would've been best friends for sure.

0 (59m 56s):
And and he was also, was he working in like, he you met him in New York?

3 (1h 0m 2s):
I actually met him. He went to Wharton with my best friend from undergrad and I met him when we went to Boston. We were selling in a little apo area that's since out of business called E six. And we needed a place to stay cuz we still were pretty scrappy. And my best friend Raquel said, well I can stay with Scott, you know, from business school. We could just stay there. And I was like, okay, sounds good. And and that's when I met him and yeah. And we got married in 2004. Wow. And he eventually came on board to like help at Tart.

0 (1h 0m 38s):
He eventually joined the company. He

3 (1h 0m 40s):
Did. He he moved to New York for me and he was in finance and then he, he became an FBI agent for a little while. Wow. A couple years. Yep. And then he loved it so much. I mean it was like the favorite thing he's ever done, but just, we were starting to really be drowning and I, you know, he had his CPA and his MBA and I just said like, I need the help, please, like, just come help even for a little while. And so he kind of took a leave of absence and came on board to help, but unfortunately never made his way back to the B which he's still sad about to this day. And it reminds me, he said, you know, gosh, it's so different here. You know, girls cry, you know, when they break up with their boyfriends it's very different from the fbi.

3 (1h 1m 24s):
I was like, ah. Yeah.

0 (1h 1m 25s):
When, when, I mean even by 2005, right? When you are in, and that's the year where you, your mascara makes its debut, which I think is becomes a, a, a big hit. But even even with the, like the magazine placements and being in, in some of those stores, like you still needed to market the product and I can't imagine you had a, a massive budget for advertising or promotional things. How did you get, how did you get people to be aware of, of, of your products?

3 (1h 1m 57s):
Yeah, you know, we've never spent $1 in advertising in tart ever. Hmm. You know, in the beginning we never had the money to, and then obviously as, as time progressed, you know, that changed a little bit. I think Facebook started in 2004. So if you think about that, you know, social media, MySpace was like 2003. You know, we hopped on the influencer trend pretty early, which was definitely great for us. And started sending it to influencers or people we thought were influencers

0 (1h 2m 35s):
At the time. Just sending them free product and and hoping that they would, they might write about it on their blog or

3 (1h 2m 41s):
Whatever. Exactly. Or put it on their Facebook page. Back then we would send it to, I did have PR back then in-house pr. Yeah. So one of the early hires was like part-time PR person. So we would send it

0 (1h 2m 54s):
And she would pitch or he would pitch to

3 (1h 2m 56s):
Who they would send it to celebrities. Like there was a, there's a data, there was a database then and there's a database now where you can like look up like you know, where to send celebrities products to and things like that. So we would just like send it out

0 (1h 3m 9s):
In the hopes that maybe they would open it up and like it and talk about it.

3 (1h 3m 14s):
Exactly. Exactly. You know, I would keep sending it to the magazine. So I remember sending it to Gail, Oprah's best friend and Gail.

0 (1h 3m 23s):
Gail from cbs. Gail came. Yep.

3 (1h 3m 26s):
And Gail gave it to Oprah And Oprah. That's smart. Put it in her Oprah's favorite things. And it was our double end of lip glosses. You snapped them apart. They were named after famous lovers. Like you know,

0 (1h 3m 44s):
Romeo and Julie

3 (1h 3m 44s):
And Romeo Juliet was one of them. Yes, absolutely. Retten Scarlet. Like Hamlet, Ophelia even carrying big and once we hit op the Oprah est, it was like, oh my gosh. Unbelievable. Like flying to the moon. I mean you had made it, you know, I mean cuz Oprah remember, I mean still is very implementable back then. It was just everything.

0 (1h 4m 9s):
She was the influencer. She

3 (1h 4m 11s):
Was the og

0 (1h 4m 13s):
I think. I would think this was a turning, pretty important turning point for your, for the growth of the business, which was 2005 and that year you signed a deal or contract, dunno how it works with qvc. Yes. And basically you go on it and, and I shouldn't be explaining this cause I think everyone listening to this knows how it works. I'm just explaining this to myself. You go on and there's a, you get like what, 15, 10, 15 minutes to talk about your product and there's a number and people can call and order it. Right,

3 (1h 4m 43s):
Exactly.

0 (1h 4m 44s):
And how much time would you get on qvc?

3 (1h 4m 46s):
Eight minutes. And you still do, to this day it hasn't changed.

0 (1h 4m 50s):
Are you selling a bunch of things or just one thing in that eight minute period?

3 (1h 4m 54s):
Generally it's one thing, unless it's tsv, in which case then it's a kit.

0 (1h 4m 58s):
So all of your products in 2005 were obviously unique because they were paraben free and vegan and cruelty and all this stuff. But you had one product that really was totally different, which was the cheek stain, right? Yes. Was that, did you patent that? Did you

3 (1h 5m 15s):
I didn't remember. I had no business experience. I, yeah. You know, which is okay looking back, I didn't patent my fabric packaging. I didn't patent my cheek stain, but we launched it on QVC and it sure did sell out. I mean those phone lines lit up.

0 (1h 5m 30s):
And how quickly before competitors jumped on that idea?

3 (1h 5m 33s):
I mean, it's hooked time actually, which was pretty great back then. I feel like not everybody copied everybody back then, which is, which was lovely. I don't know. And I felt like I was constantly moving back then. It was like, okay, what's the next cool idea? What's the next fun thing? I was always trying to like, you know, really like be different and think outside the box. But you know, I think back to my QVC days and while it wasn't sexy, I mean QVC saved us because it just helped us grow. When you think about catapulting to another like level of sales, you know, you can go on especially in q4, like holiday time and do like $23,000 a minute.

3 (1h 6m 14s):
Yeah. I'm sure I'm allow to share this. But, and when you're, you know, young and you're selling,

0 (1h 6m 21s):
It's amazing

3 (1h 6m 22s):
And you're in control of your own destiny. Yeah. And you come off and you've sold, let's say I've sold like $20,000 a minute and you have a buyer say, okay, well you didn't hit gold cuz it was 23. And I'm thinking, who cares? I just killed it. Yeah.

0 (1h 6m 35s):
Yeah. Were were you when you first started going on qvc? I mean you have no idea how many people are watching at any given time.

3 (1h 6m 45s):
A hundred, 1 million, but no, I did not know then

0 (1h 6m 47s):
How

3 (1h 6m 48s):
Many? 101 million.

0 (1h 6m 50s):
101 million. Yes. At one moment. How is that possible? A hundred.

3 (1h 6m 55s):
101. And I, I love qvc. I have to say I

0 (1h 6m 58s):
Just wait 101 million. That's around the world.

3 (1h 7m 1s):
Yeah. Viewers.

0 (1h 7m 2s):
That's like the

3 (1h 7m 3s):
Super Bowl. Yeah. They're clicking over from the nightly news and you know, they channel surf so they're never gonna watch. Yeah. Your whole, I always say cuz now I, well I don't sell myself on air anymore directly. I help the girls that do sell with their cells every single week. And I just remind them, I'm like, remember the only one watching your full eight minutes is your mom and us. Yeah.

0 (1h 7m 23s):
Right. And you're with somebody else right. From QVC who's sort of asked, host, asking you questions. Yes. A host. Yeah. And is it, was it nerve-wracking?

3 (1h 7m 31s):
Yeah, it was, it was nerve-wracking for sure. Especially cuz we were growing, we were st definitely in growth mode at that point. And you know, every hit was, it was on consignment back then and so, you know, you ship it to them and you don't get paid until you sell it. And so, right. For us, we had already like paid the, the lab and paid the packaging company and so we needed to get paid. So,

0 (1h 7m 55s):
And probably you have to price it at a price at QVC wants you to price it at

3 (1h 7m 59s):
Exactly. It had to be more competitive for sure. But I looked at QVC Yeah. As kind of like more like an infomercial because you're selling it to all of those 101 million like eyeballs and ears. Yeah. And then, you know, they may buy it there, many do. But they also may stroll into Ulta or Sephora and buy your product there cuz they wanna touch it and smell it and feel it. Yeah.

0 (1h 8m 23s):
So, alright, so you're growing I at a really healthy pace and not at a kind of explosive pace because you really are still self-financed. I think you, you know, the company starts in 2000, by 2007 you're at around 15 million in revenue. So still a small business. Right? But, but, but growing at a healthy pace, I think you had about 25 or 30 employees roughly at that time. Does that sound about right? And then we hit the beginning of what would become the great recession in 2008. And I read that at the time like almost 60% of women cut back on cosmetics and, and many cosmetics companies saw pretty significant declines around that time.

0 (1h 9m 11s):
Ha What, what happened to your business? We

3 (1h 9m 14s):
Were fine. I mean we were just growing. We were still like, in like super growth mode. So for us, we were doing great. We were just scaling on Q V C and you know, I would be driving, commuting two hours into the city, then I'd, you know, I'd work all day, then I'd drive to Westchester, Pennsylvania, I'd sell on error and I drive home. I had, you know, at this point now two kids, two little, little kids. So

0 (1h 9m 43s):
Living in New York City,

3 (1h 9m 45s):
We actually have moved out I think at that point. So when they think back on me, like just, I don't know my, my time selling on qvc, they're like, we never want you going back on air.

0 (1h 9m 57s):
You were driving from Yeah. New York to Pennsylvania once a week.

3 (1h 10m 1s):
Yeah. Or twice a week. And you get home really late. It was like Friday night beauty. And then sometimes you'd have to be on like Saturday night too. So it was, it was a, it was a lot. But you know, I mean I, I definitely loved it and that was helping us to really grow.

0 (1h 10m 16s):
So that year 2009, were you still sourcing all of your, all of your product from that lab in New Jersey or were you also sourcing it from other labs? At that point

3 (1h 10m 27s):
We were sourcing about 60% of it from that lab in New Jersey,

0 (1h 10m 31s):
From that original lab that agreed to take you on. See what you did for them. You gave them a lot of business.

3 (1h 10m 37s):
I know, I know. But you know what, it's a good, good tale of like making sure you diversify, which we of course have since then because Okay. Two really big things happened. I finally decided that we needed private equity.

0 (1h 10m 56s):
You need outside funding.

3 (1h 10m 58s):
We did because we were gonna go in Ulta and launch in 364

0 (1h 11m 2s):
Doors. And that means you need a lot of product and you needed money. Exactly.

3 (1h 11m 7s):
Product. Yeah. We needed a ton of inventory. We were gonna need a field team.

0 (1h 11m 12s):
The field team is to go out, out and to make sure that, to make sure that it's placed right. And also like sample it for people. Exactly.

3 (1h 11m 19s):
Exactly. And so

0 (1h 11m 23s):
That costs money.

3 (1h 11m 24s):
It costs money. Yeah. And so we had met with tons of private equity firms. You know, I'd heard the horror stories through the years, you know, on QVC especially, there'd be a lot of other founders and they'd say that they got pushed out or their teams got fired and they were like, be careful, Maureen, be careful. Remember I waited 11 years at this point. And so I finally found a private equity firm that I was really happy with. They're called Encore. And this guy Kevin Murphy was such a good guy and they signed an LOA because we needed that money for the Ulta expansion. Hmm. And it was really exciting.

0 (1h 12m 0s):
And they, they, so they made an investment in the company?

3 (1h 12m 3s):
Well they signed a letter of intent. Okay. Right. Okay. But literally days later I got a phone, we got a phone call. One of the girls in the office from one of our truck, one of the truckers, they're not our trucker, just a trucker that we work with. And I think this is a good example. If you're good to people, they'll be good back to you. Yeah. Saying that there's something weird. There's like activity happening at the lab and I was like, wait, what do you mean activity? Like just something weird going down and like, you should come down. I was like, okay, shoot. So I hop in a car, I drive over the bridge and I go in and I said like, Hey, you know what's going on here?

3 (1h 12m 44s):
Is everything going okay? And they said, we have really bad news and we're so sorry to be telling you this. I, I don't even know how you're here, how you knew this, but we're going outta business and it's happening right now. I was like,

0 (1h 12m 57s):
What? Wait, what? Oh my gosh. But how is that possible? They were making 60% of your product, presumably? They were doing okay.

3 (1h 13m 4s):
They were doing okay. We had like a couple of little blips where like we did like mini cheek scenes, like travel size cheek scenes. And they got like a little soft, they were a little like mushy, like cranberry. And then we had an issue with like a foundation where it was like a pump wasn't pumping out, but like we worked through it. So like there were like a few little signs, you know, looking back, there were a couple signs that I should have. And I did, I was on it and I was like addressing those concerns with them. I was meeting with them and stuff, but there was no like signs of this going outta business. Of course. I was like, oh my gosh. I was like, okay, well when is this happening? And they said immediately this week we're, we're closing. They're their, our our parent company is closing our doors.

3 (1h 13m 45s):
Wow. So I was like, what about our products? What are, what about our packaging that you, you know, they're storing a lot of our stuff there cuz you know, they store your packaging to then fill it eventually. And they said, I don't know, the bank is taking it over and you know it's not gonna be ours anymore. I was like, what do you mean? And so Scott, my husband at the time said, you know, when that happens, they usually put a lock, they put a lock on the door and then the bank owns it all until, you know, you can fight it out in court. And I was like, but what do you mean that's, we own that stuff. Like what, what do you mean the bank's gonna come to own it? That's insane. Like we paid for all the packaging and

0 (1h 14m 22s):
Oh, they and they locked you

3 (1h 14m 23s):
Out? No, they were, they they would be locking you out. So yeah, I turned around and I went out and I rented an 18 wheeler truck.

0 (1h 14m 32s):
Wait, where did you go to? Like a uley. The

3 (1h 14m 34s):
U-Haul

0 (1h 14m 34s):
U? Yes.

3 (1h 14m 35s):
Okay. It was insane. It was so insane. I've never in my life done this. But I was like, what am I gonna do? What am I gonna do? And everyone from the company came, you know, came over and I got family and everybody loaded up as much as they could. We definitely didn't get everything, but we got as much as we could. And then literally the next day the doors were padlocked because Estee Lauder, L'Oreal, they all manufactured there and they made products for like, you know, Bobby Brown and tons of company, tons of companies, you know, cuz they owned them and they couldn't get any of their stuff for a year. And talk about ex expiration dates, right?

3 (1h 15m 16s):
Like makeup expires.

0 (1h 15m 17s):
Yeah.

3 (1h 15m 18s):
It all went bad. So we would've gone bankrupt. Bankrupt at that point. And all of our bank loans were personally guaranteeing guaranteed like by us. So like, you know, including like our house. So, you know, private equity was gonna be taking some chips off the table. Sure. But like, also making sure that we didn't lose our house. And remember I said that Scott was an accountant and so like at the time he would sit and like figure it out all the time. Like, and you know, where we were kind of like numbers wise cuz I was just like, we were out of money. We get really close to being bankrupt if our retailers didn't pay us or if our suppliers didn't supply us.

3 (1h 15m 60s):
Like, you know, just anything went sideways on us. We were technically bankrupt like every other month for 2008 and 2009.

0 (1h 16m 8s):
Even though your revenue was strong.

3 (1h 16m 10s):
Yes. Just cuz we didn't have the money.

0 (1h 16m 12s):
So what happened to the investment

3 (1h 16m 14s):
Offer? So they absolutely could have walked away. I mean they probably should have walked away, but this guy, Kevin Murphy, I mean like, I, you know, I didn't know him, but like he stood by us and he said, we're gonna do it. We believe in you, we invest in people and we believe that you guys are, you're gonna pull through this. And we did, but it was really, really, really stressful. We managed through all of

0 (1h 16m 45s):
It. This is encore Consumer Capital.

3 (1h 16m 47s):
Yes. Yes.

0 (1h 16m 49s):
And so they made an investment. And what did that, what did that investment allow you to do? Was it, I mean, did were the allow it allowed you to, to to basically serve the Alta buyer? Like it allowed you to, to make enough product for that alta to, to serve all those stores?

3 (1h 17m 5s):
Well the irony is guy, that by the time it came through, we were already launched in Ulta.

0 (1h 17m 12s):
Wow.

3 (1h 17m 13s):
And so they doubled their investment. They doubled their investment. But like, it's the kind of thing where if we weren't okay, it was all sideways and we were

0 (1h 17m 22s):
Bankrupt and it was all, it was all cash flow.

3 (1h 17m 24s):
Yes, all

0 (1h 17m 25s):
Cash flow. And, but, but when you say we would've been bankrupt is cuz personally there cashflow, it's like right, it's, there's a, a a you know, if you're, I don't know, 30 days or what, just a few days between having the money, not having the money waiting for the product. And, and so you're saying if that, if you could not get your product from that bankrupt right

3 (1h 17m 45s):
Lab, that would've been it.

0 (1h 17m 46s):
That would've been it. Yeah.

3 (1h 17m 48s):
And the banks would've called in like loans and our house was tied to it. I would've literally lost everything in my entire life. And if you think back to, you know, just Mark and everything that I did in his memory to like invest and just, yeah, I just, I would've lost it all. Would've, I would've ruined everything.

0 (1h 18m 10s):
So, alright, so you get, you get through and you've got, you've got an investor and, and, and the company is growing and, and then 2014 you get an offer to be acquired, a Japanese company called <unk> I think it's pronounced Yes. They acquire you to announce in April of 2014. How did that come about?

3 (1h 18m 37s):
I think once you, once you take on private equity, you know, the, they'll always look for an exit. I think that's always gonna be kind of the end.

0 (1h 18m 49s):
Yeah. So you knew in 2010 once you took that money off I

3 (1h 18m 53s):
Did

0 (1h 18m 54s):
That there was gonna ha there was gonna inevitably be

3 (1h 18m 57s):
An exit. I did. I did. You know, which it was, it was definitely like a slower exit for me, which I think was good because, you know, I loved, I loved what I was doing, but Coe is kind of like the equivalent of like a Lauder or a L'Oreal in, in Japan. And they were looking to acquire our company that they could study and learn from to like really help them with their marketing in the states. And so they kind of felt like tart would be a great, just like a great one for, for them, for that. And I wasn't ready to kind of like hang up my high heels and, and be done for sure.

3 (1h 19m 43s):
So Koze was like a good match for me. I knew that if I went with like a L or you know, a l or L'Oreal, it would be different. Like I, I wasn't ready to go lay on the beach forever. Like, I like working and I like doing this. And I just felt like they were a good partner that would allow me to do that. And I maintained like a surprising level of control given my remaining ownership percentage that I, I, I did put in the shareholder's agreement to make sure that it remained that way.

0 (1h 20m 14s):
So you, they bought I think about almost 94% of the company. 99, 3 and a half percent.

3 (1h 20m 18s):
Right.

0 (1h 20m 20s):
And and you kept a percentage and, and you wanted to stay on as a ceo?

3 (1h 20m 28s):
I did. Yeah. I did. Yeah. I just wasn't ready to be done.

0 (1h 20m 33s):
They, they, they bought it for I guess around 135 million, which is amazing. An incredible exit for a brand that you started, you know, in your apartment, but you really, I mean you're still the CEO today that, that happened in 2014. Yes. And so we're, we're approaching nine years since crazy since that, at the time of this recording, nine years since that, that happened. And you're still the ceo?

3 (1h 20m 57s):
Yes, I am. And in 2020 is when my final, like shares were done. And at that point we were valued at 2.3 billion.

0 (1h 21m 8s):
Wow.

3 (1h 21m 9s):
Yeah.

0 (1h 21m 10s):
And tell me, I mean, how many, how many employees does Tart have now around the world?

3 (1h 21m 14s):
I think like 250 or so

0 (1h 21m 17s):
And so, so it's pretty, it's still pretty manageable. Yeah, it's crazy. And, and I mean from, I mean, but still like running a t you know, obviously not everybody is a direct report to you. No. But still you oversee that, that team, how have you, what, what's been helpful for you to, to kind of develop into the kind of leader that you have become? I mean, did you ever like hire a coach or get a mentor? Or did it just kind of over time you just kind of figured it out?

3 (1h 21m 49s):
Yeah, I mean, I have to say a little of both. Have definitely had mentors over the years. I think they're really important and read a lot, a lot of business books. But I think that it's really important to recognize as a founder and as a boss, like what you're, that you're not the expert at everything. And I just have some really amazing people around me. I have a president, I have a all female C-suite, which is something I'm very proud of. It's very unusual, believe it or not, in the cosmetic industry to have women at the top.

3 (1h 22m 32s):
And yeah, I mean I, I, I love everyone I work with. I feel very lucky. It's, it's the thing that keeps me still going and it's the thing that keeps me still at tart is the people. It's always been about the people For me.

0 (1h 22m 50s):
When you, when you think about your story, right, and, and all that you've been through and all the ups and downs and, and there were certainly some really major downs. How much of, of where you are today do you think has to do with your work and, and your work ethic? And how much do you attribute to luck?

3 (1h 23m 8s):
Oh, I think both. I think luck and hard work for sure. I think that I've worked really, really hard and have had a lot of support throughout my life, but I also feel like I've been lucky. You know, I'm very blessed. So I feel like both of them, for sure.

0 (1h 23m 36s):
That's Maureen Kelly, CEO and founder of Tart Cosmetics. By the way, despite never advertising nor even using professional models, tart has grown a super loyal customer base who the company calls, if you guessed it, tart. Lets, Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. If you wanna contact the team, our email addresses, h ibt, id.wondery.com. If you wanna follow us on Twitter, our account is at How I built this and mine is at Guy Raz. And on Instagram, I'm at Guy Raz. This episode was produced by Carrie Thompson with music composed by Rameen era Bluey. It was edited by Andrea Bruce with research help from Sam Paulson.

0 (1h 24m 19s):
Our production staff also includes JC Howard, Casey Hermann, Liz Metzker, Alex Chung, Elaine Coates, John Isabella, Chris Masini, and Carla Estevez. Our intern is Susanna Brown. I'm Guy Raz and you've been listening to How I Built This.

0 (1h 25m 1s):
Hey Prime members, you can listen to how I built this early and add free on Amazon Music. Download the Amazon Music app today, or you can listen early and ad free with Wondery Plus in Apple Podcasts. If you wanna show your support for our show, be sure to get your How I Built this merch and gear@wonderyshop.com. Before you go, tell us about yourself by completing a short survey at wondery.com/survey.