2 (0s):
Hey really quick before we get to this brand new episode of How I built this we have a book coming out. It's designed as a

1 (8s):
roadmap for building an idea into a real

2 (10s):
business and it includes

1 (12s):
hundreds of stories

2 (13s):
and lessons from some of the most

1 (14s):
inspiring entrepreneurs in the

2 (16s):
world. You can pre-order the book by looking up how I built this wherever you get your books or by visiting Kyra's.com. Okay onto

1 (24s):
the show. We ran out of money over and over and over again. I couldn't afford a salary. My partner couldn't afford a salary. I couldn't afford rent anymore. And my parents had bought a place in near the airport at that point and they let me move into them and we had this really really incredible high-end clientele. And and I was I was working on my mom's garage.

2 (1m 3s):
From NPR it's how I built this a show about innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They built I'm Gyros and on today's show how a trip to Japan and a meeting with a geisha inspired Vicky tie to launch Tasha a line of skincare products that almost nobody thought was a good idea. until everybody did So as you've heard on this show really good ideas often come from solving a problem that you and other people have and of course you can spend years solving that particular problem in just the right way obsessing over countless designs doing mountains of research to find the perfect fit between what you made and what the market wants but sometimes ideas just sort of reveal themselves.

2 (2m 8s):
Even when you're not looking and that can often happen when you're visiting a different country like Gordon and Carol Siegel who came across Scandinavian furniture on their honeymoon and went on to build cratenbarrel or Susan Griffin black who encountered lavender oil on a visit to Covent Garden in London

1 (2m 28s):
and came up with the body care company co-products or

2 (2m 31s):
Blake mycoskie. Whose trip to Argentina exposed him to a type of espadrilles shoe that people Recreate as Tom's and for Vicky tie Our Guest today the pivotal trip for her was to Kyoto Japan in 2008. She went there to kind of decompress after leaving a job that left her feeling pretty bad about herself. And it was on that trip that Vicki came

1 (2m 57s):
across the nearly impenetrable world

2 (2m 59s):
of the Geisha and in particular the natural beauty products that the Geisha used on their skin to make it look smooth and flawless. and when Vicki started to research the idea of maybe introducing some of these products to American consumers, she heard no from almost everyone people in Japan told her that the skin care products used by the Geisha were old-fashioned the kind of stuff your grandma might use and in the u.s. Beauty experts told Vicky something even more disappointing that Americans weren't even interested in beauty products from Asia, but it turns out out they were though it would definitely take years for Vicki's brand tatcha to gain traction and much of that time.

2 (3m 47s):
She worked at her mom's

1 (3m 48s):
garage scrambling to pay her

2 (3m 50s):
team and pitching her skin care products on QVC, but by 2018 tatra was doing 70 million dollars in sales and a year later. It was acquired by Unilever for a reported half a billion dollars now Vicki actually got her start in. Beauty industry working for her mom who ran a small cosmetic shop in Houston both her mom and dad came to the u.s. From Taiwan and After High School Vicky went to UT Austin before transferring to Wellesley, the women's liberal arts college in Massachusetts.

1 (4m 24s):
I loved my experience at Wellesley, but it was very very small UT. Austin is huge school, and I was used to my Independence and used to Big

2 (4m 34s):
classes and lots of different kinds of people

1 (4m 38s):
so, I went to Wellesley. It's a very small boutique experience tiny liberal arts college and it's women only which I understood

2 (4m 47s):
theoretically but it wasn't till I got

1 (4m 49s):
there. I was like where the guy's

2 (4m 51s):
a bit I guess why you were there you met this guy who would eventually become your husband named Eric. They you the story writers that you actually really kind of pursued him. That's actually the beginning. He was he was sort of Not the kind of person who would ask someone out. I guess that's the story.

1 (5m 14s):
Yeah, and it was the weekend before school started at Wellesley and it had hit me that there really were no men there and they had this dance called Tower quart mixer and men from surrounding schools would come in for the dance and I saw him. Him and he wasn't at all interested in me and you I kind of kept on doing laps around the dance floor with my with my new girlfriends and they kept on getting plucked off one by one and then every few months I would try to get his attention and email him and call him but he just wasn't interested.

2 (5m 59s):
So what guy I'm interested. How did you eventually, you know get them to agree to go out with

1 (6m 5s):
you? I'm not totally sure. I just wore him down. We've been together over 20 years now and I just I just kept asking

2 (6m 15s):
wow. So I guess after after graduation both of you moved to New York to work in finance and both of you wind up. I think at

1 (6m 27s):
Maryland, right? Yeah. Hmm.

2 (6m 30s):
Okay. So both of you are working in lower

1 (6m 33s):
Manhattan. Yes, we were and Did you

2 (6m 36s):
guys were there on on September 11

1 (6m 38s):
2001, right? Yeah, we were in one of the World Financial Centers that they actually connected to the Trade Centers via a land bridge and so I was on the trading floor which is the 7th floor of that building and my husband was on the 26th floor, which is where he worked of the Financial Centers and I was in a meeting when the first plane hit and there was no windows in the meeting room. We felt the rumble and we heard it but we didn't know what it was. But my husband when he heard the first plane hit he went straight to the windows to see what was happening and he actually watched the second plane come in and bank and he watched it go into the tower at that point.

1 (7m 25s):
I was back on the trading floor. We've gotten out of our meeting and when we heard the second plane hit we didn't know what was Going on and nothing came on over the loudspeakers yet. But I remember getting up and walking 7 flights down and actually being one of the first ones to leave the building and I'm ashamed to say that it didn't even occur to me to call up to my husband to tell him what was going on. I just split and then I waited outside for him here on the sidewalk on the sidewalk and I realized we were never going to find each other because as people start flowing out of all the Lisa got pretty chaotic down there and then and then the people were jumping.

1 (8m 12s):
And I couldn't I couldn't watch it any longer. So I walked back to our apartment which was in the West Village and I thought he's going to know that we can't find each other here and he'll he'll come find me and he'll probably beat me there because I have heels on and he's fast. He was a Marathon run at that point. So then when I got home and he still wasn't there, that's when I realized like shoot he was looking for me and then I had no way of getting a hold of him because the the mobile phones weren't working. Both both the towers fell before he got home. So there was a moment.

1 (8m 53s):
There was a moment in there. I thought he was god. Wow.

2 (8m 58s):
How long before you saw him before he got

1 (9m 1s):
home? You must have been it must be minutes not too long, but it was enough for me to be watching on the TV and see the power Towers fall it I couldn't even quantify how long but then he came after and he was okay.

2 (9m 18s):
when that happened I guess both of you decided you need to kind of rethink what you want to do with your life that maybe being a traitor in on Wall Street wasn't what you wanted to

1 (9m 29s):
do. Yeah, I don't know if I don't know if I came up with that immediately, but I knew I didn't want to be there anymore. He got sick with an autoimmune disease pretty soon after

2 (9m 41s):
right. They almost immediately after it was not related unrelated to

1 (9m 44s):
it will you know will never will never really know. He never had any symptoms before that. He had run I think five. Thongs and two years prior to that super healthy captain of the crew team and then all sudden. He couldn't move he couldn't keep food down. He lost 40 pounds throat.

2 (9m 59s):
Wow, how long was he getting treated for

1 (10m 1s):
it about three years. So we would spend the weekends in the emergency room. Eventually. We did go to the Mayo Clinic. He had some procedures. They didn't know what it was towards the end. They were thinking about Remicade which is a pretty strong treatment that aside. Effects included things like infections of the nervous system. I mean pretty horrifying stuff and we decided to just pull the plug on all the treatments stop with all the medicine and the steroids and just quit it and see what happens and thank goodness. He got his health back. Wow.

2 (10m 36s):
So for three years, he was struggling with this autoimmune disease you were spending your weekends in emergency rooms must have just been totally like debilitating and scared. Scary.

1 (10m 48s):
Yeah it it should have been Um, but I think what I did at that time, and I only realized it recently as I sorted I started to almost disassociate. I didn't want to be in Manhattan anymore. I didn't want to be in ground zero. I didn't I don't want to have to go there every day, especially because when the temporary trading floor New Jersey was moved back to ground zero break before Christmas time. The only thing I could see was out the window which looked straight at the hole that was left and you Could always tell when they found a body or body parts because it would be covered with an American flag. And that was my only view for months.

1 (11m 28s):
I couldn't see anything but that and then I would go home and my husband would be sick. And so I actually just want really numb and I just want on complete autopilot and I started planning. How do we get out of Wall Street? I just wanted to planning mode

2 (11m 45s):
and I guess eventually you did get out of New York you guys both Loser to Boston where you went to two business called Harvard Business School, right? Yes, and in right that why you were there, I guess I guess you could kind of get your first experience working in the beauty industry like you got an internship with Proctor and Gamble.

1 (12m 5s):
Yeah, so I was actually working on SK 2, which is a Japanese skincare brand that they own and I treated my face like a science experiment and gave myself a cute dermatitis. Wait.

2 (12m 20s):
Treated when you say treated your face, like a science experiment. You meant you were trying all the products that you were working with the

1 (12m 26s):
products that we were working with. But then also to do a competitive benchmarking I would go to the other luxury brand solo mayor and lefurey doesn't matter across the board. I just would got a chance to buy a lot of them to use a lot of them to try to

2 (12m 41s):
craft a ski

1 (12m 42s):
to strategy and it was at that point that I ruined my face.

2 (12m 46s):
You got East you got a cute drummer. What is acute dermatitis?

1 (12m 50s):
It's when the barrier function of your skin is become disrupted and so things that would typically not irritate the skin suddenly start irritating

2 (12m 58s):
it because it's getting

1 (12m 59s):
into the skin itself. So it looks like leading blistering scaling on my entire face including my lips in my eyelids is very painful. Wow,

2 (13m 8s):
and you'd never have that

1 (13m 9s):
before never and once you have disrupted the barrier function of your skin after that it's not able to effectively keep things out. And so anything after that

2 (13m 20s):
can start urinating your skin so detergents in my pillowcases or

1 (13m 24s):
fragrances or my shampoos that had traditional ingredients in it. It was everything when the spring came pollution, whatever I just it would freak out. It's like the plagues in ancient

2 (13m 36s):
Egypt like first there's 911 and then your husband's autoimmune disease and then your dermatitis. We're only into 2004 here. Oh, yeah, we didn't get to the fun stuff yet. That's right. Wow, so you guys were dealing with a lot of how are

1 (13m 50s):
You how did you eventually get

2 (13m 53s):
it? Did it just go away on its own or how did you eventually bring it under control?

1 (13m 58s):
I had it from the summer of business school. So between those two years, I had it my entire second year of business school. And then I had it two years after that when I graduated and I worked for Starbucks. So after business school we moved to Seattle. My job was to launch Starbucks's consumer products business in China, and I was flying all the time. Through Japan, they were not direct flights between Seattle and Beijing at that time. And the only thing I could put on my face that didn't irritate. It was aquifer. Yeah, which you know, you put under the baby's butt for they have diaper rashes for well. Yeah, but it leaves you looking kind of greasy.

1 (14m 38s):
So when I would go to China by Japan, I would pick up these blotting papers that I found in Japan. I couldn't find any us

2 (14m 47s):
what are blotting papers

1 (14m 48s):
for people. I'm sorry. Yeah. That's a great question. It's a piece of paper that is made out of this very kind of materials. The ones in the US are made of cotton. The ones in Japan are made out of a certain type of leaf and you press it to your skin when it's oily and it lifts off the oil but it won't disrupt your makeup or take any moisture from the

2 (15m 7s):
skin and that helped

1 (15m 9s):
it helped. Alright cool. So you got the blotting paper.

2 (15m 12s):
You're going to China you're working for Starbucks or sounds like a pretty amazing job and was there like a Starbucks craze and China already at that point? Point like we're people waiting in line to get their Starbucks and stuff. I

1 (15m 23s):
don't know if there's lines but it was already a very popular and admired

2 (15m 28s):
brand got it. Okay, and your job is to is to launch. What in a Starbucks essentially Frappuccino. Rapid Decay model Frappuccino. So I read a story. I don't know if it's entirely accurate that you know, you were grinding away at Starbucks. You were just working really really hard and going back and forth you really Have this initiative and then I guess it was time for you get your annual review and it was like meets expectations. That was what ha what it said you do to be your research and on that and and that that really hurt your feelings like you were really upset by that I was offended.

2 (16m 7s):
Honestly,

1 (16m 8s):
I would go 40 days straight without taking a day off. I would fly over the weekend so that I would miss any time and be back in in the office by 8:00 a.m. Monday morning. The timeline for the project was extremely compressed as a team of one with no manager and in the middle of all of that. I broke my arm and I had a cast that went all the way up to almost my shoulder that I had to wear for months and I missed 0 days of work and it ended up being a very successful launch Howard was super happy with it and had me present to his board of directors and I had a VP in my group who I had very little mentorship or guidance from and at the end of the year.

1 (16m 57s):
He gave me my performance review and it was meets expectations. And I just thought this is not a place where I'll be successful, even though I have so much admiration for Howard and the company and the brand so I left

2 (17m 9s):
wow meet expectations. Yeah, so you you left our box. Yeah.

1 (17m 18s):
And then I was recruited out to the Bay Area to head up marketing for a sustainability startup and then Howard Schultz found out and he called me on my mobile phone and asked me to come in and meet with him. So I went back to his office and it was the week that my furniture was already on a truck to San Francisco and he got something like why would you go and tell me what you want to do and tell me what job you're interested in, but I had a weird loyalty. To the sure did the VP who gave me a meets expectations review. So all I said to Howard was oh, you know, I just don't fit in here. So if I could do it all over again Howard I left because I got a crappy review

2 (18m 0s):
that I did not deserve. No, I mean, of course it's like and and when you're like, wait a minute, I worked so hard and somebody else is, you know, recruiting me now, it makes sense of you went so you got recruited by this this other company and what was the

1 (18m 15s):
company it was called. Well, it eventually became called good guide. It's very hard to say good kind good guide and it probably took Berkeley. It was a few scientists out of Berkeley and they wanted to create sustainability ratings for consumers by scraping the internet so that a consumer could plug in their values, you know, I care about I care about gay rights and care about animal testing I care about carcinogens, but I also want to shampoo for curly hair. And be able to check all these things off and how have it pop out a recommendation. They're really ahead of their time again so much credit for that

2 (18m 54s):
because it was 2008. That's still just as the iPhone is coming out to still pre app.

1 (18m 60s):
Really and mmm. Yeah. Mmm. It was

2 (19m 3s):
I should mention you were married at this point. You guys did between you did get married.

1 (19m 7s):
Yes. We are married. We still had a house in Seattle. And so I picked up and I left so quickly that I moved your I moved to the Bay Area alone.

2 (19m 16s):
It's got it. Okay and And and what was your what was your job at that internet startup? But what will you target test to do?

1 (19m 23s):
I was their first business higher and so my job was effectively to come up with a launch plan for them as well. As you know, a marketing strategy. And so I was with them for only eight I think maybe four months. So did you I mean so you

2 (19m 41s):
for months and in and did you have a plan when you quit or did you just say, I'm gonna walk I'm gonna step aside.

1 (19m 48s):
You know, I think it dates back to 9/11 and the experiences there, but I was becoming increasingly impatient with spending the

2 (19m 58s):
hours of my Waking Life doing

1 (20m 0s):
things that I didn't believe in or if I believed in but it just didn't feel like the right fit for the right people. So I typed up a letter a resignation letter and I drove into the office and I handed it to them and I told them that I I very much respected what they were doing, but it wasn't the right fit for me and I tried to leave rather. Elegantly but one I was crying because I was so lost and into I had brought this big clunky chair with me

2 (20m 28s):
and I was trying to take the chair out. He brought to the office like a chair that you wanted to sit on the ergonomic chair. Oh, yeah, and then so when I left I had to take the chair with me and and I could it fit in my car on the way out. So I had actually call up to someone in the office and have them help me compress the chair so I can close the trunk and drive away. Is the messiest resignation it's humiliating. You're like four months in and you're out of work. Did you just a part of your kind of regret leaving Starbucks at that point which is a part of you think like God. Was that what am I doing with my life?

1 (21m 3s):
Oh, yeah. I thought to myself Howard Schultz called me my cell phone and offered me any job that I wanted at Starbucks. And now I am unemployed standing in the street crying with my chair in a different city than my husband because he was zup in Seattle. Yeah. Hmm, and I definitely was thinking about all the debt that we had because we had to business school debts plus a mortgage in Seattle plus a lease for an apartment in San Francisco and my husband had undergrad debt on top of that and I just remember thinking I've really made a mess for myself. Yeah. I mean you probably

2 (21m 39s):
have hundreds of thousands of dollars in debt

1 (21m 42s):
is probably about six hundred thousand at that point. Hmm, but they now this is 2008.

2 (21m 48s):
Yeah, which is just the beginning of the Great Recession. What was your what did you what did you want to do immediately you want to like hide in bed and put the covers over your head. Like what was your plan?

1 (22m 1s):
Um, well, I told my landlord that I was not working and she let me help me the almost like the super for my building. Oh and rent out apartments for her and her other buildings 400 bucks a pop.

2 (22m 18s):
Pageant and was that pizzette pretty good to it wasn't enough to kind of keep you going

1 (22m 23s):
it why he worked out for jobs at that point. That was one of them. I think the only thing was interesting about that was often times

2 (22m 31s):
the business school types

1 (22m 33s):
when they moved to San Francisco will live in the marina. So when I was out there running out Apartments, it was not uncommon for me to see my business school classmates and they're like, is this your apartment? All like no like why are you reading? It out. I

2 (22m 48s):
like to the money they would give

1 (22m 51s):
me this look of pity and confusion but it didn't matter

2 (22m 57s):
so you left the job but to start up and you're kind of doing a bunch of different things to make money.

1 (23m 4s):
And and then I guess you at some point took a

2 (23m 7s):
trip to to Kyoto to Japan just just to go visit. Like was there a reason why you went to Kyoto in 2008?

1 (23m 16s):
So I was unemployed. I still have dermatitis. I'm still using aqua for my face and I ran out of my blotting papers. I tried to find those voting papers around in the US and they're not available. They there's different kinds here, but not that kind. And so I called up my friend from Starbucks Japan and I asked her where to find these blotting papers, and she said they're actually from around Kyoto and they come from Goldie

2 (23m 44s):
partisans. Gold gold leaf

1 (23m 47s):
Artisans. Mmm. She said they're they're hammering papers. They're beating papers. And I was like, what are you talking about? Tomoko? And I didn't really understand what she was saying, but I thought the whole thing was so fascinating and I felt drawn to travel. I think I think I was trying to find myself. So I just picked up and I went to Japan.

2 (24m 8s):
All right. So most people wouldn't just go to Japan to get a fresh batch of blotting papers. I have to imagine that you're thinking these work. Really? Well for me, I want to go check them out and see if they're maybe I can I don't know do something with them in the

1 (24m 21s):
u.s. I did not have a commercial idea yet at that point. I felt broken. We had had a pretty rough first 10 years of our adult life and in pretty rough is relative. My vote

2 (24m 38s):
is no no

1 (24m 39s):
you get to say that, you know, I just I felt like I didn't believe in anything anymore and I question my value system and I questioned what I had been chasing my whole life because my parents is first generation Asian immigrants, you know, it's a very clear equation for Success you go to an Ivy League school become a doctor or lawyer and then make your parents super proud and make their sacrifices worth it. Yep, and I sort of veered off every one of these paths and I just started traveling and I I think like a lot of people I was traveling to find myself and when she said Kyoto there was something about it that Drew me even though I had never really spent significant time in Japan before I knew nothing about Japanese culture because I'm not Japanese, but I just felt drawn.

1 (25m 31s):
So I went there.

2 (25m 33s):
And what happens when you get there, did you get your body papers

1 (25m 38s):
when I got to Kyoto? I went to The Artisans who are a couple hours outside of Kyoto. And when I went to the workshop there all they make there is gold and there's gold everywhere. There's like there's gold on their eyelashes. There's gold in their clothes

2 (25m 53s):
just like this look a mess of gold and this is gold leaf for like art for like paintings and decorative

1 (25m 59s):
Works in Japan things that are precious are often left in Gold including The Golden Temple

2 (26m 5s):
in Japan or in Japan. So basically for centuries but blotting is like blotting paper in Japan came from these Gold Leaf Artisans who were using it to hammer gold until Into Thin sheets of paper

1 (26m 19s):
exactly. So gold is soft and what they would do is they take gold paper gold paper gold paper gold paper and then these massive hammers made out of like stones and it protects the gold during the hammering process because Gold Leaf is only a few micrometers and thickness so it really has to get hammered down to almost nothing. And so this paper would get hammered with the gold and it would protect the gold and then when they were done with hammering the hammering paper would get thrown away. So how did they

2 (26m 49s):
figure out that this this paper that you were that they're using the hammer gold until in the leaf would be useful on human skin.

1 (26m 58s):
That was my question because it's such a weirdly. Yeah, and so they they You said you would have to ask a geisha or Kabuki actor because they're the ones who've been coming around getting them at the end of the day and I was like can I meet one and they said yeah and so they introduced me to one which is crazy

2 (27m 17s):
because would they like that you in touch with some with a geisha?

1 (27m 21s):
Hmm. They introduced me to a geisha that they knew and they helped arrange for me to meet her in a tea house either later that day or the next day. Wow, and I had a translator with me named Yuko, who's wonderful and the Beautiful unreal Geisha walked in and I was just

2 (27m 46s):
completely beside myself. It was the

1 (27m 48s):
summer time. I was pregnant. I was trying

2 (27m 52s):
to sit on my knees, which I'm not very good at and I was sweating and I kept sliding off of my legs because of the sweat

1 (27m 59s):
and yet she was just the picture of Action in wrapped in kimono. No sweat never had to budge never broke

2 (28m 8s):
character. It just remember thinking.

1 (28m 10s):
I'm a hot mess but you're amazing was

2 (28m 13s):
she in her uniform and her sort of costume with with makeup on and the she was in

1 (28m 19s):
full performance makeup

2 (28m 21s):
and kimono. All right, so you meet this woman and and you start asking her. Hey tell me the story about this blotting paper.

1 (28m 30s):
Yeah, and honestly, she didn't have a great answer. She just said, I don't know we always As knew that if we went and we used it before we put on our makeup, it would help create the nice canvas for makeup. And if we use it after we keep our makeup

2 (28m 40s):
fresh, but she didn't have a lot to tell me about how

1 (28m 44s):
that leap happened from one industry to another next but at the same time I was so enchanted by her look, especially the makeup and they told me that they should have been

2 (28m 54s):
around three to four

1 (28m 55s):
hundred years and I knew a lot of the things that scared me about ingredients in Personal Care were largely from the Industry and so I knew whatever they're using largely predated the

2 (29m 9s):
petrochemical industry. And so I started asking her questions about her makeup

1 (29m 13s):
not because I wanted that look but I was looking for anything at that point that I felt safe putting on my skin because I still had my skin tissue to and now I'm pregnant so I'm super careful

2 (29m 23s):
about what I'm putting on my skin, right and and what was her advice. What did she tell you to buy?

1 (29m 28s):
She just told me some basic stuff we use oil to take off our makeup. We use a lot of rice powder and Miele oil and sake and then you go took me to go find some of those things afterwards and that's when I started seeing Geisha flitting in and out of the store while we were there without any makeup on Wow, and their skin looks like a child's skin. And so if they reached for, you know a bottle of oil I would reach for that bottle of oil and then if they reach for a powder, I would reach for a

2 (29m 58s):
powder and what were the like the materials that were so different that you hadn't seen anywhere. Else like what was the source of that of the Cosmetics? Like what were they making it out of

1 (30m 8s):
largely food ingredients the when I took them home you go had to write down on Post-It note saying, you know, this is rice powder Add Water create a foam massaged into the skin or leave on as a mask because

2 (30m 25s):
everything was in Japanese, right? Okay.

1 (30m 26s):
Yeah. Yeah, and so I just came home with this box of things like that and I use half of them. Wrong, huh? But about eight weeks later. My skin had pretty much healed and that was after three years of dermatitis and steroids and antibiotics and at the same time I was so enchanted with the story of the blotting papers the gold leaf Artisans the Geisha and the history and to me it embodied so much of what I was looking for as a woman. It was authentic. It was beautiful. It was steeped in true history. And so I guess if I take one step It gives when I was still in Kyoto after him at the Geisha, I went back to the gold leaf Artisans and I did ask if I could bring the blotting papers to the

2 (31m 11s):
US if you could buy some from

1 (31m 12s):
them. Hmm and they said no we're not we're not interested in

2 (31m 17s):
in distribution. And by the way, were they selling the blotting papers to the Geisha or they just like it was just refuse the Geisha were just picking it up

1 (31m 24s):
originally it was refused and now they sell it to them.

2 (31m 27s):
All right. So original is refuse but but and and clearly they were being sold in Japan because you had already used These blotting papers before

1 (31m 35s):
exactly and I was just asking if I could bring them to the US because they weren't available in the US

2 (31m 39s):
and they said we're not

1 (31m 40s):
interested. They said they weren't interested. So then I said how many would I have two by two to get you interested and they said 10,000 and I was like, oh by it and

2 (31m 51s):
you said Oh by 10,000 piece of paper. I'll buy ten thousand booklets, right and how much did that cost you hmm? But like a star a couple thousand

1 (32m 2s):
bucks. No like 30,000 more than 30,000.

2 (32m 5s):
Wow, so you sorry so they said used to buy 10,000 these booklets and said, all right, I'll do it. But first of all, how did you how are you going to do that? Well,

1 (32m 15s):
first I said, I'll buy it then. I went back to my hotel room and called my husband that night. So it's maybe 6:00 a.m. His time and I think good morning. I hope you're doing great. I just I just bought 10,000 blotting

2 (32m 28s):
papers. To bring back with me the u.s. Yeah, and

1 (32m 34s):
he said how are you going to

2 (32m 35s):
pay for them? Did you said? I looked around the room and the only thing of value that I had left at that point was my engagement ring on my hand. So I said I'll just tell my kids cheering. Wow. You said you'll sell your engagement ring. Did you pawn it at a pawn shop?

1 (32m 51s):
I called the place in New York where I bought my engagement ring because I had I proposed my husband and I bought my ring and so I just called them and said I need to sell it back to you. Would you buy it so they took It On consignment took it took a few months for them to find a buyer. Okay?

2 (33m 8s):
And and what were you going to do with the blotting paper with 10,000 booklets of blotting paper in the

1 (33m 13s):
u.s. I had not really thought it that far out

2 (33m 17s):
honestly, but you just thought these work really well for me. There's something here.

1 (33m 21s):
There's something here. Maybe I'll keep like a thousand for myself and then I'll figure I'll give everybody else L. Then the other nine thousand and then I'll have a steady supply for

2 (33m 29s):
myself. Got it. All right, so you come back to San Francisco. And did you ship the blotting papers or

1 (33m 36s):
they it? About a month to actually make them and send them to me or maybe a couple months and so they showed up in big crates few months later.

2 (33m 45s):
So did you have a an apartment just full of blotting

1 (33m 48s):
papers? Yes, but

2 (33m 50s):
like what? How are you buddy? Then watch like do you start calling friends? Do you have like a blotting paper party at your apartment invite people over like what what do you do with them?

1 (34m 2s):
I still can't explain it but I saw this Vision in my head of sharing these beautiful Little Treasures that I found in Japan with other women like me who were looking for something that was real and beautiful and safe. And so I thought maybe maybe I can create a way to keep sharing these things and I'm finding because There are these ingredients that heal my skin there's this paper with this beautiful history that's fantastic and simple and so I actually created Tasha as just as a way of sharing these things. I was Finding when I go there and how did you come up with a name Tasha?

1 (34m 46s):
I had been helping out my friends family who had been the global head of creative for Starbucks and had left to start his own creative agency, and I had asked him for his advice on creating a And because I didn't know how to do that and when I was telling him what I wanted it to feel like I just said I want it to feel like an exhale like a breath of fresh air. And so he actually came up with the name Tasha and then shortly thereafter. He introduced me to this incredible woman Nami onodera who still with us who's our director of culture and she said when I saw the name Tasha Assumed that it was short for Tatiana, which is one of the classical Japanese Arts of flower arrangement and it speaks to the beauty of Simplicity in nature.

1 (35m 46s):
And so we said, you know what that's far. That's far more beautiful than just being an exhale or and a breath of fresh air. So let's imbued with meaning

2 (35m 57s):
and did you start to talk to people about it? I mean you would gone to business school. So you knew a little bit about like what it takes to fundraise and you build a deck and start like pitching me the idea.

1 (36m 8s):
Mmm. I knew enough about fundraising that I didn't want to do

2 (36m 10s):
it because

1 (36m 13s):
I wanted to create something really really pure and really really true and a lot of people from business school end up in a private Equity world and in the VC world and the ROI is is very straightforward there. It's about money. Yeah, they want 10x. Yeah, right. It's money and it's It has money in its growth and I wasn't interested in creating something for money or for growth. I was interested in creating something worth loving and that I would want to spend the waking hours of my life doing so I just wanted to self-finance it and and just see what it could become. Yeah, but the only thing I wanted was to make sure it stayed really true.

2 (36m 51s):
But here's a question. Right and I get this question a lot from people with nice a guy. You know, I keep hearing these stories about people self-financed but how how do they do it? I mean, I don't have any money. You sold your engagement ring, but and then presumably you had some savings from your Starbucks days and stuff like that. But I mean no savings. No those it was gone. But how did you do that? How did you how did you finance it without any I mean cuz to do a create a company Cosmetics company presumably requires a lot of capital right

1 (37m 21s):
indeed indeed. Yeah. Well I started before I even started the idea. There's maybe half a million in debt. So we immediately went to credit cards. Which I don't recommend but it is what we did. I worked for jobs. I begged my landlord for a discount in rent in exchange for renting out the apartments and being the super for the building. I sold anything that I had that was of any worth including my car my furniture. My husband is very good at poker. And so when he moved to San Francisco every Tuesday night, he would go play poker. Wow, and it would be just

2 (38m 0s):
enough I'd wake up

1 (38m 2s):
Wednesday morning. There'd be a little sexy cash. I'm gonna do that to buy food. And then I just I was just a team of one

2 (38m 10s):
working out of your

1 (38m 10s):
apartment working out of my apartment, but I mean to be to be completely honest financially things work Tire. We would when we Max that one credit card, we would roll it all. Over to another credit card to buy ourselves some time and I have a distinct memory of being nine months pregnant. I couldn't afford maternity clothes. So

2 (38m 31s):
I just sort of pulled the

1 (38m 32s):
drawstring out of my sweatpants, but then I'm like Humpty Dumpty

2 (38m 36s):
without the offenders. So like I have to hold onto the pants when I walk or else there on

1 (38m 40s):
the ground and I went to the grocery store.

2 (38m 45s):
I was checking

1 (38m 46s):
out and my credit card got declined and the behind me in the cash. The cashier looked at me with a great deal of pity because I was super

2 (38m 57s):
pregnant and I couldn't afford my

1 (38m 59s):
groceries and I left them there and I walked out

2 (39m 2s):
without them. Wow. Let me come back in just a moment. How viky finally got Tasha off the ground and into her parent's garage where she would begin an eight-year long struggle to keep the company from sinking stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible.

2 (39m 42s):
First to eat trade trading isn't for everyone. But E-Trade is whether it's saving for a rainy day or your retirement E-Trade has you covered they can help you check financial goals off your list and with a team of professionals giving you support when you need it. You can be confident that your money is working hard for you get more with just trading with E-Trade to get Visit E-Trade.com podcast for more information E-Trade Securities. LLC member finra sapt thanks also to Comcast business today businesses are starting to bounce back. But what if you could do better than that learn how you can not just bounce back but bounce forward at Comcast business.com Whenever you face a choice, it helps to think like an economist and this week on Planet Money summer school will start off our course in economics with a workout for your brain how to decide what something truly costs listen now to Planet money from NPR.

2 (40m 51s):
Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR. I'm guy Roz. So it's 2009 and Vicky and her husband. Eric are about to become new parents. With a bank account that's almost empty and an apartment. That's pretty much full of Japanese blotting papers and Vicki needs to come up with a plan to launch her brand new business Tasha. I

1 (41m 18s):
was completely

2 (41m 20s):
mistaken about how I would bring it to life.

1 (41m 23s):
I thought if they're beautifully designed and I tell you know, this this beautiful and true story about where they're from. I'll be able to find Partners to work with so retailers whom would want to carry it PR agencies who want to work with us and we were turned down

2 (41m 39s):
everywhere. You pitched everybody. He said hey, I've got

1 (41m 42s):
this great product. You name it? Yes periods of even be I couldn't even give people money to take me as a client and then retailers were not interested at all. So and everybody also told me the time to that there is no demand or interest in Asian beauty in the u.s. Because it's not aspirational. Wow, and they Pointed out that you know Shiseido had been in the US for over two decades and had not been able to really make it Beyond Chinatown sk2 Procter & Gamble was behind them. They weren't having any meaningful success yet shuuyu Amora which was owned by L'Oreal had been pulled out of the market and shut down and there was no other Asian Brands and you know people told me very very plainly that skin.

1 (42m 31s):
There's not really a thing in the u.s. We will care about they care about makeup and then Asian beauty in totality is not aspirational here. So don't do it. But you do

2 (42m 42s):
did do it. I mean you you started putting the blotting papers out into the world. So like how like, how did you how did you get the word out?

1 (42m 52s):
Well, I went to the library and I couldn't afford the magazines but I flipped through them and I wrote down the names of the editors and their mailing addresses. And the makeup artist that I admired and I started sending out care packages with handwritten letters to them just with the blotting papers and all I did was tell the truth of their story and I said, I hope you enjoy them and that was where the Press covers started coming from. And

2 (43m 19s):
so you just need to just blind. I mean you were doing your own PR. This is you literally mailing it to somebody at one of those places

1 (43m 29s):
and the makeup artist the Up artists I saw the names in the credits on the side of the picture and then I looked them up online and I found their agencies and I would send them to their agencies.

2 (43m 41s):
Where was the coverage with what magazines pretty much everyone

1 (43m 44s):
Vogue did a spread Oprah. It was on The Today Show pretty quickly. We got a ton of press. It was amazing in the in so in your first year

2 (43m 56s):
you doing great. I mean it

1 (43m 59s):
was difficult. I had the Calls made from a wine label maker in Marin and then when I got the labels home, I realized that the adhesive wasn't sticking the way that I needed it to and so I got like a purple cow paper cutter and had to cut down 10,000 tops off of these stickers, but I was pregnant. So like I was it was hard to even reach the table. So I did those 10,000 then I bundled it all up and my husband help me. And a lot of the I would say half that order I actually shipped to the

2 (44m 37s):
UK its base in case is my first retailer based on case that's that the beauty of retailer

1 (44m 42s):
Britain. Yeah, how do they even find out about you the

2 (44m 47s):
magazines and and you're still running this out of

1 (44m 50s):
your apartment out of my apartment. So so they weren't buying huge

2 (44m 56s):
amounts that were buying manageable amounts that give them a few thousand.

1 (44m 60s):
Yeah, and then I had Amazing and it's made those pretty much every single dollar. I could scrape together turned into either merchandising units or these blotting papers and they ended up hitting stores the day that I was in labor with my daughter. So we officially launched the day that my daughter was

2 (45m 18s):
born. What was what was the elbows Eric doing was his job at the time

1 (45m 23s):
Eric had found a job at that point. I think he was with Cisco. We were fortunate we had one income. So you're a brand.

2 (45m 31s):
new mom How are you guys dealing with child care?

1 (45m 37s):
I was taking care of her myself, but I also was really lucky my mom had visited and she helped me find a nanny mrs. Leow who didn't speak English. She's originally from China and she took care of my daughter in my one-bedroom apartment while I worked and then when my daughter napped she would help me pack out orders. Oh and then she became our first

2 (46m 0s):
employee was it. It clear to you that you could make a go just above it just by selling blotting-paper let you that that could be a sustainable business.

1 (46m 10s):
No, it was not I was making far less Revenue doing that then then my lowest paid salary job I've ever had it was not it was not a

2 (46m 20s):
business. It was a hobby business at that point. And did you have a huge Ambitions for it or did you think it was gonna kind of be a side hustle because it sounds like in a way

1 (46m 30s):
it was definitely not a scientist. In the sense that I worked 70 hours a week doing it. I took one day off in the hospital when I gave birth and then I went back to work. So about two weeks after that I flew birth of your after birth of my daughter. Maybe it's more like three weeks. I was flying again either consulting or going to Japan and continuing to research this and it was horrible to leave a newborn. Yeah. What

2 (46m 58s):
what you were you were doing part-time Consulting gigs like to make ends meet in

1 (47m 2s):
addition to running the company. Yes.

2 (47m 5s):
And how long did you do that? Like, how long was it was it before you were able to stop doing outside work and just focus on the company was like like two years three

1 (47m 15s):
years in three to four

2 (47m 16s):
years. Wow,

1 (47m 18s):
and then about a year into it. I had exhausted my search for those other ingredients that I had found in Japan and used the rice powder the mineral powders the Camellia oil the things that I'd heal my skin were not available in the u.s. Even in San Francisco was an incredible Japantown Japantown now Japan, I went to Japan Town Chinatown Koreatown. I went to traditional Chinese medicine places because the there's a lot of herbal treatments there. I went to eBay. I mean, I went everywhere it was it's just not here

2 (47m 52s):
you were looking for that like rice, bran, whatever like foaming powder that you were using and the camellia oil. You could not find surprised. You could not

1 (48m 1s):
find that could not find it and then even even that I did not realize how unique it was and so on one of my trips back to Japan I should flew to Tokyo and I just went to the department stores and I went straight to the Cosmetics counters for the Japanese brands and they all sort of looked at me. Like I was crazy to and Yuko was like, yeah, they don't sell that kind of

2 (48m 24s):
stuff the people don't use that kind of stuff

1 (48m 26s):
here in Japan anymore.

2 (48m 27s):
It's for like old dislike. What for like old-fashioned people are like, yeah. It was things like her.

1 (48m 32s):
Our great-grandmother's our Grandmother's at used

2 (48m 34s):
and you're like no. No, this is actually really great stuff. Yeah,

1 (48m 38s):
I don't like no. This is a super legit. I have no idea why it's super legit, but it is so

2 (48m 42s):
it seems like like at this point Vicky you were thinking of selling these products because you knew you couldn't make a go of it. Just just doing the blotting papers.

1 (48m 53s):
That's exactly right. And then I started working the scientists to develop these formulas.

2 (48m 58s):
Yeah, so you found a lab in Tokyo.

1 (49m 1s):
Yes, and I got Really lucky because it turns out that there are some of the most famous skincare Sciences in Japan

2 (49m 6s):
by the way, from what I understand like the three main ingredients in the lot of these products are green tea rice and

1 (49m 15s):
algae seaweed the the exactly right. Those are the ingredients that I had first use that healed my skin and then we went really deep so we interviewed a dozen Geisha we went to old texts including the oldest Beauty book ever written in Japan, which was written 18. 13 and the more that we dug the more that we realized that the Japanese traditional approach to beautiful skin was not some sort of exotic flower that only grows in the dark side of the moon like many other cultures hundreds of years ago and women found that their skin was dry or patchy or breaking out they go to what's Within Reach and what's within reaches in the kitchen and to the basis of the Japanese diet is the basis of their beauty and that's

2 (50m 0s):
it. It's amazing. It's amazing straight. Forward so they started tinkering with different different products. And what what did you say said? I want to do a lotion. I want to do a face cream. I want it. Like was it that

1 (50m 11s):
specific I brought them things that I had been using that the Geisha had

2 (50m 16s):
shown me and this was to wash your face or clean your face or to to to do what

1 (50m 21s):
yeah. There's a camellia oil that you use to melt off your makeup. There is a rice powder that you use to enzymatically exfoliate your skin and then a moisturizer that was made out of Silk extract and when I showed them the things that I was hoping to create I remember that they laughed a little bit

2 (50m 39s):
because they said why do you like these old-fashioned things? Nobody will like this? Nobody uses these anymore and I was like because they work I don't really care what sexy it works for me, but it's interesting because they were old-fashioned right like but but you understood that if you just updated the design, it could appeal to people in the US because so much of so much of these things is about design All right, you have great product in the design sucks No One's Gonna notice it. That's exactly right.

1 (51m 7s):
You know the way that most Beauty Brands come to life these days is you know, if you've ever wondered how does this model or this actress suddenly come out with a ATP skincare collection?

2 (51m 19s):
What does he know about skin care?

1 (51m 20s):
It's pretty easy. If you want to do it the fast way you go to a contract manufacturer. They have stock formulas in stock packaging you pick it you put in 0.01% of a marketing level ingredient you put your name on it. You pick a fragrance and it's out the door and that is how the vast majority of skin care is made in the world and I will be completely honest. I did go to labs in Japan and say do you do you have formulas like this because no brands are making anything like this and they said no we don't make

2 (51m 46s):
formulas that you were looking for him like a potential White Label

1 (51m 50s):
product because that's the way you make decision in the Beauty World. Yeah, and so they would take me to their like glass cases where they would say we used to make something like that a hundred

2 (52m 1s):
twenty years ago. But no we don't make that

1 (52m 4s):
anymore. And so that's why I had to find my own scientists.

2 (52m 8s):
How are you? How are you able to I mean at this point did you did you get some outside money? Because how are you be able to pay that lab in the

1 (52m 15s):
scientist? Um at that point I had gone and started doing a friends and family around and my friends and family is mostly my family.

2 (52m 24s):
This is like 28 2010

1 (52m 26s):
2011. Hmm. And so I went to my mom and my dad Stanley my co-founder. And then some people who eventually started working for Tasha they invested as well. And so it really was it was just us. Were

2 (52m 39s):
you able to raise more than a million

1 (52m 41s):
dollars? I think it was I think it was over the course of a few rounds it added up to a million and

2 (52m 47s):
that was going to be certainly going to be enough to get the lab to come up with the formula formulas. Yeah. We also did a custom

1 (52m 54s):
packaging which is unusual as well. So building our own molds and from scratch and

2 (52m 59s):
molds for bottles and and and tubes Mm-hmm,

1 (53m 3s):
and the molds are expensive because they're they're huge and they're made out of steel. And so having custom molds made in the engineering the design that goes into that that that's quite expensive as well.

2 (53m 14s):
So what in those first like, you know, why you were developing the product line? Like what was you burning through cash?

1 (53m 22s):
Yes, and you know, you asked me about the fundraising and I mentioned that over the course of a few rounds. It was it came to maybe a million dollars.

2 (53m 32s):
Actually

1 (53m 32s):
two but it was not an organized Affair in any way. Yeah, it wasn't like we had a thoughtful business plan despite having multiple ivy league mbas on the team. Yeah. We we were all Finance people. We should have known better right and been able to stick to a budget and a forecast and a business plan and if that didn't happen at all and we ran out of money over and over and over again, I couldn't afford a salary. My partner couldn't afford a salary I couldn't afford rent anymore. Or my parents had bought a place in near the airport at that point

2 (54m 8s):
in San Francisco in San Francisco the newer

1 (54m 10s):
Millbrae and they let me move into them. Wait, where was your husband hasn't moved with me, but we couldn't afford the apartment in the Marine anymore if he had a job he did but every single dollar that he had I took could I put into the

2 (54m 23s):
company right? So you moved into their apartment for how long

1 (54m 29s):
into their house for seven years for

2 (54m 30s):
seven years

1 (54m 32s):
and worked.

2 (54m 32s):
A garage with no salary. So I'm just I'm just curious you were making essentially a high-end brand right you were making a beauty product that was going to appeal to people who had money to spend and you could you could not live that kind of Life certainly the beginning but I guess at the same time, didn't you look at that present yourself that way a little bit like kind of as glamorous and You know just at least two people you were talking with the product to

1 (55m 8s):
I try to hide and not meet them in person and only speak with them or send them letters and your rights one of our first customers and I don't normally mention our customers but one of our first customers was Donatella Versace and like we had really really incredible high-end clientele. And and I was I was working on my mom's

2 (55m 29s):
garage. Wow. All right, so You launched the pipeline and you already had a customer base or people buying the product and in 2012

1 (55m 41s):
when started know when we launched the skincare this little 4-Piece collection with just a cleanser and exfoliant a serum and a moisturizer. I was so fortunate and then I had sort of the Holy Grail of press hits the same week or weekend that the products launched online. And so that was it. Is like a two page spread in Vogue? It was a feature and Oprah. It was the Today Show again and we had this website set up and it was beautiful and I remember we sold exactly one serum and then that wasn't going to Friday and then that that weekend I was trying to figure out how to create a promotion code and I made a mistake and I zeroed out all the pricing on the website and I didn't know it for two days.

1 (56m 27s):
Finally a woman that I knew from Starbucks who had seen a Facebook plea that Put up like please come check out my website. She went through the website and saw that everything was easy row dollars purchased made an order and then for to the order to me and was like, hey girl, you shouldn't give yourself away and I realize

2 (56m 46s):
gosh even wait. Sorry. There was a glitch on your website.

1 (56m 49s):
Yes, and so the weekend after we got the Holy Grail of press the only order that I got for zero dollars because I have zero doubt all the pricing was from someone. I know got it. Okay, and no retail. Others wanted to carry us and they said I don't think this is interesting or compelling. I don't think that anybody will think that Asian beauty is compelling and you

2 (57m 9s):
needed retailers you needed to be in Sephora and then the the department stores for to work you couldn't just do direct to Consumer.

1 (57m 17s):
I had hoped that I could do a combination of direct to Consumer and Retail but there was no traffic for website. Even when I made the prices zeros. Nobody came, even when I had great price, press nobody came and then all of The retailer said that they weren't interested with the exception of support to their

2 (57m 35s):
credit. And by the way at this point how many people are working for you? Like him your mom's garage in

1 (57m 42s):
Millbrae up to 15 everyday everyday? Yeah, I and the orders because then around that point I started going and QVC and QVC volume is

2 (57m 53s):
significant. How did you get on QVC?

1 (57m 56s):
I begged and begged and begged and begged for an introduction and I was turned down. Swiftly at least four times to even get a meeting. And then finally this one Merchant was kind enough to take a meeting with me and then they gave me a chance to go up there and we sold out

2 (58m 15s):
you went on to QVC as like the pitch the pitch person. Mhm. Yep, what was that? Like, were you nervous? Because because it's live TV right were you or were you just like if I'm here I'm ready to go.

1 (58m 26s):
It wasn't nervous about the TV part of it because I just when I get to so stressed out, I just sort of leave my body. Um, but I was nervous about whether I would hit my sales because if I did it hit my sales goal. I didn't know how I was going to make salary and I had already called my mom probably by that point four times for an emergency loan to pay salaries because 15 people means 15 salaries or 14 salaries his side and take one and then I would come home and my house would be full of half packed boxes and they would go from floor to about 5 feet up in every single room of my house. There was inventory coming in from Japan. And then there was orders going out through touch.com and then for QVC and so it was just boxes halfway up the wall at one point.

1 (59m 9s):
We lost the baby in the boxes.

2 (59m 16s):
Wow. All right when you went on QVC and and you talking about the product and the story and and

1 (59m 23s):
and how much are turning

2 (59m 25s):
point was that I mean did the QVC sales like lead to you know online sales? From from your

1 (59m 33s):
website it was symbiotic, but the what happened in between which I think I jumped over is that after we launched the blotting paper? We had to acquisition offers within a few weeks of starting the company in 2009 2009 2010. Wow, and

2 (59m 54s):
what was the story? I mean that's pretty great.

1 (59m 58s):
One was a retail partner and the other one was Large strategic acquire and I had no intention of selling the company but one the Strategic acquire said it was a mentor of mine who who I really really respect. He's a beauty veteran and said you have lucked into a brand that has the potential to be one of the greats and if you loved it like you love your child, then you'll give it to a mother who knows how to raise it because you do not have what it takes. You don't have the money. You don't have the know-how you don't have the team and I had a newborn child. Child at home when he said that to me well

2 (1h 0m 35s):
and I mean if it was me, I would have taken the deal I would have said yes, please throw me a lifeline. And and I mean, I think it would have been crazy of you not to have considered it at that

1 (1h 0m 46s):
point. I did consider it and it would have been just enough to pay down the debt and that's what was that was crushing me at that point was that I had been I taken my parents retirement. I had taken money from my friends and family who are not rich. Yeah. We were probably 800 thousand in debt at that point in maxed out all of our credit cards. And then when he said you don't have what it takes I felt terrified. That I had bitten off more than I can chew and that I would lose people's money and disrespect a culture that's on my own and so I was going to do it for no no personal profit, but just to just to

2 (1h 1m 29s):
get out just to pay everybody

1 (1h 1m 30s):
back and to let the bread live on and you would have no equity in it. No,

2 (1h 1m 36s):
so you were going to do it and why didn't it happen

1 (1h 1m 39s):
right when we thought we were going to do the deal I wake up one day and I turn on the news and there had been a tsunami. And then a radioactive incident

2 (1h 1m 50s):
with you clear that your

1 (1h 1m 52s):
earthquake in Japan this the earthquake in Japan and then the acquirable doubt

2 (1h 1m 59s):
they pulled out they pulled out because of the earthquake in

1 (1h 2m 2s):
Japan, you know, they didn't really give me an a reason at that time. They just within 24-48 hours. They were

2 (1h 2m 9s):
out. Wow. Yeah, and and so you would have taken that deal have been I pulled out it would have taken it down and we would not be talking about Tasha today. Not with me with them. Yeah.

1 (1h 2m 22s):
Well, so I think the reason I told you this story is because you asked if I was ever scared or did I know that it was going to work out and no at no point did I think it was gonna work out. I just at some point. I realized that The fear finally went away when about three years into it. We formed a partnership with an organization called room to read and they are one of the leading nonprofits globally for children's education and they have a special fund for girls and fund girls education including second skills life skills training throughout southeast Asia in Africa, and I always knew that I wanted anything that we created to give back and so we created It a one-to-one model where every single purchase funded a day of school.

1 (1h 3m 9s):
And before we started at partnership, I wanted to make sure that what we were going to tell our clients we were doing was actually happening. So I flew to Cambodia and I spent a few days with the girls in their schools with their teachers in their houses. Seeing what room tree was doing firsthand. And when I saw that that's when my fear of aberrated because I was surrounded by children. Who had no electricity no running water, maybe no parents. Not a lot of personal safety over their bodies and yet they showed up every day with hope and with courage about the fact that their past was going to Define our future and they look like my daughter.

1 (1h 3m 52s):
Yeah, they look like me. And so that completely reframed for me. What risk is and what sacrifices and what's dangerous? Huh?

2 (1h 4m 4s):
And how did the brand because I think by like by 2014, I think your revenue is like 12 million dollars a year. I know once people start to buy the product is it just was it just kind of like a self-generating process where it just grew and grew just just

1 (1h 4m 19s):
organically no, we were not profitable for the first eight years. So we had to personally financed the losses and then when we Out of money, we would have to go to friends and family and ask for help but no every step of the way was like figuring out from scratch again how to how to make sure that people knew that we existed if it

2 (1h 4m 44s):
hit if you started the business in 2009, it took you like eight years to get to profitability so you weren't really profitable until like 2016, right or I was 17. I mean like at what point did you start to kind of breathe a sigh of relief a bit? I mean at what point Were you able to say okay because you had been through, you know periods where you almost accepted a deal right to basically take care of your debt and you had to borrow money and you were constantly worrying about paying your team and nobody was making a lot of money. They were all you know promised Equity like at what point did you start to feel like okay. This is going to be okay. What was there a

1 (1h 5m 24s):
point? It every year it felt like a high wire act where the wire was getting moved Higher and Higher and Higher and it was probably only when our private Equity company came in. Two and a half years ago and it was the only institutional round of of capital that we did that I started feeling less alone. Yeah,

2 (1h 5m 51s):
so it was probably easier to attract that at that point because you will have had proven the concept exactly

1 (1h 5m 57s):
exactly and they were wonderful partners. And so that was the first time I started to breathe a sigh of relief, but it came with its own different

2 (1h 6m 5s):
pressures because private

1 (1h 6m 6s):
Equity doesn't invest for very long. And so I knew that Second that they invested the clock started and there would

2 (1h 6m 13s):
have to be another Capital event by them out

1 (1h 6m 15s):
and it was at that time that one of the operating Partners told me that he thought I should hire a real CEO and it was

2 (1h 6m 34s):
it was a gut punch its in

1 (1h 6m 35s):
2017. This was in 2017 or eight. And I have to double

2 (1h 6m 41s):
check the timeline and and it was a gut punch because you were like, I'm the CEO. Hey, yeah, I had

1 (1h 6m 49s):
founded this company and been the CEO for at that point nine years and ped, but it to, you know, pretty meaningful growth and meaningful in our industry and meaningful to our customers.

2 (1h 7m 4s):
I mean, I think 2017 you're probably doing like 30 40 million dollars in sales a year probably.

1 (1h 7m 11s):
I would have to go look at the numbers. So

2 (1h 7m 13s):
I mean you had a degree from Harvard Business School. I mean you clearly were qualified. So what and I'm not trying to despair just person maybe they were really genuinely of trying to give you advice in your best interest. But what was it that they felt you didn't have

1 (1h 7m 29s):
I asked that question and the only answer that he gave me was if you are willing to hurt the company for your own ego, then we can have that conversation. Why am

2 (1h 7m 42s):
I why would you be hurting the

1 (1h 7m 44s):
company? And that's what I said. I said, I would never hurt the company. I love the company. Like I love my family. It is my family. It's in my house. I mean, what are you talking about? So I never actually got an answer but it took the wind out of my sails.

2 (1h 7m 56s):
But what was it? What do you think? I mean if you could step out of your own body and get on the balcony look down. What would you have said about your leadership? If you were being critical of it?

1 (1h 8m 7s):
I was definitely learning on the fly, but I would say that most To founder CEOs do learn on the Fly because the job changes every day. Yes. I was trying to negotiate between being Vicky and Victoria Victoria is is what a lot of people see on QVC and in magazines and Victoria is always then and Victoria is always grateful, but you know, Vicki is an executive leader who needs to manage an agile and demanding business. And I didn't have a model of female leadership that I had seen before that I could look up to and so I never really felt comfortable asking my team to do things if they didn't want to do it.

1 (1h 8m 60s):
I think I needed to be liked too much. I didn't want to come across as a difficult female leader. So I hadn't grown into my own skin. I think as a leader. Results were there, but the confidence was not and so when when he suggested that I go and find a real CEO I did.

2 (1h 9m 25s):
I mean I must have been really hard. It's your baby and her company and but at the same time you want what's best for your company in the future and all these people who invested some money into it and had seen a return yet and not just the internet forget about the private Equity guys, but the You know the employees and your parents and friends and right, I mean, yep, and I'm sure that was a lot of pressure

1 (1h 9m 47s):
on you. It was it was a ton of pressure. I was I was burning out I was on the road

2 (1h 9m 51s):
250 days of the year missing my

1 (1h 9m 53s):
child's childhood. I miss Thanksgiving. I've left my husband and daughter in line at Disney World to catch a flight to go on QVC and I would have never told this story. You're the only person I would ever tell the story to and it's because Um, your listeners are thinking about starting their company or they're running their own companies right now. And if I could do anything over again, I would have told myself at that time

2 (1h 10m 22s):
that you're actually doing a great

1 (1h 10m 24s):
job. And if you want to hire a new leader of the company for all sorts of reasons, that's okay, but you shouldn't doubt yourself, especially just

2 (1h 10m 30s):
because you're a woman and especially just because this is your first time

1 (1h 10m 33s):
at the rodeo. So if I have one regret at the company is that I didn't believe in myself and the good news is Is it did leave me to hire a new CEO? Who is the light of my life the best partner I could ever ask for for this stage of growth of the company and it gives me the freedom to focus on what I love

2 (1h 10m 55s):
most which is taking

1 (1h 10m 56s):
care of our clients. Yeah and creating formulas how it all ended up great, but it it gutted me at that time.

2 (1h 11m 6s):
Yeah.

1 (1h 11m 8s):
In

2 (1h 11m 9s):
2019, you get a choir, I'm Adam assuming that this was a long drawn out process Unilever by touches. It's been reported for about half a billion dollars. How did that happen to they did they approach you where you guys did youdid you at this point feel like look the investors are all in we should shop our brand around and see if we can, you know partner with a bigger brand of this point.

1 (1h 11m 36s):
We were not intending on selling the company at that point. We had gotten acquisition offers or interest almost annually from our first year and every every time we said, no outside of the one time where it just fell apart and after we did a private Equity deal we assumed that we would, you know be independent and with a private Equity company for five to seven years, right, but then I had to sit back with myself and really have one of those heart-to-heart conversations with yourself about why did you really Start this yeah, what was what was this all about? It was we know it wasn't for the money. And what I realized was that I created it because at that point in my life, I very mulch felt empty and when I went to Japan, I had experienced a beauty and a kindness and humanity and a craft that I had never seen in my life and it healed my skin, but it healed my soul and I created this thing to share what I was learning because I needed it in my life.

1 (1h 12m 41s):
I needed in my heart and I have always believed that a brand is a promise and it's a promise that I can't break and I want it to live a hundred years. I wanted to outlive me and so while I love running it and I wish it could be independent forever. I have no intention on living forever like dying is definitely on my bucket list. And so I I know that eventually I have to find it a home and then I Unilever and I do nothing about Unilever and had certainly never thought about them as a strategic partner but there is this woman vasila key who was creating a group of in Unilever and the rule was that they had to be Purpose Driven Brands and they had to have a purpose above commercial and we had a conversation and she brought me to tears and she's a mother and she's a female leader that I admire and one of the things that she loved most about the brand was.

1 (1h 13m 36s):
The giving model and so that's when I decided while I would love to run this myself independently forever. I know that's not possible. So I would I would rather then get it into a forever home where it can be protected and I stay with it, but then that's it's a forever home, huh?

2 (1h 13m 58s):
So I mean when? When that became clear that they were going to acquire you. I mean, how is that changed? You know just change the way you work and it is it may I guess in a sense like I interviewed Jamie siminoff Who Sold ring to Amazon and now he works for Amazon and he loves it because he really really is just a tinkerer like he loves to just go and invent things and so he doesn't have the pressure of having to like raise money and talk to him. Stirs and do all that stuff anymore like he now just do what he loves and and he's great with that. Is that is that how you feel?

1 (1h 14m 40s):
I feel so incredibly blessed were completely independent from Unilever, but they are very much a purpose-driven company and it got put to the test with covid because they made this acquisition and everybody can talk about values and purpose when things are going great, but it's when things are difficult that you really get put to the test and the truth of it is when we sheltered in place a year in San Francisco. The stores, you know, we started getting nervous about the safety of everything

2 (1h 15m 15s):
we shut down our office. We pulled

1 (1h 15m 17s):
our field team we shut down our warehouse because we wanted to put everybody's Safety First and that meant that the first couple weeks that this was happening. We were down like 80% a day and sales well, and I said, I know this is going

2 (1h 15m 33s):
to really hurt financially, but I have to protect my people

1 (1h 15m 38s):
they didn't blink they Don't even hesitate there was never a but they said pull your people right now and tell them that their jobs are okay and we're going to keep paying them from home. Wow,

2 (1h 15m 50s):
I mean some ways you're very I mean it's almost so fortunate that you you did accept the acquisition deal because you're part of now huge well-financed multinational company that can insulate you had you been independent. It could have been a rocky road right now.

1 (1h 16m 9s):
If we are independent, I think there's a very good chance. We'd be shutting down the company right now.

2 (1h 16m 13s):
Wow, do you when you think about all the things that have happened to you and and the success of the the brand the business you do tribute most of that to your your intelligence and your work ethic or do you think a lot of that had to do with luck

1 (1h 16m 28s):
for sure not intelligence. I am no smarter than anybody else. I think when you start any company, the most important thing is to show up every day. You just you just have to you just have to keep showing up for the game. I did get very very very blessed with amazing people who believed in us when there was nothing to believe in and who stayed with us. So our scientists from day one or solar scientists today are packaging Partners from day one are still our packaging Partners today our Retail Partners Sephora who did Believe in Us in day one. I just couldn't afford to be with him until you're five because it requires more investment. They're our best partners.

1 (1h 17m 8s):
Today so I I've been really blessed but I'm definitely not smarter. I'm definitely not more strategic and that's why I love what you do and that's why I love this podcast and I wish I wish it was around when I first started because it would have been my lifeline to believe in myself and it would have felt less lonely to do this. And so I'm so grateful for this opportunity to tell you the story because the other hundreds of times that people have asked me over the last 10 years about building this company. They've only asked about the highlights and so I think about the entrepreneurs and hopeful entrepreneurs out there who read stories like the ones like mine and think that it was sort of Leaping from one gilded the lily pad to the next that just got getting better and better and easier and easier and that I'm at home meditating and it's all been very Zen and beautiful and it has been very Zen and beautiful but it is also been

2 (1h 18m 7s):
death-defying lie. Difficult and treacherous and it has broken me down to my very core and caused me to

1 (1h 18m 16s):
question who I am as a person and what I'm made of so I'm just really big believer that if I can do it and it's in the cards for you than anybody can

2 (1h 18m 26s):
do it. That's Vicki sigh founder of Tasha. By the way, remember back in the early days when Vicki first sent samples of blotting paper to professional makeup artists, but one of those artists was Daniel Martin who went on to do the makeup for Megan Marco when she married Prince Harry. Anyway, Daniel Martin has just signed on to work with Tasha in a leading creative role and his first project a 10th anniversary reissue of those original blotting papers Hey, thanks so much for listening to the show this week. You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts.

2 (1h 19m 7s):
If you want to write us our email address is HIV T at npr.org. And if you want to tweet at us, it's at how I built this or add Sky Roz. Our show is produced this week by jet Anderson with music composed by routine Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Julia Carney Canada slim. Darreth Gales Diva grants and Jeff Rogers. I'm Gyros and you've been listening to how I built this. This is NPR. These days Chelsea Handler tries to keep her and her friends White Privilege in check.

2 (1h 19m 48s):
She

1 (1h 19m 48s):
starts like really getting weepy and I was like, well, what are you doing?

2 (1h 19m 51s):
Right you just said you read white fragility. You cannot talk about I can't cry. I start to cry comedian Chelsea Handler on White Privilege and a new book Listen to It's been a minute from NPR.