1 (0s):
This message comes from NPR sponsor Comcast business gig fueled Network Solutions that help businesses. Go beyond the expected to do the extraordinary Comcast business Beyond fast. Learn more at Comcast business.com. Hey, so for the past few weeks, I've been asking you to consider a donation to your public radio station and the idea behind it isn't just ask for money but to ask for your support because public radio stations depend. On your contributions, and it's how they can Broadcast News programs and shows like this one on there are waves. So if you can please consider donating by going to donate that npr.org / built and thanks.

2 (47s):
They had driven my

1 (48s):
business six hundred thousand dollars into

2 (50s):
debt. I realized even though I was fired and had no job.

1 (55s):
I was responsible for one-third of that debt and all the money that the company had was gone and I had to fight them. I had to be get free of them. I had to get my my business back. Ramen PR it's how I built this show that innovators entrepreneurs idealists and the stories behind the movements. They go I'm guy Roz and on today's show how Kathleen King started out selling cookies from her family's Farm stand for 59 cents a bag then spent the next four decades building a brand that eventually sold.

1 (1m 40s):
for half a billion dollars it's hard for me to think of a more simple and elegant Enterprise than a lemonade stand. It's kind of like a laboratory where you can test out a whole bunch of hypotheses around marketing and price structure and human psychology take for example, the experience of my own children. Their first Lemonade Stand was just lemonade a dollar a glass and it did fine. They made about 40 bucks the second lemonade stands. Old lemonade and freshly baked cookies $2.00 for a lemonade and a cookie and that did better they cleared about $75 but the third stand had the lemonade and the cookies but also a hand-drawn sign hanging from the table that red organic handmade lemonade.

1 (2m 36s):
They added an additional sign that said 20 percent of all profits go to the Humane Society of the United States now that Lemonade Stand totally crushed it passers-by would literally hand them five and ten dollar bills and tell him to keep the change in a span of just two hours my then 8 and 6 year old cleared a hundred and fifty dollars in profit and donated 30 bucks to the Humane Society. That's two hundred and seventy-five percent growth between Lemonade Stand one and three now imagine doing this every day for an entire summer depending on how many Hours and weeks you work you could at this rate realistically clear about $5,000 by Labor Day, which is kind of what Kathleen King discovered as an 11 year old girl, except her cookie hustle turned into a business called Tate's bake shop that Kathleen would eventually sell for half a billion dollars.

1 (3m 36s):
Tate's cookies is a brand now owned by Mondelez the huge food company that also owns Oreos Chips Ahoy and Ritz crackers. But long before any of this happened Kathleen started a small bakery in Southampton on the Eastern end of Long Island in New York for 20 years. She grew her little Bakery into a sustainable business until as you will hear she lost almost everything and a bad partnership deal. And so at the age of 42 Kathleen had to start all over again and even though she grew up in the Hamptons Kathleen did not exactly cross paths. With a glamorous celebrities and Rich financiers.

1 (4m 17s):
Who go there in the summer time. Her mom was a nurse and her dad ran the Family Farm where he raised chickens and cows

2 (4m 24s):
when I was growing up. I was about 30 acres and my dad used to sell the milk to schwank Dairy which was a local Dairy and on the cows we had maybe I don't know 30 or 40. So everything was small chickens, maybe a thousand, you know, nothing

1 (4m 43s):
nothing. NG big how many gamma T kids in the

2 (4m 46s):
family? I'm the youngest of four two brothers and one sister. We had a lot of responsibility. We were nurtured emotionally, but we grew up in the 60s, you know, you fall down, you know, you get up cry I'll give you something to cry

1 (5m 2s):
about and you all work on the farm. That was just

2 (5m 4s):
expected. We did it was just an expected of the given there was they weren't options. So occasionally a brother or sister would escape from time to time to go do something fun. But I had to collect eggs and pick vegetables and wait on the customer as we did everything. There is the interesting part of my growing up was we didn't have any role playing because my mother was ahead of her time. So we had to work outside and inside the girls and the guys the boys had to do the same

1 (5m 35s):
thing was was your dad's business sustainable. Was it enough to support the whole family or where there were other times when you know was this Juggle,

2 (5m 45s):
no, thanks. It was a struggle. Yeah, my mom she worked and she brought a consistent paycheck into the house nurse. Uh-huh. Like my father used to barter like, you know a half a steer to the dentist to get our teeth done and we had everything we needed. We just didn't we didn't go to restaurants and go on vacation. Yeah, tell me about

1 (6m 9s):
baking at your house. I mean, you're on the farm you've got responsibilities and ciao. So you have to do was baking just something that was going on at the house all the time

2 (6m 20s):
my sister and her friend were baking brownies and bread and cookies and selling them at the Farm Stand but then when they turned 14, they wanted to get a real job so they could be boys. So they want it done to local ice cream parlor and I was the youngest so my dad said, okay Kathleen, you're going to start doing these cookies. You want to start making cookies and sell them at the farm so you can buy your own clothes for school next year. Here and blah blah blah so I was just like, okay and I just started baking them like we did, you know, nobody was coddled that nobody taught us, you

1 (6m 52s):
know, and and what was recipe you

2 (6m 54s):
using on the back of the Nestle chocolate chip bag the Tollhouse chocolate chip cookies, right? Yeah.

1 (6m 60s):
And did you sell directly to people passing by in their cars or anything like

2 (7m 4s):
that? Yes, we had a farm stand in the yard and a matter of fact when I was baking cookies. I would look out the window and see a customer pull up and then I'd run outside. Down the customer and then sometimes I have to say the customer. I'll be right back. I gotta run in because I knew my cookies were going to be done around that time and I just baked them and I put them in a plastic bag and put them on the counter. So who did you

1 (7m 27s):
get to keep the earnings from the

2 (7m 28s):
cookies from well? Yeah in the beginning my dad said he would buy all the ingredients and everything. I just made the cookies and made all the money. Yeah, and then as I started selling a lot of cookies, he said we need to discuss our Arrangement and you have sister. Buying your own ingredients Norse and but I always got I always got the eggs for free by the way. I make my

1 (7m 50s):
kids pay me for the ingredients for the lemonade stand. Is that horrible?

2 (7m 53s):
No, that's what you should do. Unfortunately people don't do that anymore. I mean, I want to go to Lemonade Stand sometimes where I see kids and I'm like, why are you selling Newman's Own we should be making your own you get an itch you get an itch get one step above the others.

1 (8m 8s):
All right. So you are see you're making cookies at the Farm Stand but but what accounts for the fact that you were Increasing like the demand for them was

2 (8m 16s):
increasing because they were really good and it just started to

1 (8m 20s):
spread. But what was so special about them. Did you change the recipe?

2 (8m 24s):
Well when I was 11, I was probably measuring a little haphazardly and then created the cooking the way I liked it. I don't like cakey cookies at all or thick cookies and I made them they were like five inch diameter at least because back then that was before supersizing. So I wanted to do something that you know, Drew attention to them. So I made them very large and they were thin they weren't crisp like Tate start today, but they were they were thin with a little crispy chewy and people would drive their sometimes just for the cookies. So as I got older the amount of sales grew so by the time I got into high school I was baking in the summertime 7 days a week 10 hours a day in my mom's kitchen and Just allowed me to sprawl all over.

1 (9m 16s):
So by the time you were in high school baking cookies at the stand like what are you making significant pocket money or even more than

2 (9m 22s):
pocket money? Oh, yeah. Yes. I bought my own car, you know like a second-hand car like kind of car you probably for two thousand or two thousand dollars. Yeah, and you know in the summer I could earn like 5 grand wow, and yeah just stand there all day and you know that kind of like fueled. My loner side a little bit because I never had like a real summer job where you know, there were lots of kids and people did things and they went out and all those things. I just stood there in the kitchen baking

1 (9m 54s):
cookies. All right, so you're so you're actually making some serious dough people coming by buying cookies. Just you know, and I'm assuming that when you were 18 when it was time for you to college. You didn't think that your life was going to be the life of a cookie Baker that you were going to go to college and figure out what you're gonna do and good sir. Get a quote unquote real job, right?

2 (10m 15s):
Yeah, you know, I went to two years Suny College Cobleskill a short and restaurant management and just kind of went to school and I don't know I had ideas in my head. Oh, maybe I'll work on a cruise ship, you know, because I thought I had might like to travel I hadn't and then I graduated in 1979 and went home to make cookies again for the summer because that's where I can make the most money sure and my mom said that summer so what are your plans and I was like, I don't know and she said well, this is your last summer making cookies here.

2 (10m 55s):
Why did you say that because my mother was also like my father Independence and standing on your own feet. That was everything and and then she said, you know, there's a bakery for rent in town. So I went to the bake shop and it was a Fully equipped Bakeshop to bakeries had been there prior to me both have both failed. And so I looked at it and I was like, oh this is perfect. This will work for me. So I just rented it. I needed to work and my goal when I opened the shop was, you know, really just to rent an apartment and get a car

1 (11m 33s):
and by the way how I mean how much money did you need to start this Bakery did you? Yeah. And did you have any my means you have some savings?

2 (11m 41s):
Yeah II had 5,000 or so that I saved before I rented and I had to borrow some money. And of course I couldn't get it from the bank. So my brother lent me a little bit of money because I had to buy my chocolate chips was two thousand dollars and the store wasn't pretty I took old barrels from the farm and I painted them and turn them upside down and put plywood on top and I made it a table cloth and put that on top and then my labels I wrote by

1 (12m 12s):
hand and what Call

2 (12m 13s):
The Shop started out as Kathleen's cookie, but then to expand I change the name to Kathleen's bake shop because I sold more things than just cookies

1 (12m 23s):
and how long before you actually opened it to the public.

2 (12m 28s):
Well, I think I rented it in like November and then I opened in May. So what I did that winter was just get things prepared as much as I could and develop the recipes on a larger scale. So I did blueberry muffins carrot cake. Make apple pie like old like the top 10 typical American baked goods.

1 (12m 50s):
All right, so may of 1980. You're like 21 22 years old something like that. Yes 21 and it's just you and you open the

2 (12m 59s):
shop. I open the shop my sister-in-law Robyn King. She helped because she was working on the pie. She had a baby at the time and my niece Christina. She used to just put her in a box and the floor at a blanket in it. And you know, my father was my PR guy. So anyone that went to the farm he would say, you know, my daughter's open a Bookshop pop up and I had to add back then print ads and the you know, the community was always very supportive of me. So people came

1 (13m 32s):
so that summer of 1980 right all of a sudden you get the summer crowds into the Hamptons how was business it was good.

2 (13m 40s):
I did really well and and right before Memorial Weekend Florence fabricant came in from the New York

1 (13m 45s):
Times the famous food writer Florence. Fabric. Yes. She just happened to come in like randomly.

2 (13m 51s):
Yeah, because she lives out there. She may have been shopping there prior to coming in and requesting an

1 (13m 56s):
interview. Did you even know she was?

2 (13m 58s):
No, I didn't have a New York Giants was like what city people read?

1 (14m 3s):
So a couple weeks later this article gets published in the New York Times. Yeah did people start to clamor to come tie your

2 (14m 10s):
cookies. They did they did and I was not expected because As I didn't know the power of the times and people would tell me like what do you mean you're going to be New York Times you need to bump up a book and I would be like

1 (14m 21s):
really? Oh, okay,

2 (14m 23s):
you know, I have so

1 (14m 24s):
naive so that was so you've got this pretty good summer great summer. I first yeah, but in the summer ends and you know, a lot of those people go home and people come for summer jobs leave. What happens in The Fault is your business start to kind of slow down significantly.

2 (14m 42s):
Oh, yeah the business slows down. I'm endlessly and then weekends are okay and and you know for a while you're really grateful for the rest and then things get progressively slower and I thought I needed to change that. So I went into the city because that's where most of my customers were from and just had my cookies in a shopping bag and just went door-to-door to places, you know, some customers would tell me. Oh go to Balducci go to say bar. Go to Dean & DeLuca. All your customers

1 (15m 11s):
were coming out to the Hamptons were saying you know you They should make these available in the

2 (15m 14s):
city. Yeah, and I remember walking into Balducci cold calling and I'd be like hi have cookies. Maybe you want to sell some and they were like, yeah, let's see what you got and they would try em, and they were like, yeah bring me a hundred bags next week and then I go into another store and there's someone would not be so nice and he would say, you know, my mother go make cookies like this or I'm a better but Allah Allah, you know, so I just walk out I'd always had confidence with my cookies not so much myself all the time when I was younger, but with my cookies I was like You're just wrong.

1 (15m 44s):
So you see you're going to Manhattan pitching the cookies. You're getting some some places or that's a sure we'll take them. Yeah, so what do you do you go back to Southampton and you start just cranking out the cookies and just packaging them up in like bags.

2 (16m 2s):
Yeah with my my hand printed label, which now I got printed it was all handwritten, but then I got it printed. I thought that was Major because now I don't have to sit at night and write them

1 (16m 12s):
all but well, but how Customers know to buy your cookies like they had a choice of

2 (16m 17s):
because remember this was the early 80s there wasn't competition. Like there is now, you know Finding like a homemade cookie product in the stores was a great find, you know, people recognize them from the Hamptons and and knew them then and then, you know Word of Mouth just spreads and that's how most of my whole career was established. So was it at

1 (16m 42s):
this time where the Recipe for the chocolate chip cookies started to resemble what we know of Tate's cookies today.

2 (16m 50s):
Yeah, because after a couple of years with Kathleen's cookie, I people I feel didn't want everything is big and so I just started making them smaller and when I started making them smaller, that's how they came out. They just came out crispy. Yeah, and I was like, oh these are good. Yeah, you know when I used to create new products at the bake shop, I used to watch my step. Taste the product if they taste it and they would be like what is good and they walked away and didn't turn around and come back for another bite. I said it wasn't good

1 (17m 24s):
enough. But what were what were you doing differently? I mean, were you adjusting the butter where you making brown butter? We're using more brown sugar. What was it that you were doing?

2 (17m 33s):
Um, you know, I can't really tell you everything but there's no you know, there's one little trick nothing major, but I can't tell. You what that is? Yeah fair enough. Listen,

1 (17m 45s):
it's a half a billion dollar brand. He Ki kind of protect that

2 (17m 48s):
product. I know I know.

1 (17m 52s):
All right. See you you start selling these cookies to the shops in New York City. And is that like does that become a significant generator a revenue for you?

2 (18m 2s):
Yeah, because off season is long, you know Hampton season is so short and people think. Oh, I've always making money hand over fist. I'm like well now take that two months. The money and you've got to survive for the next 10 years. So I started building my brand mourn in the city and was selling that's when it was busy. So I would be selling there all winter long and then of course in the summer I had to maintain it so II got another van or so and then I hired drivers and they would deliver tell me what your what your day is your average days were like

1 (18m 39s):
when you were 22 23

2 (18m 41s):
when I first opened my my first a big shop, I would go to work and like two o'clock in the morning and then bake and then open the store and then get home at like 8:00 at night. Then I changed my hours because that wasn't very healthy. I would drive to work at like 2:00 in the morning wanting to like hit a tree. So I go to the hospital and rest because you know, it's very depressing driving to work at two o'clock in the morning and everybody's light is off and you know, they're in their bed. So then I changed my schedule but I worked like 18-hour. Is six days a week. Wow, it was not easy. It was you know, I gave up my youth

1 (19m 21s):
really was it overwhelming for you. I mean you were baking and if you weren't baking I'm assuming you were like doing the business

2 (19m 28s):
stuff. Yeah. Yeah. It was really hard. Yeah, it was really hard

1 (19m 34s):
but I was always kind of liked we'll

2 (19m 36s):
just you just keep working harder, you know, that's how you just try to figure it out. Stay

1 (19m 41s):
afloat. What? Was the thing that kept you

2 (19m 45s):
going Pride? I didn't know how to say I can't do this pride in

1 (19m 50s):
the other side of that coin is the fear of failure.

2 (19m 53s):
I didn't have a fear of failure. I just had more of the fear saying I can't do

1 (19m 57s):
this but you just told me that there were times where you want to hit a tree so you could go to the hospital and

2 (20m 1s):
sleep I so, right

1 (20m 3s):
right. So I mean a part of you felt like you couldn't do this that this was not

2 (20m 8s):
sustainable right? But I just kept working because that's how Kind of like how I was raised. We just keep going. Yeah, you just keep just keep

1 (20m 18s):
pushing. So as you kind of this business was kind of growing I guess there is a building in Southampton that becomes available for purchase. Yes, and you decide to purchase this to kind of bring your bake shop into that new building was that was that because you had to expand you were you needed more space

2 (20m 40s):
or yeah. I was out growing my current location. Tation I didn't like having a landlord and so can my mom says well, you know, there's a building for sale up the road and I was like, oh, right and she's well doesn't hurt to call. So I met with the owner it was $350,000 for the building and he wanted $50,000 down payment and he would he himself would hold the mortgage for 300,000 at like nine and a half percent interest back then right and I had 40,000 dollars saved

1 (21m 12s):
from the From sales from the

2 (21m 14s):
business. Mhm, and I had to somehow find the 10 and my family didn't have any money and yeah, and then my father used to help this older woman with her chickens, she had chickens in her yard, I guess so he helped her from time to time. And when I was looking for the $10,000 she died and she left my father

1 (21m 38s):
$10,000. Wow,

2 (21m 41s):
and he lent it to me can't talk about luck. Alright. Yeah.

1 (21m 45s):
Alright, so you have now a pretty significant mortgage to pay down right on this business. So, what did I mean for the for your business? Did you have to really ramp up sales to cover your costs?

2 (21m 57s):
I did I had to I knew I had to double my business in order to pay for the mortgage. Yeah, and my business plan back then was okay. I can do that. That was my plan.

1 (22m 10s):
All right, see start out sort of early to mid 80s, right? Mrs. Fields exploding all over shopping malls in America. There's Famous Amos there a couple other National brands that are starting to come about. What do you think? It was I mean about your cookies was it that it was in the Hamptons and people are on vacation and it was sort of a go-to place or what?

2 (22m 35s):
Well, you know, it was kind of like a go-to place because it was something that Part of their part of people's weekends. I mean I have kids that are fully grown and married now that come in and say oh my God, I you know and I remember them and they were raised on my cookies the cookies, you know are thin and crisp and delicious. They were different from mrs. Fields and David's cookies, which is the nice concept but more of a fad, you know, they were hot served up the tray type of cookies and I always used to think how can they grow because you can't eat their cookies cold? They're only good warm, and now you're really stuck.

1 (23m 13s):
So, all right, so you are

2 (23m 15s):
kind of it sounds

1 (23m 16s):
like like the business was growing but it wasn't really your you didn't have a really a plan for to gross. Just kind of own organic. Yeah slow growth. This was your business. It was a this was a lifestyle business. It was a you were able to pay rent and even save some money and put it back into the business. Right? And did you start to actually was there a point where in those days in the 80s were Started to actually earn even more money for yourself and even your parents

2 (23m 43s):
earned. Oh, yeah, but that wasn't hard

1 (23m 46s):
break because they weren't making a lot of money, right

2 (23m 49s):
and and so with with your

1 (23m 50s):
kind of growing the growth of the business, were you able to buy a house and and and all those

2 (23m 56s):
things? Yes. I I bought I bought a little tiny house in the village. I paid the mortgage off from my family's farm and you know, I started getting time off I'd get like a day off and then I had two days off then I had weekends off and could go on

1 (24m 15s):
vacation. So basically Kathleen for almost 20 years. Yes, you're running the Bakeshop you were Distributing the cookies mainly to Manhattan or e a little bit beyond

2 (24m 28s):
their know beyond to also make a Manhattan and Long Island. Then we also ship cookies to Texas. We did some cookies in California. We did like spottings or

1 (24m 38s):
whatever. We're still small business pretty Fuck. Oh, yeah, and how did you feel about it? Did you I mean you're now in your starting to approach your 40s, right? Did you feel like you needed a change or you wanted a break or did

2 (24m 52s):
you yeah, I you know, I was like 40 years old and had made good money. You know, I had gotten married and divorced. No kids now I was 40 so like the kid thing was over and so I was like just me so So I said well I want to have you know more of a life. I want to have less responsibility and and more time.

1 (25m 19s):
So, how are you going to do that?

2 (25m 21s):
Well, I decided I

1 (25m 22s):
would if I could sell my

2 (25m 24s):
company that would be great. But I wasn't really fully prepared to retire. So I took on two partners. I had a bookkeeper. He didn't have any money, but he was interested in. Um becoming a part owner of the company and paying me off along the way and but he insisted along the way that his

1 (25m 51s):
brother also become involved

2 (25m 53s):
which I wasn't a hundred percent comfortable with I didn't really know his brother, but I don't know what happened why I just went along with

1 (26m 2s):
it. Wait, let me try and understand this. He says I want to buy into this, right and okay, and so, okay, so he brings Rings his brother in and they agree to pay, you know, I read was about like nine hundred thousand dollars total, but they were not going to give you any of this money up front. They're going to pay you in installments over time, right?

2 (26m 23s):
Yes. And so if he and his brother took over running the business and I still was part of it, but I had more time and then I was part of the The Profit system and then they would pay me for the business. Over time I was like, okay, that's okay because I don't need I don't need anymore. I don't need a lump sum of anything.

1 (26m 46s):
I'm cool. So basically you kind of brought them in as partners and they have a yes. What was the share? How did you divide it

2 (26m 54s):
up? We each had one

1 (26m 55s):
third. So you said yep. I'll give you a third. I'll take a third. Your brother will have a third right you guys run the business. I'll but that meant that you gave up two thirds of your

2 (27m 6s):
business. I always thought 1/3 1/3 1/3 Third was equal. I know it's ridiculously naive. What did

1 (27m 13s):
anybody did you go to a lawyer to hear me? Say I don't Kathleen? I don't know if you want to do this or were the two seemed totally like a great

2 (27m 19s):
idea. No, I went to a lawyer and everything and I did have like second-guessing and you know, and I just said well, you know, I gave my word I you know, I can't back out now. I had no idea how horrible the deal really

1 (27m 38s):
was. What what is it that they Promised you that they wanted to do with the business because you're in the

2 (27m 42s):
Hamptons grow the grow the business obviously because it definitely had the potential do

1 (27m 47s):
they have any experience doing this where they marketers or they do they have any of that? No, no and what was their plan? What was the first thing that they

2 (27m 54s):
did? Well first they started, you know at the bake shop and then they went to Virginia to put together a cookie plant

1 (28m 4s):
production down there. So they said hey Kathleen, we want to open up a production facility of Bakery. Three in Virginia and you thought okay great. You were fine with that. Yeah. I thought I thought it would be okay

2 (28m 18s):
because the cookie business was what really was a value and to expand on that.

1 (28m 22s):
So what happened they move down there and you stay up in Southampton and I stayed in Southampton you just communicate by phone a couple times a day. Yes. When did you when did the tension start to arise

2 (28m 34s):
a very early on because anything that they made are

1 (28m 37s):
sent from the factory? In Virginia was horrible like was terrible cookies were not good

2 (28m 45s):
were not cookies weren't good. The pies were terrible. I and I wouldn't sell it.

1 (28m 48s):
But what was the issue were they using dummy? They have the recipes they had the recipes, but that's like anything you can nobody was trained properly.

2 (28m 57s):
Nobody was making

1 (28m 58s):
anything correctly like

2 (29m 1s):
an apple pie. I remember finding with

1 (29m 3s):
a whole Apple inside

2 (29m 5s):
then I'm supposed to be running the Southampton store and

1 (29m 9s):
I'm depositing the money which I'm doing but they

2 (29m 14s):
they were meeting payroll, but they weren't paying any local vendors. So I got frustrated and so the money that the bake shop made I started paying the local vendors because that they were the ones that were making the money from the bake

1 (29m 27s):
shop. I mean vendors would call you and say Kathleen, we're not getting paid what's going on. Yeah, and I was like what

2 (29m 33s):
because I always paid my bills and they weren't paying people and then that's when I Put my foot down and I started to pay the local people with the money that I was

1 (29m 45s):
making. So when you started to pay the vendors yourself, what did the why did your partner

2 (29m 51s):
say? Oh, they had a fit. They were really angry and they and I was like, well, you know, this is what I have to do and then they I was supposed to go away for the month of January. This is mm. Yeah on a cycling trip and Guy that work down there that move down there to work down there that I knew he called me and he said Kathleen they're planning on coming up when you're not there and taking over getting rid of you. So I didn't go on my trip and I waited and one day I came to work they were there.

2 (30m 31s):
I walked into the office and they handed me papers saying that I was fired.

1 (30m 40s):
When we come back in just a moment how Kathleen watched everything she built over 20 years collapse and how that turned out to be the best thing that ever happened to her. Stay with us. I'm guy Roz and you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey everyone, just a quick thanks to two of our sponsors who helped make this podcast possible. First to Capital One with the Capital One Saver Card.

1 (31m 20s):
You can earn four percent cash back on dining and entertainment that means four percent on milkshakes with the kids and 4% on music with your pals. You'll also earn 2% cashback grocery stores and one percent on all other purchases now when you go out you cash in Capital One What's in your wallet terms apply? Thanks. Also to Brave Brave is a free next Generation web browser that values your security and privacy. This means stopping trackers and creepy ads from following you as you browse while getting unmatched speed and Battery savings. You can even earn rewards for opting into their privacy respecting ads switching to Brave is easy.

1 (32m 3s):
You can import all your bookmarks with one click and your Chrome extensions work in Brave learn more about Brave. Wave at Brave.com built Brave yesterday was about big Tech today. It's about us. When it's too cold to go out or to I see to make it out of the driveway. Where do you go to find just the right movie just the right book just the right show to binge pop culture happy hour from NPR can help you keep warm and keep up at the same time. Join us twice a week on pop culture happy hour. Hey, welcome back to how I built this I'm guy Roz.

1 (32m 45s):
So it's early 2000 and Kathleen and her business partners. The Weber's have basically had a total meltdown they disagree on just about every aspect of how the business is being run and so the brothers they fire her and of course they can do that because they control two-thirds of the company. Anyway, according to the records and media reports from the time Kathleen basically thought the brothers were running. Business into the ground and she was devastated. You know, I would just hold my breath all the time. I think that was the only thing I could control and so I

2 (33m 23s):
started holding my breath and I was like a doe in headlights and you know, there were moments that were really hard and then there were moments that were great, you know, because I was just so grateful for waking up in a house, you know, I

1 (33m 37s):
just the simple things of

2 (33m 41s):
Really going down

1 (33m 42s):
to like the Bare Bones of

2 (33m 44s):
gratitude because can always get worse. You know, you try to go you get to that place when you get down that

1 (33m 51s):
far you're not getting up and what about your business partners? What was the plan? I had to fight

2 (33m 58s):
them. I had to get my my business back and I wanted to get out of the contract because they had at that point had driven my Business six hundred thousand dollars into debt. I realize even though I was fired and had no job. I was responsible for one-third of that debt and all the money that the company had was gone.

1 (34m 24s):
So, okay. So at this point the lawsuit start and this is a super complicated story as these things usually are but but sort of long story short, you sue them they sue you back - goes back and forth and this is just over like over 2 Two years after you first form this partnership with the Weber's. Yes. I mean wow man that how quickly that became a nightmare.

2 (34m 49s):
Yeah, but the community was incredible people would call me people sent me cards and encouragement the community really rallied for me. It became like a Hallmark made-for-tv movie and I said I can spend my A's and focusing on the evil of of two people or I can spend my days and focusing on all this kindness and support that I had no idea was there for me

1 (35m 23s):
meanwhile what's going on to the Bakeshop are people still coming into work

2 (35m 28s):
people are still coming to work but you know, a lot of people were not shopping there any longer so the business was self going down and what percent was going on there. I really don't know, you know, like some of them employees they would gather at my house. They were very supportive.

1 (35m 48s):
Yeah. Yeah. So I mean obviously this is a super stressful situation and everyone knows that like that, you know litigation can take years and of course lawyers are expensive. So so I guess in the middle of mm you guys decide to settle you decide to settle with the brothers. Yes, right and as part of that settlement you dropped you gave Them the name the name Kathleen's bake shop became theirs. Mmm-hmm. You got to keep the location in Southampton the building.

2 (36m 20s):
Well, yeah, I always owned the location, but unfortunately they were the tenants of the location. So I had to get them to release the lease to get them out. And then as

1 (36m 33s):
you mentioned the business had like six hundred thousand dollars of debt at this point. So yeah another part of the settlement I What about was was an agreement to divide up that debt three ways. So that means of that total you owed around $200,000. And and you lose your name your name your own name use my no Kathleen's bake shop or presumably Kathleen's cookies ring like that whose fault that that must have been. How did you get to a point where we were able you were able to let that go.

2 (37m 7s):
I don't know. It's kind of like how I open the first bake shop you just do Yeah, you know you just you just do because what's your choice?

1 (37m 16s):
Were you bitter or you just I mean because I can imagine I would be right where you just like

2 (37m 21s):
seething. I don't know. I I can't say bitter. I don't ice not that's not my nature either. Um I was angry but which you know will help me to recreate a new

1 (37m 35s):
brand but the whole point of starting this partnership with these two people was to give yourself some freedom and space to kind of, you know, enjoy life. You'd worked really hard 20 years.

2 (37m 49s):
I know got way more than I bargained for.

1 (37m 52s):
And so now you find yourself. You're like 42 your back in the situation where You have to if you want to keep going you've got to completely start from scratch. You got abs be a start up all over again.

2 (38m 5s):
Yeah, it was it was very draining. I would say opposed to like rage and bitterness and all of that. I was really kind of more. I walked around kind of and little bit in shock. I had felt that, you know, every emotion that I could have ever had was stripped down to the bone. And I don't know what I had left in me truthfully and I didn't have any choices like I couldn't go get a job anywhere else because I didn't know how to do anything else. I just had two years of college and the things that I didn't know how to do I used to hire people to do so really I didn't have a choice but to start again and do what I knew.

2 (38m 56s):
That's how I did it.

1 (38m 58s):
So you you decide that you are going to you're going to reconstitute this business. And by the way, keep your old employees. Yes. And so what what were you going to call it? Tate's bake shop and how did that what did the name come from

2 (39m 12s):
Tate's? It was my dad's name was just a nickname, but everybody called him that so I wanted a name that was like a local named that that was genuine and integrity and kind and that was like my dad. Dad, so I thought that that would fit nicely for the bake shop and I ended up I had to get open for August because it was the season and the August at least I could make some money

1 (39m 40s):
and you'd been out of the kitchen in the business since February were locked out, right? Yes.

2 (39m 45s):
Wow, you know my employees. They all

1 (39m 48s):
rallied to work hard

2 (39m 50s):
and I ended up remortgaging the Bakeshop because I had already had a paid off because it was a 15 year mortgage. Thank God for that. I remortgage to the Bakeshop. So I got some money so I could have some cash flow

1 (40m 3s):
to make more money. Yeah,

2 (40m 6s):
and then I ended up hiring a business manager because I was in such financial trouble. I needed to have a business creating income

1 (40m 15s):
in this the business manager. Who was he and had you find him

2 (40m 21s):
his name was Michael Namie. He was in the city and he became my my business advisor, which really was a godsend for me because I am very instinctual but of course I make mistakes

1 (40m 34s):
from time to time and when you when you hired Michael to help you launched a Twitter you I mean after imagine up a part of you was still kind of standoffish, right? Because you've just gotten burned really bad. I mean, we're there like trust issues there.

2 (40m 51s):
No, he was great. I was like I felt I felt to me like a Lifeline but it was safe because I could have walked away anytime. On it, you know, I wasn't Bound By Any contract or money or anything. I find not trusting people way too exhausting and it's not the way I want to live my life. So I was very very naive and I used to trust blindly now, I still trust everybody but I trust with my eyes open. All right, but now you have

1 (41m 24s):
to re-establish your brand right as Tate. It's the same cookie, but you got to re-establish a brand-new

2 (41m 31s):
brand. I had to actually make a better cookie because I had to compete against Kathleen's bake shop. Yeah, so they're

1 (41m 36s):
meantime those guys are down in Virginia with plans presumably to take your brand that you would spend 20 years building up and really expanding that did were you did that cause anxiety for you? Did you think oh my God, they're going to take my name my brand and they're going to go all over the country people going to think it's me.

2 (41m 56s):
No, because um, I don't think about what others are doing and I just had to think about what I had to do. And of course my goal was to take them down. Your goal was to beat

1 (42m 9s):
them. Yes to be better. So did you continue on with your previous strategy of baking in the retail shop and baking for wholesale and mainly kind of gourmet, you know shops in major cities in the

2 (42m 23s):
US. Yes, and when Michael came on board We went through all the products and the products that had the highest margins is the ones we focused on selling. So we just kind of really zeroed in on the cookies, you know starting Tate's was about surviving. So, you know, when you're in a survival mode those things those kind of decisions weren't hard. They just had to be executed. They just have to be

1 (42m 51s):
done. So, where were you guys I mean, did you even start to expand your distribution?

2 (42m 56s):
Yeah. First of all I had to Yet I had to get all of Long Island in New York City back because my whole story was so public some stores welcomed me with open arms some stores stuck with the Kathleen's brand a lot of stores carried both right and that's how it shook out. And then even when I was some vendors I had for 20 years and and when I opened up Tate's they treated me like I was a brand-new customer others were just so helpful and just said, okay. I know you owe us this thousand dollars, you know you pay that off when you can and and we're stand by you, you know, it's amazing, you know, just the difference of people.

2 (43m 37s):
Just amazing. so

1 (43m 40s):
when you re launch the company as Tate's you had wanted to take a break in your life. You knew that was not going to happen anytime soon because all of a sudden you got to start up

2 (43m 50s):
again, right?

1 (43m 52s):
And so were you back to that hamster wheel back to those crazy long

2 (43m 55s):
hours only for a short time because when I opened Tate's then I had a plan and I had a goal

1 (44m 4s):
and what was your plan? What was the goal?

2 (44m 6s):
I had to have an exit strategy. My goal was to sell when I was

1 (44m 9s):
55. So you knew when you reconstituted this thing new Relaunched it. There was a time Horizon. Yes, and you were thinking maybe some local business would buy it or something like that.

2 (44m 20s):
No, I thought I did think bigger than that. I didn't think it's big as I went. But you know, I was going to sell it

1 (44m 25s):
55 so I could retire. I mean, you're still a pretty small shop at this point, right it still 40 or so

2 (44m 31s):
employees. When I first opened Tate's yeah. And

1 (44m 35s):
in those first few years of Tate's like what was your annual revenue?

2 (44m 39s):
I mean, I would say we maybe started out a couple A million, but as we start to expand I couple years down the road. I rented a 5,000 square-foot additional kitchen and and then I needed to we outgrew that and so then we needed something bigger. So I purchased a school in East

1 (45m 0s):
Moriches and you turn that into a bakery to start to bake more

2 (45m 5s):
cookies. Yes, we turned that into a commercial kitchen first making it 15,000 square feet and then adding on at because it We had space to add on and we added on as as we needed. And

1 (45m 17s):
by the way, your former business partners who have the name Kathleen's bake shop. They were still trying to compete with you right? But but then I guess just a few years after the lawsuit and then the settlement they actually go out of

2 (45m 32s):
business. Yeah. I don't even know what happened to them. You have no idea what happened to them. No, I don't know what happened with the name at the Brandt nothing. I just doesn't exist as far as I know.

1 (45m 43s):
Well, so was it pretty clear to you pretty soon after you launched hates that you know, this wasn't just about survival mode that this could actually grow this could actually get bigger than Kathleen's.

2 (45m 56s):
Yes, because that was my

1 (45m 57s):
plan. But how are you going to do that? Because you know food companies be the big guys, right the General Mills and the Kellogg's and they I mean they and you know, they have a huge distribution networks. They decide what goes on the supermarket shelves where how You guys negotiating and getting big companies to pay attention to you and to continue to agree to distribute and put your stuff on their shelves

2 (46m 21s):
Well that took time. I mean first of all we started where first we had our own trucks and we went for small guys with like 10 to 12 SK use and then we would strategically pick areas of the United States that we were going to go sell to start to build our foundation with upscale. Gourmet shops. That's going to kind of like the first Tier 1 We were building our brand and then as we started to get bigger, we went into the second tier, which was like the Whole Foods the Fresh Market's the you know,

1 (46m 51s):
citarella and how would you get how would you get those meetings? You would I mean that but I'm assuming some Buyers Real Whole Foods may have seen your products at some of these smaller stores.

2 (46m 59s):
Yeah. I mean some some buyers, you know would contact us. You know, Michael was also a great salesperson. So he helped negotiate some of those deals to get into various. Locations and because Michael was such a great numbers guy and forecaster. We did then do every year he would say. Okay this here's the plan. I had Drew up three forecast for you. We can do a b or c. If you do this route, you'll make this. If you do this route, you'll make this interview did this route you'll make this and then he would say which which route you want to take and I would say, okay this this one works for me and then we would do it.

2 (47m 41s):
So

1 (47m 42s):
as you work, Of re-branding and growing again. I mean you start to get attention again. I mean, I think Rachael Ray row like it was on her show. She said you did. Yes cooking America, and then

2 (47m 54s):
Consumer Reports voted Tate's Big Shot the best cookie and Parish reports. Yes did

1 (47m 59s):
that, you know 2011 when Consumer Reports called you the best cook in America and after Gwyneth Paltrow and Rachael Ray and his people are saying that about your cookies were the were the line starting to go out the

2 (48m 9s):
shop. Um, you know, we're always busy like I Can't say you don't get the lines out the door, but we were always increasing, you know, Tate's, you know had like a 30% or more increase per year. Wow. Yeah, which is amazing.

1 (48m 24s):
When when I guess when you started to get closer to age 55, you were serious. This really was your plan you were sticking to this plan. I am going to I want to an exit. Yeah. And so how did you even begin that process? Whoo-hoo. How do you do? What do you do tell how do you put your business up for

2 (48m 41s):
sale? Well, No, my business matters, and I we would discuss it a lot and a lot of you know investment bankers. They're all watching but this time around I was going to do everything right and I wasn't going to leave a penny on the table.

1 (48m 59s):
So I

2 (49m 1s):
interviewed a couple bankers and I settled with TM capital in New York City

1 (49m 6s):
and they were basically a go couldn't take your company and say alright it's available and who's in marketed to

2 (49m 12s):
sell it, right?

1 (49m 14s):
And this is 2014. I think render 2013. Yeah, so they started to to do that. And because this is already a pretty strong brand it had name recognition. It had value were there lots of bitters. Yes. It was

2 (49m 27s):
but there was it was started off with like like something like 50 people that showed an interest. We narrowed it down to like 12, you know, they put in another bid and then it came down to like

1 (49m 40s):
five. I think that I think eventually a private Equity or investment from Riverside but a majority

2 (49m 49s):
stake. Yes in the end. We settled on Riverside and I ended up selling 80% of the company because I was really ready to retire.

1 (50m 2s):
They paid a hundred million dollars for it and 2014. Yes. Was that just insane to you? I mean, wow you started this out of a Farm Stand and 1970s. A hundred million dollars to did you even imagine that that's what it would go for.

2 (50m 17s):
No, you know, it went for like twice for what I originally thought and I remember the closing over the telephone. I was in my own office everybody's on the phone and then it was over it was done and everyone's like okay. Yeah. Thanks. Bye and I walked out of my office and I think I went home and made dinner. I don't know it was so, you know. Kind of another deer in headlights

1 (50m 45s):
moment. I mean, I wonder given the fact that you grew up in a pretty modest environment, right? I'm watching the sort of the Rich and Famous come to The Hamptons, you know, when you were a kid, I mean suddenly you had a lot of money like you sort of become one of those rich people and in the Hamptons,

2 (51m 5s):
right? Well, I didn't become that but other people thought I became that I thought I live great before really Haven't changed the way I live because I like the way I live like I'm all about freedom and time. Yeah, you know I can I can donate more and I can be more generous which is great. The one nice thing is that you know, I was able to buy my dream property of childhood that I never thought would have ever been an opportunity in my lifetime. But other than that, everything else is the same. I like to ride my bike. I like to wear. Jeans and a t-shirt. I like to watch movies on my own TV a lot of stuff.

2 (51m 48s):
You know, it creates a burden I do anything. I can't use I don't want anything after guard just doesn't interest me.

1 (51m 56s):
I think Kathleen think about this for a moment you sold his company majority stake in 2014 for a hundred million Riverside four years later sold it to Mondelez. They make Oreos and Chips Ahoy for half a billion dollars your brand taste. Brand that you kind of reconstitute a From the Ashes of this terrible value of This Disaster. Yeah. I mean the irony of the crisis that you went through in 2000 is that without it? You would have never built Tate's and you you may not have become the kind of person who could build a company like Tate's

2 (52m 34s):
right? Yes, that that that is true. You know that the biggest disaster of my life was really became. I am the greatest gift of my life and like when I started Tate's I said, I'm not giving blood for this company because I did that already for Kathleen's and I ended up standing there with nothing. And the thing I regretted losing the most was my youth. I worked my youth away. You can't get that back. You can't buy that back. It was quite an eye-opener to realize we are Society of feeling like we have to give up everything and sacrifice. Everything and work day and night in order to achieve and get ahead.

2 (53m 17s):
But in the big picture, it's really not true. You have to do it for a period of time but the key point is knowing when to let it go. Yes to create something from nothing requires that kind of dedication of day and night but a lot of it is self-driven of nobody's as good as I am. Nobody can do it as good as I can and that keeps you trapped because as you're too focused on all that emotional attachment that comes with creating something from nothing

1 (53m 50s):
and you were able to shed that emotional attachment with the disaster of the first business, I guess.

2 (53m 58s):
Yes because I was basically stripped of everything

1 (54m 2s):
when you think about all of the work you put in the sacrifice that you made and you know, you talked about kind of giving up your youth like you had to kind of give that time up. Given what happened and the exit and the incredible success that you that you saw do you regret it? Do you regret any of that? Because I think a lot of people listening would say no, it was all worth it. Would you say that's the

2 (54m 27s):
case. No, I've asked myself that several times and sometimes when I see young people working like really really hard like in the in the corporate circle going round and round I say to them, you know, try to always keep the balance because if I had to ask myself if I would do it all over again, would I I still don't really have an answer.

1 (54m 53s):
Do you feel Kathleen like what happened to you? And and the success of this company is due to the work you put into it. You're just you're Relentless hard work or do you think that it had more to do with luck?

2 (55m 5s):
No, it's not luck. I think it was more. I worked really hard putting it together. I never gave up. I never let its success get the best of me if anything and not luck. I think sometimes it. My destiny,

1 (55m 24s):
I know I know Kathleen that your folks passed away recently, but they did get

2 (55m 32s):
to see you

1 (55m 33s):
achieve incredible success from this cookie stand.

2 (55m 38s):
Yes, they didn't see the Mondelez sale, but they saw the Riverside sale.

1 (55m 44s):
What do they think? I mean, what did your parents think that you mean? You were so honest these cookie isn't Farm Stand Inside that I mean, your dad was a Dairy Farmer like What did they think about this?

2 (55m 55s):
It's very funny, you know because you know, I sold it was in the paper and they never said a word about money. Not a word they just were like oh congratulations. I'm proud of you, too. Because that's who they were. They never once mentioned the money. My father always told me as I was being coming successful. Never forget where you came

1 (56m 23s):
from a must they must have been so proud of you

2 (56m 28s):
they were they really were

1 (56m 33s):
That's Kathleen King. The founder of Kathleen's bake shop and taste bake shop. By the way, Kathleen still likes to bake cookies at home and she loves spotting taste cookies out in the wild. In fact a while back. She was on a bike tour of the Natchez Trace Parkway and at one point our guide stopped to take a break. He reached into his backpack pulled out a bag of Tate's handed one to Kathleen and ask have you ever tried these cookies are amazing. And please do stick around because in just a moment. We're going to hear from you about the things you're building, but first a quick message from one of our 2019 lead sponsors of how I built this

2 (57m 21s):
hiscox. Hiscox. Taylor's

1 (57m 23s):
its policies to fit every business has very specific needs which may explain. It's 97 percent customer service rating get a quote or by at H is co x.com Billy eilish little no sex and lizzo dominated the year in music, but there was a lot more from 2019 that you might have forgotten. I'm Robin Hilton join in pure music all this month as we look back at the defining artists trans and Milestones from the past year. Listen to new episodes each week on NPR's all songs considered. Hey, thanks so much for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that and this week story starts at a restaurant in Denver where Thomas Outhouse was giving his wife a gift for their 10-year wedding anniversary and I gave her the bag and she opened it up and she goes where did you buy these and at this point Thomas wasn't quite sure.

1 (58m 19s):
He got her the right gift. And I said do you like them? It was a bracelet and a pair of earrings and she goes yeah, they're really cool. Whoo, so Far so good and she goes so where'd you buy him? I said I made them he made them out of a tin can a bracelet and a pair of earrings that Thomas Made for his wife have a tin can and to be fair Thomas really meant this more as a gag gift, but his wife Emily actually like the look of the earrings and she appreciated the Thomas Made them in his garage just using a hammer and pliers and some tin snips out of the lid I cut it. In half, so there were two half circles.

1 (58m 60s):
I folded in the edges again, so they wouldn't be sharp folded them in on each other. So they created kind of a prism shape. Anyway, Emily liked them so much that she wore them all the time and she started getting so many compliments that she encouraged Thomas to try selling them. So we said how about we make a go of this canned goods thing and that's what we call it. That's what Emily mentioned right away. She said, I think you're gonna Your company can good this point Emily had a full-time job and Thomas was a stay-at-home dad. So in a spare time he worked on designs for more jewelry and he started to gather more raw materials.

1 (59m 40s):
I'd walk through the alleys and kind of dig through people's Recycling and find different cans. That's like do you want to buy anything new? He was really into this idea of repurposing used cans. And so after he hauled his neighbors cans back to his garage. He began To realize that on the inside they didn't all look the same like tomato cans has a brilliant copper color. There is a white color that is from coconut milk and there's a gold all these different colors inspired Thomas. So he hammered out some bracelets earrings at different styles and shapes one was a ribbon Loop another was kind of like a fan and when he had about 10 of them, he pitched them to a boutique owner in Denver, but I said, okay free.

1 (1h 0m 28s):
B3 so give a can of food back to charity and he said I'll take a hundred pieces the earrings and bracelets started to sell word spread and then Thomas began selling more jewelry in local stores and then online and this year he and his wife expect to make about $100,000 and to donate four thousand cans of food to charity and since Thomas started canned goods about six years ago. He's made over 10,000 pieces to this point I've touched And every piece that we've sold Thomas is still working out of the garage, but he's hired for people to help him and he hopes to hire even more soon. Well, you're from now we want to be in every Major Market around the country and we're knocking on some national stores as upscale as Nordstrom's if you want to hear more about canned goods or here previous episodes had to our podcast page how I built this dot npr.org and of course if you want to Us your story go to build npr.org and thanks so much for listening to the show this week.

1 (1h 1m 34s):
You can subscribe wherever you get your podcasts. And while you're there. Please do give us a review. You can also write to us at HIV T at npr.org and if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this or add guy Roz our show is produced this week by Casey Herrmann with music composed by rub teen Arab Louis. Thanks. Also to Canada slim Julia Carney Neva Grant and Jeff Rogers. He's our intern is Sequoia Carrillo. And before you go I just want to remind you to please consider donating to your local public radio station by December 31st, because your gift helps bring Public Radio 2 listeners like you donate to your public radio station at donate dot npr.org built.

1 (1h 2m 17s):
I'm guy Roz and you've been listening to how I built this. This is

2 (1h 2m 34s):
NPR.