0 (0s):
Hey everyone. Just a quick note. This episode first ran back in October of 2017. Hope you enjoy it.

2 (9s):
When I walked into Ross Perot's office, I felt like I was at the end. Like I had tried everything. I had tried to access everyone, and I knew either he supports this, or I just really don't know where else to turn. So I, I literally told myself I won't leave his office. I'm going to glue myself to the chair in his office and I'm not going to leave until he commits

0 (41s):
From NPR. It's how I built this a show about innovators, entrepreneurs, idealists, and the stories behind the movements. They built Guy rosin on the show today. How Wendy Kopp convinced graduates from some of the top universities to forget wall street, forget law school, forget big money and instead become a teacher. So today's show is just a little bit different from other episodes you might've heard. For starters, you will not discover how Wendy Kopp made her millions because she didn't money was never the point.

0 (1m 22s):
But when the is still a really successful builder, you could say one of the most successful nonprofit founders in recent times. And in many ways, her story is a textbook case study for how to start a business. In fact, it's probably why there's an actual case study about her at Harvard business school, because Wendy built teach for America from an idea in her head to a huge operation, with a budget in the hundreds of millions of dollars. And it's a program that sends thousands of college graduates to some of the most neglected public schools across the us each and every year. Now, TFA isn't without its critics. And you'll hear about that, but it's also a program that's changed lives and schools.

0 (2m 6s):
And the idea came to Wendy during her time as a student at Princeton, even though she didn't really have any experience working with underserved students. In fact, her own upbringing in Dallas was practically another world.

2 (2m 20s):
I mean, honestly, I grew up in a community in Dallas, Texas that referred to itself as the bubble, you know, for its kind of lack of diversity and disadvantage. I mean, my parents had really made it a point to buy a place in this community so that we could go to the, you know, kind of notably strong public schools there. And somehow I managed to grow up really without understanding the extreme disparities in our country. And the fact that where you're born really does so much to determine whether you have access to an excellent education. And I, you know, you can never become aware of that really in its full extent at Princeton, but on any campus and Princeton included, you can see evidence of that.

2 (3m 6s):
That, I mean my freshman year roommate had gone to public schools in the Bronx and I mean, honestly, one of the most driven, brilliant people to make it to Princeton, but still through her and through her friends, many of them were kind of other first-generation college students at Princeton. I realized how differently prepared they were to do well. So many things had turned me on to this, this fact that our country, that claims to be in really aspires to be a place of equal opportunity, really isn't one.

0 (3m 38s):
And were you just thinking about this stuff or did you, did you start to do something about it?

2 (3m 44s):
Well, actually I had organized a conference alongside some other students at Princeton about improving our education system. And it was at that conference where we had pulled together students from all over the country and they were some of the most incredible student leaders. And they were saying, we had no idea there was a need for teachers in urban and rural areas we would teach. And it was really sitting there that I thought of this idea, like why aren't we channeling these people, the energy into teaching. And what struck me was this idea that we would essentially build a movement among the rising generation of leaders to channel their energy, to teach in urban and rural public schools, knowing that that would have a really important immediate impact in, in classrooms, in schools and in the lives of kids.

2 (4m 37s):
So I became obsessed. I mean, the minute I thought of it, I just thought this would change our country. It would change the consciousness of our country and it became the answer to everything. Like I need to propose this in my senior thesis.

0 (4m 49s):
So you just had to turn this idea into, into your thesis, your like your research project.

2 (4m 55s):
Yeah. I mean, I, you know, I looked at different things. I looked at other models. Like I looked at the peace Corps and there was a federal teacher Corps in the sixties and Vista. I mean, I really went back. I analyzed the policy contexts, you know, would this actually work? Could we get these folks into classrooms? And also at the mood on college campuses, I mean, at all the factors and ended up in this thesis proposing the creation of a national teacher Corps

0 (5m 23s):
Was the idea of like that they were all of these talented college graduates every year who were willing and, and could contribute a few years to teaching kids in particularly in low income areas. I mean, and that, that just was that that resource was being under utilized.

2 (5m 43s):
Yeah. I mean, I felt like, you know, when I was thinking about my own self and all of my peers at Princeton, you know, folks were really searching for, you know, what do we want to do? And not a whole lot of people knew exactly what they to do. So they were doing what was in front of them. I mean, at the time this is late eighties. So all the recruiters were literally investment banks, management, consulting firms, and a couple of brand management firms. I mean, if I was at Princeton liberal arts majors at Princeton, I mean, those were the companies that were banging down our doors. And so my thought was, you know, how different would it be in our country if we had many of the most promising future leaders instead of, you know, working on wall street for two years, right out of college teaching for two years in urban and rural areas.

0 (6m 31s):
And w how was the thesis received? Like when your advisor called even to give you feedback, what'd they say,

2 (6m 38s):
Well, he called me up and said, can you come into my office? And I was thinking, oops, I guess this didn't go over, but he loved it. You know, he, he said, he thought this was brilliant.

0 (6m 52s):
Wow. So he was like, let's, let's make this happen for real

2 (6m 55s):
Well, in the last week of writing the thesis, I decided I'm just going to say in the thesis that I'm going to go do this. So he liked the idea, but he thought it was really crazy to think that I was really going to try to go do this. So I had this plan and one of the things I had looked at the origin of the peace Corps and there's this incredible paper. And the paper was this beautiful analysis that concluded that it had to start with 500 core members. That that was the smallest possible number that would seem nationally important, but that it was a workable number, anything bigger would be unmanageable. So that became my number, like, okay, we've got to recruit 500 people. So the whole plan was to inspire thousands of people to apply in the first year and select and train in place.

2 (7m 40s):
No fewer than 500 of them in five or six communities across the country. And I had a budget saying this was going to cost two and a half million dollars in the first year. And my thesis advisor became really obsessed with that number. Like, how are you going to raise two and a half million dollars? And he said, you know, do you know how hard it is to raise $2,500? And he sent me down, he said, I'll tell you what, I'm going to link you up with the head of development at Princeton. Who's going to explain how hard it is to raise $2,500.

0 (8m 11s):
Yeah. And this is 1989. Yeah. Yeah. And so, so did that happen? Did you sit down with the head of the bed?

2 (8m 17s):
Yes. I met the head of development and

0 (8m 19s):
You said, Hey, I've got this idea. I just need to raise two and a half million bucks.

2 (8m 22s):
Yes. He was very nice. He, he did explain how hard it would be, but meanwhile, I had taken, I mean, I look back at this and I to wonder, you know, what possessed me, I was blessed with the advantage of, you know, naivete. And I was really obsessed with this idea. I mean, I just thought, and really, it was an idea whose time had come. I mean, I would tell people this idea and they would just say, doesn't this already exist. In fact, they spent most of the thesis writing, just looking for it. I was just convinced someone must be trying to start this because there really was a mood on college campuses. I mean, people really were searching for something that would enable them to make a real difference.

2 (9m 6s):
And, you know, the fall of my freshmen or of my senior year, there was a front page article in fortune magazine saying corporate America takes on education reform. And so I thought these people will fund this. So I wrote letters to everyone quoted in the article and a few others, by the way, I would pick out like, you know, Delta airlines and write to the CEO. I mean, this is, you know, the advantage of an experience, but believe it or not, I got seven meetings off those letters, not with the CEOs, but with people who they would pass the letters down to. And one was the head of the business round table who was the CEO of union carbide. And, you know, the business round table was the group that had said, we're going to take on education reform and they had no plan.

2 (9m 51s):
So, you know, I think my timing was just perfect. And he said, I'll tell you what, I'll let you use our office in Manhattan. And I'll introduce you to some other folks. And I met another executive at Mobil who was just loved the idea and said, you know, what do you need to try to make it work? And I said, I needed $26,000. I had developed a budget saying, that's what I needed to do to, you know, needed to spend three months like flying all over the country and really trying to put it together. And he said, okay, I'll tell you what, I'll do it. If you can get Princeton to be the conduit of funds. So I called the head of development and literally, I mean, this is amazing. I now realize, but in two hours he got the president to sign off on being the conduit of funds.

0 (10m 34s):
What was the conduit of fund? What did that

2 (10m 36s):
Mean? Like they could write the check to Princeton and then Princeton would just give it to

0 (10m 42s):
Me,

2 (10m 42s):
Even though we didn't have our tax exempt status.

0 (10m 45s):
Oh. So, so, but why was that important to them?

2 (10m 49s):
Well, I had no credibility and you can't give, I mean, as a foundation, you can't give funds to an individual like me. So, you know, other NGOs can figure out how to be a conduit to start ups, but you know, you have to jump through hoops to be able to do that.

0 (11m 5s):
So you got Princeton to agree to, to essentially launder this money, to help you launch, teach for America. I mean, right off the bat, and you thought I've got to just go to, to corporations to get funding for this.

2 (11m 18s):
Well, I had to find again, I had to find some funding before I graduated so that I had something to live on. And that was my biggest thing was ha you know, that was very stressful. It's April, I'm thinking I've got two months to get some money.

0 (11m 31s):
You know, a lot of, a lot of students, right. College VCs, right? Like mine was on Gladstone and liberalism. That was the last time I exposed myself to Gladstone and liberalism, you know, two decades ago. But you, here we are, you know, your thesis is, has been your life's work. I mean, you, yeah. So what do you think it was that compelled you

2 (11m 54s):
To

0 (11m 55s):
Stick with this idea and to, to go out and graduate and say I'm going to pursue this?

2 (11m 60s):
Well, it is a really, it is a good idea, right? Like, I mean, it's one of those ideas that if I hadn't pursued it, someone would have figured it out in the, in the couple years after I'm really convinced to that. I mean, it's just one of those ideas. It's so foundational to so many other things, you know, somehow I just landed on, on a good idea.

0 (12m 22s):
Okay. So you've got a $26,000 in seed money, and then you've got this office space from the business round table. And are you guys at this point already calling yourselves, teach for America?

2 (12m 34s):
Well, we, we had named ourselves teach America, and then we found out that that was the name of a medical supply company. So we spent a full three months trying to think of an alternative until one night at midnight in the subway. I just thought for teach for America thank heaven. Right? Because teach for America is such a better name. Yeah.

0 (12m 52s):
So you, you keep, you keep saying we, so I'm assuming that you, and I guess a couple of friends came up with a plan to launch this thing.

2 (13m 2s):
Yes. Well, our plan was let's show people that the college students want to do this. So, I mean, that was pretty much, you know, cause we were hearing no one was going to do anything. The school districts were telling us, if you get these people from these colleges, we had a list of 100 colleges and they would look at the list. I remember meeting the head of human resources in Los Angeles. And I mean, he had his legs kicked back on the desk the whole bit. And he started laughing when he looked at the list of a hundred colleges and said, okay, I'll tell you what, you get 500 people from these colleges to want to teach in my schools. And I'll hire all 500 of them,

0 (13m 36s):
The LA unified school district. So you went to meet with the head of hiring there and said, I have this plan. I'm going to get college students. Do you want him? And he said, if you can do it, sure. I'll take him. Yes. And, and he wouldn't have to pay any of them because you were going to get the funding for this.

2 (13m 52s):
Well, no, he was going to hire them. I have regular teacher salary. So I had gone through and just was really testing the feasibility. Will the districts hire them? And I was hearing, yes, if you can actually get them. And then the funders, I would meet these potential funders. And they would say, well, it's a good idea, but you know, it's not going to work because the college students won't do it. So the whole plan became, let's just show people that the college students want to do it. So what we did was to decide, okay, we're going to find two students at each of a hundred campuses. We're going to find one and tell them to go find someone who represents a different, you know, sort of diversity on that campus. And then those two people are going to essentially put flyers under doors and try to inspire people to apply.

0 (14m 35s):
You said, Hey, if you want to teach in a low-income school, we can train you and then place you in a school. And then, and you put that out there and did applications start to come in?

2 (14m 46s):
Yeah, I mean, the pitch was even, it was like, if you want to be part of the movement to improve education in America and ensure that we live up to our nation's promise to be a place of equal opportunity, then you know, apply to this and you'll teach for two years. And then you'll be part of a group of leaders who work for the rest of their lives to, to change things. And one of the first people we found was a guy at Yale actually who drafted this flyer. And he was really the first one. He put it under doors and within one weekend he had 170 voicemail messages on his answering machine

0 (15m 24s):
Saying, Hey, I want to apply them. I want to know more about this.

2 (15m 27s):
Yes. And, and there was a man who, some of your listeners will remember Fred Hechinger, who was a columnist at the New York times who, you know, I hadn't met him along the way. And he just couldn't believe, you know, where's this outpouring of idealism coming from the me generation. So he told that story in an article on the faults probably October. And so one thing would lead to another people, started realizing, wow, I mean, this generation does want to do this. So, you know, the donors who were not, you know, making a decision, decided some of them, okay, we'll get behind this. The school district started taking it more seriously. So everything was coming together. The only massive problem was that we were nowhere near raising two and a half million dollars.

0 (16m 10s):
Here's the thing they don't get. You are going out and basically advertising to students at these hundred colleges saying apply for this thing. But like, you didn't really have a guarantee, an ironclad guarantee that, that you could actually place them in any jobs you were really just kind of, you were kind of just hoping that it would work out.

2 (16m 33s):
Yeah, well that is, as I look back like you, that may be how it looks. I mean, at the time it didn't seem so precarious. There were real teacher shortages in these districts. You know, we had talked to folks in many of these districts and realize that they really wanted to hire these folks. And so it didn't seem as precarious as it sounds now.

0 (16m 58s):
So how many applications did you get?

2 (17m 1s):
We had 2,500 people apply.

0 (17m 3s):
And how many spots could you, could you

2 (17m 6s):
Do? We were aiming for 500,

0 (17m 8s):
500. So, wow. I mean, how many of you were, we're now running this organization? Like,

2 (17m 14s):
Well, you know, it just kept building on itself, but we had all these applications. We had underestimated of course, everything like what to do with 2,500

0 (17m 24s):
Applicants through 5 2500 applications.

2 (17m 26s):
Yes. That's a very good question that we hadn't thought through, but I mean, one thing we did was say, okay, we're going to send teams of two out in, you know, actually I got the head of Hertz to donate rent-a-cars. So we had five rent-a-cars and we were going to send two people in each of them off to interview these books. So they would each take parts of the country and they would drive from campus to campus and would do these interviews. And we had created a day long application process that, you know, started with an essay application. And then they did a sample teaching session and an interview. I mean, we had had someone go out and develop this kind of selection process. And by the way, this is about when, I mean, you know, we have these teams out on the road and they're interviewing these folks and I'm thinking we don't have any money

0 (18m 16s):
When we come back the scramble for money, a mutiny in the ranks and the struggle to stay alive, stay with us. I'm guy Raz. And you're listening to how I built this from NPR. Hey, welcome back to how I built this from NPR I'm guy Ross. So it's the spring of 1990 and Wendy is about to train TFAs very first class of teachers. The only problem is she's short on money, like two and a half, a million dollars short.

0 (18m 56s):
So in kind of a hail Mary move, when do you decide to contact Ross Perot, who at the time was one of the richest businessmen in Texas and you might've heard of him because he ran for president in the early 1990s.

2 (19m 10s):
He's from Dallas and I'm from Dallas. And he's really into education reform. I mean, when I was growing up, Ross Perot as a business leader in Texas was, you know, really fighting for all this legislation to improve the school. So I had never met him, but I just had in my head, he was going to fund this and Ross Perot doesn't doesn't think I wrote him 11 letters before he agreed to see me, but We have different memories.

0 (19m 36s):
He wrote him 11 letters and he finally agreed.

2 (19m 38s):
Finally he called me up. I mean, I actually thought it was a friend of mine. Cause everyone knew I was trying to get to Ross Perot and someone yells down the hall, Ross Perot's on the line. And I pick up the phone and say, yup, I'm thinking this is one of my friends pulling a prank. And I hear his voice on the other end, you know, which is very recognizable. I'm like, oh my gosh. And I said to him, I'm coming to Dallas. I'm going to be there next week. Can I come see you? And he agreed.

0 (20m 4s):
And what happened when, when you went down there?

2 (20m 8s):
Well, when I walked into Ross Perot's office, I felt like I was at the end. Like I had tried everything. I had tried to access everyone and I knew either he supports this or I just really don't know where else to turn. So I, I literally told myself and I've often wished I could be as persistent, but I won't leave his office. I'm going to glue myself to the chair in his office. And I'm not going to leave until he commits. Yeah.

0 (20m 37s):
You say to him, this is my thing. This is my program. And what did you ask him for? How much, how much money?

2 (20m 43s):
Well, I asked him for a million dollars. I needed, you know, another 2 million basically. And he spent, I mean, I was in there for probably two hours and he spent the whole time thinking about his friends who would do this. I mean, he really loved the idea. And he kept saying, I think Sam Walton would do this. And I kept thinking, oh no, I know where all this leads. Like, no, like you are the one I know, you're the one you care about education. You you're an entrepreneur. You understand this. And he finally, I actually think he decided I wasn't going to leave. And he said, I'll tell you what, I will give you $500,000 if you can raise the other 1.5 million. Huh.

2 (21m 24s):
And that was the moment I knew it's done. Like, I knew that his, his credibility and that kind of leverage, I could just go back to everyone else and that they would all come in.

0 (21m 34s):
You could go back to everyone else and say, Ross, Perot's committed $500,000 guys. I need your money.

2 (21m 38s):
Yep. In order to leverage that.

0 (21m 40s):
Yeah. All right. So, so did you, I'm assuming you raised the money after Ross Perot?

2 (21m 48s):
So one year after I graduated, I was literally looking out on an auditorium full of 489. Wow. Recent grads who were all in that auditorium at USC. Yeah.

0 (21m 59s):
So a year after you graduated year after the thesis, you've done it. You've got these 499 college graduates in this room ready for a, what? A four or five week training program. Eight

2 (22m 11s):
Weeks

0 (22m 12s):
At the time they were all going to go to the LA unified school district.

2 (22m 14s):
No, well they were during the summer they were, but then they would go to the one of six places where we had decided to cluster them and where the school districts had agreed to hire them. Where

0 (22m 24s):
Was that? Where were they?

2 (22m 25s):
New York city and NLA, new Orleans, Baton Rouge in Southern Louisiana. And then two world sites in world, middle Georgia and Eastern North Carolina.

0 (22m 36s):
And they had to make a two-year commitment. That was part of the

2 (22m 39s):
Deal. Yeah.

0 (22m 40s):
So I mean, I, I didn't remember correctly. You were not a teacher. You did not study how to be a teacher. You did not have a teaching credential. Like how did you know how to train 400?

2 (22m 52s):
Well, I didn't know. And you know, that's why we found these experienced teacher educators and experienced teachers who had a specialty in preparing and supporting teachers in urban and rural areas. And we really just turned the whole thing over to them. So how

0 (23m 8s):
Did that first summer go of, of training?

2 (23m 11s):
Oh, it was terrifying, you know, I mean, it was the first year we had 489 people cooped up in dorms for eight weeks, a diverse group, not as diverse as you know, we would all hope and as teach for America is achieved at this point. But I mean, we had a mix of folks who had never been in an environment like this and were never had many of them who hadn't been working in urban, rural communities. So there was just a lot of tension and a lot of issues to sort through. And it was, it was very, you know, it was exhausting. I mean, you start teaching and you see the microcosm of the world playing out in your classroom.

2 (23m 54s):
You know, you see kids who are facing all the challenges of poverty and lack of adequate healthcare and nutrition and racial discrimination the whole bit. And it's very overwhelming. So the pioneering first Corps members had to kind of find their way to the solutions, you know, often from other teachers in their schools. And we ultimately were learning from them

0 (24m 22s):
Once that first class of teachers went, you know, to their schools and started to, started to teach. Did you just have to get right back on the fundraising hamster wheel?

2 (24m 34s):
I mean this and on the recruitment side and you know, like it's, it's a cycle, right? Like every year. And so yeah, the fundraising never stops. I mean, that's just kind of an ongoing, underlying thing that you just constantly have to be thinking about the resource,

0 (24m 47s):
Because that was where all of your revenue was going to come from right

2 (24m 50s):
From fundraising. Right.

0 (24m 52s):
I mean, it's a nonprofit, so it was very different from, as, as I mentioned, the other companies we've done on the show, but it does, you were running a business. I mean, you were a Creek business.

2 (25m 3s):
Yeah. I mean the hardest piece as you say, was about recruiting, selecting, training, supporting them. But then there was, how do you manage something? I mean, I had no idea what I was doing. I mean, I had really, really idealistic notions, you know, we should all make the same salary and there shouldn't be any hierarchy and all sorts of things, which now I might think maybe there's a path to some of that, but at the time this was just chaos. And, and then ultimately most importantly, I mean, there were also the political learnings, you know, how do you navigate the politics of education, but probably most fundamentally because you can't do anything without resources. Like how are we going to sustain this thing financially? Because none of those donors thought that they were going to stick with it.

2 (25m 44s):
And we were losing donors in like half a million, a million dollar chunks and had to completely convert the funding base essentially overnight. And that kind of threw us into what I think of as the dark years of teach for America. You know, like every paycheck, every payroll, you know, there's a question about whether we were going to meet it.

0 (26m 4s):
Was there something that happened during, during that period that was particularly difficult?

2 (26m 9s):
Oh, there was so much, probably the most excruciating moment was when president Clinton launched AmeriCorps. This national service initiative teach for America was one of those first partners with AmeriCorps. And so that federal funding really gave us a big boost. But the second year there was well, all sorts of questions actually about our financial viability. And so the, the folks who were operating AmeriCorps, wouldn't approve a grant to teach for America. And this is about June and we have 500 teachers who think that they're going to go into training, but we didn't have the money to even fly them there.

2 (26m 55s):
And so I felt like this is it either we get the governmental approval or we shut it down. And we were ready. I mean, we were ready to FedEx letters to all 500 people saying we can't make it. You're not going to be able to come and we could not get anyone in the government. And I, again, like, you know, I'm still in my twenties, 20 whatever, we still had only so much credibility. And we're dealing with these governmental officials and, you know, we were taking ourselves a lot more seriously than they were taking us. Let's just say, but ultimately at about one minute before we would have pushed, send on, you know, the plan B of just shutting it down, they finally came through.

2 (27m 42s):
But that was one of many, many examples of the extreme stress of that era.

0 (27m 48s):
How, I mean, what, how much money did you need to, to meet payroll or to, to meet this costs?

2 (27m 53s):
Well, I mean, I think that grant was just a big one. You know, it was probably one and a half million for us at that point. And

0 (27m 59s):
Why did it come in at the last minute?

2 (28m 1s):
I mean, we, we were calling every single person and lever we could possibly come up with and ultimately, I guess we wore them down, but you know, these things happen like this is what happens in big bureaucracies and it's what happens to social entrepreneurs. You know? I mean, ultimately it all works out cause you kind of reshape the ecosystem and the environment and that's why teach for America ultimately thrived. But I think it's kind of the definition of social entrepreneurship. Like, you know, there aren't natural funding sources, so you almost have to create them and ultimately by your existence help shape them. And until that's happened, it's just excruciating to make it

0 (28m 42s):
Wendy, I guess at a certain point, maybe, maybe it was about five years into teach for America. The staff, like from what I've read, like they, they, they revolted, they rebel, they all threatened to quit. What was going on?

2 (28m 54s):
Oh gosh, that was even earlier. I mean, I think it was our second year, actually. We were all at our training Institute and I was still, I had this notion of no hierarchy, which was a genuine notion. I just thought if we're all on the same, you know, we're on the same mission. Why do we need to hire drivers?

0 (29m 13s):
Self-directed

2 (29m 14s):
But people decided this was because I wanted to control everything and they just decided, unless we can make all decisions by vote, we're all walking out the

0 (29m 23s):
Door. How many people said that?

2 (29m 25s):
Well, it was everyone sitting in a room it's like 10

0 (29m 28s):
People or 15 people.

2 (29m 29s):
Oh gosh, we had 60 people at that point.

0 (29m 31s):
So they said if we can't vote on every decision made democratically, we leave. Yeah. And so would you do

2 (29m 39s):
Well at this point, I didn't know what to do. I was honestly, I still remember it was like midnight. I'm so exhausted. And one of our staff members who turned into my husband later much later raises his hand and said, Wendy, I mean, I was making no sense and wasn't being responsive to anything. I said, what I'm hearing you say is that we're not going to make all decisions by vote. Is that right? And even then I had, like, I should have said yes, but no. So we all left. And the next morning I sent out a note saying, you know, we're not going to make decisions by vote and you know what, no one left.

0 (30m 17s):
I mean, was there any truth into what they were saying? Like, were you autocratic in your style?

2 (30m 24s):
Let's just say I wasn't autocratic in my intention. You know, I really did have this thought that everyone should just do the right thing and you know, so it was just not playing itself out as intended. So I'm sure that there was some truth on all sides, you know,

0 (30m 42s):
When you are 24 or whatever, 25, however old you were at the time. And the whole team is like, Hey, we want to, you know, it's essentially like a vote of no confidence, even, even if it wasn't, but it kind of was, did you, did it shake you, but did you feel like, did it exacerbate any self doubt?

2 (31m 1s):
Oh yes it did, but I didn't know what to do. I mean, part of what was leading me to stay in, it was just a sense of responsibility. Like I couldn't figure out how to get out of it. I mean, honestly, if someone had appeared who I felt like could get us out of this and get us to a point of stability or something, I would have just turned the whole thing over to them at this point. There's no doubt about that. I mean, I was just, in fact I was kind of looking for this, but I just, I couldn't seem to find the answer other than to keep putting my head down and keep going at it until we could get out of it.

0 (31m 37s):
So once you did get out of it and, and, you know, became more financially stable where you able to S to start seeing the impact of teach for America?

2 (31m 47s):
Well, I think, I mean, we were seeing, even in your five, we were starting to see real evidence of, you know, the immediate impact of our teachers, of what some of our alumni were starting to do. It's like we were starting to see the big idea, play itself out. These people aren't leaving, they're dedicating themselves to this. They're becoming the pioneering leaders. We thought they could be. So that's what kept us going through these dark years. Like realizing that actually this really is a good idea. Like it really is working because we were seeing enough evidence in classrooms and enough evidence, even our whole schools that actually, when you meet kids who are facing a lot of challenges and have a lot of assets, but, you know, with high expectations and the extra support they need, they'll Excel at an absolute scale.

2 (32m 35s):
So that recognition is what really us to say, okay, how do we take this to the next level

0 (32m 43s):
As Teesha America really started to take off and grow and grow and get more and more attention. You also with more visibility comes more criticism. And I'm just trying to think, I mean, you were still pretty young, you had no teaching experience and there were professional educators who were kind of going after you and criticizing, teach for America. Everything from this is, you know, white paternalism of middle-class wealthy kids going into poor neighborhoods of color too. You know, there's not enough training to, you know, they're only there for two years. It's actually disruptive. Did that, did that criticism hurt you? Did it, did it, did it keep you up at night?

2 (33m 22s):
Well, you know, we were working very hard to get better, you know, and the criticism actually started pretty early on. I mean, you know, this was a constant thread during our first decade actually, but in a way we were our own harshest critics. I mean, we were tearing ourselves up. I mean, we felt that we needed to do things a lot better. So I guess our assessment was the world. Isn't going to be better if we shut down, teach for America. So there's really only one option, which is to get better.

0 (33m 54s):
So you just, it didn't, it didn't phase you.

2 (33m 56s):
Well, it's not that it didn't. I mean, the fact is it made the work so much more difficult, you know, it's easy now to justify a decision to go off, to work for the consulting firm for two years, because you don't even know like is teach for America. Really a good thing. Like there's enough question out there in the blogosphere, you know? And, and so it definitely made the work more difficult, but, you know, as the criticism became probably at its most extreme, we were seeing incredible impact in communities. I mean, when we started placing teachers in Washington, DC, it was the lowest performing of all the major urban districts. It's kids were two years behind the kids in Harlem.

2 (34m 37s):
And you know, now it's graduation rates, enrollment rates, everything moving in the right direction. And the fact is if you took the teach for America, people out of that city, not just the teachers during the two years, right. But the teachers who are still in the system and the school principals and the last two schools, chancellors who presided over the system for a decade and

0 (34m 57s):
One of whom was a, an alum of

2 (34m 59s):
Lumps. That's what I'm saying. Like everyone. And that's one city, I mean, name is city. I could tell you the stats, like it's really, they've become such a leadership force for change in these cities. So, you know, you can critique it all you want, but I guess my view is propose the alternatives, right? Like we have here a deeply entrenched and systemic issue that cannot be solved from within classrooms alone, right? And that this is no amount of teaching is going to solve this. We need incredible teachers, but we also need some of those people who understand what you understand from teaching and decided I'm going to go become a school principal and what shape schools and some who say I'm going to work at the system level.

2 (35m 45s):
And some who say I'm going to run for office because we got to change the policy conduct. Then somebody say I'm going to start something that improves the child welfare system. Cause that until we do that, we will never solve this problem. And that's what teach for America is trying to do. So I know that, and I know that we need to stay the course because I have yet to see another thing that's made a bigger difference in really tackling the systemic challenge in its full complexity and the critics, you know, I wish they'd dive in and help us do better. Essentially.

0 (36m 14s):
What's teach for America's budget today.

2 (36m 18s):
It's about 300 million.

0 (36m 19s):
Wow. That's

2 (36m 20s):
Huge.

0 (36m 22s):
It's gone from two and a half million to 300 million. How many teachers does it disappearing in? Does it

2 (36m 28s):
Were about, you know, seven to 8,000 teachers at any given time and 50,000 alumni,

0 (36m 35s):
50,000

2 (36m 36s):
Alone. Most of whom I will say are still in the work,

0 (36m 42s):
Wendy. I mean, I think anybody hearing this could conclude that you could have been a, started a business, a for-profit company and probably made $300 million that you have the talent and skill to do that. And I wonder whether, I mean, you could have gone on and done that, and let's say you had $300 million. Now you could have just been the huge philanthropist and given $300 million to education projects and your name would be everywhere. It'd be the Wendy Kopp building for education reform and people would be doing,

2 (37m 15s):
I don't think I would have, right. I mean, who knows, but I, it's just not, there's really not a bone in my body. I feel like I don't even know how I would do that. Like, you know, when everyone's cut out for different things and, and we're shaped by our early experiences, of course, but I don't even, I have not one instinct to do that. Right? Like I'm, so to this day, I've never been more energized like 27 or however many years in, you know, like this is really all I've ever wanted to do.

0 (37m 50s):
That's Wendy Cobb, founder of teach for America in 2013, she stepped down as CEO. She also co founded teach for all which partners with organizations all over the world to recruit teachers to work in needy schools today, that network has more than 14,000 teachers in 50 countries. Hey, thanks so much for sticking around because it's time now for how you built that. And today we're going to update a story that we ran about a year ago in 2015, Abby Kertscher was a teenager with a food obsession.

4 (38m 32s):
I always loved peanut butter, flavored anything, peanut cups, peanut butter, ice cream. I love peanut butter and jelly sandwiches heavy on the peanut butter.

0 (38m 42s):
But one day Abby did something that you probably shouldn't do with a food you eat every day. She looked at the label

4 (38m 50s):
And I was just like, oh my gosh, this is so much sugar, tons of additives and preservatives. And so it just doesn't feel like it's almost peanut butter in any more, you know, it just feels kind of like a sugar spread.

0 (39m 2s):
So Abby decided to go cold Turkey on peanut butter, but of course she missed eating it.

4 (39m 7s):
So I was like, I might as well make my own, you know, there's no reason why I couldn't make my own. So that's when I just whipped out a food processor and just tried it out.

0 (39m 16s):
This was by the way, her mom's food processor into which she puts some nuts and coconut oil and salt,

4 (39m 23s):
And eventually took forever. It turned into a creamy texture. I was like, wow, this is so cool. I got very excited. Then I was like, okay, how do I want to flavor this? Or Sween it. So I threw in some dates process that a little bit and it was so good,

0 (39m 41s):
So good. In fact that Abby started spreading the nut butter on everything, apples sandwiches, pancakes, even the salad. And she began sharing it with her family and friends. And then one night

4 (39m 53s):
I went into my room and it was quite literally an aha moment. And I just ran back into the kitchen and said, mom, I could start a business. And she just kinda was like, oh right. Yeah, absolutely.

0 (40m 5s):
No, it's a good thing. Abby's mom and dad were on board because remember Abby was like 15 at the time. So she needed her parents help to track down jars and labels in a commercial kitchen to make the nut butter. But he was still making a lot of the big decisions like early on. She actually decided to forget about peanuts and to branch out into other types of nuts.

4 (40m 28s):
And it's something a little different. And I realized there weren't a lot of pecan and cashier butters out there at the time.

0 (40m 34s):
So Abby came up with five recipes each with just a handful of ingredients, flavors like dates pecan or strawberry cashew and copy almond. And she and her mom, Anna set up a stand at a big farmer's market just outside Charlotte.

4 (40m 48s):
And we would just, you know, call people over. They were all incredibly intrigued by the story and how young I was. They would always look to my mom and be like, so you started this and she'd be like, Nope.

0 (40m 60s):
Anyway, they kept selling out at the farmer's market. And people kept asking for more, that was getting hard because they were still packing the jars of nut butter themselves. And how were they doing that?

4 (41m 11s):
The spoons believe it or not many spoons, many, many hands. That was the worst part, for sure. It just took so,

0 (41m 20s):
So a few months later they got a machine to do the jarring for them. And soon they were pitching their nut butter at local grocery stores

4 (41m 29s):
Or a young girl and her mom to walk in. They're excited about a product and made them excited. And I think that was a huge factor in our growth.

0 (41m 37s):
Less than two years after Abby started making nut butters, they were selling them like 300 grocery stores in the Charlotte area. And over time, it wasn't just Abby and her mom doing this, her older brother joined the business and her dad actually quit his job to join them as well.

4 (41m 54s):
Technically I'm the boss of my parents and brother. Yes. Which is definitely a learning experience trying to figure out, okay, what are our positions in the business? Regardless of our positions in the family,

0 (42m 8s):
Abby has been running the company for four years now and her nut butters have spread to nearly 1000 stores across the east coast and the Midwest, including some pretty big chains like Wegmans and lows. Abby's nut butter is expected to pull in $1.6 million this year. Pretty amazing for a CEO who is now just 19 years old,

4 (42m 30s):
Being a young entrepreneur and starting at such a young age. You know, I didn't think that I can't do it. I just thought I could. It's such an incredible opportunity and a blessing.

0 (42m 42s):
The business is called Abby's better. That's B E T T E R. And if you want to find out more about it or hear previous episodes, head to our podcast page, how I built this.npr.org. Of course, if you want to tell us your story, go to build that npr.org. And thanks so much for listening to the show this week, you can subscribe at apple podcasts or wherever you get your podcasts. And while you're there, please do give us a review. You can also write to us@hivtatnpr.org. And if you want to send a tweet, it's at how I built this. Our show is produced this week by Rhonda Abdel. Fattah with music composed by Rotina or bluey. Thanks also to Juliette Carney, Neva grant Sanaz Meshkinpour and Jeff Rogers.

0 (43m 26s):
Our intern is David jock. I'm guy Raz, and you've been listening to how I built this.